Task-Optimal Exploration in Linear Dynamical Systems
Andrew Wagenmaker 1 Max Simchowitz 2 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
Exploration in unknown environments is a fundamental problem in reinforcement learning and
control. In this work, we study task-guided exploration and determine what precisely an agent
must learn about their environment in order to
complete a particular task. Formally, we study
a broad class of decision-making problems in
the setting of linear dynamical systems, a class
that includes the linear quadratic regulator problem. We provide instance- and task-dependent
lower bounds which explicitly quantify the difficulty of completing a task of interest. Motivated
by our lower bound, we propose a computationally efficient experiment-design based exploration
algorithm. We show that it optimally explores
the environment, collecting precisely the information needed to complete the task, and provide
finite-time bounds guaranteeing that it achieves
the instance- and task-optimal sample complexity,
up to constant factors. Through several examples
of the linear quadratic regulator problem, we show
that performing task-guided exploration provably
improves on exploration schemes which do not
take into account the task of interest. Along the
way, we establish that certainty equivalence decision making is instance- and task-optimal, and
obtain the first algorithm for the linear quadratic
regulator problem which is instance-optimal. We
conclude with several experiments illustrating the
effectiveness of our approach in practice.

1. Introduction
Modern reinforcement learning aims to understand how
agents should best explore their environments in order to
successfully complete assigned tasks. In the face of uncer1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 2 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Andrew
Wagenmaker <ajwagen@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tainty about the environment, a naive strategy might be to
explore the environment until it is uniformly understood
(system identification), and then devise a plan to complete
the task under this precise understanding of the environment (control). However, it is widely understood that such
a two-phased approach of system identification followed by
control can be wasteful since, depending on the task, some
aspects of the environment ought to be estimated more accurately than others. For instance, if a task requires a precise
sequence of steps to be taken in order to be completed, one
need not understand all possible outcomes leading to failure after a missed early critical step. Since it may be very
costly for an agent to estimate all facets of a complex or
high dimensional environment to high precision, it is far
preferable to direct agents’ exploration only to those aspects
most relevant to their tasks. Motivated by this challenge,
this paper aims to answer:
Q1. What exactly must an agent learn about its environment to carry out a particular task?
Q2. Given knowledge of the task, can the agent direct their exploration to speed up the process of
learning this task-specific critical information?
Q3. Having explored its environment, how can the
agent best use the information gained to complete
the task of interest?
Our work provides answers to the above questions for a family of decision-making problems in environments parameterized by a linear dynamical system, including synthesis of
the linear quadratic regulator. Specifically, for Q1 we show
that accomplishing a variety of tasks amounts to maximizing
a task-specific linear functional of the Fisher-information
matrix, a quantity of fundamental importance to optimal
experimental design. Indeed, our results naturally reduce
to classical linear optimal experimental design criteria (for
example, A-optimal) in the absence of dynamics. Answering Q2 in the affirmative amounts to being able to learn
just enough about the environment to drive the system to a
sequence of states that maximize this task-specific function
as fast as possible. We accomplish this via a sequence of
experimental design problems over control inputs given a
successively improving estimate of the environment. Finally, to answer Q3 we show that the certainty equivalence

