Generalized Doubly-Reparameterized Gradient Estimators
Matthias Bauer 1 Andriy Mnih 1

Abstract
Efficient low-variance gradient estimation enabled by the reparameterization trick (RT) has
been essential to the success of variational autoencoders. Doubly-reparameterized gradients
(DR E Gs) improve on the RT for multi-sample
variational bounds by applying reparameterization a second time for an additional reduction in
variance. Here, we develop two generalizations of
the DR E Gs estimator and show that they can be
used to train conditional and hierarchical VAEs
on image modelling tasks more effectively. First,
we extend the estimator to hierarchical models
with several stochastic layers by showing how to
treat additional score function terms due to the
hierarchical variational posterior. We then generalize DR E Gs to score functions of arbitrary distributions instead of just those of the sampling
distribution, which makes the estimator applicable to the parameters of the prior in addition to
those of the posterior.

1. Introduction
In probabilistic machine learning we often optimize expectations of the form Lφ,θ = Eqφ (z) [fφ,θ (z)] w.r.t. to their
parameters, where fφ,θ (z) is some objective function, and
φ and θ denote the parameters of the sampling distribution
qφ (z) and other (e.g. model) parameters, respectively. In
the case of the influential variational autoencoder (VAE,
Kingma & Welling (2014), Rezende et al. (2014)), qφ (z) is
the variational posterior, θ denotes the model parameters,
and Lφ,θ is typically either the ELBO (Jordan et al., 1999;
Blei et al., 2017) or IWAE (Burda et al., 2016) objective.
In most cases of interest, this expectation is intractable,
and we estimate it and its gradients, ∇φ L and ∇θ L, using
Monte Carlo samples z ∼ qφ (z). The resulting gradient
estimators are characterized by their bias and variance. We
1

DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Matthias
Bauer <msbauer@deepmind.com>, Andriy Mnih <andriy@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

usually prefer unbiased estimators as they tend to be betterbehaved and are better understood. Lower variance is also
preferable because it enables faster training by allowing
using higher learning rates.
In this paper, we address gradient estimation for continuous
variables in variational objectives. A naive implementation
of ∇φ L results in a score function, or REINFORCE, estimator (Williams, 1992), which tends to have high variance;
however, if fφ,θ (z) depends on φ only through z, we can
use reparameterization (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) to obtain an estimator with lower variance by
replacing the score function estimator of the gradient with a
pathwise estimator.
In variational inference, fφ,θ (z) typically depends on φ not
only through z but also through the value of the log density log qφ (z). Then, the gradient estimators still involve
the score function ∇φ log qφ (z) despite using reparameterization. Roeder et al. (2017) propose the sticking the
landing (STL) estimator, which simply drops these score
function terms to reduce variance. Tucker et al. (2019) show
that STL is biased in general, and introduce the doublyreparameterized gradient (DR E Gs) estimator for IWAE
objectives, which again yields unbiased lower-variance gradient estimates. This is achieved by applying reparameterization a second time, targeting the remaining score function
terms.
However, the DR E Gs estimator has two major limitations:
1) it only applies to latent variable models with a single latent layer; 2) it only applies in cases where the score function
depends on the same parameters as the sampling distribution. In this work we address both limitations. Moreover,
we show that for hierarchical models with several stochastic
layers, gradients that look like pathwise gradients can actually contain additional score function gradients that are not
doubly reparameterizable. Despite this, we show that we
can still obtain a simple estimator with a sizable reduction
in gradient variance for hierarchical IWAE objectives.
Our main contributions are:
• We extend DR E Gs to hierarchical models;
• We introduce GDR E Gs, a generalization of DR E Gs to
score functions that depend on a different distribution
than the sampling distribution;

