Elementary Superexpressive Activations

Dmitry Yarotsky 1

Abstract
We call a finite family of activation functions superexpressive if any multivariate continuous function can be approximated by a neural network that
uses these activations and has a fixed architecture
only depending on the number of input variables
(i.e., to achieve any accuracy we only need to adjust the weights, without increasing the number
of neurons). Previously, it was known that superexpressive activations exist, but their form was
quite complex. We give examples of very simple
superexpressive families: for example, we prove
that the family {sin, arcsin} is superexpressive.
We also show that most practical activations (not
involving periodic functions) are not superexpressive.

1. Introduction
In the study of approximations by neural networks, an interesting fact is the existence of activation functions that allow
to approximate any continuous function on a given compact
domain with arbitrary accuracy by using a network with a
finite, fixed architecture independent of the function and
the accuracy (i.e., merely by adjusting the network weights,
without increasing the number of neurons). We will refer
to this property as “superexpressiveness”. The existence of
superexpressive activations can be seen as a consequence of
a result of (Maiorov & Pinkus, 1999).
Theorem 1 (Maiorov & Pinkus 1999). There exists an activation function σ which is real analytic, strictly increasing,
sigmoidal (i.e., limx→−∞ σ(x) = 0 and limx→+∞ σ(x) =
1), and such that any f ∈ C([0, 1]d ) can be uniformly
with
P6d+3 approximated
P3d
Pd any accuracy by expressions
d
σ(
c
σ(
i
ij
i=1
j=1
k=1 wijk xk + θij ) + γi ) with
some parameters di , cij , wijk , θij , γi .
The proof of this theorem includes two essential steps. In
the first step, the result is proved for univariate functions
1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Dmitry Yarotsky
<d.yarotsky@skoltech.ru>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(i.e., for d = 1). The key idea here is to use the separability
of the space C([0, 1]), and construct a (quite complicated)
activation by joining all the functions from some dense
countable subset. In the second step, one reduces the multivariate case to the univariate one by using the Kolmogorov
Superposition Theorem (KST).
Though the superexpressive activations constructed in the
proof of Theorem 1 have the nice properties of analyticity,
monotonicity and boundedness, they are nevertheless quite
complex and non-elementary – at least, not known to be
representable in terms of finitely many elementary functions. See the papers (Ismailov, 2014; Guliyev & Ismailov,
2016; 2018a;b) for refinements and algorithmic aspects of
such and similar activations, as well as the papers (Kůrková,
1991; 1992; Igelnik & Parikh, 2003; Montanelli & Yang,
2020; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020) for further connections between KST and neural networks.
There is, however, another line of research in which some
weaker forms of superexpressiveness have been recently
established for elementary (or otherwise simple) activations.
The weaker form means that the network must grow to
achieve higher accuracy, but this growth is much slower
than the power laws expected from the abstract approximation theory under standard regularity assumptions (DeVore
et al., 1989). In particular, results of (Yarotsky & Zhevnerchuk, 2019) imply that a deep network having both sin and
ReLU activations can approximate Lipschitz functions with
1/2
error O(e−cW ), where c > 0 is a constant and W is the
number of weights. Results of (Shen et al., 2020b) (see also
(Shen et al., 2020a)) imply that a three-layer network using
the floor b·c, the exponential 2x and the step function 1x≥0
as activations can approximate Lipschitz functions with an
exponentially small error O(e−cW ).
In the present paper, we show that there are activations superexpressive in the initially mentioned strong sense and yet
constructed using simple elementary functions; see Section
2. For example, we prove that there are fixed-size networks
with the activations sin and arcsin that can approximate any
continuous function with any accuracy. On the other hand,
we show in Section 3 that most practically used activations
(not involving periodic functions) are not superexpressive.

