A Language for Counterfactual Generative Models

Zenna Tavares 1 James Koppel 1 Xin Zhang 2 Ria Das 1 Armando Solar-Lezama 1

Abstract
We present O MEGA C , a probabilistic programming language with support for counterfactual
inference. Counterfactual inference means to observe some fact in the present, and infer what
would have happened had some past intervention
been taken, e.g. “given that medication was not
effective at dose x, what is the probability that
it would have been effective at dose 2x?” We
accomplish this by introducing a new operator to
probabilistic programming akin to Pearl’s do, define its formal semantics, provide an implementation, and demonstrate its utility through examples
in a variety of simulation models.

1. Introduction

value it actually took is contradictory.

In this paper we introduce O MEGA C : a Turing-universal
programming language for causal reasoning. O MEGA C allows users to automatically derive causal inferences about
phenomena modelled through simulation. This contribution focuses on using O MEGA C to compute counterfactuals
– what-if causal inferences about the way the world could
have been, had things been different.
O MEGA C programs are simulation models augmented with
probability distributions to represent uncertainty. In a similar vein to other probabilistic languages, O MEGA C provides primitive operators for conditioning, which revises the
model to be consistent with observed evidence. Counterfactuals, however, cannot be expressed through probabilistic
conditioning alone. They have the form: “Given that some
evidence E is true, what would Y have been had X been
different?” For example, given that a drug treatment was
not effective on a patient, would it have been effective at a
stronger dosage? Although one can condition on E being
true, attempting to condition on X being different to the
1

Figure 1: A speeding driver (Left: driver’s view) crashes
into a pedestrian (yellow) emerging from behind an obstruction (blue). Given a single frame of camera footage
(Right), O MEGA C infers whether driving below the speed
limit would have prevented the crash.

2

CSAIL, MIT, USA Key Lab of High Confidence Software
Technologies, Ministry of Education, Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Zenna Tavares <zenna@csail.mit.edu>, Xin Zhang
<xin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In order to express these hypothetical scenarios, O MEGA C
introduces a do operator, which constructs interventions:
Y | do(X → x)

(1)

This evaluates to what Y would have been had X been
bound to x when Y was defined. Here, X and Y are program variables, typically bound to random variables.
A counterfactual in O MEGA C is then simply an expression
of the form Yx | E where Yx = Y | do(X → x), i.e.,
one that contains both a condition and an intervention, in a
particular pattern. The salient feature of this counterfactual
pattern is that conditioning on E revises the distribution
over Y (because E is defined in terms of Y , not YX ), and
it is to this revised distribution that a causal intervention
is performed. The relative nesting of the condition and
intervention reflects the fact that we want to intervene Y but
not on the evidence E.
To illustrate the potential of counterfactual reasoning within
a universal programming language, consider the scenario of
an expert witness called to determine, from only a frame of
recorded video (Fig. 1), whether a driver was to blame for
them crashing into a pedestrian. Using O MEGA C , the expert
could first construct a probabilistic model that includes the
car dynamics, the driver and pedestrian’s behaviour, and a
rendering function that produces two dimensional images

