Interaction-Grounded Learning

Tengyang Xie 1 John Langford 2 Paul Mineiro 2 Ida Momennejad 2

Abstract
Consider a prosthetic arm, learning to adapt to its
user’s control signals. We propose InteractionGrounded Learning for this novel setting, in
which a learner’s goal is to interact with the environment with no grounding or explicit reward
to optimize its policies. Such a problem evades
common RL solutions which require an explicit
reward. The learning agent observes a multidimensional context vector, takes an action, and
then observes a multidimensional feedback vector. This multidimensional feedback vector has
no explicit reward information. In order to succeed, the algorithm must learn how to evaluate
the feedback vector to discover a latent reward
signal, with which it can ground its policies without supervision. We show that in an InteractionGrounded Learning setting, with certain natural
assumptions, a learner can discover the latent reward and ground its policy for successful interaction. We provide theoretical guarantees and a
proof-of-concept empirical evaluation to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

learn to give useful responses based upon a user’s idiosyncratic ways of signaling pleasure or annoyance. In a BCI
(Brain Computer Interface) setting, a computer could learn
to interact with a human based upon a user’s EEG signals.
These problems are not easily solved using traditional reinforcement learning (RL), inverse RL, or supervised learning
because the absence of an explicit reward is an essential
ambiguity of the setting. When solving these problems, a
key issue is agreeing on a shared code between a human
and a computer. For example, in neurofeedback and BCI
an algorithm is often trained via supervised learning techniques to interpret brain signals, which are in turn used
to interact with or train human participants (Katyal et al.,
2014; Mishra & Gazzaley, 2015; deBettencourt et al., 2015;
Muñoz-Moldes & Cleeremans, 2020; Akinola et al., 2020;
Chiang et al., 2021). The supervised learning techniques
used, however, tend to be laborious and can require chronic
retraining. Another challenge of BCI solutions is that, over
time, the initial placement of sensors that read user signals,
as well as the interpretation of the signals, often change and
require re-calibration. IGL opens up the possibility of more
natural and continual self-calibration.
Learner

Environment
Context vector

1. Introduction

There are many examples and potential applications of
Interaction-Grounded Learning. In a visual domain, a robot
could learn to interact effectively with a user’s personalized
hand gestures. In an audio domain, a smart speaker could
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Microsoft Research, New York City. Correspondence to: Tengyang Xie
<tx10@illinois.edu>, John Langford <jcl@microsoft.com>,
Paul Mineiro <pmineiro@microsoft.com>, Ida Momennejad
<idamo@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

5

Time

We consider a novel setting. A learner’s goal is to interact
with an environment, and while the environment reacts to the
learner’s actions, its feedback does not provide an explicit
reward signal. Because the learner must deduce a grounding
for the feedback solely via interaction, we call this setting
Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL).

e.g. EEG signal for ‘5’

Action
e.g. show a
number

5 != 7

Feedback vector

Figure 1. A schematic example of the Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL) setting. The learner observes a context vector (e.g. EEG
signal of interacting partner thinking about number 5 or intention
to grab a cup), takes an action (e.g. show number 7 or move arm),
and observes a feedback vector (e.g. an ungrounded multidimensional EEG signal). Importantly, there is no explicit reward signal.
The learner assumes there is a latent reward in the feedback vector
then learns a reward decoder and an optimal action policy given
those assumptions.

