Grounding Language to Entities and Dynamics
for Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

Austin W. Hanjie 1 Victor Zhong 2 Karthik Narasimhan 1

Abstract
We investigate the use of natural language to drive
the generalization of control policies and introduce the new multi-task environment M ESSEN GER with free-form text manuals describing the
environment dynamics. Unlike previous work,
M ESSENGER does not assume prior knowledge
connecting text and state observations — the control policy must simultaneously ground the game
manual to entity symbols and dynamics in the environment. We develop a new model, E MMA (Entity Mapper with Multi-modal Attention) which
uses an entity-conditioned attention module that
allows for selective focus over relevant descriptions in the manual for each entity in the environment. E MMA is end-to-end differentiable and
learns a latent grounding of entities and dynamics
from text to observations using only environment
rewards. E MMA achieves successful zero-shot
generalization to unseen games with new dynamics, obtaining a 40% higher win rate compared
to multiple baselines. However, win rate on the
hardest stage of M ESSENGER remains low (10%),
demonstrating the need for additional work in this
direction.

1. Introduction
Interactive game environments are useful for developing
agents that learn grounded representations of language for
autonomous decision making (Golland et al., 2010; Branavan et al., 2011; Andreas & Klein, 2015; Bahdanau et al.,
2018). The key objective in these environments is learning
to interpret language speciﬁcations by relating entities and
dynamics of the environment (i.e. how entities behave) to
their corresponding references in the text, in order to effectively and efﬁciently win new settings with previously

unseen entities or dynamics (Narasimhan et al., 2018; Zhong
et al., 2020). While existing methods demonstrate successful transfer to new settings, they assume a ground-truth
mapping between individual entities and their textual references.
We introduce M ESSENGER,1 an environment which features
multiple game variants with differing dynamics and accompanying text manuals in English for each. The manuals contain descriptions of the entities and world dynamics obtained
through crowdsourced human writers. Crucially, while prior
work assumes a ground truth mapping (e.g. the word ‘knight’
in the manual refers to the entity name ‘knight’ in the observation), M ESSENGER does not contain prior signals that
map between text and state observations (e.g. between the
phrase ‘mounted warrior is ﬂeeing’ and the symbol « moving away from the agent). To succeed in M ESSENGER, an
agent must relate entities and dynamics of the environment
to their references in the natural language manual using
only scalar reward signals from the environment. The overall game mechanics of M ESSENGER involve obtaining a
message and delivering it to a goal. For instance, in game 1
of Figure 1, the agent must read the manual to:
1. Identify the entity that holds the message. In this case,
description 2 (d-2) reveals that it is with the thief but
there is an identical entity that is an enemy (d-4).
2. Map d-2 and d-4 to the correct symbols in the observation
(green-cloaked person).
3. Observe the movement patterns of the two entities (‘heading closer’ vs. ‘rushing away’) to disambiguate which of
the two entities holds the message.
4. Pick up the message from the entity that holds it.
5. Identify the entity that is the goal. Here, d-3 and d-6
reference a goal. It must realize that there is no ‘canine’
that is ‘running away’ and so d-6 must be a distractor,
and a mage must be the goal.
6. Follow a similar procedure to 3 to disambiguate which
mage is the goal and which is the enemy (d-3 vs d-5).
7. Bring the message to the goal.

1
Computer Science, Princeton University, USA 2 Computer Science, University of Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Austin
W. Hanjie <hjwang@cs.princeton.edu>.

To ground entities and dynamics to their corresponding

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
Available at: https://github.com/ahjwang/mes
senger-emma

