Variational Auto-Regressive Gaussian Processes for Continual Learning
Sanyam Kapoor 1 Theofanis Karaletsos 2 Thang D. Bui 3

Abstract
Through sequential construction of posteriors on
observing data online, Bayes’ theorem provides
a natural framework for continual learning. We
develop Variational Auto-Regressive Gaussian
Processes (VAR-GPs), a principled posterior updating mechanism to solve sequential tasks in
continual learning. By relying on sparse inducing point approximations for scalable posteriors,
we propose a novel auto-regressive variational
distribution which reveals two fruitful connections to existing results in Bayesian inference,
expectation propagation and orthogonal inducing points. Mean predictive entropy estimates
show VAR-GPs prevent catastrophic forgetting,
which is empirically supported by strong performance on modern continual learning benchmarks
against competitive baselines. A thorough ablation study demonstrates the efficacy of our modeling choices.

(a) VAR-GP (ours)

(b) VCL (with coreset size 10)

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) is the constant development of
complex behaviors by building upon previously acquired
skills (Ring, 1994; Thrun, 1998); humans and other animals
exhibit knowledge acquisition for continual skill development (Hoppitt & Laland, 2013). To the contrary, modern
artificial intelligence methods based on supervised machine
learning rely on a stronger assumption of all representative
information being available at once, i.e. i.i.d data. Many
systems, however, violate this assumption. A hospital may
not have legal access to past patient data to provide automated diagnosis, real-time learning systems may be limited
by compute to utilize all available data, and a mobile device
may prefer on-device learning and inference to guarantee
user privacy. In each of these examples, the learning algoWork done when the authors were at Uber AI, San Francisco, CA, USA. 1 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY, USA 2 Facebook Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA
3
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Correspondence
to: Sanyam Kapoor <sanyam@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. By first, only training on classes 0/1 (Task 0), and next,
only training on classes 2/3 (Task 1), we show the posterior predictive density surface (brighter is higher) for a four-way classifier
on the synthetic dataset (marked ) from Figure 2. (a) VAR-GPs
preserve information from Task 0 even after training on Task 1,
i.e. prevent catastrophic forgetting (seen as bright regions around
data from Task 0). (b) VCL is overconfident in its predictions and
is structurally less stable (seen as large variations in predictive
probabilities between Task 0 and Task 1).

rithm does not observe i.i.d data, but only new parts of the
data space. We still want to improve our models using new
data without compromising existing performance.
Conventional training methods, however, tend to perform
poorly when it comes to balancing rigidity: the inability
to adapt to new experience, and plasticity: the tendency to
forget past experience. For example, neural network training is known to be vulnerable to catastrophic forgetting,
causing any data distribution shift to override past learning (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990). Many approaches have been pursued to address these issues, and
among them, the Bayesian framework is arguably the most

