Dynamic Game Theoretic Neural Optimizer

Guan-Horng Liu 1 2 Tianrong Chen 3 Evangelos A. Theodorou 1 2

Abstract
The connection between training deep neural networks (DNNs) and optimal control theory (OCT)
has attracted considerable attention as a principled
tool of algorithmic design. Despite few attempts
being made, they have been limited to architectures where the layer propagation resembles a
Markovian dynamical system. This casts doubts
on their flexibility to modern networks that heavily rely on non-Markovian dependencies between
layers (e.g. skip connections in residual networks).
In this work, we propose a novel dynamic game
perspective by viewing each layer as a player in
a dynamic game characterized by the DNN itself.
Through this lens, different classes of optimizers can be seen as matching different types of
Nash equilibria, depending on the implicit information structure of each (p)layer. The resulting
method, called Dynamic Game Theoretic Neural
Optimizer (DGNOpt), not only generalizes OCTinspired optimizers to richer network class; it also
motivates a new training principle by solving a
multi-player cooperative game. DGNOpt shows
convergence improvements over existing methods
on image classification datasets with residual and
inception networks. Our work marries strengths
from both OCT and game theory, paving ways to
new algorithmic opportunities from robust optimal control and bandit-based optimization.

1. Introduction
Attempts from different disciplines to provide a fundamental
understanding of deep learning have advanced rapidly in recent years. Among those, interpretation of DNNs as discretetime nonlinear dynamical systems has received tremendous
focus. By viewing each layer as a distinct time step, it motivates principled analysis from numerical equations (Weinan,
1

Center for Machine Learning 2 School of Aerospace Engineering 3 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Guan-Horng
Liu <ghliu@gatech.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Dynamic game perspective of generic DNN training process, where we treat layer modules as players in a dynamic game
and solve for the related Nash equilibria (Best viewed in color).

2017; Lu et al., 2017) to physics (Greydanus et al., 2019).
For instance, casting residual networks (He et al., 2016) as a
discretization of ordinary differential equations enables fundamental reasoning on the loss landscape (Lu et al., 2020)
and inspires new architectures with numerical stability or
continuous limit (Chang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018).
This dynamical system viewpoint also motivates controltheoretic analysis, which further recasts the network weight
as control. With that, the training process can be viewed as
an optimal control problem, as both methodologies aim to
optimize some variables (weights v.s. controls) subjected
to the chain structure (network v.s. dynamical system).
This connection has lead to theoretical characterization of
the learning process (Weinan et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019;
Liu & Theodorou, 2019) and practical methods for hyperparameter adaptation (Li et al., 2017b) or computational
acceleration (Gunther et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019).
Development of algorithmic progress, however, remains
relatively limited. This is because OCT-inspired training
methods, by construction, are restricted to network class that
resembles Markovian state-space models (Liu et al., 2021;
Li & Hao, 2018; Li et al., 2017a). This raises questions of
their flexibility and scalability to training modern architectures composed of complex dependencies between layers. It
is unclear whether this interpretation of dynamical system
and optimal control remains suitable, or how it should be
adapted, under those cases.
In this work, we address the aforementioned issues using
dynamic game theory, a discipline of interactive decision
making (Yeung & Petrosjan, 2006) built upon optimal con-

