Toward Better Generalization Bounds with Locally Elastic Stability

Zhun Deng 1 Hangfeng He 2 Weijie J. Su 3

Abstract
Algorithmic stability is a key characteristic to
ensure the generalization ability of a learning
algorithm. Among different notions of stability, uniform stability is arguably the most popular one, which yields exponential generalization
bounds. However, uniform stability only considers the worst-case loss change (or so-called sensitivity) by removing a single data point, which
is distribution-independent and therefore undesirable. There are many cases that the worst-case
sensitivity of the loss is much larger than the average sensitivity taken over the single data point
that is removed, especially in some advanced
models such as random feature models or neural
networks. Many previous works try to mitigate
the distribution independent issue by proposing
weaker notions of stability, however, they either
only yield polynomial bounds or the bounds derived do not vanish as sample size goes to infinity. Given that, we propose locally elastic stability as a weaker and distribution-dependent stability notion, which still yields exponential generalization bounds. We further demonstrate that
locally elastic stability implies tighter generalization bounds than those derived based on uniform
stability in many situations by revisiting the examples of bounded support vector machines, regularized least square regressions, and stochastic
gradient descent.

1. Introduction
A central question in machine learning is how the performance of an algorithm on the training set carries over to unseen data. Continued efforts to address this question have
given rise to numerous generalization error bounds on the
gap between the population risk and empirical risk, using a
1

Harvard University 2 Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania 3 Wharton Statistics Department, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Zhun
Deng <zhundeng@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

variety of approaches from statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1979; 2013; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Bousquet
& Elisseeff, 2002). Among these developments, algorithmic stability stands out as a general approach that allows
one to relate certain specific properties of an algorithm to
its generalization ability. Ever since the work of Devroye
& Wagner (1979), where distribution-independent exponential generalization bounds for the concentration of the
leave-one-out estimate are proposed, various results for different estimates are studied. Lugosi & Pawlak (1994) study
the smooth estimates of the error for the deleted estimate
developed in terms of a posterior distribution and Kearns &
Ron (1999) propose error stability, which provides sanitycheck bounds for more general classes of learning rules regarding the deleted estimate. For general learning rules,
Bousquet & Elisseeff (2002) propose the notion of uniform
stability, which extends Lugosi & Pawlak (1994)’s work
and yields exponential generalization bounds. Loosely
speaking, Bousquet & Elisseeff (2002) show that an algorithm would generalize well to new data if this algorithm
is uniformly stable in the sense that its loss function is not
sensitive to the deletion of a single data point. To date, uniform stability is perhaps the most popular stability notion.
Despite many recent developments, most results on stability and generalization can be divided into two categories
if not counting sanity-check bounds. The first category includes stability notions such as hypothesis stability, which
only yield sub-optimal polynomial generalization bounds.
The second category includes stability notions based on
uniform stability and its variants, which yield optimal exponential generalization bounds. Nevertheless, the stability
notions in the second category either stop short of providing distribution-dependent bounds or, worse, the bounds do
not vanish even when the training sample size tends to infinity (Abou-Moustafa & Szepesvári, 2019). Recognizing
these facts, in this paper, we aim to relax the uniform stability notion and propose a weaker and distribution-dependent
stability notion, which yields exponential generalization
bounds that are consistent in the sense that the bounds vanish to zero as the training sample size tends to infinity.
1.1. A Motivating Example
To further motivate our study, note that there are many
cases where the worst-case sensitivity of the loss is much

