Optimizing Black-box Metrics with Iterative Example Weighting

Gaurush Hiranandani† 1 Jatin Mathur 1 Harikrishna Narasimhan 2 Mahdi Milani Fard 2 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 3 1

Abstract
We consider learning to optimize a classification
metric defined by a black-box function of the confusion matrix. Such black-box learning settings
are ubiquitous, for example, when the learner only
has query access to the metric of interest, or in
noisy-label and domain adaptation applications
where the learner must evaluate the metric via
performance evaluation using a small validation
sample. Our approach is to adaptively learn example weights on the training dataset such that the
resulting weighted objective best approximates
the metric on the validation sample. We show
how to model and estimate the example weights
and use them to iteratively post-shift a pre-trained
class probability estimator to construct a classifier.
We also analyze the resulting procedure’s statistical properties. Experiments on various label
noise, domain shift, and fair classification setups
confirm that our proposal compares favorably to
the state-of-the-art baselines for each application.

1. Introduction
In many real-world machine learning tasks, the evaluation
metric one seeks to optimize is not explicitly available in
closed-form. This is true for metrics that are evaluated
through live experiments or by querying human users (Tamburrelli & Margara, 2014; Hiranandani et al., 2019a), or that
require access to private or legally protected data (Awasthi
et al., 2021), and hence cannot be written as an explicit
training objective. This is also the case when the learner
only has access to data with skewed training distribution or
labels with heteroscedastic noise (Huang et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2020), and hence cannot directly optimize the metric
on the training set despite knowing its mathematical form.
These problems can be framed as black-box learning tasks,
†

Part of this work was done when G.H. was an intern at Google
Research, USA. 1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA 2 Google Research, USA 3 Google Research, Accra. Correspondence to: Gaurush Hiranandani <gaurush2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where the goal is to optimize an unknown classification
metric on a large (possibly noisy) training data, given access
to evaluations of the metric on a small, clean validation
sample (Jiang et al., 2020). Our high-level approach to
these learning tasks is to adaptively assigns weights to the
training examples, so that the resulting weighted training
objective closely approximates the black-box metric on the
validation sample. We then construct a classifier by using the
example weights to post-shift a class-probability estimator
pre-trained on the training set. This results in an efficient,
iterative approach that does not require any re-training.
Indeed, example weighting strategies have been widely used
to both optimize metrics and to correct for distribution shift,
but prior works either handle specialized forms of metric
or data noise (Sugiyama et al., 2008; Natarajan et al., 2013;
Patrini et al., 2017), formulate the example-weight learning task as a difficult non-convex problem that is hard to
analyze (Ren et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019), or employ an
expensive surrogate re-weighting strategy that comes with
limited statistical guarantees (Jiang et al., 2020). In contrast,
we propose a simple and effective approach to optimize a
general black-box metric (that is a function of the confusion
matrix) and provide a rigorous statistical analysis.
A key element of our approach is eliciting the weight coefficients by probing the black-box metric at few select
classifiers and solving a system of linear equations matching the weighted training errors to the validation metric. We
choose the “probing” classifiers so that the linear system is
well-conditioned, for which we provide both theoreticallygrounded options and practically efficient variants. This
weight elicitation procedure is then used as a subroutine to
iteratively construct the final plug-in classifier.
Contributions: (i) We provide a method for eliciting example weights for linear black-box metrics (Section 3). (ii)
We use this procedure to iteratively learn a plug-in classifier
for general black-box metrics (Section 4). (iii) We provide
theoretical guarantees for metrics that are concave functions
of the confusion matrix under distributional assumptions
(Section 5). (iv) We experimentally show that our approach
is competitive with (or better than) the state-of-the-art methods for tackling label noise in CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al.,
2009) and domain shift in Adience (Eidinger et al., 2014),
and optimizing with proxy labels and a black-box fairness

