Temporally Correlated Task Scheduling for Sequence Learning

Xueqing Wu 1 Lewen Wang 2 Yingce Xia 2 Weiqing Liu 2 Lijun Wu 2 Shufang Xie 2 Tao Qin 2 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Sequence learning has attracted much research
attention from the machine learning community
in recent years. In many applications, a sequence
learning task is usually associated with multiple
temporally correlated auxiliary tasks, which are
different in terms of how much input information
to use or which future step to predict. For example, (i) in simultaneous machine translation, one
can conduct translation under different latency
(i.e., how many input words to read/wait before
translation); (ii) in stock trend forecasting, one
can predict the price of a stock in different future
days (e.g., tomorrow, the day after tomorrow).
While it is clear that those temporally correlated
tasks can help each other, there is a very limited
exploration on how to better leverage multiple
auxiliary tasks to boost the performance of the
main task. In this work, we introduce a learnable
scheduler to sequence learning, which can adaptively select auxiliary tasks for training depending
on the model status and the current training data.
The scheduler and the model for the main task
are jointly trained through bi-level optimization.
Experiments show that our method significantly
improves the performance of simultaneous machine translation and stock trend forecasting.

1. Introduction
Sequence learning (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al.,
2014) is an important problem in deep learning, which covers many applications including machine translation (Wu
et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017), time series prediction (Qin et al., 2017a; Zhang et al., 2017a), weather forecasting (Shi et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2017), etc. In real-world
applications, a sequence learning task is often associated
with multiple temporally correlated tasks: (1) In simulta1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui,
China 2 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Yingce Xia <yingce.xia@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

neous machine translation, we need to begin translation
before reading the complete source sequence. In this application, the generation of output sentence is k word behind
the source input, which is called wait-k strategy/task (Ma
et al., 2019). Wait-k tasks with different k values are temporally correlated. (2) Stock forecasting aims to predict the
trend of stocks at some future day (Dai & Zhang, 2013).
Tasks of predicting stock prices at different future days constitute a set of temporally correlated tasks. Different from
general multi-task learning, the input and output data of
these temporally correlated tasks are highly overlapped, and
only differ in how much future input to use when processing
the current input (e.g., how many future source words to read
to translate the current word in simultaneous translation) or
which future data to predict (e.g., the price movement of
which future day to predict in stock trend forecasting).
Clearly, a given sequence learning task (denoted as the main
or target task) can be boosted by its temporally correlated
tasks. Taking English-to-Vietnamese simultaneous translation as an example, assume the main task is wait-3, and
the temporally correlated tasks are wait-1, 2, 3, · · · , 13. By
training a model on all those correlated tasks and evaluating
the model on wait-3, we observe that the BLEU score is improved from 27.17 to 28.54. (BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)
is a widely used accuracy metric in machine translation,
the larger the better.) A similar phenomenon is observed
in stock price forecasting. Improvements across various
applications motivate us to explore how to leverage those
temporally correlated tasks more effectively to improve performance on the main task.
Given that there are usually multiple temporally correlated
tasks, the key challenge lies in which tasks to use and when
to use them in the training process. In this work, we introduce a learnable task scheduler for sequence learning,
which adaptively selects temporally correlated tasks during
the training process. The scheduler accesses the model status and the current training data (e.g., in current minibatch),
and selects the best auxiliary task to help the training of the
main task. The scheduler and the model for the main task
are jointly trained through bi-level optimization: the scheduler is trained to maximize the validation performance of the
model, and the model is trained to minimize the training loss
guided by the scheduler. Experimental results on simultaneous machine translation and stock trend forecasting show

