Provably Efficient Fictitious Play Policy Optimization for
Zero-Sum Markov Games with Structured Transitions
Shuang Qiu 1 Xiaohan Wei 2 Jieping Ye 1 Zhaoran Wang 3 Zhuoran Yang 4

Abstract
While single-agent policy optimization in a fixed
environment has attracted a lot of research attention recently in the reinforcement learning community, much less is known theoretically when
there are multiple agents playing in a potentially
competitive environment. We take steps forward
by proposing and analyzing new fictitious play
policy optimization algorithms for two-player
zero-sum Markov games with structured but unknown transitions. We consider two classes of
transition structures: factored independent transition and single-controller √
transition. For both
e T ) regret bounds
scenarios, we prove tight O(
after T steps in a two-agent competitive game
scenario. The regret of each player is measured
against a potentially adversarial opponent who
can choose a single best policy in hindsight after observing the full policy sequence. Our algorithms feature a combination of Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB)-type optimism and fictitious play
under the scope of simultaneous policy optimization in a non-stationary environment. When both
players adopt the proposed
√ algorithms, their overall optimality gap is e
O( T ).

1. Introduction
Widely applied in multi-agent reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Bu et al., 2008), Policy Optimization
(PO) has achieved tremendous empirical success (Foerster
et al., 2016; Leibo et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2016; 2017;
Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019), due to its high efficiency and easiness to combine with different optimization
techniques. Despite these empirical successes, theoretical
1
University of Michigan 2 Facebook, Inc. 3 Northwestern
University 4 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Shuang
Qiu <qiush@umich.edu>, Xiaohan Wei <ubimeteor@fb.com>,
Jieping Ye <jpye@umich.edu>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>, Zhuoran Yang <zy6@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

understanding of multi-agent policy optimization, especially
the zero-sum Markov game (Littman, 1994) via policy optimization, lags rather behind. Most recent works studying
zero-sum Markov games (e.g. Xie et al. (2020); Bai
√ & Jin
e T ) re(2020)) focus on value-based methods achieving O(
grets and they assume there is a central controller available
solving for coarse correlated equilibrium or Nash equilibrium at each step, which introduces extra computational cost.
On the other hand, although there has been great progress
on understanding single-agent PO algorithms (Sutton et al.,
2000; Kakade, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015; Papini et al.,
2018; Cai et al., 2019; Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Liu et al.,
2019), directly extending single-agent PO to multi-agent
setting encounters a main challenge of non-stationary environments caused by agents changing their own policies
simultaneously (Bu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2019a). In this
paper, we aim to answer the following open question:
Can policy optimization probably√solve zero-sum Markov
games to achieve O( T ) regrets?
As an initial attempt to tackle the problem, in this work, we
focus on two non-trivial classes of zero-sum Markov games
with structured transitions: factored independent transition
and single-controller transition. For the game with the factored independent transition, the transition model is factored
into two independent parts, and each player makes transition
following their own transition model. The single-controller
zero-sum game assumes that the transition model is entirely
controlled by the actions of Player 1. In both settings, the
rewards received are decided jointly by the actions of both
players. These two problems capture the non-stationarity
of the multi-agent reinforcement learning in the following
aspects: (1) the rewards depend on both players’ potentially adversarial actions and policies in both settings; (2)
Player 2 in the single-controller setting faces non-stationary
states determined by Player 1’s policies. In addition to the
non-stationarity, practically, the true transition model of the
environment could be unknown to players and only bandit
feedback is accessible to players. Thus, the non-stationarity,
as well as the unknown transition model and the full reward
function, poses great challenges to the design and theoretical
analysis of the multi-agent PO algorithms.
In this paper, we propose two novel optimistic Fictitious

