LieTransformer: Equivariant Self-Attention for Lie Groups

Michael Hutchinson * 1 Charline Le Lan * 1 Sheheryar Zaidi * 1
Emilien Dupont 1 Yee Whye Teh 1 2 Hyunjik Kim 2

Abstract
Group equivariant neural networks are used as
building blocks of group invariant neural networks, which have been shown to improve generalisation performance and data efficiency through
principled parameter sharing. Such works have
mostly focused on group equivariant convolutions,
building on the result that group equivariant linear maps are necessarily convolutions. In this
work, we extend the scope of the literature to selfattention, that is emerging as a prominent building
block of deep learning models. We propose the
LieTransformer, an architecture composed
of LieSelfAttention layers that are equivariant to arbitrary Lie groups and their discrete
subgroups. We demonstrate the generality of our
approach by showing experimental results that are
competitive to baseline methods on a wide range
of tasks: shape counting on point clouds, molecular property regression and modelling particle
trajectories under Hamiltonian dynamics.

1. Introduction
Group equivariant neural networks are useful architectures
for problems with symmetries that can be described in terms
of a group (in the mathematical sense). Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) are a special case that deal with translational symmetry, in that when the input to a convolutional
layer is translated, the output is also translated. This property is known as translation equivariance, and offers a useful inductive bias for perception tasks which usually have
translational symmetry. Constraining a linear layer to obey
this symmetry, resulting in a covolutional layer, greatly re*
Equal contribution, with alphabetical ordering. See Appendix A for detailed contributions. Please cite as: [Hutchinson, Le Lan, Zaidi et al. 2020]. 1 Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford, UK 2 DeepMind, UK. Correspondence
to: Michael Hutchinson <hutchinson.michael.john@gmail.com>,
Charline Le Lan <charline.lelan@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Sheheryar
Zaidi <sheh zaidi96@hotmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

duces the number of parameters and computational cost.
This has led to the success of CNNs in multiple domains
such as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and audio
(Graves & Jaitly, 2014). Following on from this success,
there has been a growing literature on the study of group
equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) that generalise CNNs to deal
with other types of symmetries beyond translations, such as
rotations and reflections.
Most works on group equivariant NNs deal with CNNs
i.e. linear maps with shared weights composed with pointwise non-linearities, building on the result that group equivariant linear maps (with mild assumptions) are necessarily
convolutions (Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Cohen et al., 2019;
Bekkers, 2020). However there has been little work on
non-linear group equivariant building blocks. In this paper
we extend group equivariance to self-attention (Vaswani
et al., 2017), a non-trivial non-linear map, that has become
a prominent building block of deep learning models in various data modalities, such as natural-language processing
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Zhang et al., 2019; Parmar et al., 2019b), reinforcement learning (Parisotto et al., 2020), and audio generation
(Huang et al., 2019).
We thus propose LieTransformer, a group invariant Transformer built from group equivariant
LieSelfAttention layers. It uses a lifting based
approach, that relaxes constraints on the attention module
compared to approaches without lifting. Our method is
applicable to Lie groups and their discrete subgroups
(e.g. cyclic groups Cn and dihedral groups Dn ) acting
on homogeneous spaces. Our work is very much in the
spirit of Finzi et al. (2020), our main baseline, but for
group equivariant self-attention instead of convolutions.
Among works that deal with equivariant self-attention, we
are the first to propose a methodology for general groups
and domains (unspecified to 2D images (Romero et al.,
2020; Romero & Cordonnier, 2021) or 3D point clouds
(Fuchs et al., 2020)). We demonstrate the generality of our
approach through strong performance on a wide variety of
tasks, namely shape counting on point clouds, molecular
property regression and modelling particle trajectories
under Hamiltonian dynamics.

