Dropout: Explicit Forms and Capacity Control
Raman Arora 1 Peter Bartlett 2 Poorya Mianjy 1 Nathan Srebro 3

Abstract
We investigate the capacity control provided by
dropout in various machine learning problems.
First, we study dropout for matrix completion,
where it induces a distribution-dependent regularizer that equals the weighted trace-norm of the
product of the factors. In deep learning, we show
that the distribution-dependent regularizer due to
dropout directly controls the Rademacher complexity of the underlying class of deep neural networks. These developments enable us to give concrete generalization error bounds for the dropout
algorithm in both matrix completion as well as
training deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Dropout is a popular algorithmic regularization technique
for training deep neural networks that aims at “breaking
co-adaptation” among neurons by randomly dropping them
at training time (Hinton et al., 2012). Dropout has been
shown effective across a wide range of machine learning
tasks, from classification (Srivastava et al., 2014; Szegedy
et al., 2015) to regression (Toshev & Szegedy, 2014). Notably, dropout is considered an essential component in the
design of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which won the
ImageNet challenge in 2012 with a significant margin.
Dropout regularizes the empirical risk by randomly perturbing the model parameters during training. A natural first
step toward understanding generalization due to dropout,
therefore, is to instantiate the explicit form of the regularizer
due to dropout. In linear regression, with dropout applied
to the input layer (i.e., on the input features), the explicit
regularizer was shown to be akin to a data-dependent ridge
penalty (Srivastava et al., 2014; Wager et al., 2013; Baldi
& Sadowski, 2013; Wang & Manning, 2013). In factored
models, dropout yields more exotic forms of regularization. For instance, dropout induces regularizer that behaves
similar to nuclear norm regularization in matrix factoriza1
Johns Hopkins University. 2 University of California, Berkeley. 3 TTI Chicago.. Correspondence to: Raman Arora
<arora@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion (Cavazza et al., 2018; Mianjy et al., 2018), in two layer
linear networks (Mianjy et al., 2018), and in deep linear
networks (Mianjy & Arora, 2019). However, none of the
works above discuss how the induced regularizer provides
capacity control, or help us establish generalization bounds
for dropout.
In this paper, we give explicit forms of the regularizers
induced by dropout for the matrix sensing problem and twolayer neural networks with ReLU activations. Further, we
establish capacity control due to dropout and give precise
generalization bounds. Our key contributions are as follows.
1. Our generalization bounds are solely in terms of
the value of the explicit regularizer due to dropout.
This is a significant departure from most of the prior
work wherein dropout is analyzed in conjunction with
additional norm-based capacity control, e.g., maxnorm (Wan et al., 2013; Gao & Zhou, 2016), or `p norm
on the weights of the model (Zhai & Wang, 2018).
2. Our generalization bounds are data-dependent. We
identify a simple distributional property (a notion we
refer to as retentivity) that yields tight generalization
bounds as evidenced by matching lower and upper
bounds. We believe that this property may be useful
more generally; see Zhang et al. (2021) for another
application.
3. Our results emphasize the role of parametrization, i.e.,
the choice of model architecture. We find that dropout
does not yield useful capacity control when training a
two-layer linear networks (unless we further assume
that the covariance matrix of input features satisfies certain isotropic assumption). On the other hand, dropout
for training a network with convolutional topology or
a non-linearity imparts useful inductive bias (see Section 4 for more details).
4. We provide extensive numerical evaluations for validating our theory including verifying that the proposed
theoretical bound on the Rademacher complexity is
predictive of the observed generalization gap as well as
highlighting how dropout breaks “co-adaptation”, a notion that was the main motivation behind the invention
of dropout (Hinton et al., 2012).

