Shortest-Path Constrained Reinforcement Learning for Sparse Reward Tasks

Sungryull Sohn * 1 2 Sungtae Lee * 3 Jongwook Choi 1 Harm van Seijen 4 Mehdi Fatemi 4 Honglak Lee 2 1

Abstract
We propose the k-Shortest-Path (k-SP) constraint:
a novel constraint on the agent’s trajectory that
improves the sample efficiency in sparse-reward
MDPs. We show that any optimal policy necessarily satisfies the k-SP constraint. Notably, the kSP constraint prevents the policy from exploring
state-action pairs along the non-k-SP trajectories
(e.g., going back and forth). However, in practice, excluding state-action pairs may hinder the
convergence of RL algorithms. To overcome this,
we propose a novel cost function that penalizes
the policy violating SP constraint, instead of completely excluding it. Our numerical experiment
in a tabular RL setting demonstrates that the SP
constraint can significantly reduce the trajectory
space of policy. As a result, our constraint enables
more sample efficient learning by suppressing redundant exploration and exploitation. Our experiments on MiniGrid, DeepMind Lab, Atari, and
Fetch show that the proposed method significantly
improves proximal policy optimization (PPO) and
outperforms existing novelty-seeking exploration
methods including count-based exploration even
in continuous control tasks, indicating that it improves the sample efficiency by preventing the
agent from taking redundant actions.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved a
large number of breakthroughs in many domains including
video games (Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019), and
board games (Silver et al., 2017). Nonetheless, a central
challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) is the sample efficiency (Kakade et al., 2003); it has been shown that the
RL algorithm requires a large number of samples for successful learning in MDP with large state and action space.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Michigan 2 LG AI Research
Yonsei University 4 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Sungryull Sohn <srsohn@umich.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Moreover, the success of the RL algorithm heavily hinges
on the quality of collected samples; the RL algorithm tends
to fail if the collected trajectory does not contain enough
evaluative feedback (e.g., sparse or delayed reward).
To circumvent this challenge, planning-based methods utilize the environment’s model to improve or create a policy
instead of interacting with the environment. Recently, combining the planning method with an efficient path search algorithm, such as Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Norvig,
2002; Coulom, 2006), has demonstrated successful results (Guo et al., 2016; Vodopivec et al., 2017; Silver et al.,
2017). However, such tree search methods would require an
accurate model of MDP and the complexity of planning may
grow intractably large for a complex domain. Model-based
RL methods attempt to learn a model instead of assuming
that model is given, but learning an accurate model also
requires a large number of samples, which is often even
harder to achieve than solving the given task. Model-free
RL methods can be learned solely from the environment reward, without the need of a (learned) model. However, both
value-based and policy-based methods suffer from poor sample efficiency, especially in sparse-reward tasks. To tackle
the sparse reward problem, researchers have proposed to
learn an intrinsic bonus function that measures the novelty
of the state that agent visits (Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer
& Kaplan, 2009; Pathak et al., 2017; Savinov et al., 2018b;
Choi et al., 2018; Burda et al., 2018b). However, when
such an intrinsic bonus is added to the reward, it often requires a careful balancing between environment reward and
bonus and scheduling of the bonus scale to guarantee the
convergence to an optimal solution.
To tackle the aforementioned challenge of sample efficiency
in sparse reward tasks, we introduce a constrained-RL framework that improves the sample efficiency of any model-free
RL algorithm in sparse-reward tasks, under the mild assumptions on MDP (see Appendix J). Of note, though our
framework will be formulated for policy-based methods, our
final form of the cost function (Eq. (15) in Section 4) applies
to both policy-based and value-based methods. We propose
a novel k-shortest-path (k-SP) constraint (Definition 7) that
improves the sample efficiency of policy learning (See Figure 1). The k-SP constraint is applied to a trajectory rolled
out by a policy; all of its sub-path of length k is required
to be a shortest-path under the π-distance metric which we

