Adversarial Purification with Score-based Generative Models
Jongmin Yoon 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2 Juho Lee 1 2

Abstract
While adversarial training is considered as a
standard defense method against adversarial attacks for image classifiers, adversarial purification, which purifies attacked images into clean
images with a standalone purification model, has
shown promises as an alternative defense method.
Recently, an Energy-Based Model (EBM) trained
with Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) has
been highlighted as a purification model, where
an attacked image is purified by running a long
Markov-chain using the gradients of the EBM.
Yet, the practicality of the adversarial purification using an EBM remains questionable because
the number of MCMC steps required for such purification is too large. In this paper, we propose
a novel adversarial purification method based on
an EBM trained with Denoising Score-Matching
(DSM). We show that an EBM trained with DSM
can quickly purify attacked images within a few
steps. We further introduce a simple yet effective
randomized purification scheme that injects random noises into images before purification. This
process screens the adversarial perturbations imposed on images by the random noises and brings
the images to the regime where the EBM can denoise well. We show that our purification method
is robust against various attacks and demonstrate
its state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Image classifiers built with deep neural networks are known
to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where an image containing a small perturbation imperceptible to human completely changes the prediction results (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Kurakin et al., 2017). There are various methods that
aim to make classifiers robust to such adversarial attacks,
and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
Korea 2 AITRICS, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jongmin
Yoon <jm.yoon@kaist.ac.kr>, Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2019), in which a classifier is trained with adversarial examples, is considered as a standard defense method due to its
effectiveness.
Another approach for the adversarial defense is to purify
attacked images before feeding them to classifiers. This
strategy, referred to as adversarial purification (Srinivasan
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2021), learns a
purification model whose goal is to remove any existing adversarial noise from potentially attacked images into clean
images so that they could be correctly classified when fed
to the classifier. The purification model is usually trained
independently of the classifier and does not necessarily require the class labels for training; thus, it is less likely to
affect the clean image classification accuracy compared to
the adversarial training methods. The most common way
is for adversarial purification to learn a generative model
over the images (Samangouei et al., 2018; Song et al., 2018;
Schott et al., 2019; Ghosh et al., 2019) such that one can
restore clean images from attacked images.
Recently, along with the advances in learning Energy-Based
Models (EBMs) with deep neural networks, adversarial purification methods using an EBM trained with Markov-Chain
Monte-Carlo (MCMC) as a purification model have been
highlighted (Du & Mordatch, 2019; Grathwohl et al., 2020;
Hill et al., 2021). Hinging on the memoryless behavior of
MCMC , these methods purify attacked images by running
a large number of sampling steps defined by Langevin dynamics. When started from an attacked image, in the long
run, Langevin sampling will eventually bring the attacked
image to a clean image that is likely to be generated from
the data distribution. However, the success of the purification heavily depends on the number of sampling steps, and
unfortunately, the number of steps required for stably purify
attacked images is too large to be practical.
In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial purification method using an EBM trained with Denoising ScoreMatching (DSM) (Hyvärinen, 2005; Song & Ermon, 2019)
as a purification model. Unlike an EBM trained with MCMC
estimating the energy function, DSM (Vincent et al., 2010)
learns the score function that can denoise the perturbed
samples, which is more closely related to the adversarial
purification because the purification can be thought as denoising of the adversarial attacks. We show that an EBM
trained with DSM, using the deterministic update scheme

