FILTRA: Rethinking Steerable CNN by Filter Transform

Bo Li 1 Qili Wang 1 Gim Hee Lee 2

Abstract
Steerable CNN imposes the prior knowledge of
transformation invariance or equivariance in the
network architecture to enhance the the network
robustness on geometry transformation of data
and reduce overfitting. It has been an intuitive
and widely used technique to construct a steerable
filter by augmenting a filter with its transformed
copies in the past decades, which is named as filter transform in this paper. Recently, the problem
of steerable CNN has been studied from aspect
of group representation theory, which reveals the
function space structure of a steerable kernel function. However, it is not yet clear on how this
theory is related to the filter transform technique.
In this paper, we show that kernel constructed
by filter transform can also be interpreted in the
group representation theory. This interpretation
help complete the puzzle of steerable CNN theory and provides a novel and simple approach to
implement steerable convolution operators. Experiments are executed on multiple datasets to
verify the feasibility of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Beyond the well-known property of equivariance under
translation, there has been substantial recent interest in CNN
architectures that are equivariant with respect to other transformation groups, e.g. reflection and rotation. Applications
of such architectures range over scenarios where object orientation might variate, including OCR, aerial image processing, 3D point cloud processing, medical image processing,
texture analysis and etc.
1.1. Related Works
Previous works on constructing equivariant CNN can be
coarsely categorized as two aspects. The first aspect designs special steerable filters so that the convolutional out1

JD Technology 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Bo Li <prclibo@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

put is hard-baked to transform accordingly when the input
reflects or rotates. A plenty of works develop this idea
by filter rotation, including hand-crafted filters (Oyallon &
Mallat, 2015) and learned filters (Laptev et al., 2016; Zhou
et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2018; Marcos et al., 2017). TIPooling (Laptev et al., 2016) produce invariant output as
input rotates. ORN (Zhou et al., 2017) and RotDCF (Cheng
et al., 2018) produces output which circularly shifted as
input rotates. Since each dimension of such permutable
output corresponds to a uniformly discrete rotation angle,
RotEqNet (Marcos et al., 2017) propose to extract rotation
angle from the permutable features. Another approach to
construct steerable filters is to linearly combine a set of
steerable bases. These bases can be solved in in the form
of filter patches (Cohen & Welling, 2014; 2016), harmonic
bases (Worrall et al., 2017; Weiler & Cesa, 2019), and differential operators (Shen et al., 2020). Weiler & Cesa (2019)
comprehensively summarize works on steerable bases using
polar Fourier basis.
The second aspect exploits specific transforms to act on
input. Spatial Transformer Network (STN) is a well-known
representative, which predicts an affine matrix to transform
its input to the canonical form. Tai et al. (2019) inherits
this idea to design equivariant network. Another choice of
transform is to the polar coordinate system (Henriques &
Vedaldi, 2017; Esteves et al., 2018). Since 2D rotation in
Cartesian coordinate system corresponds to 2D translation
in polar coordinate system, rotation equivariance can be
achieved by conventional translation equivariant CNN.
1.2. Contributions
The approach proposed in this paper falls into the first category and is closely related to Weiler & Cesa (2019). Weiler
& Cesa (2019) exhaustively proves that all steerable convolutional operator could be denoted as the combination of a
specific set of polar Fourier bases. However, it is not clear
yet how this interpretation is related with the widely used
filter transform technique. In this paper, we aim to establish the missing connection between the group representation based analysis for steerable filters and filter transform
scheme. To this end, we propose a new approach (FILTRA)
to use filter transform to establish steerability between features in different group representation in cyclic group CN
and dihedral group DN . The contribution of FILTRA can

