Composing Normalizing Flows for Inverse Problems

Jay Whang 1 Erik M. Lindgren 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 3

Abstract
Given an inverse problem with a normalizing flow
prior, we wish to estimate the distribution of the
underlying signal conditioned on the observations.
We approach this problem as a task of conditional
inference on the pre-trained unconditional flow
model. We first establish that this is computationally hard for a large class of flow models.
Motivated by this, we propose a framework for
approximate inference that estimates the target
conditional as a composition of two flow models.
This formulation leads to a stable variational inference training procedure that avoids adversarial
training. Our method is evaluated on a variety of
inverse problems and is shown to produce highquality samples with uncertainty quantification.
We further demonstrate that our approach can be
amortized for zero-shot inference.

1. Introduction
We are interested in solving inverse problems using a pretrained normalizing flow prior. Inverse problems encompass
a variety of tasks such as image inpainting, super-resolution
and compressed sensing from linear projections. Due to this
generality, the applications range from scientific and medical imaging to computational photography (Ongie et al.,
2020). Inverse problems can be solved by either supervised (Pathak et al., 2016; Richardson et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2018) or unsupervised (Menon et al., 2020; Bora et al., 2017;
Pajot et al., 2019) methods, see the recent survey (Ongie
et al., 2020) for a unified presentation.
In this paper we focus on unsupervised image reconstruction
techniques that benefit from a pre-trained deep generative
prior, specifically normalizing flows. Flow models (Papamakarios et al., 2019) are a family of generative models
that provide efficient sampling, likelihood evaluation, and
1

Dept. of Computer Science, UT Austin, TX, USA 2 Google
Research, NY, USA 3 Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UT Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Jay Whang
<jaywhang@utexas.edu>.

inversion. While other types of models can outperform flow
models in terms of likelihood or sample quality, flow models
are often simpler to train and evaluate compared to other
models.
These characteristics make normalizing flows attractive for
numerous downstream tasks, including density estimation,
inverse problems, semi-supervised learning, reinforcement
learning, and audio synthesis (Ho et al., 2019; Asim et al.,
2019; Whang et al., 2020; Atanov et al., 2019; Ward et al.,
2019; Oord et al., 2018).
Even with such computational flexibility, how to perform
efficient probabilistic inference on a flow model subject
to observations obtained from an inverse problem remains
challenging. This question is becoming increasingly important as flow models increase in size, and the computational
resources necessary to train them from scratch are out of
reach for many researchers and practitioners1 . Our goal is
to re-purpose these powerful pre-trained models for different custom inverse problems without re-training them from
scratch.
Concretely, we wish to recover the distribution of the
unknown image x from the observed measurements
y ∗ = A(x) + noise. We assume that a pre-trained flow
model p(x) serves as the prior for natural images we are
sensing, and that the measurement function A(·) (also
known as forward operator) is differentiable. Thus the
goal is to estimate the following conditional distribution
as accurately as possible:
p(x | A(x) = y ∗ ).
We propose a novel formulation that composes a new flow
model with the pre-trained prior p(x) to estimate the conditional distribution given observations y ∗ . While such a
composed model is in general intractable to train for latent
variable models, the invertibility of the given prior leads
to a tractable and stable training procedure via variational
inference (VI).
Our contributions:
• We show that even though flow models are designed to
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

For example, Kingma & Dhariwal (2018) report that their
largest model had 200M parameters and was trained on 40 GPUs
for a week.

