Few-shot Conformal Prediction with Auxiliary Tasks

Adam Fisch 1 Tal Schuster 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1 Regina Barzilay 1

Abstract
We develop a novel approach to conformal prediction when the target task has limited data available for training. Conformal prediction identifies a small set of promising output candidates
in place of a single prediction, with guarantees
that the set contains the correct answer with high
probability. When training data is limited, however, the predicted set can easily become unusably large. In this work, we obtain substantially
tighter prediction sets while maintaining desirable marginal guarantees by casting conformal
prediction as a meta-learning paradigm over exchangeable collections of auxiliary tasks. Our
conformalization algorithm is simple, fast, and
agnostic to the choice of underlying model, learning algorithm, or dataset. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this approach across a number of
few-shot classification and regression tasks in natural language processing, computer vision, and
computational chemistry for drug discovery.

1

Introduction

Accurate estimates of uncertainty are important for difficult
or sensitive prediction problems that have variable accuracy (Amodei et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2012; 2018; Angelopoulos et al., 2021). Few-shot learning problems, in
which training data for the target task is severely limited,
pose a discouragingly compounded challenge: in general,
not only is (1) making accurate predictions with little data
hard, but also (2) rigorously quantifying the uncertainty in
these few-shot predictions is even harder.
In this paper, we are interested in creating confident prediction sets that provably contain the correct answer with high
probability (e.g., 95%), while only relying on a few in-task
examples. Specifically, we focus on conformal prediction
(CP)—a model-agnostic and distribution-free methodology
1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Adam Fisch <fisch@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for creating confidence-based set predictions (Vovk et al.,
2005). Concretely, suppose we have been given n examples, (Xj , Yj ) ∈ X × Y, j = 1, . . . , n, as training data,
that have been drawn exchangeably from some underlying
distribution P . Let Xn+1 ∈ X be a new exchangeable test
example for which we would like to predict Yn+1 ∈ Y.
The aim of conformal prediction is to construct a set-valued
output, C (Xn+1 ), that contains Yn+1 with distribution-free
marginal coverage at a significance level  ∈ (0, 1), i.e.,
P (Yn+1 ∈ C (Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − .

(1)

A conformal model is considered to be valid if the frequency
of error, Yn+1 6∈ C (Xn+1 ), does not exceed . The challenge for few-shot learning, however, is that as n → 0,
standard CP methods quickly result in outputs C (Xn+1 ) so
large that they lose all utility (e.g., a trivially valid classifier
that returns all of Y). A conformal model is only considered
to be efficient if E[|C (Xn+1 )|] is relatively small.
In this work, we approach this frustrating data sparsity issue
by casting conformal prediction as a meta-learning paradigm
over exchangeable collections of tasks. By being exposed
to a set of similar, auxiliary tasks, our model can learn to
learn quickly on the target task at hand. As a result, we can
increase the data efficiency of our procedure, and are able
to produce more precise—and confident—outputs.
Specifically, we use the auxiliary tasks to meta-learn both
a few-shot model and a quantile predictor. The few-shot
model provides relevance scores (i.e., nonconformity scores,
see §3.1) for each possible label candidate y ∈ Y, and the
quantile predictor provides a threshold rule for including
the candidate y in the prediction set, C (Xn+1 ), or not. A
good few-shot model should provide scores that clearly
separate correct labels from incorrect labels—much like
a maximum-margin model. Meanwhile, a good quantile
predictor—which is intrinsically linked to the specific fewshot model used—should quantify what few-shot scores
correspond to relatively “high” or relatively “low” values
for that task (i.e., as the name suggests, they infer the target
quantile of the expected distribution of few-shot scores).
Both of these models must be able to operate effectively
given only a few examples from the target task, hence how
they are meta-learned over auxiliary tasks becomes crucial.
Consider the example of image classification for novel cate-

