Straight to the Gradient:
Learning to Use Novel Tokens for Neural Text Generation
Xiang Lin 1 Simeng Han 1 Shafiq Joty 1 2

Abstract
Advanced large-scale neural language models
have led to significant success in many language
generation tasks. However, the most commonly
used training objective, Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), has been shown problematic,
where the trained model prefers using dull and
repetitive phrases. In this work, we introduce
ScaleGrad, a modification straight to the gradient
of the loss function, to remedy the degeneration
issue of the standard MLE objective. By directly
maneuvering the gradient information, ScaleGrad
makes the model learn to use novel tokens. Empirical results show the effectiveness of our method
not only in open-ended generation, but also in
directed generation tasks. With the simplicity in
architecture, our method can serve as a general
training objective that is applicable to most of the
neural text generation tasks.

1. Introduction
Text generation has been one of the most important research
problems in natural language processing (NLP). Thanks to
the advances in neural architectures, models are now capable of generating texts that are of better quality than before
(Brown et al., 2020). However, despite the countless efforts that have been made to improve neural architectures,
models trained with the standard Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) objective are known to prefer generating
dull and highly repetitive texts. For instance, in open-ended
generation tasks, such as story continuation or open dialogue generation, it has been observed that even with large
pre-trained models like GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), high
frequency tokens largely dominate the generation (Welleck
et al., 2020; Holtzman et al., 2020). Similar observation has
been reported in directed generation tasks such as summa1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Salesforce
Research Asia, Singapore. Correspondence to: Xiang Lin
<linx0057@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rization (See et al., 2017), image captioning (Melas-Kyriazi
et al., 2018; Wang & Chan, 2019) and machine translation
(Tu et al., 2016; Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019).
The methods proposed to solve the degeneration issues with
neural text generation can be primarily categorized into two
groups: (i) training based methods, which include incorporating auxiliary losses (See et al., 2017; Welleck et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2020) and coverage vector (See et al., 2017; Tu
et al., 2016); (ii) decoding based methods, such as stochastic
beam search (Kool et al., 2019), top-k sampling (Fan et al.,
2018), nucleus or top-p sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020),
and inverse probability weighting (Zhang et al., 2021).
Though decoding based methods, in particular nucleus and
top-k sampling, perform well in practice in open-ended
generation tasks, significantly reducing the degeneration
problem, they do not address the fundamental modeling issue that the token-level probabilities produced by the neural
model are problematic (Welleck et al., 2020). In addition,
our experiments demonstrate that sampling methods also
fail to generate high-quality texts in directed generation
tasks such as abstractive text summarization.
In this work, based on the known observation that the text
generation models trained with MLE objective tend to generate repetitive tokens or phrases, we introduce a novel method
called ScaleGrad for neural text generation training, by directly maneuvering the gradients to make the model learn
to use novel tokens during training. Our method lies in the
training based group, which aims to address the fundamental modeling problem, that is, the token-level distribution
predicted by the generation model.
In a concurrent work, Wang et al. (2020) introduce a temperature scaling approach called Contextual Temperature to
improve general language modeling. In this approach, the
temperature value in the softmax function is parameterized
by a neural network that is jointly trained with the main
model. Though the objective of their work is not explicitly
related to text degeneration, their analysis shows temperature scaling essentially changes the gradient updates that
each token receives during training, which further motivates
our work.
We conduct experiments with different neural architectures

