GANMEX: One-vs-One Attributions using GAN-based Model Explainability

Sheng-Min Shih * 1 Pin-Ju Tien * Zohar Karnin 1

Abstract
Attribution methods have been shown as promising approaches for identifying key features that
led to learned model predictions. While most
existing attribution methods rely on a baseline
input for performing feature perturbations, limited research has been conducted to address the
baseline selection issues. Poor choices of baselines limit the ability of one-vs-one explanations
for multi-class classifiers, which means the attribution methods were not able to explain why
an input belongs to its original class but not the
other specified target class. Achieving one-vsone explanation is crucial when certain classes
are more similar than others, e.g. two bird types
among multiple animals, by focusing on key differentiating features rather than shared features
across classes. In this paper, we present GANMEX, a novel approach applying Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) by incorporating the
to-be-explained classifier as part of the adversarial networks. Our approach effectively selects the
baseline as the closest realistic sample belonging
to the target class, which allows attribution methods to provide true one-vs-one explanations. We
showed that GANMEX baselines improved the
saliency maps and led to stronger performance on
multiple evaluation metrics over the existing baselines. Existing attribution results are known for
being insensitive to model randomization, and we
demonstrated that GANMEX baselines led to better outcome under the cascading randomization
of the model.

1. Introduction
Modern Deep Neural Network (DNN) designs have been
advancing the state-of-the-art performance of numerous
*

1
contribution
Amazon.
Correspondence
to:
Sheng-Min
Shih
<shengminshih@gmail.com>,
Pin-Ju Tien <pinju.tien@gmail.com>,
Zohar Karnin
<zkarnin@gmail.com>.

Equal

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

machine learning tasks with the help of increasing model
complexities, which at the same time reduces model transparency. The need for explainable decision is crucial for
earning trust of decision makers, required for regulatory purposes (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017), and extremely useful
for development and maintainability.
Due to this, various attribution methods were developed to
explain the DNNs decisions by attributing an importance
weight to each input feature. In high level, most attribution
methods, such as integrated gradient (IG) (Sundararajan
et al., 2017), DeepSHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), DeepLift
(Shrikumar et al., 2017) and Occlusion (Zeiler & Fergus,
2013), alter the features between the original values and
the values of some baseline instance, and accordingly highlight the features that impacts the model’s decision. While
extensive research has been conducted on the attribution
algorithms, research regarding the selection of baselines is
rather limited, and it is typically treated as an afterthought.
Most existing methodologies by default apply a uniformvalue baseline, which can dramatically impact the validity of
the feature attributions (Sturmfels et al., 2020), and as a result, existing attribution methods showed rather unperturbed
output even after complete randomization of the DNN (Adebayo et al., 2018).
In a multi-class classification setting, existing baseline
choices do not allow specifying a target class, and this has
limited the ability for providing a class-targeted or one-vsone explanation, meaning explaining why the input belongs
to class A and not a specific class B. These explanations are
crucial when certain classes are more similar than others, as
often happens for example when the classes have a hierarchy among them. For example, in a classification task of
apples, oranges and bananas, a model decision for apples
vs oranges should be based on their color rather than the
shape since both an apple and orange are round. This would
intuitively only happen when asking for an explanation of
‘why apple and not orange’ rather than ‘why apple’.
In this paper, we present GAN-based Model EXplainability (GANMEX), a novel methodology for generating onevs-one explanations leveraging GANs. In a nutshell, we
use GANs to produce a baseline image which is a realistic
instance from a target class that resembles the original instance. A naive use of GANs can be problematic because

