Robust Policy Gradient against Strong Data Corruption

Xuezhou Zhang 1 Yiding Chen 1 Jerry Zhu 1 Wen Sun 2

Abstract
We study the problem of robust reinforcement
learning under adversarial corruption on both rewards and transitions. Our attack model assumes
an adaptive adversary who can arbitrarily corrupt
the reward and transition at every step within an
episode, for at most ε-fraction of the learning
episodes. Our attack model is strictly stronger
than those considered in prior works. Our first
result shows that no algorithm can find a better than O(ε)-optimal policy under our attack
model. Next, we show that surprisingly the natural policy gradient (NPG) method retains a natural robustness property if the reward
corruption
√
is bounded, and can find an O( ε)-optimal policy. Consequently, we develop a Filtered Policy Gradient (FPG) algorithm that can tolerate
even unbounded reward corruption and can find
an O(ε1/4 )-optimal policy. We emphasize that
FPG is the first that can achieve a meaningful
learning guarantee when a constant fraction of
episodes are corrupted. Complimentary to the
theoretical results, we show that a neural implementation of FPG achieves strong robust learning
performance on the MuJoCo continuous control
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods are a popular class of Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods among practitioners, as they
are amenable to parametric policy classes (Schulman et al.,
2015b; 2017), resilient to modeling assumption mismatches
(Agarwal et al., 2019; 2020a), and they directly optimizing
the cost function of interest. However, one current drawback
of these methods and most existing RL algorithms is the lack
of robustness to data corruption, which severely limits their
applications to high-stack decision-making domains with
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Xuezhou Zhang <xzhang784@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

highly noisy data, such as autonomous driving, quantitative
trading, or medical diagnosis.
In fact, data corruption can be a larger threat in the RL
paradigm than in traditional supervised learning, because
supervised learning is often applied in a controlled environment where data are collected and cleaned by highly-skilled
data scientists and domain experts, whereas RL agents are
developed to learn in the wild using raw feedbacks from
the environment. While the increasing autonomy and less
supervision mark a step closer to the goal of general artificial intelligence, they also make the learning system more
susceptible to data corruption: autonomous vehicles can
misread traffic signs when the signs are contaminated by
adversarial stickers (Eykholt et al., 2018); chatbot can be
mistaught by a small group of tweeter users to make misogynistic and racist remarks (Neff & Nagy, 2016); recommendation systems can be fooled by a small number of
fake clicks/reviews/comments to rank products higher than
they should be. Despite the many vulnerabilities, robustness against data corruption in RL has not been extensively
studied only until recently.
The existing works on robust RL are mostly theoretical and
can be viewed as a successor of the adversarial bandit literature. However, several drawbacks of this line of approach
make them insufficient to modern real-world threats faced
by RL agents. We elaborate them below:
1. Reward vs. transition contamination: The majority of
prior works on adversarial RL focus on reward contamination (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Neu et al., 2010; 2012;
Zimin & Neu, 2013; Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019; Jin
et al., 2020a), while in reality the adversary often has
stronger control during the adversarial interactions. For
example, when a chatbot interacts with an adversarial
user, the user has full control over both the rewards and
transitions during that conversation episode.
2. Density of contamination: The existing works that do
handle adversarial/time-varying transitions can only tolerate sublinear number of interactions being corrupted
(Lykouris et al., 2019; Cheung et al., 2019; Ornik &
Topcu, 2019; Ortner et al., 2019). These methods would
fail when the adversary’s attack budget also grows linearly with time, which is often the case in practice.
3. Practicability: The majority of these work focuses on

