Bilevel Optimization: Convergence Analysis and Enhanced Design

Kaiyi Ji 1 Junjie Yang 1 Yingbin Liang 1

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has arisen as a powerful
tool for many machine learning problems such
as meta-learning, hyperparameter optimization,
and reinforcement learning. In this paper, we investigate the nonconvex-strongly-convex bilevel
optimization problem. For deterministic bilevel
optimization, we provide a comprehensive convergence rate analysis for two popular algorithms
respectively based on approximate implicit differentiation (AID) and iterative differentiation (ITD).
For the AID-based method, we orderwisely improve the previous convergence rate analysis due
to a more practical parameter selection as well
as a warm start strategy, and for the ITD-based
method we establish the first theoretical convergence rate. Our analysis also provides a quantitative comparison between ITD and AID based
approaches. For stochastic bilevel optimization,
we propose a novel algorithm named stocBiO,
which features a sample-efficient hypergradient
estimator using efficient Jacobian- and Hessianvector product computations. We provide the convergence rate guarantee for stocBiO, and show
that stocBiO outperforms the best known computational complexities orderwisely with respect to
the condition number κ and the target accuracy
. We further validate our theoretical results and
demonstrate the efficiency of bilevel optimization
algorithms by the experiments on meta-learning
and hyperparameter optimization.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization has received significant attention
recently and become an influential framework in various machine learning applications including metalearning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Bertinetto et al., 2018;
Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2020a), hyperparameter
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio
State University. Correspondence to: Kaiyi Ji <ji.367@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018; Shaban et al., 2019;
Feurer & Hutter, 2019), reinforcement learning (Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 2000; Hong et al., 2020), and signal processing (Kunapuli et al., 2008; Flamary et al., 2014). A general
bilevel optimization takes the following formulation.
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x))

x∈Rp

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y),

(1)

y∈Rq

where the upper- and inner-level functions f and g are both
jointly continuously differentiable. The goal of eq. (1) is
to minimize the objective function Φ(x) with respect to
(w.r.t.) x, where y ∗ (x) is obtained by solving the lower-level
minimization problem. In this paper, we focus on the setting
where the lower-level function g is strongly convex w.r.t. y,
and the upper-level objective function Φ(x) is nonconvex.
Such geometrics commonly exist in many applications such
as meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization, where
g corresponds to an empirical loss with a strongly-convex
regularizer and x are parameters of neural networks.
A broad collection of algorithms have been proposed to
solve bilevel optimization problems. For example, Hansen
et al. 1992; Shi et al. 2005; Moore 2010 reformulated the
bilevel problem in eq. (1) into a single-level constrained
problem based on the optimality conditions of the lowerlevel problem. However, such type of methods often involve a large number of constraints, and are hard to implement in machine learning applications. Recently, more efficient gradient-based bilevel optimization algorithms have
been proposed, which can be generally categorized into
the approximate implicit differentiation (AID) based approach (Domke, 2012; Pedregosa, 2016; Gould et al., 2016;
Liao et al., 2018; Ghadimi & Wang, 2018; Grazzi et al.,
2020; Lorraine et al., 2020) and the iterative differentiation
(ITD) based approach (Domke, 2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015;
Franceschi et al., 2017; 2018; Shaban et al., 2019; Grazzi
et al., 2020). However, most of these studies have focused
on the asymptotic convergence analysis, and the nonasymptotic convergence rate analysis (that characterizes how fast
an algorithm converges) has not been well explored except
a few attempts recently. Ghadimi & Wang 2018 provided
the convergence rate analysis for the ITD-based approach.
Grazzi et al. 2020 provided the iteration complexity for the
hypergradient computation via ITD and AID, but did not

