On Limited-Memory Subsampling Strategies for Bandits

Dorian Baudry * 1 Yoan Russac * 2 Olivier Cappé 2

Abstract
There has been a recent surge of interest in nonparametric bandit algorithms based on subsampling. One drawback however of these approaches
is the additional complexity required by random
subsampling and the storage of the full history
of rewards. Our first contribution is to show
that a simple deterministic subsampling rule, proposed in the recent work of Baudry et al. (2020)
under the name of “last-block subsampling”, is
asymptotically optimal in one-parameter exponential families. In addition, we prove that these
guarantees also hold when limiting the algorithm
memory to a polylogarithmic function of the time
horizon. These findings open up new perspectives, in particular for non-stationary scenarios
in which the arm distributions evolve over time.
We propose a variant of the algorithm in which
only the most recent observations are used for
subsampling, achieving optimal regret guarantees under the assumption of a known number of
abrupt changes. Extensive numerical simulations
highlight the merits of this approach, particularly
when the changes are not only affecting the means
of the rewards.

1. Introduction
In the K-armed stochastic bandit model, the learner repeatedly picks an action among K available alternatives and only
observes the rewards associated with her actions. By interacting with the environment, the learner aims at maximizing
her expected sum of rewards and needs to sequentially adapt
her decision strategy in light of the information gained up
to now. In this model, over-confident policies are provably
suboptimal and a proper trade-off between exploitation and
exploration has to be found.
*
Equal contribution 1 Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale
Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 2 DI ENS,
CNRS, Inria, ENS, Université PSL, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Dorian Baudry <dorian.baudry@inria.fr>, Yoan Russac
<yoan.russac@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Multi-armed bandits models have been used to address a
wide range of sequential optimization tasks under uncertainty: online recommendation (Li et al., 2011; 2016), strategic pricing (Bergemann & Välimäki, 1996) or clinical trials
(Zelen, 1969; Vermorel & Mohri, 2005) to name a few. In
its standard formulation the multi-armed bandit model postulates that the distributions of the rewards obtained when
drawing the different arms remain constant over time. However, in some scenarios the stationary assumption is not
realistic. In clinical trials, the disease to defeat may mutate
and the initially optimal treatment could become suboptimal compared to another candidate (Gorre et al., 2001). In
strategic pricing problems, the price maximizing the profit
of a given asset can evolve with the introduction of a new
product on the market (Eliashberg & Jeuland, 1986). For online recommendation systems, the preferences of the users
are likely to evolve (Wu et al., 2018) and collected data
becomes progressively obsolete.
During the past ten years, several works have considered
non-stationary variants of the multi-armed bandit model,
proposing methods that can be grouped into two main categories: they either actively try to detect modifications in
the distribution of the arms with changepoint detection algorithms (Liu et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2019; Auer et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2019; Besson et al., 2020) or they passively
forget past information (Garivier & Moulines, 2011; Raj &
Kalyani, 2017; Trovo et al., 2020). To some extent, all of
these methods require some knowledge on the distribution
to obtain theoretical guarantees.
To balance exploration and exploitation, the algorithms mentioned so far are based on one of the two standard building
blocks introduced in the bandit literature: Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB) constructions (Auer et al., 2002) or Thompson Sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933). However, there has
been a recent surge of interest for alternative non-parametric
bandit strategies (Kveton et al., 2019a;b; Riou & Honda,
2020). Instead of using prior information on the reward distributions as in Thompson sampling or of building tailored
upper-confidence bounds (Cappé et al., 2013) those methods only use the empirical distribution of the data. These
algorithms are non-parametric in the sense that the exact
same implementation can be used with different probability
distributions, while still achieving optimal regret guarantees
(in a sense to be defined in Section 2 below).

