Memory-Efficient Pipeline-Parallel DNN Training

Deepak Narayanan 1 * Amar Phanishayee 2 Kaiyu Shi 3 Xie Chen 3 Matei Zaharia 1

Abstract
Many state-of-the-art ML results have been obtained by scaling up the number of parameters in
existing models. However, parameters and activations for such large models often do not fit in
the memory of a single accelerator device; this
means that it is necessary to distribute training
of large models over multiple accelerators. In
this work, we propose PipeDream-2BW, a system that supports memory-efficient pipeline parallelism. PipeDream-2BW uses a novel pipelining and weight gradient coalescing strategy, combined with the double buffering of weights, to
ensure high throughput, low memory footprint,
and weight update semantics similar to data parallelism. In addition, PipeDream-2BW automatically partitions the model over the available hardware resources, while respecting hardware constraints such as memory capacities of accelerators
and interconnect topologies. PipeDream-2BW can
accelerate the training of large GPT and BERT
language models by up to 20× with similar final
model accuracy.

1. Introduction
In the quest to achieve higher accuracy across a range of
tasks, DNN models have grown in size, often by scaling up
the number of parameters in existing architectures (Devlin
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
It is challenging to train large models with billions of parameters. Modern accelerators have limited memory, which
means that the model parameters and intermediate outputs
that need to be in accelerator memory during training might
not fit on a single accelerator. One of the solutions researchers and practitioners have turned to is model-parallel
training (Dean et al., 2012; Chilimbi et al., 2014), where a
model is partitioned over multiple accelerator devices. How*
Work done in part as intern at Microsoft Research. 1 Stanford
University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Microsoft. Correspondence to:
Deepak Narayanan <deepakn@cs.stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ever, model parallelism, when traditionally deployed, can
either lead to resource under-utilization (Narayanan et al.,
2019) or high communication overhead with good scaling
only within a multi-GPU server (Shoeybi et al., 2019), and
consequently an increase in training time and dollar cost.
Recent work has proposed pipelined model parallelism
to accelerate model-parallel training.
For example,
GPipe (Huang et al., 2019) and PipeDream (Harlap et al.,
2018; Narayanan et al., 2019) push multiple inputs in sequence through a series of workers that each manage one
model partition, allowing different workers to process different inputs in parallel. Naı̈ve pipelining can harm model
convergence due to inconsistent weight versions between
the forward and backward passes of a particular input. Existing techniques trade off memory footprint and throughput
in different ways to avoid this. GPipe maintains a single
weight version, but has periodic pipeline flushes where the
pipeline is drained of inputs to update weights (Figure 1a);
these flushes limit overall throughput as resources are idle.
PipeDream does not periodically flush the pipeline but stores
multiple weight versions, which increases throughput but
also increases the memory footprint, making the training of
large models infeasible due to memory constraints. Efficient
training of large models requires an approach with both high
throughput and low memory footprint.
Additionally, the performance of a pipeline-parallel system
is dependent on how DNN model operators are partitioned
over workers. This is challenging for three reasons:
• Memory Capacity Constraints: Parameters and intermediate activations associated with a model partition need
to fit in the main device memory of the accelerator.
• Heterogeneous Network Interconnects: Training deployments today feature heterogeneous network topologies, with higher-bandwidth links between devices on the
same server.
• Large Search Space for Operator Placement: As
model sizes increase, splitting an operator graph becomes
computationally expensive since the number of distinct
partitionings is exponential in the model size.
In this paper, we introduce PipeDream-2BW, a system for
efficient pipeline-parallel training of DNN models with billions of parameters. PipeDream-2BW achieves high through-

