MARINA: Faster Non-Convex Distributed Learning with Compression

Eduard Gorbunov 1 2 3 Konstantin Burlachenko 3 Zhize Li 3 Peter Richtárik 3

Abstract
We develop and analyze MARINA: a new communication efficient method for non-convex distributed learning over heterogeneous datasets. MARINA employs a novel communication compression strategy based on the compression of gradient differences that is reminiscent of but different
from the strategy employed in the DIANA method
of Mishchenko et al. (2019). Unlike virtually
all competing distributed first-order methods, including DIANA, ours is based on a carefully designed biased gradient estimator, which is the
key to its superior theoretical and practical performance. The communication complexity bounds
we prove for MARINA are evidently better than
those of all previous first-order methods. Further,
we develop and analyze two variants of MARINA:
VR-MARINA and PP-MARINA. The first method
is designed for the case when the local loss functions owned by clients are either of a finite sum
or of an expectation form, and the second method
allows for a partial participation of clients – a
feature important in federated learning. All our
methods are superior to previous state-of-the-art
methods in terms of oracle/communication complexity. Finally, we provide a convergence analysis of all methods for problems satisfying the
Polyak-Łojasiewicz condition.

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization problems appear in various applications of machine learning, such as training deep neural
networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016) and matrix completion
and recovery (Ma et al., 2018; Bhojanapalli et al., 2016). Because of their practical importance, these problems gained
much attention in recent years, which led to a rapid develop1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 Yandex, Moscow, Russia 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence
to: Eduard Gorbunov <eduard.gorbunov@phystech.edu>, Peter
Richtárik <peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ment of new efficient methods for non-convex optimization
problems (Danilova et al., 2020), and especially the training
of deep learning models (Sun, 2019).
Training deep neural networks is notoriously computationally challenging and time-consuming. In the quest to improve the generalization performance of modern deep learning models, practitioners resort to using increasingly larger
datasets in the training process, and to support such workloads, it is imperative to use advanced parallel and distributed hardware, systems, and algorithms. Distributed
computing is often necessitated by the desire to train models
from data naturally distributed across several edge devices,
as is the case in federated learning (Konečný et al., 2016;
McMahan et al., 2017). However, even when this is not the
case, distributed methods are often very efficient at reducing the training time (Goyal et al., 2017; You et al., 2020).
Due to these and other reasons, distributed optimization has
gained immense popularity in recent years.
However, distributed methods almost invariably suffer from
the so-called communication bottleneck: the communication cost of information necessary for the workers to jointly
solve the problem at hand is often very high, and depending on the particular compute architecture, workload, and
algorithm used, it can be orders of magnitude higher than
the computation cost. A popular technique for resolving
this issue is communication compression (Seide et al., 2014;
Konečný et al., 2016; Suresh et al., 2017), which is based on
applying a lossy transformation/compression to the models,
gradients, or tensors to be sent over the network to save
on communication. Since applying a lossy compression
generally decreases the utility of the exchanged messages,
such an approach will typically lead to an increase in the
number of communications, and the overall usefulness of
this technique manifests itself in situations where the communication savings are larger compared to the increased
need for the number of communication rounds (Horváth
et al., 2019).
The optimization and machine learning communities have
exerted considerable effort in recent years to design distributed methods supporting compressed communication.
From many methods proposed, we emphasize VR-DIANA
(Horváth et al., 2019), FedCOMGATE (Haddadpour et al.,
2020), and FedSTEPH (Das et al., 2020) because these pa-

