Policy Gradient Bayesian Robust Optimization for Imitation Learning

Zaynah Javed * 1 Daniel S. Brown * 1 Satvik Sharma 1 Jerry Zhu 1 Ashwin Balakrishna 1 Marek Petrik 2
Anca D. Dragan 1 Ken Goldberg 1

Abstract
The difficulty in specifying rewards for many realworld problems has led to an increased focus on
learning rewards from human feedback, such as
demonstrations. However, there are often many
different reward functions that explain the human
feedback, leaving agents with uncertainty over
what the true reward function is. While most
policy optimization approaches handle this uncertainty by optimizing for expected performance,
many applications demand risk-averse behavior.
We derive a novel policy gradient-style robust optimization approach, PG-BROIL, that optimizes a
soft-robust objective that balances expected performance and risk. To the best of our knowledge, PG-BROIL is the first policy optimization
algorithm robust to a distribution of reward hypotheses which can scale to continuous MDPs.
Results suggest that PG-BROIL can produce a
family of behaviors ranging from risk-neutral to
risk-averse and outperforms state-of-the-art imitation learning algorithms when learning from
ambiguous demonstrations by hedging against uncertainty, rather than seeking to uniquely identify
the demonstrator’s reward function.

1. Introduction
We consider the following question: How should an intelligent agent act if it has epistemic uncertainty over its
objective function? In the fields of reinforcement learning
(RL) and optimal control, researchers and practitioners typically assume a known reward or cost function, which is
then optimized to obtain a policy. However, even in settings where the reward function is specified, it is usually
only a best approximation of the objective function that a
human thinks will lead to desirable behavior. Furthermore,
1
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley 2 CS
Department, University of New Hampshire. Correspondence to:
Daniel Brown <dsbrown@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

human-designed reward functions are also often augmented
with human feedback. This may also result in reward uncertainty since human feedback, be it in the form of policy
shaping (Griffith et al., 2013), reward shaping (Knox &
Stone, 2012), or a hand-designed reward function (HadfieldMenell et al., 2017; Ratner et al., 2018), can fail to perfectly
disambiguate the human’s intent true (Amodei et al., 2016).
Reward function ambiguity is also a key problem in imitation learning (Hussein et al., 2017; Osa et al., 2018), in
which an agent seeks to learn a policy from demonstrations
without access to the reward function that motivated the
demonstrations. While many imitation learning approaches
either sidestep learning a reward function and directly seek
to imitate demonstrations (Pomerleau, 1991; Torabi et al.,
2018) or take a maximum likelihood (Choi & Kim, 2011;
Brown et al., 2019) or maximum entropy approach to learning a reward function (Ziebart et al., 2008; Fu et al., 2017),
we believe that an imitation learning agent should explicitly reason about uncertainty over the true reward function to avoid misalignment with the demonstrator’s objectives (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020a).
Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) methods (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007) seek a posterior distribution
over likely reward functions given demonstrations, but often
perform policy optimization using the expected reward function or MAP reward function (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007;
Choi & Kim, 2011; Ratner et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020a).
However, in many real world settings such as robotics, finance, and healthcare, we desire a policy which is robust to
uncertainty over the true reward function.
Prior work on risk-averse and robust policy optimization in
reinforcement learning has mainly focused on robustness
to uncertainty over the true dynamics of the environment,
but assumes a known reward function (Garcıa & Fernández,
2015; Tamar et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2020; Derman et al.,
2018; Lobo et al., 2020; Thananjeyan et al., 2021). Some
work addresses robust policy optimization under reward
function uncertainty by taking a maxmin approach and optimizing a policy that is robust under the worst-case reward function (Syed et al., 2008; Regan & Boutilier, 2009;
Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018). However, these approaches are limited to tabular domains, and
maxmin approaches have been shown to sometimes lead to

