On Variational Inference in Biclustering Models

Guanhua Fang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St Bellevue WA 98004 USA
{guanhuafang, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
Biclustering structures exist ubiquitously in data
matrices and the biclustering problem was first
formalized by John Hartigan (1972) to cluster
rows and columns simultaneously. In this paper,
we develop a theory for the estimation of general
biclustering models, where the data is assumed to
follow certain statistical distribution with underlying biclustering structure. Due to the existence of
latent variables, directly computing the maximal
likelihood estimator is prohibitively difficult in
practice and we instead consider the variational
inference (VI) approach to solve the parameter
estimation problem. Although variational inference method generally has good empirical performance, there are very few theoretical results
around VI. In this paper, we obtain the precise estimation bound of variational estimator and show
that it matches the minimax rate in terms of estimation error under mild assumptions in biclustering setting. Furthermore, we study the convergence property of the coordinate ascent variational inference algorithm, where both local and
global convergence results have been provided.
Numerical results validate our new theories.

1. Introduction
In a wide range of data analytic scenarios, we encounter
two-mode matrices with biclustering structures (Hartigan,
1972) and we might be interested in modeling the effects of
both rows and columns on the data matrix. Consider the following specific situations. In educational testing (Templin
and Henson, 2010; Matechou et al., 2016), two modes could
be test takers and question items. We expect that test takers
with same skills will form a group and similar questions
may also form into different groups. In gene expression
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

studies (Prelić et al., 2006; Gu and Liu, 2008), one can organize the data matrix such that each row corresponds to a
cancer patients and each column corresponds to transcript.
Then the patients can form groups according to different
cancer subtypes and the genes are also expected to exhibit
clustering effect according to different pathways they belong
to. In online e-commerce service (Dolnicar et al., 2012),
researcher may wish to study user behaviors through their
purchasing and navigation history. Users and items can be
viewed as two modes. Users with similar shopping preferences can be clustered into a group and items with same
functionality can also be grouped together.
To capture aforementioned group effects, statistical models are often used for modeling the structure of two-mode
data matrix. Latent variables are introduced to capture underlying block effects (Govaert and Nadif, 2010). However, in two-mode block mixture models, the maximal likelihood estimator (MLE) is prohibitively hard to compute
since computing marginal likelihood requires summation
over exponentially many terms. Quite a few computational
methods are developed to estimate the parameters in biclustering models (e.g., double k-means method (Maurizio, 2001), model-based expectation-maximization (EM)
method (Pledger and Arnold, 2014), Gibbs-sampling based
method (Meeds and Roweis, 2007; Gu and Liu, 2008), nonparametric Bayesian method (Niu et al., 2012)). Unfortunately, these methods have no corresponding theoretical
results. We aim to fill this gap in the literature.
Variational inference (VI) approach (Jordan et al., 1999;
Hoffman et al., 2013) is a powerful tool for parameter estimation in complicated hierarchical latent variable models.
When the analytic form of posterior distribution of latent
variables cannot be computed, VI seeks a good candidate
distribution to approximate the true posterior and reduces
computation complexity. VI method has also become popular in biclustering models in the recent literature (Guan et al.,
2010; Vu and Aitkin, 2015) . In this paper, we start from a
theoretical perspective and consider an estimation problem
for biclustering models via variational inference and develop
the corresponding theory. Specifically, we show both upper

