Accelerating Feedforward Computation via
Parallel Nonlinear Equation Solving

Yang Song 1 Chenlin Meng 1 Renjie Liao 2 3 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Feedforward computation, such as evaluating a
neural network or sampling from an autoregressive model, is ubiquitous in machine learning.
The sequential nature of feedforward computation,
however, requires a strict order of execution and
cannot be easily accelerated with parallel computing. To enable parallelization, we frame the task
of feedforward computation as solving a system
of nonlinear equations. We then propose to find
the solution using a Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel fixedpoint iteration method, as well as hybrid methods
of both. Crucially, Jacobi updates operate independently on each equation and can be executed
in parallel. Our method is guaranteed to give exactly the same values as the original feedforward
computation with a reduced (or equal) number of
parallelizable iterations, and hence reduced time
given sufficient parallel computing power. Experimentally, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach in accelerating (i) backpropagation of RNNs, (ii) evaluation of DenseNets, and
(iii) autoregressive sampling of MADE and PixelCNN++, with speedup factors between 2.1 and
26 under various settings.

1. Introduction
With sufficient parallel computing resources, we can certainly accelerate any algorithm with a parallelizable component. However, many machine learning algorithms heavily
rely on a seemlingly non-parallelizable part—feedforward
computation. To evaluate the output of a neural network,
layers are computed one after the other in a feedforward fashion. To sample text from an autoregressive model, words
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford Univer2
sity.
Department of Computer Science, University of
3
Toronto.
Vector Institute.
Correspondence to: Yang
Song <yangsong@cs.stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon <ermon@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

are generated in sequence one by one. Because of the inherently sequential nature, it is difficult to directly perform
feedforward computation in parallel—how can one output
a label before any intermediate features are extracted, or
generate the last word in a sentence before having seen the
initial part?
At first sight, the idea of executing in parallel the various
steps that comprise a feedforward computation procedure
seems hopeless. Indeed, the task is clearly impossible in
general. Machine learning workloads, however, have special
properties that make the idea viable in some cases. First,
computations are numerical in nature, and can tolerate small
approximation errors. For example, it is acceptable if a faster
method produces image samples at the cost of small imperceptible errors. Second, computations have been learned
from data rather than designed by hand. As a result, they
might involve unnecessary steps, and have dependencies between the various (sequential) stages that are weak enough
to be ignored without significantly affecting the final results.
Although we might not be able to explicitly characterize this
structure of redundant dependencies, as long as it is present,
we can design methods to take advantage of it.
Based on these insights, we propose an approach to accelerate feedforward computation with parallelism. Despite
not beneficial for certain types of feedforward computation,
it works well for many cases of practical interest in machine learning. Our key idea is to interpret feedforward
computation as solving a triangular system of nonlinear
equations, and use efficient numerical solvers to find the
solution. This is advantageous because (i) many numerical
equation solvers can be easily parallelized; and (ii) iterative
numerical equation solvers generate a sequence of intermediate solutions of increasing quality, so we can use early
stopping to trade off approximation error with computation
time. In particular, we propose to find the solution of the
triangular system using nonlinear Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel
(GS) methods (Ortega & Rheinboldt, 1970). Crucially, Jacobi iterations update each state independently and can be
naturally executed in parallel. Moreover, we show feedforward computation corresponds to GS iterations, and can be
combined with Jacobi iterations to build hybrid methods
that interpolate between them.

