Connecting Optimal Ex-Ante Collusion in Teams to Extensive-Form
Correlation: Faster Algorithms and Positive Complexity Results
Gabriele Farina 1 Andrea Celli 2 Nicola Gatti 2 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract
We focus on the problem of finding an optimal strategy for a team of players that faces an
opponent in an imperfect-information zero-sum
extensive-form game. Team members are not allowed to communicate during play but can coordinate before the game. In this setting, it is
known that the best the team can do is sample a
profile of potentially randomized strategies (one
per player) from a joint (a.k.a. correlated) probability distribution at the beginning of the game. In
this paper, we first provide new modeling results
about computing such an optimal distribution by
drawing a connection to a different literature on
extensive-form correlation. Second, we provide
an algorithm that allows one for capping the number of profiles employed in the solution. This
begets an anytime algorithm by increasing the
cap. We find that often a handful of well-chosen
such profiles suffices to reach optimal utility for
the team. This enables team members to reach
coordination through a simple and understandable plan. Finally, inspired by this observation
and leveraging theoretical concepts that we introduce, we develop an efficient column-generation
algorithm for finding an optimal distribution for
the team. We evaluate it on a suite of common
benchmark games. It is three orders of magnitude
faster than the prior state of the art on games that
the latter can solve and it can also solve several
games that were previously unsolvable.

*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213 2 DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy 3 Strategic Machine, Inc. 4 Strategy Robot, Inc.
5
Optimized Markets, Inc.. Correspondence to: Gabriele Farina
<gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Andrea Celli <andrea.celli@polimi.it>,
Nicola Gatti <nicola.gatti@polimi.it>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Much of the computational game theory literature has focused on finding strong strategies for large two-player zerosum extensive-form games. In that setting, perfect game
playing corresponds to playing strategies that belong to a
Nash equilibrium, and such strategies can be found in polynomial time in the size of the game. Recent landmark results,
such as superhuman agents for heads-up limit and no-limit
Texas hold’em poker (Bowling et al., 2015; Brown & Sandholm, 2019; Moravčı́k et al., 2017) show that the problem of
computing strong strategies in two-player zero-sum games
is well understood both in theory and in practice. The same
cannot be said for almost any type of strategic multi-player
interaction, where computing strong strategies is generally
hard in the worst case.
In this paper, we study adversarial team games, that is,
games in which a team of coordinating (colluding) players
faces an opponent. We will focus on a two-player team
coordinating against a third player. Team members can
plan jointly at will before the game, but are not allowed
to communicate during the game (other than through their
actions in the game). These games are a popular middle
ground between two-player zero-sum games and multiplayer
games (von Stengel & Koller, 1997; Celli & Gatti, 2018).
They can be used to model many strategic interactions of
practical relevance. For example, how should two players
colluding against a third at a poker table play? Or, how
would the two defenders in Bridge (who are prohibited
from communicating privately during the game) play optimally against the declarer? Even though adversarial team
games are conceptually zero-sum interactions between two
entities—the team and the opponent—computing optimal
strategies is hard in this setting. Even finding a best-response
strategy for the team given a fixed strategy for the opponent
is hard (Celli & Gatti, 2018).
One might think that finding the optimal strategy for the
team simply amounts to finding an optimal profile of potentially mixed (a.k.a. randomized) strategies, one strategy
per team members. A solution of this type that yields maximum expected sum of utilities for the team players against
a rational (that is, best-responding) opponent is known as a
team-maxmin equilibrium (TME) strategy (Basilico et al.,

