Learning to Rehearse in Long Sequence Memorization

Zhu Zhang * 1 2 Chang Zhou * 2 Jianxin Ma 2 Zhijie Lin 1 Jingren Zhou 2 Hongxia Yang 2 Zhou Zhao 1

Abstract
Existing reasoning tasks often have an important assumption that the input contents can be
always accessed while reasoning, requiring unlimited storage resources and suffering from severe time delay on long sequences. To achieve
efficient reasoning on long sequences with limited storage resources, memory augmented neural networks introduce a human-like write-read
memory to compress and memorize the long input sequence in one pass, trying to answer subsequent queries only based on the memory. But
they have two serious drawbacks: 1) they continually update the memory from current information
and inevitably forget the early contents; 2) they
do not distinguish what information is important
and treat all contents equally. In this paper, we
propose the Rehearsal Memory (RM) to enhance
long-sequence memorization by self-supervised
rehearsal with a history sampler. To alleviate the
gradual forgetting of early information, we design
self-supervised rehearsal training with recollection and familiarity tasks. Further, we design a
history sampler to select informative fragments
for rehearsal training, making the memory focus
on the crucial information. We evaluate the performance of our rehearsal memory by the synthetic
bAbI task and several downstream tasks, including text/video question answering and recommendation on long sequences.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the tremendous progress of neural networks
has enabled machines to perform reasoning given the input
contents X and a query Q, e.g., infer the answer of given
questions from the text/video stream in text/video question
answering (Seo et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2019a; Le et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, China 2 DAMO
Academy, Alibaba Group, China. Correspondence to: Zhou Zhao
<zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020b), or predict whether a user will click the given item
based on the user behavior sequence in recommender systems (Ren et al., 2019; Pi et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021).
Studies that achieve top performances at such reasoning
tasks usually have an important assumption that the raw input contents X can be always accessed while answering the
query Q. In this setting, the complex interaction between
X and Q can be designed to extract query-relevant information from X with little loss, such as co-attention interaction (Xiong et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2019b). Though these
methods (Seo et al., 2016; Le et al., 2020b) can effectively
handle these reasoning tasks, they require unlimited storage
resources to hold the original input X. Further, they have to
encode the whole input contents and develop the elaborate
interaction from scratch, which are time-consuming. This
is not acceptable for online services that require instant response such as recommender systems, as the input sequence
becomes extremely long (Ren et al., 2019).
To achieve efficient reasoning on long sequences with
limited storage resources, memory augmented neural networks (MANNs) (Graves et al., 2014; 2016) introduce a
write-read memory M with fixed-size capacity (size much
smaller than |X|) to compress and remember the input contents X. In the inference phase, they can capture queryrelevant clues directly from the memory M , i.e., the raw
input X is not needed at the time of answering Q. This
procedure is very similar to the daily situation of our human
beings, i.e., we may not know the tasks Q that we will answer in the future when we are experiencing current events,
but we have the instincts to continually memorize our experiences within the limited memory capacity, from which we
can rapidly recall and draw upon past events to guide our
behaviors given the present tasks (Moscovitch et al., 2016;
Baddeley, 1992). Such human-like memory-based methods
bring three benefits for long-sequence reasoning: 1) storage
efficiency: we only need to maintain the limited memory
M rather than X; 2) reasoning efficiency: inference over
M and Q is more lightweight than inference over X and Q
from scratch ; 3) high reusability: the maintained memory
M can be reused for any query Q.
However, existing MANNs have two serious drawbacks for
memory-based long-sequence reasoning. First, these approaches ignore the long-term memorization ability of the
memory. They learn how to maintain the memory M only

