Exploration in Approximate Hyper-State Space
for Meta Reinforcement Learning

Luisa Zintgraf 1 Leo Feng 2 Cong Lu 1 Maximilian Igl 1 Kristian Hartikainen 1
Katja Hofmann 3 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
To rapidly learn a new task, it is often essential
for agents to explore efficiently – especially when
performance matters from the first timestep. One
way to learn such behaviour is via meta-learning.
Many existing methods however rely on dense
rewards for meta-training, and can fail catastrophically if the rewards are sparse. Without a suitable
reward signal, the need for exploration during
meta-training is exacerbated. To address this,
we propose HyperX, which uses novel reward
bonuses for meta-training to explore in approximate hyper-state space (where hyper-states represent the environment state and the agent’s task
belief). We show empirically that HyperX metalearns better task-exploration and adapts more
successfully to new tasks than existing methods.

1. Introduction
In meta-learning, the experience of a machine learning
model over multiple learning episodes (which can range
from single model updates to entire lifetimes), is used to improve future learning performance (Hospedales et al., 2020),
e.g., in terms of data or computational efficiency. This
“learning to learn” requires a feedback signal on the metalevel, which quantifies how well the model performs after a
learning episode. In meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL),
this is often measured by episodic (online or final) return of
the agent, or learning improvement. If this feedback signal
is not present because the agent has not made sufficient
learning progress, meta-learning can fail to solve the task.
In this case, the agent faces an exploration challenge at the
meta-level: how to find a good meta-learning signal in the
first place.
1
University of Oxford, UK. 2 Mila, Université de Montréal,
Canada. 3 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence
to: Luisa Zintgraf <luisa.zintgraf@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of the Meta-Exploration Problem. In this
environment, the agent must find the hidden treasure but cannot
see above the grass. Two possible task-exploration strategies are
to (s1) search the grass for the treasure, or (s2) climb up the
mountain, see the treasure, and go there. The agent is meta-trained
across different treasure locations, and should try both s1 and s2
to find out which one leads to higher online return in expectation
across tasks. We call this meta-exploration across task-exploration
strategies. Due to a lack of sufficient meta-exploration, existing
methods often fail to find the (superior) task-exploration strategy
s2 (Sec 5.1).

A weakness of existing meta-RL methods is that they often
rely on dense rewards or sufficiently small state spaces, such
that even with naive exploration during meta-training the
agent receives rewards that guide it towards good behaviour.
However, we observe empirically (Sec 5) that if the rewards
are sparse or if exploratory behaviour is penalised in the
short term, existing methods can fail. This is problematic,
since defining dense rewards can be tedious and error-prone,
and many real-world applications have sparse rewards (e.g.,
a fail/success criterion). Hence, to make meta-learning
practical for such settings, we need methods that can metalearn even when rewards are sparse.
In this paper we consider this challenge in the context of
meta-learning fast online adaptation to tasks from a given
distribution. In this setting, the agent aims to maximise
expected online return when adapting to an unknown task,
which requires it to carefully trade off exploration and exploitation. To make this distinction clear, we call this taskexploration in contrast to meta-exploration, illustrated with
an example in Figure 1. Task-exploration refers to the

