Network Inference and Influence Maximization from Samples

Wei Chen 1 Xiaoming Sun 2 3 Jialin Zhang 2 3 Zhijie Zhang 2 3

Abstract
Influence maximization is the task of selecting a
small number of seed nodes in a social network to
maximize the spread of the influence from these
seeds, and it has been widely investigated in the
past two decades. In the canonical setting, the
whole social network as well as its diffusion parameters is given as input. In this paper, we consider the more realistic sampling setting where
the network is unknown and we only have a set of
passively observed cascades that record the set of
activated nodes at each diffusion step. We study
the task of influence maximization from these
cascade samples (IMS), and present constant approximation algorithms for this task under mild
conditions on the seed set distribution. To achieve
the optimization goal, we also provide a novel
solution to the network inference problem, that
is, learning diffusion parameters and the network
structure from the cascade data. Comparing with
prior solutions, our network inference algorithm
requires weaker assumptions and does not rely
on maximum-likelihood estimation and convex
programming. Our IMS algorithms enhance the
learning-and-then-optimization approach by allowing a constant approximation ratio even when
the diffusion parameters are hard to learn, and we
do not need any assumption related to the network
structure or diffusion parameters.

1. Introduction
Maximizing the spread of influence through a social network
has been widely studied in the past two decades. It models
the phenomenon in which a small set of initially active
1

2

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.. Correspondence to: Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>, Xiaoming Sun,
Jialin Zhang, Zhijie Zhang <{sunxiaoming, zhangjialin, zhangzhijie}@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

nodes called seeds takes some piece of information (news,
ideas or opinions, etc.), and the information spreads over
the network to activate the remaining nodes. The expected
number of final active nodes is called the influence spread
of the seed set. The influence maximization problem asks
to pick at most k seeds in order to maximize the influence
spread. Under many diffusion models such as the discrete
time independent cascade (IC) model and linear threshold
(LT) model (Kempe et al., 2003), the problem enjoys a (1 −
1/e − ε)-approximation (with small ε > 0), which is tight
assuming P 6= NP (Feige, 1998). It has found applications
in many scenarios.
Traditional influence maximization problem requires as input the whole social network (as well as its parameters),
based on which one can compute or estimate the influence
spread function. In many scenarios, however, this might be
too demanding, especially for those who do not have free
access to the network. In this work, we consider influence
maximization in the sampling setting where one only has
access to a set of passively observed cascades spreading
over an implicit social network. Each cascade records the
set of activated nodes at each time step. Such sample data
is available in many scenarios, especially on the Internet
where the timestamps can be recorded in principle. We
are interested in whether we can maximize the influence
from such sample data. We model this problem as influence
maximization from samples below:
Influence maximization from samples (IMS). For an unknown social network G with IC model parameters, given t
cascade samples where each seed is independently sampled
with an unknown probability, can we find a seed set of size
at most k such that its influence spread is a constant approximation of the optimal seed set, when t is polynomial to the
size of G?
En route to solving the above problem, a natural and reasonable approach is to first learn the network structure as
well as its parameters, and then maximize the influence over
the learned network. This leads to the well-studied network
inference problem below.
Network Inference. For an unknown social network G,
given polynomial number of cascade samples where each
seed is sampled independently with an unknown probability,
estimate all IC model parameters such that with probability

