Recovering AES Keys with a Deep Cold Boot Attack

Itamar Zimerman * 1 Eliya Nachmani * 1 2 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract
Cold boot attacks inspect the corrupted random
access memory soon after the power has been
shut down. While most of the bits have been
corrupted, many bits, at random locations, have
not. Since the keys in many encryption schemes
are being expanded in memory into longer keys
with fixed redundancies, the keys can often be
restored. In this work, we combine a novel cryptographic variant of a deep error correcting code
technique with a modified SAT solver scheme
to apply the attack on AES keys. Even though
AES consists of Rijndael S-box elements, that are
specifically designed to be resistant to linear and
differential cryptanalysis, our method provides a
novel formalization of the AES key scheduling
as a computational graph, which is implemented
by a neural message passing network. Our results
show that our methods outperform the state of the
art attack methods by a very large margin.

1. Introduction
Many cipher architectures use expanded keys in their
code. For reasons of efficiency, these algorithms do not
re-calculate the expanded key with the expansion function
each time a message is to be encrypted or decrypted. Instead, it is written to some RAM device (such as DDR and
SRAM), until it is used. These devices often induce a security leak: after the power is shut down (even if the device
is damaged, deleted, or burned) parts of the data still exist
in the memory. This phenomenon is called data remanence
(Gutmann, 2001; Skorobogatov, 2005). Its occurrence was
established for a variety of memory devices (Yitbarek et al.,
2017; Bauer et al., 2016).
A cold boot attack is a side-channel attack (Halderman et al.,
2009), in which the attacker tries to recover the encryption
*

Equal contribution 1 Tel Aviv University 2 Facebook AI
Research. Correspondence to: Itamar Zimerman <zimerman1@mail.tau.ac.il>, Eliya Nachmani <enk100@gmail.com>,
Lior Wolf <liorwolf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

key by exploiting the memory leakage and the redundancy of
the key expansion function used by the encryption method.
This attack is well-known, and defense methods for it have
been heavily researched (Ooi & Kam, 2009). Vulnerable devices include computers and smartphones (CBT, a;b; Müller
et al., 2012; CBT, c;d). Examples of encryption systems
that have been broken by this attack include Microsoft’s
BitLocker, Apple’s FileVault, Linux’s Dm-crypt, TrueCrypt,
Google’s Android’s disk encryption, and many others.
The data remanence phenomena are often modeled in one of
two ways: a theoretical model and a more practical one. In
both models, there is a tendency of decaying the bit values
to the ground state, which can be 0 or 1. For simplicity, we
assume that 0 is the ground state. The strength of this trend
depends on the hardware, the temperature, and the time that
has elapsed since the power was turned off.
This model is formalized in the literature by the probability
δ0 that a key-bit with a value of 1 on the original key will
corrupt to value 0. Common values in the literature are in
the range of δ0 ∈ [0.3, 0.75]. In the theoretical model, we
assume that no bit will corrupt from 0 to 1. The realistic
model accounts for some reading errors for bits with an
original value of 0. Let δ1 be the probability that a keybit with an original value of 0 will corrupt to value 1. In
the theoretical model δ1 = 0.0, and in the realistic model
δ1 ∈ {0.0005, 0.001}.
The main computational problem is the one of recovering
an encryption key from its corrupted key by using the redundancy that is induced by the key expansion function. In this
paper, we present a new algorithmic method based on deep
learning for the key recovering problem. While the previous
leading methods are based completely on SAT solvers, our
method contains a deep network that provides an estimate
of the solution, which is subsequently used to seed the SAT
solver. The network employs techniques from the field of
error-correcting codes, which are further enhanced by cryptographic components that we term as neural S-boxes. Our
method is employed in order to drastically improve an existing algorithm for recovering AES-256 keys (Daemen &
Rijmen, 1999). AES is the most popular symmetric cipher
and it considered to be completely secure.

