Segmenting Hybrid Trajectories using Latent ODEs

Ruian Shi 1 2 Quaid Morris 1 2 3

Smooth dynamics interrupted by discontinuities
are known as hybrid systems and arise commonly
in nature. Latent ODEs allow for powerful representation of irregularly sampled time series but
are not designed to capture trajectories arising
from hybrid systems. Here, we propose the Latent
Segmented ODE (LatSegODE), which uses Latent ODEs to perform reconstruction and changepoint detection within hybrid trajectories featuring jump discontinuities and switching dynamical
modes. Where it is possible to train a Latent ODE
on the smooth dynamical fows between discontinuities, we apply the pruned exact linear time
(PELT) algorithm to detect changepoints where
latent dynamics restart, thereby maximizing the
joint probability of a piece-wise continuous latent dynamical representation. We propose usage of the marginal likelihood as a score function for PELT, circumventing the need for modelcomplexity-based penalization. The LatSegODE
outperforms baselines in reconstructive and segmentation tasks including synthetic data sets of
sine waves, Lotka Volterra dynamics, and UCI
Character Trajectories.

1. Introduction
The complexity of modelling time-series data increases
when accounting for discontinuous changes in dynamical
behavior. As a motivational example, consider the LotkaVolterra equations, a simplifed model of predator-prey interactions. The system is described by the pair of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs):
dx
dy
= αx − βxy
= δxy − γy
(1)
dt
dt
where x and y are the population size of predators and
prey respectively. Coeffcients α, β, δ, γ describe interac1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute, Toronto 3 Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. Correspondence to: Ruian Shi
<ian.shi@mail.utoronto.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion characteristics, such as the rate of encounter, and rate of
successful predation per encounter. When these parameters
are fxed, modelling this system from observed population
trajectories is straightforward. However, external factors
can perturb the system. Additional predators can suddenly
be introduced via migration midway in an observed population trajectory, causing a jump discontinuity in the trajectory. The coeffcients describing predator-prey interaction
may also abruptly change, instantaneously changing the
dynamical mode of the system. Systems featuring smooth
dynamical fows (SDFs) interrupted by discontinuities are
known as hybrid systems (Van Der Schaft & Schumacher,
2000). These discontinuities can arise as discrete jumps or
instantaneous switches in dynamical mode (Ackerson & Fu,
1970), shown in Figure 1 at times (a) and (b) respectively.
We propose a method to model the hybrid trajectories which
arise from hybrid systems.
SDF

SDF

SDF
Prey
Predator

6
Population

Abstract

4
2

0

2

4

6
(a)

8
Time

10
(b)

12

14

Figure 1. A Lotka-Volterra hybrid trajectory composed of three
smooth dynamical fows. The plot shows populations of predators
and prey over time. At time (a), a jump discontinuity occurs. At
time (b), a distributional shift in dynamical coeffcients occurs.

Recently, the Latent ODE architecture (Rubanova et al.,
2019) has been introduced to represent time series using
latent dynamical trajectories. However, Latent ODEs are not
designed to model discontinuous latent dynamics and, thus,
represent hybrid trajectories poorly. Here, we propose the
Latent Segmented ODE (LatSegODE), an extension of a Latent ODE explicitly designed for hybrid trajectories. Given
a base model Latent ODE trained on the segments of SDFs
between discontinuities, we apply the Pruned Exact Linear
Time (PELT) search algorithm (Killick et al., 2012) to model
hybrid trajectories as a sequence of samples from the base
model, each with a different initial state. The LatSegODE
detects the positions where the latent ODE dynamics are
restarted with a new initial state, thus modelling hybrid trajectories using a piece-wise continuous latent trajectory. We
provide a novel way to use deep architectures in conjunction

