Privacy-Preserving Feature Selection with Secure Multiparty Computation

Xiling Li 1 Rafael Dowsley 2 Martine De Cock 1 3

Abstract
Existing work on privacy-preserving machine
learning with Secure Multiparty Computation
(MPC) is almost exclusively focused on model
training and on inference with trained models, thereby overlooking the important data preprocessing stage. In this work, we propose the
first MPC based protocol for private feature selection based on the filter method, which is independent of model training, and can be used in combination with any MPC protocol to rank features.
We propose an efficient feature scoring protocol
based on Gini impurity to this end. To demonstrate the feasibility of our approach for practical
data science, we perform experiments with the
proposed MPC protocols for feature selection in
a commonly used machine-learning-as-a-service
configuration where computations are outsourced
to multiple servers, with semi-honest and with
malicious adversaries. Regarding effectiveness,
we show that secure feature selection with the
proposed protocols improves the accuracy of classifiers on a variety of real-world data sets, without
leaking information about the feature values or
even which features were selected. Regarding
efficiency, we document runtimes ranging from
several seconds to an hour for our protocols to
finish, depending on the size of the data set and
the security settings.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) thrives because of the availability of
an abundant amount of data, and of computational resources
and devices to collect and process such data. In many effective ML applications, the data that is consumed during
ML model training and inference is often of a very personal
1
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, Washington, USA 2 Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton, Australia 3 Department of
Appl. Math., Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium. Correspondence to: Xiling Li <xl32@uw.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

nature. Protection of user data has become a significant
concern in ML model development and deployment, giving
rise to laws to safeguard the privacy of users, such as the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the
California Customer Privacy Act (CCPA). Cryptographic
protocols that allow computations on encrypted data are an
increasingly important mechanism to enable data science applications while complying with privacy regulations. In this
paper, we contribute to the field of privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML), a burgeoning and interdisciplinary
research area at the intersection of cryptography and ML
that has gained significant traction in tackling privacy issues.
In particular, we use techniques from Secure Multiparty
Computation (MPC), an umbrella term for cryptographic
approaches that allow two or more parties to jointly compute a specified output from their private information in a
distributed fashion, without actually revealing their private
information to each other (Cramer et al., 2015). We consider the scenario where different data owners or enterprises
are interested in training an ML model over their combined
data. There is a lot of potential in training ML models over
the aggregated data from multiple enterprises. First of all,
training on more data typically yields higher quality ML
models. For instance, one could train a more accurate model
to predict the length of hospital stay of COVID-19 patients
when combining data from multiple clinics. This is an application where the data is horizontally distributed, meaning
that each data owner or enterprise has records/rows of the
data. Furthermore, being able to combine different data
sets enables new applications that pool together data from
multiple enterprises, or even from different entities within
the same enterprise. An example of this would be an ML
model that relies on lab test results as well as healthcare
bill payment information about patients, which are usually
managed by different departments within a hospital system.
This is an example of an application where the data is vertically distributed, i.e. each data owner has their own columns.
While there are clear advantages to training ML models over
data that is distributed across multiple data owners, often
these data owners do not want to disclose their data to each
other, because the data in itself constitutes a competitive
advantage, or because the data owners need to comply with
data privacy regulations. These roadblocks can even affect
different departments within the same enterprise, such as
different clinics within a healthcare system.

