CIFS: Improving Adversarial Robustness of CNNs via Channel-wise
Importance-based Feature Selection

Hanshu Yan 1 Jingfeng Zhang 2 Gang Niu 2 Jiashi Feng 1 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 3 Masashi Sugiyama 2 4

Abstract
We investigate the adversarial robustness of CNNs
from the perspective of channel-wise activations.
By comparing normally trained and adversarially trained models, we observe that adversarial
training (AT) robustifies CNNs by aligning the
channel-wise activations of adversarial data with
those of their natural counterparts. However, the
channels that are negatively-relevant (NR) to predictions are still over-activated when processing
adversarial data. Besides, we also observe that AT
does not result in similar robustness for all classes.
For the robust classes, channels with larger activation magnitudes are usually more positivelyrelevant (PR) to predictions, but this alignment
does not hold for the non-robust classes. Given
these observations, we hypothesize that suppressing NR channels and aligning PR ones with their
relevances further enhances the robustness of
CNNs under AT. To examine this hypothesis, we
introduce a novel mechanism, i.e., Channel-wise
Importance-based Feature Selection (CIFS). The
CIFS manipulates channels’ activations of certain
layers by generating non-negative multipliers to
these channels based on their relevances to predictions. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets including CIFAR10 and SVHN clearly
verify the hypothesis and CIFS’s effectiveness of
robustifying CNNs.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
tremendous successes in real-world applications, such as au1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 2 RIKEN Center for
Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Tokyo, Japan; 3 Department
of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore;
4
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Jingfeng Zhang
<jingfeng.Zhang@riken.jp>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tonomous vehicles (Grigorescu et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020)
and computer-aided medical diagnoses (Trebeschi et al.,
2017; Shu et al., 2020). However, CNNs have be shown
vulnerable to well-crafted (and even minute) adversarial
perturbations to inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Ilyas et al., 2019). This has become hazardous
in high-stakes applications such as medical diagnoses and
autonomous vehicles.
Recently, many empirical defense methods have been proposed to secure CNNs against these adversarial perturbations, such as adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018),
input/feature denoising (Xie et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020)
and defensive distillation (Papernot et al., 2016). AT (Madry
et al., 2018), which generates adversarial data on the fly for
training CNNs, has emerged as one of the most successful
methods. AT effectively robustifies CNNs but leads to a
clear drop in the accuracies for natural data (Tsipras et al.,
2019) and suffers from the problem of overfitting to adversarial data used for training (Rice et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). To ameliorate these problems, researchers have proposed variants of AT, including
TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019) and Friendly-AdversarialTraining (FAT) (Zhang et al., 2020). To further robustify
CNNs under AT, many works attempt to propose novel defense mechanism to mitigate the effects of adversarial data
on features (Xie et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2019). For example, Xie et al. (2019) found that adversarial data result in abnormal activations in the feature maps
and performed feature denoising to remove the adversarial
effects. Most of these works improved robustness by identifying and suppressing abnormalities at certain positions
across channels (commonly referred to as feature maps in
CNNs), whereas the other direction, namely, the connection between robustness and irregular activations of certain
entire channels, has received scant attention.
Since channels of CNNs’ deeper layers are capable of extracting semantic characteristic features (Zeiler & Fergus,
2014), the process of making predictions usually relies heavily on aggregating information from various channels (Bach
et al., 2015). As such, anomalous activations of certain
channels may result in incorrect predictions. Thus, it is
imperative to explore which channels are entirely irregularly

