Zero-Shot Knowledge Distillation from a Decision-Based Black-Box Model

Zi Wang 1

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a successful approach for deep neural network acceleration, with
which a compact network (student) is trained by
mimicking the softmax output of a pre-trained
high-capacity network (teacher). In tradition, KD
usually relies on access to the training samples
and the parameters of the white-box teacher to acquire the transferred knowledge. However, these
prerequisites are not always realistic due to storage costs or privacy issues in real-world applications. Here we propose the concept of decisionbased black-box (DB3) knowledge distillation,
with which the student is trained by distilling the
knowledge from a black-box teacher (parameters
are not accessible) that only returns classes rather
than softmax outputs. We start with the scenario
when the training set is accessible. We represent
a sample’s robustness against other classes by
computing its distances to the teacher’s decision
boundaries and use it to construct the soft label for
each training sample. After that, the student can
be trained via standard KD. We then extend this
approach to a more challenging scenario in which
even accessing the training data is not feasible.
We propose to generate pseudo samples that are
distinguished by the decision boundaries of the
DB3 teacher to the largest extent and construct
soft labels for these samples, which are used as
the transfer set. We evaluate our approaches on
various benchmark networks and datasets and experiment results demonstrate their effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Training compact deep neural networks (DNNs) (Howard
et al., 2017) efficiently has become an appealing topic because of the increasing demand for deploying DNNs on
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA. Correspondence to: Zi Wang <zwang84@vols.utk.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

resource-limited devices such as mobile phones and drones
(Moskalenko et al., 2018). Recently, a large number of approaches have been proposed for training lightweight DNNs
with the help of a cumbersome, over-parameterized model,
such as network pruning (Li et al., 2016; He et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2021), quantization (Han et al., 2015), factorization (Jaderberg et al., 2014), and knowledge distillation
(KD) (Hinton et al., 2015; Phuong & Lampert, 2019; Jin
et al., 2020; Yun et al., 2020; Passalis et al., 2020; Wang,
2021). Among all these approaches, knowledge distillation
is a popular scheme with which a compact student network
is trained by mimicking the softmax output (class probabilities) of a pre-trained deeper and wider teacher model
(Hinton et al., 2015). By doing so, the rich information
learned by the powerful teacher can be imitated by the student, which often exhibits better performance than solely
training the student with a cross-entropy loss. Many variants
have been developed to improve the vanilla KD approach by
not only mimicking the softmax output but also matching
extra elements in the teacher.
The success of KD relies on three factors: (1) access to the
teacher’s training dataset, (2) the white-box teacher model,
i.e., access to the teacher’s parameters, and (3) the scorebased outputs, i.e., class probabilities of the training samples
outputted by the teacher. In real-world applications, however, these prerequisites are usually unrealistic. Due to
storage costs of large training datasets (such as ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009)) or privacy issues (such as sensitive patient data or personal photos), accessing the training samples
are sometimes not feasible. With this concern, the concept
of zero-shot knowledge distillation (ZSKD) (Nayak et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2020; Wang, 2021) is
proposed. ZSKD generates pseudo training samples via
backpropagation with access to the parameters of the whitebox teacher, which are then used as the transfer set for
training the student model via KD. However, we argue that
this scenario is still not realistic under certain circumstances.
In some cases, training samples are publicly available, but
pre-trained models are not. For example, YouTube’s recommendation system (Covington et al., 2016) is trained with
tons of videos that can be accessed by any user. However,
the trained model is a core competitiveness of the company
and its parameters are not released. One can argue that a
surrogate teacher can be trained locally with the accessible

