Whitening and Second Order Optimization Both Make Information in the
Dataset Unusable During Training, and Can Reduce or Prevent Generalization

Neha S. Wadia 1 Daniel Duckworth 2 Samuel S. Schoenholz 2 Ethan Dyer 2 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 2

Abstract
Machine learning is predicated on the concept of
generalization: a model achieving low error on a
sufficiently large training set should also perform
well on novel samples from the same distribution.
We show that both data whitening and second order optimization can harm or entirely prevent generalization. In general, model training harnesses
information contained in the sample-sample second moment matrix of a dataset. For a general
class of models, namely models with a fully connected first layer, we prove that the information
contained in this matrix is the only information
which can be used to generalize. Models trained
using whitened data, or with certain second order optimization schemes, have less access to this
information, resulting in reduced or nonexistent
generalization ability. We experimentally verify
these predictions for several architectures, and
further demonstrate that generalization continues
to be harmed even when theoretical requirements
are relaxed. However, we also show experimentally that regularized second order optimization
can provide a practical tradeoff, where training
is accelerated but less information is lost, and
generalization can in some circumstances even
improve.

1. Introduction
Whitening is a data preprocessing step that removes correlations between input features (see Fig. 1). It is used across
many scientific disciplines, including geology (Gillespie
et al., 1986), physics (Jenet et al., 2005), machine learning
(Le Cun et al., 1998), linguistics (Abney, 2007), and chemistry (Bro & Smilde, 2014). It has a particularly rich history
in neuroscience, where it has been proposed as a mechanism
by which biological vision realizes Barlow’s redundancy
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Neha S. Wadia <neha.wadia@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

reduction hypothesis (Attneave, 1954; Barlow, 1961; Atick
& Redlich, 1992; Dan et al., 1996; Simoncelli & Olshausen,
2001).
Whitening is often recommended since, by standardizing
the variances in each direction in feature space, it typically
speeds up the convergence of learning algorithms (Le Cun
et al., 1998; Wiesler & Ney, 2011), and causes models
to better capture contributions from low variance feature
directions. Whitening can also encourage models to focus on more fundamental higher-order statistics in data, by
removing second-order statistics (Hyvärinen et al., 2009).
Whitening has further been a direct inspiration for deep
learning techniques such as batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015) and dynamical isometry (Pennington et al.,
2017; Xiao et al., 2018).
1.1. Whitening Destroys Information Useful for
Generalization
Our argument proceeds in two parts: First, we prove that
when a model with a fully connected first layer whose
weights are initialized isotropically is trained with either
gradient descent or stochastic gradient descent (SGD), information in the data covariance matrix is the only information
that can be used to generalize. This result is agnostic to the
choice of loss function and to the architecture of the model
after the first layer. Second, we show that whitening always
destroys information in the data covariance matrix.
Whitening the data and then training with gradient descent
or SGD therefore results in either diminished or nonexistent generalization properties compared to the same model
trained on unwhitened data. The seriousness of the effect
varies with the difference between the number of datapoints
n and the number of features d, worsening as n − d gets
smaller.
Empirically, we find that this effect holds even when the first
layer is not fully connected and when its weight initialization
is not isotropic - for example, in a convolutional network
trained from a Xavier initialization.

