Sliced Iterative Normalizing Flows

Biwei Dai 1 Uroš Seljak 1 2

Abstract
We develop an iterative (greedy) deep learning
(DL) algorithm which is able to transform an arbitrary probability distribution function (PDF) into
the target PDF. The model is based on iterative
Optimal Transport of a series of 1D slices, matching on each slice the marginal PDF to the target.
The axes of the orthogonal slices are chosen to
maximize the PDF difference using Wasserstein
distance at each iteration, which enables the algorithm to scale well to high dimensions. As special
cases of this algorithm, we introduce two sliced
iterative Normalizing Flow (SINF) models, which
map from the data to the latent space (GIS) and
vice versa (SIG). We show that SIG is able to
generate high quality samples of image datasets,
which match the GAN benchmarks, while GIS
obtains competitive results on density estimation
tasks compared to the density trained NFs, and
is more stable, faster, and achieves higher p(x)
when trained on small training sets. SINF approach deviates significantly from the current DL
paradigm, as it is greedy and does not use concepts such as mini-batching, stochastic gradient
descent and gradient back-propagation through
deep layers.

1. Introduction
Latent variable generative models such as Normalizing
Flows (NFs) (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al.,
2014; 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al., 2016) aim to model
the distribution p(x) of high-dimensional input data x by
introducing a mapping from a latent variable z to x, where z
is assumed to follow a given prior distribution π(z). These
1

Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Biwei Dai <biwei@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

models usually parameterize the mapping using neural networks, and the training of these models typically consists
of minimizing a dissimilarity measure between the model
distribution and the target distribution. For NFs and VAEs,
maximizing the marginal likelihood is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. While for
GANs, the adversarial training leads to minimizations of the
Jenson-Shannon (JS) divergence (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
The performance of these models largely depends on the
following aspects:
1) The parametrization of the mapping (the architecture of
the neural network) should match the structure of the data
and be expressive enough. Different architectures have been
proposed (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; van den Oord et al.,
2017; Karras et al., 2018; 2019), but to achieve the best
performance on a new dataset one still needs extensive hyperparameter explorations (Lucic et al., 2018).
2) The dissimilarity measure (the loss function) should be
appropriately chosen for the tasks. For example, in high
dimensions the JS divergence is more correlated with the
sample quality than KL divergence (Huszár, 2015; Theis
et al., 2016), which is believed to be one of the reasons
that GANs are able to generate higher quality samples than
VAEs and NFs. However, JS divergence is hard to directly
work with, and the adversarial training could bring many
problems such as vanishing gradient, mode collapse and
non-convergence (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Wiatrak &
Albrecht, 2019).
To avoid these complexities, in this work we adopt a different approach to build the map from latent variable z to data
x. We approach this problem from the Optimal Transport
(OT) point of view. OT studies whether the transport maps
exist between two probability distributions, and if they do,
how to construct the map to minimize the transport cost.
Even though the existence of transport maps can be proved
under mild conditions (Villani, 2008), it is in general hard to
construct them in high dimensions. We propose to decompose the high dimensional problem into a succession of 1D
transport problems, where the OT solution is known. The
mapping is iteratively augmented, and it has a NF structure
that allows explicit density estimation and efficient sampling.
We name the algorithm Sliced Iterative Normalizing Flow
(SINF). Our objective function is inspired by the Wasserstein distance, which is defined as the minimal transport

