Deep Continuous Networks

Nergis Tomen 1 Silvia L. Pintea 1 Jan C. van Gemert 1

Abstract
CNNs and computational models of biological
vision share some fundamental principles, which
opened new avenues of research. However, fruitful cross-field research is hampered by conventional CNN architectures being based on spatially
and depthwise discrete representations, which
cannot accommodate certain aspects of biological complexity such as continuously varying receptive field sizes and dynamics of neuronal responses. Here we propose deep continuous networks (DCNs), which combine spatially continuous filters, with the continuous depth framework
of neural ODEs. This allows us to learn the
spatial support of the filters during training, as
well as model the continuous evolution of feature maps, linking DCNs closely to biological
models. We show that DCNs are versatile and
highly applicable to standard image classification
and reconstruction problems, where they improve
parameter and data efficiency, and allow for metaparametrization. We illustrate the biological plausibility of the scale distributions learned by DCNs
and explore their performance in a neuroscientifically inspired pattern completion task. Finally, we
investigate an efficient implementation of DCNs
by changing input contrast.

1. Introduction
Computational neuroscience and computer vision have a
long and mutually beneficial history of cross-pollination of
ideas (Cox & Dean, 2014; Sejnowski, 2020). The current
state-of-the-art in computer vision relies heavily on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), from which multiple analogies can be drawn to biological circuits (Kietzmann et al.,
2018). Thus, based on recent developments in deep learning,
there has been a growing trend to relate CNNs to biologi1
Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology,
Delft, Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Nergis Tomen
<n.tomen@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cal circuits (Schrimpf et al., 2018), and employ CNNs as
models of biological vision (Zhuang et al., 2020a). Specifically, recent advances in CNNs have enabled researchers
to learn more accurate models of the response properties
of neurons in the visual cortex (Klindt et al., 2017; Cadena
et al., 2019; Ecker et al., 2019), as well as to test decades old
hypotheses from neuroscience in the domain of computer
vision (Lindsey et al., 2019). Hence, links between CNNs
and biological models from neuroscience is fruitful for both
research fields.
Contrary to many biological models, feed-forward CNNs
typically use spatio-temporally discrete representations:
CNNs employ spatially discretized, pixel-based kernels,
and input is processed through a depthwise-discrete pipeline
made up of successive convolutional layers. To clarify,
within our framework we consider CNN depth to be analogous to time, similar to input-processing time-course in
biological models. Unlike CNNs, large-scale, neuroscientific neural network models of the visual system often adopt
continuous, closed-form expressions to describe spatiotemporal receptive fields, as well as the interaction strength
between populations of neurons (Dayan & Abbott, 2001).
Among others, such descriptions serve to limit the scope and
parameter space of a model, by utilizing prior information
regarding receptive field shapes (Jones & Palmer, 1987) and
principles of perceptual grouping (Li, 1998). In addition,
the choice of continuous—and often analytic—functions
help retain some analytical tractability in complex models
involving a large number of coupled populations. Our approach draws inspiration from such computational models
to propose continuous CNNs.
In this work we aim for a biologically more plausible CNN
model: We bring together (a) spatially continuous receptive fields, where both the shape and the scale of the filters
are trainable in the continuous domain, and (b) depthwise
continuous representations capable of modeling the continuous evolution of neuronal responses in feed-forward CNNs.
Continuous receptive fields provide a link between modern CNNs and large-scale rate-based models of the visual
system (Ernst et al., 2001). In addition, recent influential
work in deep learning has introduced neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Lu et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2018; Ruthotto & Haber, 2019) which propose a continuous
depth (or time) interpretation of CNNs, while having spa-

