Modeling Hierarchical Structures with Continuous Recursive Neural Networks

Jishnu Ray Chowdhury 1 Cornelia Caragea 1

Abstract
Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs), which compose sequences according to their underlying hierarchical syntactic structure, have performed well
in several natural language processing tasks compared to similar models without structural biases.
However, traditional RvNNs are incapable of inducing the latent structure in a plain text sequence
on their own. Several extensions have been proposed to overcome this limitation. Nevertheless,
these extensions tend to rely on surrogate gradients or reinforcement learning at the cost of higher
bias or variance. In this work, we propose Continuous Recursive Neural Network (CRvNN) as
a backpropagation-friendly alternative to address
the aforementioned limitations. This is done by
incorporating a continuous relaxation to the induced structure. We demonstrate that CRvNN
achieves strong performance in challenging synthetic tasks such as logical inference (Bowman
et al., 2015b) and ListOps (Nangia & Bowman,
2018). We also show that CRvNN performs comparably or better than prior latent structure models
on real-world tasks such as sentiment analysis and
natural language inference.1

1. Introduction
Constructing a sentence representation is crucial for Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks such as natural language
inference, document retrieval, and text classification. In
certain contexts, methods with a bias towards composing
sentences according to their underlying syntactic structures
(Chomsky, 1957) have been shown to outperform comparable structure-agnostic methods (Socher et al., 2013; Tai et al.,
2015; Nangia & Bowman, 2018; Choi et al., 2018; Maillard
et al., 2019; Havrylov et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2019a) and

some of these structure-aware methods (Shen et al., 2019a;
Qian et al., 2020) also exhibit better systematicity (Fodor &
Pylyshyn, 1988). Notably, even contemporary Transformerbased methods (Vaswani et al., 2017) have benefited from
structural biases in multiple natural language tasks (Wang
et al., 2019; Fei et al., 2020).
Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs) (Pollack, 1990;
Socher et al., 2013) are capable of composing sequences in
any arbitrary order as defined by the structure of the input.
However, RvNNs follow a hard structure when composing
a given sequence. Latent-Tree models such as GumbelTree-LSTM (Choi et al., 2018), despite being capable of
adaptively making structural decisions, still follow a hard
structure of composition. As such, these models are forced
to either make discrete structural decisions or rely on external parsers. In the former case, the model is often forced
to rely on surrogate gradients2 (resulting in increased bias)
or reinforcement learning (resulting in increased variance).
The increased bias or variance can lead to poor performance (Nangia & Bowman, 2018) unless much care is taken
(Havrylov et al., 2019).
In contrast to these RvNN-based methods, chart-based
parsers (Le & Zuidema, 2015; Maillard et al., 2019) can follow a “soft-structure” by recursively applying weighted average on outputs from multiple possible structures. However,
these methods require the construction and maintenance of
a chart of vectors, which is comparatively expensive.
Given these challenges, in this work, we propose Continuous Recursive Neural Network (CRvNN), which incorporates a continuous relaxation to RvNNs making it end-to-end
differentiable. We aim for the following features:
1. Automatic task-specific latent tree induction. Our
model is not reliant on ground truth structural labels in
any form.

Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago,
United States. Correspondence to: Jishnu Ray Chowdhury
<jraych2@uic.edu>, Cornelia Caragea <cornelia@uic.edu>.

2. Backpropagation friendly. This allows our model to
be easily integrated as a module within a larger neural
architecture and avoid the challenges of reinforcement
learning or surrogate gradients (Havrylov et al., 2019).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at:
https://github.com/JRC1995/Continuous-RvNN

2
We use the term “surrogate gradients” in the same sense as
Martins et al. (2019) to indicate methods that approximate gradients of a discrete argmax-style mapping. Straight-through estimation with Gumbel-Softmax is such an example.

1

