Leveraged Weighted Loss for Partial Label Learning

1

Hongwei Wen 2 * Jingyi Cui 1 * Hanyuan Hang 2 Jiabin Liu 3 Yisen Wang 1 Zhouchen Lin 1 4

Abstract
As an important branch of weakly supervised
learning, partial label learning deals with data
where each instance is assigned with a set of candidate labels, whereas only one of them is true.
Despite many methodology studies on learning
from partial labels, there still lacks theoretical
understandings of their risk consistent properties
under relatively weak assumptions, especially on
the link between theoretical results and the empirical choice of parameters. In this paper, we
propose a family of loss functions named Leveraged Weighted (LW) loss, which for the first time
introduces the leverage parameter β to consider
the trade-off between losses on partial labels and
non-partial ones. From the theoretical side, we
derive a generalized result of risk consistency for
the LW loss in learning from partial labels, based
on which we provide guidance to the choice of
the leverage parameter β. In experiments, we verify the theoretical guidance, and show the high
effectiveness of our proposed LW loss on both
benchmark and real datasets compared with other
state-of-the-art partial label learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Partial label learning (Cour et al., 2011), also called ambiguously label learning (Chen et al., 2017) and superset label
problem (Gong et al., 2017), refers to the task where each
training example is associated with a set of candidate labels,
while only one is assumed to be true. It naturally arises in a
number of real-world scenarios such as web mining (Luo &
Orabona, 2010), multimedia contents analysis (Cour et al.,
2009; Zeng et al., 2013), ecoinformatics (Liu & Dietterich,
*
Equal contribution 1 Key Lab. of Machine Perception
(MoE), School of EECS, Peking University, China 2 Department
of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente, The Netherlands 3 Samsung Research China-Beijing, Beijing, China 4 Pazhou
Lab, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yisen Wang
<yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>, Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>,
Jiabin Liu <Jiabin.liu@samsung.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2012), etc, and subsequently attracts a lot of attention on
methodology studies (Feng et al., 2020b; Wang & Zhang,
2020; Yao et al., 2020; Lyu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019).
As the main target of partial learning lies in disambiguating
the candidate labels, two general strategies have been proposed with different assumptions to the latent label space:
1) Average-based strategy that treats each candidate label equally in the model training phase (Hüllermeier &
Beringer, 2006; Cour et al., 2011; Zhang & Yu, 2015). 2)
Identification-based strategy that considers the ground-truth
label as a latent variable, and assume certain parametric
model to describe the scores of each candidate label (Feng
& An, 2019; Yan & Guo, 2020; Yao et al., 2020). The former
is intuitive but has an obvious drawback that the predictions
can be severely distracted by the false positive labels. The
latter one attracted lots of attentions in the past decades
but is criticized for the vulnerability when encountering
differentiated label in candidate label sets. Furthermore, in
recent years, more and more literature focuses on making
amendments and adjustments on the optimization terms and
loss functions on the basis of identification-based model (Lv
et al., 2020; Cabannes et al., 2020; Wu & Zhang, 2018; Lyu
et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2020b).
Despite extensive studies on partial label learning algorithms, theoretically guaranteed ones remain to be the minority. Some researchers have studied the statistical consistency
(Cour et al., 2011; Feng et al., 2020b; Cabannes et al., 2020)
and the learnability (Liu & Dietterich, 2014) of partial label
learning algorithms. However, these theoretical studies are
often based on rather strict assumptions, e.g. convexity of
loss function (Cour et al., 2011), uniformly sampled partial
label sets (Feng et al., 2020b), etc. Moreover, it remains to
be an open problem why an algorithm performs better than
others under specific parameter settings, or in other words,
how can theoretical results guide parameter selections in
computational implementations.
In this paper, we aim at investigating further theoretical explanations for partial label learning algorithms. Applying
the basic structure of identification-based methods, we propose a family of loss functions named Leveraged Weighted
(LW) loss. From the perspective of risk consistency, we
provide theoretical guidance to the choice of the leverage
parameter in our proposed LW loss by discussing the super-

