On the price of explainability for some clustering problems

Eduardo Laber 1 Lucas Murtinho 1

Abstract
The price of explainability for a clustering task
can be defined as the unavoidable loss, in terms
of the objective function, if we force the final partition to be explainable. Here, we study this price
for the following clustering problems: k-means,
k-medians, k-centers and maximum-spacing. We
provide upper and lower bounds for a natural
model where explainability is achieved via decision trees. For the k-means and k-medians problems our upper bounds improve those obtained by
[Dasgupta et. al, ICML 20] for low dimensions.
Another contribution is a simple and efficient algorithm for building explainable clusterings for the
k-means problem. We provide empirical evidence
that its performance is better than the current state
of the art for decision-tree based explainable clustering.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models and algorithms have been used in
a number of systems that take decisions that affect our lives.
Thus, explainable methods are desirable so that people are
able to have a better understanding of their behavior, which
allows for comfortable use of these systems or, eventually,
the questioning of their applicability.
Although most of the work on the field of explainable machine learning has been focusing on supervised learning
(Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Vidal & Schiffer, 2020), there has recently been some effort to devise
explainable methods for unsupervised learning tasks, in particular, for clustering (Dasgupta et al., 2020b; Bertsimas
et al., 2020). We investigate the framework discussed by
(Dasgupta et al., 2020b), where an explainable clustering is
given by a partition, induced by the leaves of a decision tree,
that optimizes some predefined objective function.
Figure 1 shows a clustering with three groups induced by a
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
PUC-Rio, Brazil. Correspondence to: Eduardo Laber <eduardo.laber1@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

decision tree with 3 leaves. As an example, the blue cluster
can be explained as the set of points that satisfy Feature
1 ≤ 70 and Feature 2 > 40. Simple explanations as
this one are usually not available for the partitions produced
by popular methods such as the Lloyd’s algorithm for the
k-means problem.

In order to achieve explainability, one may be forced to
accept some loss in terms of the quality of the chosen objective function (e.g. sum of squared distances). In this
sense, explainability has its price. (Dasgupta et al., 2020b)
presents theoretical bounds on this price for the k-medians
and the k-means objective functions.
Here, we expand on their work by presenting new bounds
for these objectives and also providing nearly tight bounds
for two other goals that arise in relevant clustering problems,
namely, the k-centers and the maximum-spacing problems.
We note that the objective for the latter is the one optimized by the widely known Single-Linkage method,
employed for hierarchical clustering. We also give a more
practice-oriented contribution by devising and evaluating
a simple and efficient algorithm for building explainable
clusterings for the k-means problem.
1.1. Problem definition
Let X be a set of n points in Rd . We say that a decision
tree is standard if each internal node v is associated with a
test (cut), specified by a coordinate iv ∈ [d] and a real value
θv , that partitions the points in X that reach v into two sets:
those having the coordinate iv smaller than or equal to θv
and those having it larger than θv . The leaves of a standard
decision tree induce a partition of Rd into axis-aligned boxes
and, naturally, a partition of X into clusters.

