Interpretable Stability Bounds for Spectral Graph Filters
Henry Kenlay 1 Dorina Thanou 2 Xiaowen Dong 1

Abstract
Graph-structured data arise in a variety of realworld context ranging from sensor and transportation to biological and social networks. As a ubiquitous tool to process graph-structured data, spectral graph filters have been used to solve common tasks such as denoising and anomaly detection, as well as design deep learning architectures
such as graph neural networks. Despite being an
important tool, there is a lack of theoretical understanding of the stability properties of spectral
graph filters, which are important for designing
robust machine learning models. In this paper,
we study filter stability and provide a novel and
interpretable upper bound on the change of filter
output, where the bound is expressed in terms
of the endpoint degrees of the deleted and newly
added edges, as well as the spatial proximity of
those edges. This upper bound allows us to reason, in terms of structural properties of the graph,
when a spectral graph filter will be stable. We
further perform extensive experiments to verify
intuition that can be gained from the bound.

1. Introduction
A graph is a general-purpose data structure that uses edges
to model pairwise interactions between entities, which are
modelled as the nodes of the graph. Many types of data
in the real-world reside on graph domains, such as those
collected in sensor, biological, and social networks. This
has sparked a major interest in recent years in developing
machine learning models for graph-structured data (Chami
et al., 2020), leading to the fast-growing fields of graph
signal processing (Shuman et al., 2013; Ortega et al., 2018)
and geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2017).
Spectral graph filters, generalisation of classical filters to the
graph domain via spectral graph theory (Chung, 1997), are
1
University of Oxford 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne.
Correspondence to: Henry Kenlay <kenlay@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a ubiquitous tool designed to process graph-structured data.
In addition to various signal processing tasks (Shuman et al.,
2013; Ortega et al., 2018), graph filters are becoming an
important tool for machine learning tasks defined on graphs
(Dong et al., 2020). For example, they have been used
to define convolution on graphs and design graph neural
networks, which lead to state-of-the-art performance in both
node and graph classification (Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Levie et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020; Balcilar et al., 2020).
Despite the surge of research proposing new graph-based
machine learning models, significantly less attention has
been paid to the understanding of theoretical properties,
such as stability, of existing models, in particular graph
filters. Informally, a filter is considered to be stable against
a perturbation if, after being applied to a signal, it does not
lead to large changes in the filter output. In the context of
graph-structured data, stability can be defined with respect
to perturbation to the signal or the underlying topology. We
focus on the latter in this work as graph filters are typically
through a function of the graph topology.
Stability is important mainly for two reasons. First, realworld graph-structured data often come with perturbations,
either due to measurement error or inaccuracy in the graph
construction. Second, when these data are used in machine
learning tasks, stability of the graph filters is important to
designing learning algorithms that are robust to small perturbations. As a practical example, graph filters are often used
to extract spatio-temporal predictive features from fMRI
signals realised as signals on a structural brain network.
The underlying structural brain network is typically an approximation of the true brain connectivity and therefore the
topology will inherently be noisy. Nevertheless, we would
desire the predictions, and thus the filtering process, to be
robust to the noise inherent in this data.
There has only been a handful of papers considering the
stability of spectral graph filters. Among the existing works
(Levie et al., 2019; Kenlay et al., 2020b; Gama et al., 2020)
which address this, most provide an upper bound on the
change of the filter output. These upper bounds are in terms
of the magnitude of perturbation and lack interpretation in
terms of how the structure of the graph has changed, for
example the degree of the nodes. This limitation hampers

