Deeply-Debiased Off-Policy Interval Estimation

Chengchun Shi * 1 Runzhe Wan * 2 Victor Chernozhukov 3 Rui Song 2

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation learns a target policy’s value
with a historical dataset generated by a different behavior policy. In addition to a point estimate, many applications would benefit significantly from having a confidence interval (CI) that
quantifies the uncertainty of the point estimate. In
this paper, we propose a novel deeply-debiasing
procedure to construct an efficient, robust, and
flexible CI on a target policy’s value. Our method
is justified by theoretical results and numerical experiments. A Python implementation of
the proposed procedure is available at https:
//github.com/RunzheStat/D2OPE.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a general technique in sequential decision making that learns an
optimal policy to maximize the average cumulative reward.
Prior to adopting any policy in practice, it is crucial to know
the impact of implementing such a policy. In many real
domains such as healthcare (Murphy et al., 2001; Luedtke &
van der Laan, 2017; Shi et al., 2020a), robotics (Andrychowicz et al., 2020) and autonomous driving (Sallab et al., 2017),
it is costly, risky, unethical, or even infeasible to evaluate a
policy’s impact by directly running this policy. This motivates us to study the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem
that learns a target policy’s value with pre-collected data
generated by a different behavior policy.
In many applications (e.g., mobile health studies), the number of observations is limited. Take the OhioT1DM dataset
(Marling & Bunescu, 2018) as an example, only a few thousands observations are available (Shi et al., 2020b). In these
cases, in addition to a point estimate on a target policy’s
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, London School
of Economics and Political Science, London, United Kingdom
2
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
USA 3 Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Song
<rsong@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

value, it is crucial to construct a confidence interval (CI)
that quantifies the uncertainty of the value estimates.
This paper is concerned with the following question: is it
possible to develop a robust and efficient off-policy value
estimator, and provide rigorous uncertainty quantification
under practically feasible conditions? We will give an affirmative answer to this question.
Overview of the OPE Literature. There is a growing literature for OPE. Existing works can be casted into as direct
method (see e.g., Le et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020c; Feng
et al., 2020), importance sampling-based method (IS, Precup, 2000; Thomas et al., 2015b; Hanna et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2018; Nachum et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020) and doubly robust method (Jiang & Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill,
2016; Farajtabar et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2019; Uehara et al.,
2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2020; Jiang & Huang, 2020). Direct
method derives the value estimates by learning the system
transition matrix or the Q-function under the target policy.
IS estimates the value by re-weighting the observed rewards
with the density ratio of the target and behavior policies.
Both direct method and IS have their own merits. In general,
IS-type estimators might suffer from a large variance due
to the use of the density ratio, whereas direct method might
suffer from a large bias due to the potential misspecification
of the model. Doubly robust methods combine both for
more robust and efficient value evaluation.
Despite the popularity of developing a point estimate of a
target policy’s value, less attention has been paid to constructing its CI, which is the focus of this paper. Among
those available, Thomas et al. (2015b) and Hanna et al.
(2016) derived the CI by using bootstrap or concentration inequality applied to the stepwise IS estimator. These methods
suffer from the curse of horizon (Liu et al., 2018), leading to
very large CIs. Feng et al. (2020) applied the Hoeffding’s inequality to derive the CI based on a kernel-based Q-function
estimator. Similar to the direct method, their estimator might
suffer from a large bias. Dai et al. (2020) reformulated the
OPE problem using the generalized estimating equation approach and applied the empirical likelihood approach (see
e.g., Owen, 2001) to CI estimation. They derived the CI by
assuming the data transactions are i.i.d. However, observations in reinforcement learning are typically time-dependent.
Directly applying the empirical likelihood method to weakly

