Revisiting Rainbow: Promoting more Insightful and Inclusive Deep
Reinforcement Learning Research

Johan S. Obando-Ceron Pablo Samuel Castro 1

Abstract
Since the introduction of DQN, a vast majority of
reinforcement learning research has focused on
reinforcement learning with deep neural networks
as function approximators. New methods are typically evaluated on a set of environments that have
now become standard, such as Atari 2600 games.
While these benchmarks help standardize evaluation, their computational cost has the unfortunate
side effect of widening the gap between those
with ample access to computational resources,
and those without. In this work we argue that,
despite the community’s emphasis on large-scale
environments, the traditional small-scale environments can still yield valuable scientific insights
and can help reduce the barriers to entry for underprivileged communities. To substantiate our
claims, we empirically revisit the paper which
introduced the Rainbow algorithm (Hessel et al.,
2018) and present some new insights into the algorithms used by Rainbow.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) reinforcement learning has witnessed a dramatic increase in research
papers (Henderson et al., 2018). A large portion of these
papers propose new methods that build on the original DQN
algorithm and network architecture, often adapting methods
introduced before DQN to work well with deep networks
(e.g., (van Hasselt et al., 2016; Bacon et al., 2017; Castro,
2020)). New methods are typically evaluated on a set of
environments that have now become standard, such as the
Atari 2600 games made available in the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2012) and the control
tasks available in MuJoCo and DM control suites (Todorov
et al., 2012; Tassa et al., 2020).
1
Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Johan
S. Obando-Ceron <jobando0730@gmail.com>, Pablo Samuel
Castro <psc@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While these benchmarks have helped to evaluate new methods in a standardized manner, they have also implicitly established a minimum amount of computing power in order
to be recognized as valid scientific contributions. Although
classic reinforcement learning tasks such as MountainCar,
CartPole, Acrobot, and grid worlds have not gone away, they
are now used mostly for evaluating theoretical contributions
(e.g., (Nachum et al., 2019; Lyle et al., 2019)); indeed, in
our experience it is quite difficult to have a paper proposing
a new reinforcement learning method accepted at one of
the major machine learning conferences unless it includes
experiments with one of the benchmarks just mentioned.
This is unfortunate, as the low computational cost and speed
at which one can train on small-scale environments enables
broad hyper-parameter sweeps and more thorough investigations into the nuances of the methods being considered,
as well as the reevaluation of certain empirical choices that
have become “folk wisdom” in these types of experiments.
Furthermore, at a time when efforts such as Black in AI
and LatinX in AI are helping bring people from underrepresented (and typically underprivileged) segments of society
into the research community, these newcomers are faced
with enormous computational hurdles to overcome if they
wish to be an integral part of said community.
It thus behooves the reinforcement learning research community to incorporate a certain degree of flexibility and
creativity when proposing and evaluating new research; of
course, this should not be at the expense of scientific rigour.
This paper is partly a position paper, partly an empirical
evaluation. We argue for a need to change the status-quo in
evaluating and proposing new research to avoid exacerbating the barriers to entry for newcomers from underprivileged
communities. In section 4 we complement this argument
by revisiting the Rainbow algorithm (Hessel et al., 2018),
which proposed a new state of the art algorithm by combining a number of recent advances, on a set of small- and
medium-sized tasks. This allows us to conduct a “counterfactual” analysis: would Hessel et al. (2018) have reached
the same conclusions if they had run on the smaller-scale
experiments we investigate here? In section 5 we extend this
analysis by investigating the interaction between the different algorithms considered and the network architecture used,

