Training Quantized Neural Networks to Global Optimality via Semidefinite
Programming

Burak Bartan 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
Neural networks (NNs) have been extremely successful across many tasks in machine learning.
Quantization of NN weights has become an important topic due to its impact on their energy
efficiency, inference time and deployment on
hardware. Although post-training quantization
is well-studied, training optimal quantized NNs
involves combinatorial non-convex optimization
problems which appear intractable. In this work,
we introduce a convex optimization strategy to
train quantized NNs with polynomial activations.
Our method leverages hidden convexity in twolayer neural networks from the recent literature,
semidefinite lifting, and Grothendieck’s identity.
Surprisingly, we show that certain quantized NN
problems can be solved to global optimality provably in polynomial time in all relevant parameters
via tight semidefinite relaxations. We present numerical examples to illustrate the effectiveness of
our method.

1. Introduction
In this paper we focus on training quantized neural networks for efficient machine learning models. We consider
the combinatorial and non-convex optimization of minimizing empirical error with respect to quantized weights. We
focus on polynomial activation functions, where the training
problem is still non-trivial to solve.
Recent work has shown that two-layer neural networks with
ReLU (Pilanci & Ergen, 2020; Sahiner et al., 2021a) and
leaky ReLU activations (Lacotte & Pilanci, 2020b) can be
trained via convex optimization in polynomial time with
respect to the number of samples and neurons. Moreover,
degree-two polynomial activations can be trained to global
optimality in polynomial time with respect to all problem
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Burak Bartan <bbartan@stanford.edu>, Mert Pilanci <pilanci@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

dimensions using semidefinite programming (Bartan & Pilanci, 2021). In this work, we take a similar convex duality
approach that involves semidefinite programming. However,
our method and theoretical analysis are substantially different since we consider quantized weights, which involves
a discrete non-convex optimization problem. The fact that
the first layer weights are discrete renders it a combinatorial NP-hard problem and thus we cannot hope to obtain a
similar result as in (Bartan & Pilanci, 2021) or (Pilanci &
Ergen, 2020). In contrast, in (Bartan & Pilanci, 2021) it is
shown that with the constraint kuj k2 = 1 and `1 -norm regularization on the second layer weights, the global optimum
can be found in fully polynomial time and that the problem
becomes NP-hard in the case of quadratic regularization (i.e.
weight decay).
The approach that we present in this paper for training quantized neural networks is significantly different from others
in the quantization literature. In particular, our approach
involves deriving a semidefinite program (SDP) and designing a sampling algorithm based on the solution of the SDP.
Our techniques lead to a provable guarantee for the difference between the resulting loss and the optimal non-convex
combinatorial loss. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first method that provides provably optimal neural networks
with quantized parameters.
1.1. Prior work
Recently, there has been a lot of research effort in the realm
of compression and quantization of neural networks for
hardware implementations. In (Zhu et al., 2016), the authors proposed a method that reduces network weights into
ternary values by performing training with ternary values.
Experiments in (Zhu et al., 2016) show that their method
does not suffer from performance degradation and achieve
16x compression compared to the original model. The authors in (Gong et al., 2014) focus on compressing dense
layers using quantization to tackle model storage problems
for large-scale models. The work presented in (Han et al.,
2015) also aims to compress deep networks using a combination of pruning, quantization and Huffman coding. In
(Lin et al., 2015), the authors present a quantization scheme
where they use different bit-widths for different layers (i.e.,

