Context-Aware Online Collective Inference for Templated Graphical Models

Charles Dickens * 1 Connor Pryor * 1 Eriq Augustine 1 Alex Miller 1 Lise Getoor 1

Abstract
In this work, we examine online collective inference, the problem of maintaining and performing
inference over a sequence of evolving graphical
models. We utilize templated graphical models
(TGM), a general class of graphical models expressed via templates and instantiated with data.
A key challenge is minimizing the cost of instantiating the updated model. To address this, we
define a class of exact and approximate contextaware methods for updating an existing TGM.
These methods avoid a full re-instantiation by using the context of the updates to only add relevant
components to the graphical model. Further, we
provide stability bounds for the general online
inference problem and regret bounds for a proposed approximation. Finally, we implement our
approach in probabilistic soft logic, and test it on
several online collective inference tasks. Through
these experiments we verify the bounds on regret
and stability, and show that our approximate online approach consistently runs two to five times
faster than the offline alternative while, surprisingly, maintaining the quality of the predictions.

1. Introduction
In many practical machine learning settings it is common
for both the data and structure of the model to change incrementally over time. Incoming data may provide additional
evidence or add to a set of predictive targets a system has to
infer, and new information or a shifting context may alter
a model’s defining parameters or underlying structure. For
instance, a new product review may change recommendations made for the reviewer and users who bought related
products, or a recent event could impose constraints on a
product’s availability which were previously not considered
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, California, United States. Correspondence to: Charles Dickens
<cadicken@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

by a predictor. These are two of many examples of problems
that are both online and require joint predictions.
Online inference is especially challenging for structured
prediction settings (Baki et al., 2007). Structured prediction
algorithms utilize the underlying relational properties of the
data and problem domain to improve predictive performance
and typically require collective (i.e., joint) inference over a
probabilistic model. However, updates to the evidence and
dependency structure of these methods can have cascading
effects on the predictions that are expensive to perform. Updating inference is a long-standing problem in the machine
learning community, and there is a vast body of literature on
the topic for graphical models subject to structural updates
(Buntine, 1991; Friedman & Goldszmidt, 1997; Li et al.,
2006; Acar et al., 2009; Sümer et al., 2011) and for dynamic
models (Murphy, 2002; Nodelman et al., 2002).
In this work we develop theory and methodologies for updating maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates in undirected
graphical models with density functions belonging to logconcave exponential families. We address the scalability of
online inference by proposing exact and approximate model
instantiation methods which leverage the context of an existing model and structured updates. Then, we develop a novel
framework for analyzing the stability of MAP states subject
to changes in the model evidence and structure. The stability results are applied to derive bounds on the distance to
optimality of warm start MAP states and a measure of regret
that is incurred by performing inference on an approximated
model.
Our work is most closely related to Pujara et al. (2015),
however, here the definition of online collective inference
is much more general, supporting the introduction of new
random variables and changes to the structure of the graphical model. Further, we develop a theory and method for
performing exact inference on evolving models, as opposed
to approximate budgeted inference. We define the problem of online collective inference using the framework of
templated graphical models (TGMs). In this framework,
graphical models are specified by functions of relations
and attributes of entities in a dataset, typically expressed as
weighted logical rules. Then, online collective inference is
the task of performing inference on a series of TGMs related by sequences of updates to the dataset and dependency

