APS: Active Pretraining with Successor Features

Hao Liu 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
We introduce a new unsupervised pretraining objective for reinforcement learning. During the
unsupervised reward-free pretraining phase, the
agent maximizes mutual information between
tasks and states induced by the policy. Our
key contribution is a novel lower bound of this
intractable quantity. We show that by reinterpreting and combining variational successor features (Hansen et al., 2020) with nonparametric
entropy maximization (Liu & Abbeel, 2021), the
intractable mutual information can be efficiently
optimized. The proposed method Active Pretraining with Successor Feature (APS) explores the environment via nonparametric entropy maximization, and the explored data can be efficiently leveraged to learn behavior by variational successor
features. APS addresses the limitations of existing
mutual information maximization based and entropy maximization based unsupervised RL, and
combines the best of both worlds. When evaluated on the Atari 100k data-efficiency benchmark,
our approach significantly outperforms previous
methods combining unsupervised pretraining with
task-specific finetuning.

1. Introduction
Deep unsupervised pretraining has achieved remarkable success in various frontier AI domains from natural language
processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Peters et al., 2018; Brown
et al., 2020) to computer vision (He et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a). The pre-trained models can quickly solve downstream tasks through few-shot fine-tuning (Brown et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020b).
In reinforcement learning (RL), however, training from
scratch to maximize extrinsic reward is still the dominant
paradigm. Despite RL having made significant progress in
playing video games (Mnih et al., 2015; Schrittwieser et al.,
1

University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Hao Liu <hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2019; Vinyals et al., 2019; Badia et al., 2020a) and solving
complex robotic control tasks (Andrychowicz et al., 2017;
Akkaya et al., 2019), RL algorithms have to be trained from
scratch to maximize extrinsic return for every encountered
task. This is in sharp contrast with how intelligent creatures quickly adapt to new tasks by leveraging previously
acquired behaviors.
In order to bridge this gap, unsupervised pretraining RL
has gained interest recently, from state-based (Gregor et al.,
2016; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020; Mutti
et al., 2020) to pixel-based RL (Hansen et al., 2020; Liu
& Abbeel, 2021; Campos et al., 2021). In unsupervised
pretraining RL, the agent is allowed to train for a long
period without access to environment reward, and then got
exposed to reward during testing. The goal of pretraining is
to have data efficient adaptation for some downstream task
defined in the form of rewards.
State-of-the-art unsupervised RL methods consider various
ways of designing the so called intrinsic reward (Barto et al.,
2004; Barto, 2013; Gregor et al., 2016; Achiam & Sastry,
2017), with the goal that maximizing this intrinsic return can
encourage meaningful behavior in the absence of external
rewards. There are two lines of work in this direction, we
will discuss their advantages and limitations, and show that
a novel combination yields an effective algorithm which
brings the best of both world.
The first category is based on maximizing the mutual information between task variables (p(z)) and their behavior in
terms of state visitation (p(s)) to encourage learning distinguishable task conditioned behaviors, which has been
shown effective in state-based RL (Gregor et al., 2016;
Eysenbach et al., 2019) and visual RL (Hansen et al.,
2020). VISR proposed in Hansen et al. (2020) is the prior
state-of-the-art in this category. The objective of VISR is
max I(s; z) = max H(z) − H(s|z) where z is sampled
from a fixed distribution. VISR proposes a successor features based variational approximation to maximize a variational lower bound of the intractable conditional entropy
−H(s|z). The advantage of VISR is that its successor features can quickly adapt to new tasks. Despite its effectiveness, the fundamental problem faced by VISR is lack of
exploration.
Another category is based on maximizing the entropy of

