Directed Graph Embeddings in Pseudo-Riemannian Manifolds

Aaron Sim 1 Maciej Wiatrak 1 Angus Brayne 1 Páidı́ Creed 1 Saee Paliwal 1

Abstract
The inductive biases of graph representation learning algorithms are often encoded in the background geometry of their embedding space. In
this paper, we show that general directed graphs
can be effectively represented by an embedding
model that combines three components: a pseudoRiemannian metric structure, a non-trivial global
topology, and a unique likelihood function that
explicitly incorporates a preferred direction in
embedding space. We demonstrate the representational capabilities of this method by applying it to
the task of link prediction on a series of synthetic
and real directed graphs from natural language
applications and biology. In particular, we show
that low-dimensional cylindrical Minkowski and
anti-de Sitter spacetimes can produce equal or better graph representations than curved Riemannian
manifolds of higher dimensions.

1. Introduction
Representation learning of symbolic objects is a central
area of focus in machine learning. Alongside the design of
deep learning architectures and general learning algorithms,
incorporating the right level of inductive biases is key to
efficiently building faithful and generalisable entity and
relational embeddings (Battaglia et al., 2018).
In graph representation learning, the embedding space geometry itself encodes many such inductive biases, even in
the simplest of spaces. For instance, vertices embedded
as points in Euclidean manifolds, with inter-node distance
guiding graph traversal and link probabilities (Grover &
Leskovec, 2016; Perozzi et al., 2014), carry the underlying
assumption of homophily with node similarity as a metric
function.
The growing recognition that Euclidean geometry lacks the
flexibility to encode complex relationships on large graphs

at tractable ranks, without loss of information (Nickel et al.,
2011; Bouchard et al., 2015), has spawned numerous embedding models with non-Euclidean geometries. Examples
range from complex manifolds for simultaneously encoding
symmetric and anti-symmetric relations (Trouillon et al.,
2016), to statistical manifolds for representing uncertainty
(Vilnis & McCallum, 2015).
One key development was the introduction of hyperbolic embeddings for representation learning (Nickel & Kiela, 2017;
2018). The ability to uncover latent graph hierarchies was
applied to directed acyclic graph (DAG) structures in methods like Hyperbolic Entailment Cones (Ganea et al., 2018),
building upon Order-Embeddings (Vendrov et al., 2016),
and Hyperbolic Disk embeddings (Suzuki et al., 2019), with
the latter achieving good performance on complex DAGs
with exponentially growing numbers of ancestors and descendants. Further extensions include hyperbolic generalisations of manifold learning algorithms (Sala et al., 2018),
product manifolds (Gu et al., 2018), and the inclusion of
hyperbolic isometries (Chami et al., 2020).
While these methods continue to capture more complex
graph topologies they are largely limited to DAGs with
transitive relations, thus failing to represent many naturally
occurring graphs, where cycles and non-transitive relations
are common features.
In this paper we introduce pseudo-Riemannian embeddings
of both DAGs and graphs with cycles. Together with a
novel likelihood function with explicitly broken isometries,
we are able to represent a wider suite of graph structures.
In summary, the model makes the following contributions
to graph representation learning, which we will expand in
more detail below:
• The ability to disentangle semantic and edge-based
similarities using the distinction of space- and timelike
separation of nodes in pseudo-Riemannian manifolds.

BenevolentAI, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Aaron Sim <aaron.sim@benevolent.ai>.

• The ability to capture directed cycles by introducing
a compact timelike embedding dimension. Here we
consider Minkowski spacetime with a circle time dimension and anti-de Sitter spacetime.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• The ability to represent chains in a directed graph that
flexibly violate local transitivity. We achieve this by

1

