Toward Understanding the Feature Learning Process of Self-supervised
Contrastive Learning

Zixin Wen 1 Yuanzhi Li 2

Abstract
We formally study how contrastive learning learns
the feature representations for neural networks
by analyzing its feature learning process. We
consider the case where our data are comprised
of two types of features: the more semantically
aligned sparse features which we want to learn
from, and the other dense features we want to
avoid. Theoretically, we prove that contrastive
learning using ReLU networks provably learns
the desired sparse features if proper augmentations are adopted. We present an underlying principle called feature decoupling to explain the
effects of augmentations, where we theoretically
characterize how augmentations can reduce the
correlations of dense features between positive
samples while keeping the correlations of sparse
features intact, thereby forcing the neural networks to learn from the self-supervision of sparse
features. Empirically, we verified that the feature decoupling principle matches the underlying
mechanism of contrastive learning in practice.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (Devlin et al., 2019; Mikolov et al.,
2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Jing & Tian, 2020) has demonstrated its immense power in different areas of machine
learning (e.g. BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) in natural language processing). Recently, it has been discovered that
contrastive learning (e.g., Tian et al. (2019); He et al. (2020);
Chen et al. (2020a); Chen et al. (2020); Grill et al. (2020);
Chen & He (2020)), one of the most typical forms of selfsupervised learning, can indeed learn representations of image data that achieve superior performance in many downstream vision tasks. Moreover, as shown by the seminal
work (He et al., 2020), the learned feature representations
1

University of International Business and Economics,
Beijing 2 Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence
to: Zixin Wen <zixinw@andrew.cmu.edu>, Yuanzhi Li
<yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

can even outperform those learned by supervised learning in
several downstream tasks. The remakable potential of contrastive learning methods poses challenges for researchers
to understand and improve upon such simple but effective
algorithms.
Contrastive learning in vision learns the feature representations by minimizing pretext task objectives similar to the
cross-entropy loss used in supervised learning, where both
the inputs and “labels” are derived from the unlabeled data,
especially by using augmentations to create multiple views
of the same image. The seminal paper Chen et al. (2020b)
has demonstrated the effects of stronger augmentations
(comparing to supervised learning) for the improvement
of feature quality. Tian et al. (2020a) showed that as the augmentations become stronger, the quality of representations
displayed a U-shaped curve. Such observations provided
insights into the inner-workings of contrastive learning. But
it remains unclear what has happened in the learning process that renders augmentations necessary for successful
contrastive learning.
Some recent works have been done to understand contrastive
learning from theoretical perspective (Arora et al., 2019;
Wang & Isola, 2020; Tsai et al., 2020). However, these
works have not analyzed how data augmentations affect
the feature learning process in neural networks, which
we deem as crucial to understand how contrastive learning
works in practice. We state the fundamental questions we
want to address below, and provide tentative answers to all
the questions by building theory on a simplified model that
shares similar structures with real scenarios, and we provide
some empirical evidence through experiments to verify the
validity of our models.

Fundamental Questions
1. How do neural networks trained by contrastive
learning learn their feature representations efficiently,
and are the representations similar to those learned in
supervised learning?
2. Why does contrastive learning in deep learning collapse in practice when no augmentation is used, and
how do standard data augmentations help contrastive
learning?

