Versatile Verification of Tree Ensembles
Laurens Devos 1 Wannes Meert 1 Jesse Davis 1

Abstract
Machine learned models often must abide by certain requirements (e.g., fairness or legal). This
has spurred interested in developing approaches
that can provably verify whether a model satisfies
certain properties. This paper introduces a generic
algorithm called V ERITAS that enables tackling
multiple different verification tasks for tree ensemble models like random forests (RFs) and gradient
boosted decision trees (GBDTs). This generality
contrasts with previous work, which has focused
exclusively on either adversarial example generation or robustness checking. V ERITAS formulates the verification task as a generic optimization
problem and introduces a novel search space representation. V ERITAS offers two key advantages.
First, it provides anytime lower and upper bounds
when the optimization problem cannot be solved
exactly. In contrast, many existing methods have
focused on exact solutions and are thus limited
by the verification problem being NP-complete.
Second, V ERITAS produces full (bounded suboptimal) solutions that can be used to generate
concrete examples. We experimentally show that
our method produces state-of-the-art robustness
estimates, especially when executed with strict
time constraints. This is exceedingly important
when checking the robustness of large datasets.
Additionally, we show that V ERITAS enables tackling more real-world verification scenarios.

1. Introduction
Currently, it is becoming more common for deployed machine learned models to conform to requirements (e.g., legal) or exhibit specific properties (e.g., fairness). This has
motivated the development of verification approaches that
are applicable to learned models. Given a specific property,
these techniques verify, that is, prove whether or not the
1
Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Correspondence to: Laurens Devos <laurens.devos@kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

property holds. Examples of verification questions include:
• Adversarial example generation: Given a data example, can slightly perturbing it cause its predicted
label to flip? (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Einziger et al., 2019)
• Robustness checking: Given a data example, what is
the minimum distance to such an adversarial example?
(Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Ranzato & Zanella, 2020)
• Feature dominance: Given a set of constraints describing a class of data examples of interest, can we
find one or more attributes where changing their values
would disproportionately affect the model’s prediction?
• Fairness: Do two instances exist that differ only on
their protected attributes (e.g. sex, race, age) or a proxy
variable, but have different predicted labels? (Dwork
et al., 2012)
If a property is violated, it is desirable to also return constructed counter examples. For instance, if an adversarial
example exists it is useful to see one concrete instance as
this could, for example, be added to the training set.
The popularity of additive tree ensembles (e.g., random
forests (Breiman, 2001) and gradient boosted tree models (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017; Devos et al.,
2019)) has motivated interest in developing verification techniques for this model class. Most current work is characterized by its focus on (1) solving one specific type of verification problem (e.g., adversarial example generation (Einziger
et al., 2019) or robustness checking (Chen et al., 2019b;
Törnblom & Nadjm-Tehrani, 2020; Ranzato & Zanella,
2020)) and (2) developing exact solutions. While exact
solutions are desirable, in practice they are not always feasible because verification tasks on additive ensembles are
NP-complete (Kantchelian et al., 2016).
One recent approximate approach is due to Chen et al.
(2019b), who proposed a graph-based approach that computes an upper bound rather than a full solution if time and
space limits are exceeded. However, this approach has three
important limitations. First, the search steps are very coarsegrained, and the algorithm often terminates after only a few
steps. Second, the algorithm is not guided by a heuristic,

