AdaXpert: Adapting Neural Architecture for Growing Data

Shuaicheng Niu * 1 2 Jiaxiang Wu * 3 Guanghui Xu 1 Yifan Zhang 4
Yong Guo 1 Peilin Zhao 3 Peng Wang 5 Mingkui Tan 1 6

In real-world applications, data often come in
a growing manner, where the data volume and
the number of classes may increase dynamically.
This will bring a critical challenge for learning:
given the increasing data volume or the number
of classes, one has to instantaneously adjust the
neural model capacity to obtain promising performance. Existing methods either ignore the growing nature of data or seek to independently search
an optimal architecture for a given dataset, and
thus are incapable of promptly adjusting the architectures for the changed data. To address this, we
present a neural architecture adaptation method,
namely Adaptation eXpert (AdaXpert), to efficiently adjust previous architectures on the growing data. Specifically, we introduce an architecture adjuster to generate a suitable architecture for
each data snapshot, based on the previous architecture and the different extent between current and
previous data distributions. Furthermore, we propose an adaptation condition to determine the necessity of adjustment, thereby avoiding unnecessary and time-consuming adjustments. Extensive
experiments on two growth scenarios (increasing
data volume and number of classes) demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art
results in many challenging tasks, including image classification (Hu et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2021), neural language pro*

Equal contribution. This work is done when Shuaicheng Niu
works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab. 1 School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China 2 Key
Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education, China 3 Tencent AI Lab, China 4 National University of Singapore, Singapore 5 Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
6
Pazhou Laboratory, China. Correspondence to: Mingkui Tan
<mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

80

CIFAR100 Acc (%)

Abstract

network
adjustment

70
60
50

30

data
growing

ResNet6
ResNet10
ResNet50

40
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

The size of training set

1

Data
distribution 1

Data
distribution 2

Figure 1. The motivation for architecture adaptation. Left: Performance comparisons of ResNets trained on different subsets of
CIFAR100. The optimal architecture varies among different subset
sizes. Right: Since data come in a growing manner and the data
distribution may dynamically change, one should adjust the model
architecture according to the shift of data distribution.

cessing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), and many
other areas (Cao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b; Guo et al.,
2020a; Zeng et al., 2020). One of the key factors behind the
success of DNNs lies in the design of effective neural architectures, including 1) the manually designed architectures
such as ResNet (He et al., 2016) and MobileNet (Howard
et al., 2017); 2) the automatically designed architectures
such as (Zoph et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2019).
However, these methods often design a fixed architecture
for a specific task/dataset.
In real-world applications, data often come in a growing
manner. For example, intelligent edge devices (e.g., billions of mobile phones and surveillance cameras) and medical imaging devices continue collecting new data every
day (Grantz et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2019). Specifically,
the newly collected data have the following two types: (1)
increasing data volume: the labels of new data have appeared in previous data, and the growing do not change the
label space of data; (2) increasing number of classes: the
newly arriving data have different labels from previous data,
and thus the label space of data is growing. For both two
scenarios, the data distribution may dynamically change.
Since the optimal network architecture may vary under different data distributions (Zoph & Le, 2017), when applying
DNNs to growing data, one can (and should) dynamically
adjust the architecture for better performance (see Figure 1).
To achieve the above goal, one straightforward solution
is to redesign a network architecture when new data arrive. However, the design of effective neural architectures

