Learning and Planning in Complex Action Spaces

Thomas Hubert * 1 Julian Schrittwieser * 1 Ioannis Antonoglou 1 Mohammadamin Barekatain 1
Simon Schmitt 1 David Silver 1

Abstract
Many important real-world problems have action
spaces that are high-dimensional, continuous or
both, making full enumeration of all possible actions infeasible. Instead, only small subsets of
actions can be sampled for the purpose of policy evaluation and improvement. In this paper,
we propose a general framework to reason in a
principled way about policy evaluation and improvement over such sampled action subsets. This
sample-based policy iteration framework can in
principle be applied to any reinforcement learning
algorithm based upon policy iteration. Concretely,
we propose Sampled MuZero, an extension of
the MuZero algorithm that is able to learn in domains with arbitrarily complex action spaces by
planning over sampled actions. We demonstrate
this approach on the classical board game of Go
and on two continuous control benchmark domains: DeepMind Control Suite and Real-World
RL Suite.

1. Introduction
Real-world environments abound with complexity in their
action space. Physical reality is continuous both in space
and time; hence many important problems, most notably
physical control tasks, have continuous multi-dimensional
action spaces. The joints of a robotic hand can assume arbitrary angles; the acceleration of a self-driving car should
vary smoothly to minimise discomfort for passengers. Discrete problems also often have high-dimensional action
spaces, leading to an exponential number of possible actions. Many other domains have richly structured actions
spaces such as sentences, queries, images, or serialised objects. Consequently, a truly general reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm must be able to deal with such complex
action spaces in order to be successfully applied to those
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Thomas Hubert <tkhubert@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

real-world problems.
Recent advances in deep learning and RL have indeed led
to remarkable progress in model-free RL algorithms for
continuous action spaces (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2017; Barth-Maron et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al.,
2018; Hoffman et al., 2020) and other complex action spaces
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2016). Simultaneously, planning based
methods have enjoyed huge successes in domains with discrete action spaces, surpassing human performance in the
classical games of chess and Go (Silver et al., 2018) or poker
(Brown & Sandholm, 2018; Moravčı́k et al., 2017). The
prospect of combining these two areas of research holds
great promise for real-world applications.
The model-based MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) RL
algorithm took a step towards applicability in real-world
problems by learning a model of the environment and thus
unlocking the use of the powerful methods of planning
in domains where the dynamics of the environment are
unknown or impossible to simulate efficiently. However,
MuZero was only applied to domains with relatively small
action spaces; small enough to be in fact enumerated in full
by the tree-based search at its core.
Sample-based methods provide a powerful approach to dealing with large complex actions spaces. Rather than enumerating all possible actions, the idea is to sample a small
subset of actions and compute the optimal policy or value
function with respect to those samples. This simple strategy
is so general that it can be applied to large, continuous, or
structured action spaces. Specifically, action sampling can
be used both to propose improvements to the policy at each
of the sampled actions, and subsequently to evaluate the
proposed improvements. However, to correctly improve or
evaluate the policy across the entire action space, and not
just the samples, one must understand how the sampling procedure interacts with both policy improvement and policy
evaluation.
In this work, we propose a framework to reason in a principled way about policy improvement and evaluation computed over small subsets of sampled actions. We show
how this local information can be used to train a global
policy, act and even perform explicit steps of policy evaluation for the purpose of planning and local policy iteration.

