Approximate Group Fairness for Clustering

Bo Li 1 Lijun Li 2 Ankang Sun 3 Chenhao Wang 4 * Yingfan Wang 5

Abstract
We incorporate group fairness into the algorithmic
centroid clustering problem, where k centers are
to be located to serve n agents distributed in a
metric space. We refine the notion of proportional
fairness proposed in [Chen et al., ICML 2019]
as core fairness, and k-clustering is in the core
if no coalition containing at least n/k agents can
strictly decrease their total distance by deviating
to a new center together. Our solution concept
is motivated by the situation where agents are
able to coordinate and utilities are transferable. A
string of existence, hardness and approximability
results is provided. Particularly, we propose two
dimensions to relax core requirements: one is
on the degree of distance improvement, and the
other is on the size of deviating coalition. For
both relaxations and their combination, we study
the extent to which relaxed core fairness can be
satisfied in metric spaces including line, tree and
general metric space, and design approximation
algorithms accordingly.

1. Introduction
Motivated by various real-world machine learning algorithm
deployments where the data points are real human beings
who should be treated unbiasedly, fairness is increasingly
concerned. Most traditional algorithms mainly focus on
the efficiency or profit, and thus fail to ensure fairness for
individual point or collection of points. Accordingly, the
past several years have seen considerable efforts in developing fair learning algorithms (Chierichetti et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2019; Backurs et al., 2019; Bera et al., 2019).

in unsupervised learning – specifically, centroid clustering.
A canonical clustering problem is described as: given a
metric space X with distance measure d : X × X → R+ ∪
{0}, a multiset N ⊆ X of n data points (in this work,
each data point is an agent), a set M ⊆ X of possible
centers and a positive integer k, the task is to find a subset
Y ⊆ M of k cluster centers and assign each data point to
its closest center in Y . The commonly studied objective is
to make data points to be as close to their assigned centers
as possible. Standard algorithms, such as k-means and kmedians, solve the clustering problem by satisfying a global
criterion, where individual or group-wise happiness has not
been taken into consideration. It has been noted that the
globally efficient solutions are less preferred, especially
when the application scenario is about public resources
allocation (Conitzer et al., 2017; Fain et al., 2018). We
consider the following facility location problem proposed
in (Chen et al., 2019; Micha and Shah, 2020).
Example 1. Suppose the government plans to build k = 11
identical parks to serve the residents, where every resident’s
cost (e.g. gasoline) is proportional to the distance between
her home and the closest park. There is a dense urban center
with a population of 10, 000 and 10 small suburbs, each of
which has a population of 100. Suppose the suburbs are
close to each other (e.g. 10km) compared with the distance
between them and the urban center (e.g. 500km).

1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences,
Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China 3 Warwick Business
School, University of Warwick, United Kingdom 4 University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, United States 5 Department of Computer Science, Duke University, United States. Correspondence to: Chenhao Wang <chenhwang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>.

Accordingly, by k-means or k-medians algorithms, the government will build 1 park at the urban center, and 10 parks
for each small suburb. It is not hard to see such a plan is
not fair: a single park is used to serve 10, 000 people in the
urban area, but each small suburb of 100 people has its own
a park. This intuition is formalized by Moulin as the principle of equal entitlement (Moulin, 2003): A solution is fair
if it respects the entitlements of groups of agents, namely,
every subset of agents that is of sufficiently large size is
entitled to choose a center for themselves. Such group-wise
fairness is also referred as core, which has been extensively
studied in game theory (Deng and Papadimitriou, 1994;
Chalkiadakis et al., 2011), social choice (McKelvey, 1986;
Feldman and Serrano, 2006) and fair division (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez, 1998; Fain et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Chen et al. (2019) first formally and theoretically studied
group fairness in the clustering problem, and proposed

Following (Chen et al., 2019), we revisit the group fairness

