On-Off Center-Surround Receptive Fields
for Accurate and Robust Image Classification

Zahra Babaiee 1 Ramin Hasani 2 Mathias Lechner 3 Daniela Rus 2 Radu Grosu 1

Robustness to variations in lighting conditions is a
key objective for any deep vision system. To this
end, our paper extends the receptive field of convolutional neural networks with two residual components, ubiquitous in the visual processing system
of vertebrates: On-center and off-center pathways,
with excitatory center and inhibitory surround;
OOCS for short. The on-center pathway is excited
by the presence of a light stimulus in its center,
but not in its surround, whereas the off-center one
is excited by the absence of a light stimulus in its
center, but not in its surround. We design OOCS
pathways via a difference of Gaussians, with their
variance computed analytically from the size of
the receptive fields. OOCS pathways complement
each other in their response to light stimuli, ensuring this way a strong edge-detection capability,
and as a result an accurate and robust inference
under challenging lighting conditions. We provide extensive empirical evidence showing that
networks supplied with the OOCS edge representation gain accuracy and illumination-robustness
compared to standard deep models.

1. Introduction
The great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Fukushima, 2003) is rooted in receptive fields, a main architectural motif of visual processing in living organisms (Kandel et al., 2013). Originating in the retina, a receptive field
defines the region of visual space within which visual stimuli
affect the firing of a single ganglial neuron (Hartline, 1940;
Kandel et al., 2013). This motif is preserved by neurons of
the visual cortex, too (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968).
However, receptive fields are just one of the motifs employed by visual processing in the retina. Another important
motif is the center-surround (CS) motif, which divides the
1

CPS, TU Wien 2 CSAIL, MIT 3 IST Austria. Correspondence
to: Zahra Babaiee <zahra.babaiee@tuwien.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

OOCS-CNN

Feed Forward

…

Abstract

Pooling
Conv

Conv

+

+

Conv

Conv

On-Center
Conv

Pooling
Conv

Off-Center
Conv

Conv

Figure 1. On-off center-surround (OOCS) inductive biases significantly enhance the performance and robustness of a vision network
in different lighting conditions.

receptive field of a ganglial neuron into a circular excitatory
region (the center), and a concentric inhibitory region (the
surround) (Kuffler, 1953; Kandel et al., 2013). Finally, a
third important motif classifies the center-surround fields
into either on-center, when the neurons fire in response to
the presence of a light stimulus at the center of their receptive field, and into off-center (OO), when the neurons fire
in response to the absence of a light stimulus at the center
of their receptive field (Enroth-Cugell & Pinto, 1972). The
center-surround motif is also reported to occur in the receptive fields of the primary level visual cortex, causing the so
called surround-modulation effect (Hubel & Wiesel, 1965;
Knierim & van Essen, 1992; Allman et al., 1985).
As shown in Figures 1-5, the on-off center-surround pathways (OOCS) introduce edge detection inductive biases in
a given model. If a light stimulus is turned on at the center
of an on-receptive field, but not at its surround, then the
on-ganglial neuron fires vigorously. If the light also touches
the surround, then the neuron yields a weak response, and
ceases to fire in case of a uniform or a surround-only stimulation. This is because of the mutual inhibition of the center
and its surround. Complementary, when the light stimulus
at the center of an off-receptive field is turned off, but not at

