Deep Generative Learning via Schrödinger Bridge

Gefei Wang 1 Yuling Jiao 2 Qian Xu 3 Yang Wang 1 4 Can Yang 1 4

Abstract
We propose to learn a generative model via entropy interpolation with a Schrödinger Bridge.
The generative learning task can be formulated
as interpolating between a reference distribution
and a target distribution based on the KullbackLeibler divergence. At the population level, this
entropy interpolation is characterized via an SDE
on [0, 1] with a time-varying drift term. At the
sample level, we derive our Schrödinger Bridge
algorithm by plugging the drift term estimated by
a deep score estimator and a deep density ratio estimator into the Euler-Maruyama method. Under
some mild smoothness assumptions of the target
distribution, we prove the consistency of both the
score estimator and the density ratio estimator,
and then establish the consistency of the proposed
Schrödinger Bridge approach. Our theoretical results guarantee that the distribution learned by our
approach converges to the target distribution. Experimental results on multimodal synthetic data
and benchmark data support our theoretical findings and indicate that the generative model via
Schrödinger Bridge is comparable with state-ofthe-art GANs, suggesting a new formulation of
generative learning. We demonstrate its usefulness in image interpolation and image inpainting.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have achieved enormous success in
learning the underlying high-dimensional data distribution
from samples. They have various applications in machine
learning, like image-to-image translation (Zhu et al., 2017;
1

Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 3 AI Group,
WeBank Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China 4 Guangdong-Hong KongMacao Joint Laboratory for Data-Driven Fluid Mechanics and Engineering Applications, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Yuling Jiao
<yulingjiaomath@whu.edu.cn>, Can Yang <macyang@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Choi et al., 2020), semantic image editing (Zhu et al., 2016;
Shen et al., 2020) and audio synthesis (Van Den Oord et al.,
2016; Prenger et al., 2019). Most of existing generative
models seek to learn a nonlinear function to transform a
simple reference distribution to the target distribution as data
generating mechanisms. They can be categorized as either
likelihood-based models or implicit generative models.
Likelihood-based models, such as variational auto-encoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and flow-based methods
(Dinh et al., 2015), optimize the negative log-likelihood
or its surrogate loss, which is equivalent to minimize the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the target distribution and the generated distribution. Although their
ability to learn flexible distributions is restricted by the way
to model the probability density, many works have been
established to alleviate this problem and achieved appealing results (Makhzani et al., 2016; Tolstikhin et al., 2018;
Razavi et al., 2019; Dinh et al., 2017; Papamakarios et al.,
2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Behrmann et al., 2019).
As a representative of implicit generative models, generative adversarial networks (GANs) use a min-max game
objective to learn the target distribution. It has been shown
that vanilla GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) minimizes the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between the target distribution and the generated distribution. To generalize vanilla
GAN, researchers consider some other criterions including more general f -divergences (Nowozin et al., 2016), 1Wasserstein distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017) and maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) (Bińkowski et al., 2018). Meanwhile, recent progress on designing network architectures
(Radford et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019) and training techniques (Karras et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2019) has enabled
GANs to produce impressive high-quality images.
Despite the extraordinary performance of generative models
(Razavi et al., 2019; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Brock et al.,
2019; Karras et al., 2019), there still exists a gap between
the empirical success and the theoretical justification of
these methods. For likelihood-based models, consistency
results require that the data distribution is within the model
family, which is often hard to hold in practice (Kingma
& Welling, 2014). Recently, new generative models have
been developed from different perspectives, such as gradient
flow in a measure space in which GAN can be covered as
a special case (Gao et al., 2019; Arbel et al., 2019) and

