Optimal Complexity in Decentralized Training
Yucheng Lu 1 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract
Decentralization is a promising method of scaling up parallel machine learning systems. In this
paper, we provide a tight lower bound on the iteration complexity for such methods in a stochastic
non-convex setting. Our lower bound reveals a
theoretical gap in known convergence rates of
many existing decentralized training algorithms,
such as D-PSGD. We prove by construction this
lower bound is tight and achievable. Motivated
by our insights, we further propose DeTAG, a
practical gossip-style decentralized algorithm that
achieves the lower bound with only a logarithm
gap. Empirically, we compare DeTAG with other
decentralized algorithms on image classiﬁcation
tasks, and we show DeTAG enjoys faster convergence compared to baselines, especially on
unshufﬂed data and in sparse networks.

1. Introduction
Parallelism is a ubiquitous method to accelerate model training (Abadi et al., 2016; Alistarh, 2018; Alistarh et al., 2020;
Lu et al., 2020). A parallel learning system usually consists
of three layers (Table 1): an application to solve, a communication protocol deciding how parallel workers coordinate,
and a network topology determining how workers are connected. Traditional design for these layers usually follows a
centralized setup: in the application layer, training data is
required to be shufﬂed and shared among parallel workers;
while in the protocol and network layers, workers either
communicate via a fault-tolerant single central node (e.g.
Parameter Server) (Li et al., 2014a;b; Ho et al., 2013) or
a fully-connected topology (e.g. AllReduce) (Gropp et al.,
1999; Patarasuk & Yuan, 2009). This centralized design limits the scalability of learning systems in two aspects. First,
in many scenarios, such as Federated Learning (Koloskova
et al., 2019a; McMahan et al., 2016) and Internet of Things
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York, United States. Correspondence to: Yucheng Lu
<yl2967@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Table 1. Design choice of centralization and decentralization in
different layers of a parallel machine learning system. The protocol
speciﬁes how workers communicate. The topology refers to the
overlay network that logically connects all the workers.
Layer

Centralized

Decentralized

Application

Shufﬂed Data

Unshufﬂed Data
(Federated Learning)

Protocol

AllReduce/AllGather
Parameter Server

Gossip

Network
Topology

Complete(Bipartite) Graph

Arbitrary Graph

(IOT) (Kanawaday & Sane, 2017), a shufﬂed dataset or a
complete (bipartite) communication graph is not possible or
affordable to obtain. Second, a centralized communication
protocol can signiﬁcantly slow down the training, especially
with a low-bandwidth or high-latency network (Lian et al.,
2017b; Tang et al., 2019b; Yu et al., 2018).
The rise of decentralization. To mitigate these limitations,
decentralization comes to the rescue. Decentralizing the
application and network allows workers to learn with unshufﬂed local datasets (Li et al., 2019) and arbitrary topologies (Seaman et al., 2017; Shanthamallu et al., 2017). Furthermore, the decentralized protocol, i.e. Gossip, helps to
balance load, and has been shown to outperform centralized
protocols in many cases (Lian et al., 2017a; Yu et al., 2019;
Nazari et al., 2019; Lu & De Sa, 2020).
Understanding decentralization with layers. Many decentralized training designs have been proposed, which can
lead to confusion as the term “decentralization” is used
inconsistently in the literature. Some works use “decentralized” to refer to approaches that can tolerate non-iid or
unshufﬂed datasets (Li et al., 2019), while others use it to
mean gossip communication (Lian et al., 2017a), and still
others use it to mean a sparse topology graph (Wan et al.,
2020). To eliminate this ambiguity, we formulate Table 1,
which summarizes the different “ways” a system can be
decentralized. Note that the choices to decentralize different
layers are independent, e.g., the centralized protocol AllReduce can still be implemented on a decentralized topology
like the Ring graph (Wan et al., 2020).

