Sequential Domain Adaptation
by Synthesizing Distributionally Robust Experts

Bahar Taskesen 1 Man-Chung Yue 2 José Blanchet 3 Daniel Kuhn 1 Viet Anh Nguyen 3 4

Abstract
Least squares estimators, when trained on a few
target domain samples, may predict poorly. Supervised domain adaptation aims to improve the
predictive accuracy by exploiting additional labeled training samples from a source distribution that is close to the target distribution. Given
available data, we investigate novel strategies to
synthesize a family of least squares estimator experts that are robust with regard to moment conditions. When these moment conditions are specified using Kullback-Leibler or Wasserstein-type
divergences, we can find the robust estimators
efficiently using convex optimization. We use
the Bernstein online aggregation algorithm on
the proposed family of robust experts to generate predictions for the sequential stream of target
test samples. Numerical experiments on real data
show that the robust strategies may outperform
non-robust interpolations of the empirical least
squares estimators.

1. Introduction
A natural approach to improving predictive performance
in data-scarce tasks involves translating informative signals from a data-abundant source domain to the data-scarce
target domain. This transfer of knowledge is commonly
referred to as domain adaptation or transfer learning, and
it is increasingly applied in a wide range of settings, see
for example Wilson & Cook (2020); Chu & Wang (2018);
Weiss et al. (2016) and Redko et al. (2019).
We consider the supervised domain adaptation setting with
scarce labeled target data. The key challenge here is the

absence of meaningful data to tune any parameters. However, in many practically relevant applications, new data will
arrive sequentially to enrich the information on the target
domain. In this case, many online algorithms can be utilized
to adaptively learn the best predictor on the target domain,
which also guarantee optimal asymptotic regrets (Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2020).
In this paper, we take a pragmatic approach to resolve a
specific setup of the domain adaptation problem. We assume access to a scarce labelled target data, and the future
target data arrives sequentially. For example, consider understanding the dynamics of ride-sharing platforms requires
insights about the demand and supply from both sides of
the market. These insights are signalled through the ride
fares, which can be explained by characteristics such as the
travel distances and the origin-destination pairs of the trips,
the time of the day as well as the weather conditions. The
capability to correctly predict ride fares directly translates
into improved profit forecasts, and thus it vitally supports
the growth of new-coming platforms. In a competitive market, a follower (e.g., Lyft) needs to target a slightly different
market segment than the leader (e.g., Uber) who had entered
earlier. Thus, the demand and supply characteristics for the
follower may differ from those of the leader. Nevertheless,
as both platforms provide on-demand transportation, it is
reasonable to assume that their supply and demand dynamics are similar. The follower, who possesses limited data,
can query demand on the leader’s platform to collect data
in order to leap forward in its predictive precision. Our
approach to solve this problem is illustrated in Figure 1 and
it consists of two components:
1. Expert Generation Module: This module generates a
set of competitive experts E by fine-tuning the explanatory power of the source domain data and harnessing the
signal guidance from the scarce target domain data.

1

Risk Analytics and Optimization Chair, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University 4 VinAI
Research, Vietnam. Correspondence to: Bahar Taskesen <bahar.taskesen@epfl.ch>.

2. Expert Aggregation Module: Acting on the sequential
arrival of the unseen target data, this module aggregates
the predictive capability of the generated experts via an
online aggregation mechanism. In this work we will use
the Bernstein Online Aggregation mechanism.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

We will propose two ways to generate the experts. The first

