Learning to Weight Imperfect Demonstrations

Yunke Wang 1 Chang Xu 2 Bo Du 1 Honglak Lee 3 4

Abstract
This paper investigates how to weight imperfect
expert demonstrations for generative adversarial
imitation learning (GAIL). The agent is expected
to perform behaviors demonstrated by experts.
But in many applications, experts could also make
mistakes and their demonstrations would mislead
or slow the learning process of the agent. Recently, existing methods for imitation learning
from imperfect demonstrations mostly focus on
using the preference or confidence scores to distinguish imperfect demonstrations. However, these
auxiliary information needs to be collected with
the help of an oracle, which is usually hard and
expensive to afford in practice. In contrast, this
paper proposes a method of learning to weight imperfect demonstrations in GAIL without imposing
extensive prior information. We provide a rigorous mathematical analysis, presenting that the
weights of demonstrations can be exactly determined by combining the discriminator and agent
policy in GAIL. Theoretical analysis suggests that
with the estimated weights the agent can learn a
better policy beyond those plain expert demonstrations. Experiments in the Mujoco and Atari
environments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms baseline methods in handling
imperfect expert demonstrations.

1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Argall et al.,
2009; Hussein et al., 2017), which aims to let the agent
imitate the behavior of the human demonstrations without
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China 2 School of
Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia 3 EECS Department, University of Michingan, USA
4
LG AI Research, South Korea. Correspondence to: Chang Xu
<c.xu@sydney.edu.au>, Bo Du <dubo@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

any access to reward signal, has achieved great success in
many sequential decision making problems (Stadie et al.,
2017; Ermon et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016). Compared
to complex reward engineering (Ng et al., 1999; Amodei
et al., 2016) in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
2018), IL provides a much easier way to infer a reward
function from the collected demonstrations directly, so that
the agent can effectively improve the demonstrated behavior.
Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016) is one of the state-of-the-art imitation learning
methods. Within the framework of generative adversarial
network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), GAIL regards
imitation learning as a distribution matching problem between the state-action distribution of expert policy and that
of agent’s policy. After GAIL, a few variants have been developed to further improve the performance of plain GAIL
from different aspects. InfoGAIL (Li et al., 2017) learns
a policy with a latent variable, and the latent variable is
believed to have interpretable representations of complex
demonstrations. This allows InfoGAIL to reproduce a variety of behaviors within demonstrations. Since it is hard to
recover the reward function with GAIL, Adversarial IRL (Fu
et al., 2017) separates a reward function from the discriminator, and thus the reward function can be directly learned
during training. AIRL is also proven to be effective and
robust in large and high-dimension dynamics. WAIL (Xiao
et al., 2019) follows the idea of WGAN (Gulrajani et al.,
2017) by replacing the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence objective function with a Wasserstein distance GAN-based
objective function, so that WAIL can directly learn a reward
function in a more stable way.
Though GAIL and its variants have achieved impressive
experimental results, their underlying assumption that the
expert demonstrations are sampled from an optimal policy
cannot always hold in practice. In real-world tasks, it is
usually difficult to collect plenty of expert demonstrations
from the optimal policy. Even a human expert cannot always make optimal choices due to limited energy and the
presence of distractions. For example, an agent learns how
to play football through imitation learning, where professional football players can be qualified experts. However,
since professional football players may still make mistakes
during the match, the resulting imperfect expert demonstrations could thus mislead the procedure of imitation learning

