Grey-box Extraction of Natural Language Models

Santiago Zanella-Béguelin 1 Shruti Tople 1 Andrew Paverd 1 2 Boris Köpf 1

Abstract
Model extraction attacks attempt to replicate a
target machine learning model by querying its inference API. State-of-the-art attacks are learningbased and construct replicas by supervised training on the target model’s predictions, but an
emerging class of attacks exploit algebraic properties to obtain high-fidelity replicas using orders
of magnitude fewer queries. So far, these algebraic attacks have been limited to neural networks
with few hidden layers and ReLU activations.
In this paper we present algebraic and hybrid
algebraic/learning-based attacks on large-scale
natural language models. We consider a greybox setting, targeting models with a pre-trained
(public) encoder followed by a single (private)
classification layer. Our key findings are that (i)
with a frozen encoder, high-fidelity extraction is
possible with a small number of in-distribution
queries, making extraction attacks indistinguishable from legitimate use; (ii) when the encoder
is fine-tuned, a hybrid learning-based/algebraic
attack improves over the learning-based state-ofthe-art without requiring additional queries.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are often deployed behind APIs
that enable querying the model but that prevent direct access
to the model parameters. This restriction aims to protect
intellectual property, as models are expensive to train and
hence valuable (Strubell et al., 2019); security, as access
to model parameters facilitates the creation of adversarial
examples (Laskov et al., 2014; Ebrahimi et al., 2018); and
privacy, as model parameters carry potentially sensitive
information about the training data (Leino & Fredrikson,
2020). Model extraction attacks (Tramèr et al., 2016) attempt to replicate machine learning models from sets of
1
Microsoft Research 2 Microsoft Security Response Center. Correspondence to: Santiago Zanella-Béguelin <santiago@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

query-response pairs obtained via the model’s inference
API, thus effectively circumventing the protection offered
by the API.
Several extraction attacks on deep neural networks
(see Jagielski et al. (2020) for a recent overview) follow
a learning-based approach (Tramèr et al., 2016; Orekondy
et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2020; Krishna et al., 2020), where the
target model is queried to label data used for training the
replica. The replicas obtained in this way achieve accuracy
on the desired task, or agreement with the target model on
predictions, but recovery of the model weights is out of
scope of this approach.
More recently, a novel class of attacks has emerged that
uses algebraic techniques to recover the weights of deep
neural networks up to model-specific invariances. Examples include the attacks of Milli et al. (2019), which leverage observations of gradients to recover model parameters,
and Rolnick & Kording (2020); Jagielski et al. (2020); Carlini et al. (2020), which estimate gradients from finite differences of logits, and then use this information to recover
model parameters. Algebraic attacks improve on learningbased attacks in that they (i) achieve higher-fidelity replicas
and (ii) are orders of magnitude more query-efficient. So far,
however, algebraic attacks have only been applied to small,
fully connected neural networks with ReLU activations. In
particular, for modern large-scale natural language models
(LLMs) such as BERT or GPT-2 that rely on non-linear
activations, the state-of-the-art model extraction attack is
still learning-based (Krishna et al., 2020).
In this paper, we propose novel algebraic and hybrid
(algebraic/learning-based) model extraction attacks on
LLMs. We assume a grey-box setting where an encoder
is pre-trained and known to the adversary, and where the
target model is obtained from the encoder by (1) adding a
task-specific linear classification head and by (2) fine-tuning
using data unknown to the attacker. Our attack relies on an
algebraic approach to extract the linear classification head,
and a learning-based approach to extract the rest of the layers, i.e., the encoder and any additional layers between the
encoder and the final classification layer.
For the algebraic approach, consider for a moment an idealized setting where the encoder is frozen during fine-tuning.
There are two key observations that enable us to extract the

