Bayesian Optimization over Hybrid Spaces

Aryan Deshwal 1 Syrine Belakaria 1 Janardhan Rao Doppa 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing hybrid
structures (mixture of discrete and continuous input variables) via expensive black-box function
evaluations. This problem arises in many realworld applications. For example, in materials
design optimization via lab experiments, discrete
and continuous variables correspond to the presence/absence of primitive elements and their relative concentrations respectively. The key challenge is to accurately model the complex interactions between discrete and continuous variables.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach referred as Hybrid Bayesian Optimization (HyBO)
by utilizing diffusion kernels, which are naturally
defined over continuous and discrete variables.
We develop a principled approach for constructing diffusion kernels over hybrid spaces by utilizing the additive kernel formulation, which allows
additive interactions of all orders in a tractable
manner. We theoretically analyze the modeling
strength of additive hybrid kernels and prove that
it has the universal approximation property. Our
experiments on synthetic and six diverse realworld benchmarks show that HyBO significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
A large number of science and engineering applications involve optimizing hybrid spaces (mixture of discrete and continuous input variables) guided by expensive black-box function evaluations. For example, in materials design optimization, discrete variables correspond to the presence/absence
of primitive elements and continuous variables correspond
to their relative concentrations, and evaluation of each design involves performing an expensive physical lab experiment. A popular and effective framework for optimizing expensive black-box functions is Bayesian optimization (BO)
(Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018; Greenhill et al., 2020;
1

School of EECS, Washington State University, Pullman, USA.
Correspondence to: Aryan Deshwal <aryan.deshwal@wsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Belakaria et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Belakaria et al.,
2020e;c;a;f). The key idea behind BO is to learn a surrogate
statistical model and intelligently select the sequence of inputs for evaluation to approximately optimize the unknown
objective. Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006) is the most popular choice for learning statistical models. GPs allow to incorporate domain knowledge about the
problem in the form of a kernel over the input space and
provide good uncertainty quantification. GPs have been
successfully applied for both continuous (Shahriari et al.,
2016; Belakaria et al., 2020b;d) and discrete spaces (Oh
et al., 2019; Deshwal et al., 2021; Roustant et al., 2020).
However, as we discuss in the related work section, there is
very limited work on BO methods to optimize hybrid spaces
(Hutter et al., 2010; 2011; Bergstra et al., 2011; Daxberger
et al., 2020; Ru et al., 2020). Most of them employ nonGP based surrogate models as it is challenging to define
a generic kernel over hybrid spaces that can account for
complex interactions between variables.
To precisely fill this gap in our knowledge, we propose a
novel approch referred as Hybrid Bayesian Optimization
(HyBO). HyBO builds GP based surrogate models using diffusion kernels, which are naturally defined over continuous
(Kondor & Vert, 2004) and discrete spaces (Kondor & Lafferty, 2002). We develop a principled approach to construct
diffusion kernels over hybrid spaces. This approach employs the general formulation of additive Gaussian process
kernels (Duvenaud et al., 2011) to define additive hybrid
diffusion kernels. The key idea is to assign a base kernel for
each discrete/continuous variable and construct an overall
kernel by summing over all possible orders of interaction
between these kernels. This construction procedure has
two advantages: 1) Allows to leverage existing kernels for
continuous and discrete spaces; and 2) Can automatically
identify the strength of different orders of interaction in a
data-driven manner for a given application.
A key question about the modeling strength of this hybrid
diffusion kernel is whether given sufficient data, can it
approximate any black-box function defined over hybrid
spaces. This question has been studied in the past in terms
of a property called universality of a kernel (Steinwart, 2001;
Micchelli et al., 2006; Sriperumbudur et al., 2011; Mania
et al., 2018). We prove that the proposed hybrid diffusion
kernel has universal approximation property by composing

