SPADE: A Spectral Method for Black-Box Adversarial Robustness Evaluation

Wuxinlin Cheng * 1 Chenhui Deng * 2 Zhiqiang Zhao * 1 Yaohui Cai 2 Zhiru Zhang 2 Zhuo Feng 1

Abstract
A black-box spectral method is introduced for
evaluating the adversarial robustness of a given
machine learning (ML) model. Our approach,
named SPADE, exploits bijective distance mapping between the input/output graphs constructed
for approximating the manifolds corresponding
to the input/output data. By leveraging the generalized Courant-Fischer theorem, we propose a
SPADE score for evaluating the adversarial robustness of a given model, which is proved to
be an upper bound of the best Lipschitz constant
under the manifold setting. To reveal the most
non-robust data samples highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks, we develop a spectral graph embedding procedure leveraging dominant generalized eigenvectors. This embedding step allows
assigning each data sample a robustness score
that can be further harnessed for more effective
adversarial training. Our experiments show the
proposed SPADE method leads to promising empirical results for neural network models that are
adversarially trained with the MNIST and CIFAR10 data sets.

1. Introduction
Recent research efforts have demonstrated the evident lack
of robustness in state-of-the-art machine learning (ML)
models—e.g., a visually imperceptible adversarial image
can be crafted via an optimization procedure to mislead a
well-trained deep neural network (DNN) (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Consequently, it is becoming increasingly important to effectively assess and improve
the adversarial robustness of ML models for safety-critical
applications, such as autonomous driving systems. To this
end, a variety of white-box approaches has been proposed.
*

1

Equal contribution Stevens Institute of Technology, New
Jersey, USA 2 Cornell University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Zhuo Feng <zhuo.feng@stevens.edu>, Zhiru Zhang
<zhiruz@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

For instance, study in (Szegedy et al., 2013) proposed a
layer-wise global Lipschitz constant estimation approach,
which provides a loose bound on robustness evaluation;
(Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017) introduced a method for
assessing the lower bound of model robustness based on
local Lipschitz continuous condition for a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with a single hidden layer; (Weng et al., 2018)
proposed a method for estimating local Lipschitz constant
based on extreme value theory. However, most existing
adversarial robustness evaluation frameworks are based on
white-box methods which assume the model parameters
are given in advance. For example, the recent CLEVER
algorithm for adversarial robustness evaluation (Weng et al.,
2018) requires full access to the gradient information of a
given neural network for estimating a universal lower bound
on the minimal distortion required to craft an adversarial
example from an original one.
This work introduces SPADE 1 , a black-box method for
evaluating adversarial robustness by only using the input
(features) and output vectors of the ML model. Essentially,
our method evaluates adversarial robustness through checking if there exist two nearby input data samples that can
be mapped to very distant output ones by the underlying
function of the ML model; if so, we have a large distance
mapping distortion (DMD), which implies potentially poor
adversarial robustness since a small perturbation applied to
these inputs can lead to rather significant changes on the
output side. To allow meaningful distance comparisons of
input/output data samples in a high-dimensional space, our
approach leverages graph-based manifolds and focuses on
resistance distance metric for adversarial robustness evaluations. The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• To our knowledge, we are the first to introduce a black-box
spectral method (SPADE) for adversarial robustness evaluation of an ML model by examining the bijective distance
mappings between the input/output graph-based manifolds.
• We show that the largest generalized eigenvalue (i.e.,
SPADE score) computed with the input/output graph Laplacians can be a good surrogate (upper bound) for the best
Lipschitz constant of the underlying function, which thus
can be leveraged for quantifying the adversarial robustness.
1

The SPADE source code is available at github.com/FengResearch/SPADE.

