Calibrate Before Use:
Improving Few-Shot Performance of Language Models

Tony Z. Zhao * 1 Eric Wallace * 1 Shi Feng 2 Dan Klein 1 Sameer Singh 3

Abstract
GPT-3 can perform numerous tasks when provided a natural language prompt that contains a
few training examples. We show that this type of
few-shot learning can be unstable: the choice of
prompt format, training examples, and even the
order of the training examples can cause accuracy
to vary from near chance to near state-of-the-art.
We demonstrate that this instability arises from
the bias of language models towards predicting
certain answers, e.g., those that are placed near
the end of the prompt or are common in the pretraining data. To mitigate this, we first estimate
the model’s bias towards each answer by asking
for its prediction when given the training prompt
and a content-free test input such as “N/A”. We
then fit calibration parameters that cause the prediction for this input to be uniform across answers.
On a diverse set of tasks, this contextual calibration procedure substantially improves GPT-3 and
GPT-2’s average accuracy (up to 30.0% absolute)
and reduces variance across different choices of
the prompt.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning—the ability to learn tasks with limited
examples—is an important aspect of intelligence (Lake et al.,
2015; Yogatama et al., 2019). Recent work shows that large
neural language models can perform few-shot learning without finetuning (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020).
Specifically, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) can perform numerous tasks when provided a few examples in a natural
language prompt. For example, to perform sentiment analysis one can condition GPT-3 on a prompt such as:
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 University of Maryland 3 UC Irvine. Correspondence to: Eric Wallace <ericwallace@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Input: Subpar acting. Sentiment: Negative
Input: Beautiful film. Sentiment: Positive
Input: Amazing.
Sentiment:
where the first two lines correspond to two training examples
and the last line is a test example. To make predictions, the
model predicts whether the subsequent token is more likely
to be the word “Positive” or “Negative”.
This style of few-shot “in-context” learning is interesting
because it shows that the model can learn without parameter
updates. And, more importantly, it has numerous practical advantages over the now-standard approach of finetuning (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019). First, it allows
practitioners to “rapidly prototype” NLP models: changing
the prompt immediately leads to a new model. Second, it
provides a fully natural language interface to a machine
learning model, which allows users—even those without
technical expertise—to create NLP systems. Finally, since
in-context learning reuses the same model for each task, it
reduces memory requirements and system complexity when
serving many different tasks.
However, despite these promises, we show that GPT-3’s
accuracy can be highly unstable across different prompts
(Section 3). A prompt contains three components: a format,
a set of training examples, and a permutation (ordering) for
those examples. We show that different choices for these
factors can lead to highly different accuracies, e.g., changing
the permutation of the training examples in a sentiment
analysis prompt can change accuracy from near chance
(54%) to near state-of-the-art (93%). This instability implies
that GPT-3 users, who typically design prompts manually,
cannot expect to consistently obtain good accuracy.
We next analyze what causes this instability. We identify
three pitfalls of language models that lead them to be biased toward certain answers during few-shot learning. In
particular, they suffer from majority label bias, recency bias,
and common token bias (Section 4). The majority label and
recency biases lead the model to predict training answers
that appear frequently or near the end of the prompt. For
example, a prompt that ends with a Negative training example may cause a bias towards the Negative class. On
the other hand, the common token bias leads the model to
prefer answers that are frequent in its pre-training data, e.g.,

