Large-Scale Multi-Agent Deep FBSDEs

Tianrong Chen 1 Ziyi Wang 2 Ioannis Exarchos 3 Evangelos A. Theodorou 2 4

Abstract
In this paper we present a scalable deep learning
framework for finding Markovian Nash Equilibria
in multi-agent stochastic games using fictitious
play. The motivation is inspired by theoretical
analysis of Forward Backward Stochastic Differential Equations (FBSDE) and their implementation in a deep learning setting, which is the source
of our algorithm’s sample efficiency improvement.
By taking advantage of the permutation-invariant
property of agents in symmetric games, the scalability and performance is further enhanced significantly. We showcase superior performance
of our framework over the state-of-the-art deep
fictitious play algorithm on an inter-bank lending/borrowing problem in terms of multiple metrics. More importantly, our approach scales up
to 3000 agents in simulation, a scale which, to
the best of our knowledge, represents a new stateof-the-art. We also demonstrate the applicability
of our framework in robotics on a belief space
autonomous racing problem.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Differential Games (SDG) represent a framework
for investigating scenarios where multiple players make
decisions in a stochastic environment. The theory of differential games dates back to the seminal work of Isaacs
(1965) studying two-player zero-sum dynamic games, with
the stochastic extension first appearing in Kushner & Chamberlain (1969). A key step in the study of games is to obtain
the Nash equilibrium among players (Osborne & Rubinstein,
1994). A Nash equilibrium represents the solution of noncooperative games where two or more players are involved.
1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 Center for Machine Learning, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA 4 School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Tianrong Chen
<tchen429@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

At the equilibrium, each player cannot gain any benefit
by modifying his/her own strategy given opponents’ strategy. In the context of adversarial multi-objective games, the
Nash equilibrium can be represented as a system of coupled
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations when the system satisfies the Markovian property. Analytical solutions
exist only for few special cases. Therefore, obtaining the
Nash equilibrium solution is usually done numerically, and
this can become challenging as the number of states/agents
increases. Despite extensive theoretical work (Buckdahn
& Li, 2008; Ramachandran & Tsokos, 2012), the algorithmic part has received less attention and is limited to special
cases of differential games (e.g., Duncan & Pasik-Duncan
(2015)), or suffers from the curse of dimensionality (Kushner, 2002). Nevertheless, SDG has a variety of applications
including in robotics, autonomy, economics and management. Relevant examples include Mataramvura & Øksendal
(2008), which formulates portfolio management as a SDG
in order to obtain a market portfolio that minimizes the
convex risk measure of a terminal wealth index value, as
well as Prasad & Sethi (2004), which investigates optimal
advertising spending in duopolistic settings via SDG.
Researchers have also been solving differential games via
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Harmon et al., 1995). Kamalapurkar et al. (2016) seeks to combine differential game
theory and RL to solve cooperative control problems in
which agents are coupled by graphs. Multi-agent RL
(MARL) is an extension of RL, which is a more complex
task due to internal interactions between agents and external
interactions with environment. Independent learning (Tan,
1993) is an approach which assumes other agents are part
of environment, and it suffers from the unstable learning
problem. Training agents by augmenting their states and actions is called centralized training and executing (Yang et al.,
2019), and scalability of it is limited. Another method is
centralized training and decentralized execute (CTDE), however the challenge therein lies on how to decompose value
function in the execute phase for value-based MARL. Sunehag et al. (2018); Zhou et al. (2019); Rashid et al. (2018);
Son et al. (2019); Mahajan et al. (2019) achieve remarkable
success in this vein. However, RL usually adopts modelfree learning scheme in discrete time. Here we leverage the
HJB PDE which contains information of the dynamics to
develop data-efficient algorithm in continuous time. The de-

