A Nullspace Property for Subspace-Preserving Recovery

Mustafa D. Kaba 1 Chong You 2 Daniel P. Robinson 3 Enrique Mallada 4 René Vidal 5

Abstract
Much of the theory for classical sparse recovery
is based on conditions on the dictionary that are
both necessary and sufficient (e.g., nullspace property) or only sufficient (e.g., incoherence and restricted isometry). In contrast, much of the theory
for subspace-preserving recovery, the theoretical
underpinnings for sparse subspace classification
and clustering methods, is based on conditions
on the subspaces and the data that are only sufficient (e.g., subspace incoherence and data innerradius). This paper derives a necessary and sufficient condition for subspace-preserving recovery
that is inspired by the classical nullspace property.
Based on this novel condition, called here the subspace nullspace property, we derive equivalent
characterizations that either admit a clear geometric interpretation that relates data distribution and
subspace separation to the recovery success, or
can be verified using a finite set of extreme points
of a properly defined set. We further exploit these
characterizations to derive new sufficient conditions, based on inner-radius and outer-radius measures and dual bounds, that generalize existing
conditions and preserve the geometric interpretations. These results fill an important gap in the
subspace-preserving recovery literature.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems involve the analysis of
high-dimensional data whose intrinsic dimension is much
lower than the ambient dimension. When such data comes
from multiple classes, it can be well approximated by a
union of low-dimensional subspaces, where each subspace
1
eBay Inc., San Jose, CA, USA. 2 Dept. of Elect. Eng. & Comp.
Sci., University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
3
Dept. of Ind. & Sys. Eng., Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA,
USA. 4 Dept. of Elect. & Comp. Eng., Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA. 5 MINDS & Dept. of Biom. Eng., Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.. Correspondence to:
Mustafa D. Kaba <mkaba@ebay.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

corresponds to one class. This has motivated the development of many supervised and unsupervised methods for
learning a union of subspaces, a.k.a. the subspace classification and subspace clustering tasks (Vidal et al., 2016).
Among existing methods for subspace classification and
clustering, sparse representation based methods (Wright
et al., 2009; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Soltanolkotabi &
Candès, 2012; Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014; You & Vidal,
2015; Robinson et al., 2019) have drawn much attention due
to their simplicity, broad theoretical guarantees and superior
empirical performance. Such methods are based on expressing each data point as a linear combination of the other
data points while enforcing `1 regularization on the representation coefficients. The idea is that the nonzero entries
of the coefficient vector should correspond to data points
that lie in the same subspace as the point being represented.
Coefficient vectors that have that property are referred to
as subspace-preserving (Vidal et al., 2016), a notion that
plays a central role in establishing the correctness of sparse
subspace classification and clustering methods. In particular,
the recovery of subspace-preserving solutions is provably
guaranteed when the subspaces are independent (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009), disjoint (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2010) and
non-trivially intersecting (Soltanolkotabi & Candès, 2012;
Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014; You & Vidal, 2015). Recently,
such guarantees have been further extended to a broader
range of applications that deal with dimension-reduced
data (Wang et al., 2015), corrupted data (Soltanolkotabi
& Candès, 2012; Wang & Xu, 2016; You et al., 2017), data
with missing entries (Tsakiris & Vidal, 2018), and affine
subspaces (Li et al., 2018; You et al., 2019).
Most of the existing theoretical conditions for subspacepreserving recovery characterize the geometry of the union
of subspaces (e.g., via subspace independence (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Lu et al., 2012) and subspace incoherence (Soltanolkotabi & Candès, 2012; You & Vidal, 2015))
and the distribution of points in the subspaces (e.g., via
inner-radius and circumradius (Soltanolkotabi & Candès,
2012; You & Vidal, 2015)). Such geometric conditions have
clear geometric interpretations and provide an important
understanding of the regimes in which sparse methods are
applicable. However, such conditions are only sufficient and
a tight characterization of subspace-preserving recovery has
been missing in the existing literature.

