High-Dimensional Experimental Design and Kernel Bandits

Romain Camilleri 1 Julian Katz-Samuels 2 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
In recent years methods from optimal linear experimental design have been leveraged to obtain
state of the art results for linear bandits. A design
returned from an objective such as G-optimal design is actually a probability distribution over a
pool of potential measurement vectors. Consequently, one nuisance of the approach is the task
of converting this continuous probability distribution into a discrete assignment of N measurements. While sophisticated rounding techniques
have been proposed, in d dimensions they require
N to be at least d, d log(log(d)), or d2 based on
the sub-optimality of the solution. In this paper
we are interested in settings where N may be
much less than d, such as in experimental design
in an RKHS where d may be effectively infinite.
In this work, we propose a rounding procedure
that frees N of any dependence on the dimension
d, while achieving nearly the same performance
guarantees of existing rounding procedures. We
evaluate the procedure against a baseline that
projects the problem to a lower dimensional space
and performs rounding which requires N to just
be at least a notion of the effective dimension.
We also leverage our new approach in a new algorithm for kernelized bandits to obtain state of
the art results for regret minimization and pure
exploration. An advantage of our approach over
existing UCB-like approaches is that our kernel
bandit algorithms are also robust to model misspecification.

We consider the following game between a learner and nature: at each time t = 1 . . . T , the learner requests xt ∈ X
and nature immediately reveals
yt = µxt + ξt
where {ξt }Tt=1 is a sequence of independent, mean-zero
random variables with bounded variance. We are interested
in two objectives:
Regret minimization In this setting, we evaluate the performance of an algorithm choosing actions {xt }Tt=1 by its
PT
cumulative regret: RT = maxx∈X t=1 (µx − µxt ).
Pure exploration in the PAC setting For a tolerance  ≥
0 and confidence level δ ∈ (0, 1), the aim of the learner
in pure exploration is to sequentially take samples until a
learner-defined stopping criterion is met, at which time the
learner outputs an arm x
b ∈ X such that µxb ≥ maxx∈X µx −
 with probability at least 1 − δ.
To aid us in our objectives, we assume some structure on
the reward function µ.
Assumption 1. There exists a known feature map φ : Rd 7→
H that maps each x ∈ X to a (possibly infinite dimensional)
Hilbert space H, and moreover, there exists a θ∗ ∈ H and
h ≥ 0 such that maxx∈X |µx − hθ∗ , φ(x)iH | ≤ h.
Consequently, if h is not too big, the expected value of
each of the observations yt is nearly a linear function of its
associated features φ(xt ). We say the model is misspecified
when h > 0, and otherwise the setting is well-specified and
reduces to the classical stochastic setting when h = 0.
Assumption 2. Rewards are bounded maxx∈X |µx | ≤ B.

1. Introduction
This work studies a non-parametric multi-armed bandit
game through the lens of experimental design. Fix a finite
set of measurements X ⊂ Rd and a function µ : X → R.
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 2 University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. Correspondence to: Romain Camilleri
<camilr@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Assumption 3. For every time t, the additive stochastic
noise ξt is independent, mean-zero with E[ξt2 ] ≤ σ 2 .
While we assume the learner knows B and σ 2 , we assume
that the learner does not know the extent of the model misspecification h ≥ 0. Note that we do not assume ξt is
bounded, indeed, it can even be heavy tailed.
1.1. Elimination algorithms and experimental design
Whether the model is misspecified (h > 0) or not (h = 0),
a popular class of algorithms for both the objectives of

