A Lower Bound for the Sample Complexity of Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Abi Komanduru 1 Jean Honorio 2

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is the task of
finding a reward function that generates a desired
optimal policy for a given Markov Decision Process (MDP). This paper develops an informationtheoretic lower bound for the sample complexity of the finite state, finite action IRL problem.
A geometric construction of β-strict separable
IRL problems using spherical codes is considered. Properties of the ensemble size as well as
the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the generated trajectories are derived. The resulting ensemble is then used along with Fano’s inequality
to derive a sample complexity lower bound of
O(n log n), where n is the number of states in the
MDP.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on the well studied
problem of finding an optimal policy for a given Markov
Decision Process (MDP) with a known reward function.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng & Russel, 2000)
considers a MDP with known optimal policy and aims to
find a reward function that generates the desired optimal
policy. It is well known that the choice of such reward
function is not necessarily unique. The IRL problem occurs
in situations where the actions of an expert, which represent
the optimal policy, are known or can be observed and are to
be replicated through the proper choice of a reward function.
Examples include cases such as apprenticeship learning.
Two major formulations of the IRL problem have been
proposed. The first is the standard MDP formulation considered by (Ng & Russel, 2000). This is the formulation
that is considered in this paper and for which the results are
derived. The second is the linearly-solvable MDP (LMDP)
formulation of (Dvijotham & Todorov, 2010). As noted
in (Dvijotham & Todorov, 2010), while the standard MDP
1
Purdue University, Indiana, USA 2 Purdue University,
Indiana USA. Correspondence to: Abi Komanduru <akomandu@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

problem can be embedded in LMDP, solutions to standard
MDP problems based on standard MDPs are guaranteed to
generate the desired Bellman optimal policy given the true
transition probabilities whereas the LMDP formulation does
not. Both formulations are used successfully in practice.
Methods to solve the standard MDP formulations include
the methods presented in (Ng & Russel, 2000), (Abbeel
& Ng, 2004), Multiplicative Weights for Apprenticeship
Learning (Syed et al., 2008), Bayesian Estimation IRL (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007), Maximum Margin Planning
(Ratliff et al., 2006), Hybrid IRL (Neu & Szepesvári, 2007)
and the L1 SVM formulation(Komanduru & Honorio, 2019).
Examples of methods for solving the LMDP formulation are
Maximum-Entropy IRL (Ziebart et al., 2008) and Gaussian
Process IRL (Levine et al., 2011).
As shown in (Komanduru & Honorio, 2019), various solutions to the standard MDP problem can fail to result in a
reward that uniquely generates the desired optimal policy.
This failure can render such reward function solutions useless in the case where the goal is to replicate the policy of
the expert and not just simply achieve similar values for the
value function. With this in mind, (Komanduru & Honorio,
2
2019) derived an upper bound of O( nβ 2 log(nk)) for the
sample complexity of the inverse reinforcement learning
problem. In this paper, we derive an information-theoretic
lower bound for the sample complexity of the standard MDP
IRL problem when the transition probabilities are estimated
from observed trajectories. In this case, a sample is an observation of tuples consisting of the previous state, action and
resultant state from the observed trajectories. The derived
sample complexity is a bound on the number of samples
with respect to the goal of recovering a reward function that
correctly generates the desired optimal policy.
We use Fano’s inequality (Cover & Thomas, 2006) to
prove our result through a careful construction of an ensemble. The use of restricted ensembles is customary for
information-theoretic lower bounds (Santhanam & Wainwright, 2012), (Wang et al., 2010), (Tandon et al., 2014). To
the best of our knowledge, no such information-theoretic
sample complexity lower bound exists for the recovery of
the reward function with the stated properties in the case of
standard MDP IRL.
In the following section, we review the basic notation of the

