Learning by Turning: Neural Architecture Aware Optimisation
Yang Liu * 1 Jeremy Bernstein * 2 Markus Meister 2 Yisong Yue 2

Abstract
Descent methods for deep networks are notoriously capricious: they require careful tuning
of step size, momentum and weight decay, and
which method will work best on a new benchmark is a priori unclear. To address this problem,
this paper conducts a combined study of neural
architecture and optimisation, leading to a new
optimiser called Nero: the neuronal rotator. Nero
trains reliably without momentum or weight decay, works in situations where Adam and SGD
fail, and requires little to no learning rate tuning.
Also, Nero’s memory footprint is „ square root
that of Adam or LAMB. Nero combines two ideas:
(1) projected gradient descent over the space of
balanced networks; (2) neuron-specific updates,
where the step size sets the angle through which
each neuron’s hyperplane turns. The paper concludes by discussing how this geometric connection between architecture and optimisation may
impact theories of generalisation in deep learning.

1. Introduction

This observation motivates the combined study of architecture and optimisation, and this paper explores several
questions at that intersection. First of all:
h?i What is the right domain of optimisation for a neural network’s weights? Is it Rd , or something more
exotic—such as a Cartesian product of hyperspheres?
Typically, optimisation is conducted over Rd , while a careful
weight initialisation and a tuned weight decay hyperparameter impose a soft constraint on the optimisation domain.
Since normalisation schemes such as batch norm (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015) render the network invariant to the scale
of the weights, weight decay also plays a somewhat subtle
second role in modifying the effective learning rate. Hyperparameters with this kind of subtle coupling add to the
compounding cost of hyperparameter search.
Furthermore, descent methods such as Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015) and LAMB (You et al., 2020) use either synapsespecific or layer-specific gradient normalisation. This motivates a second question:
h?i At what level of granularity should an optimiser work?
Should normalisation occur per-synapse or per-layer—
or perhaps, per-neuron?

Deep learning has brought on a new paradigm in computer
science, enabling artificial systems to interact with the world
at an unprecedented level of complexity. That said, the core
technology relies on various heuristic numerical techniques
that are sometimes brittle and often require extensive tuning.
A major goal of modern research in machine learning is to
uncover the principles underlying learning in neural systems,
and thus to derive more reliable learning algorithms.

This paper contends that in deep learning, hyperparameters
proliferate because of hidden couplings between optimiser
and architecture. By studying the above questions, and distilling simple rules that govern optimisation and architecture,
this paper aims to make deep learning less brittle—and less
sensitive to opaque hyperparameters.

Part of the challenge of this endeavour is that learning in
deep networks is an inherently coupled problem. Suppose
that training performance is sensitive to a particular detail
of the neural architecture—then it is unclear whether that
detail affects the expressivity of the architecture, or just the
ability of the descent method to train the architecture.

1. A new optimiser—Nero: the neuronal rotator. Nero
performs per-neuron projected gradient descent, and
uses „ square root the memory of Adam or LAMB.

*
Equal contribution 1 Abacus.AI 2 Caltech. Correspondence to:
YL <yang@abacus.ai> and JB <bernstein@caltech.edu>. Code
available at github.com/jxbz/nero.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the authors.

Summary of contributions:

2. Experiments across image classification, image generation, natural language processing and reinforcement
learning, in which Nero’s out-of-the-box configuration
tends to outperform tuned baseline optimisers.
3. Discussion of how the connection between optimisation and architecture relates to generalisation theories,
such as PAC-Bayes and norm-based complexity.

