Keyframe-Focused Visual Imitation Learning

Chuan Wen * 1 Jierui Lin * 2 Jianing Qian 3 Yang Gao 1 4 Dinesh Jayaraman 3

Abstract
Imitation learning trains control policies by mimicking pre-recorded expert demonstrations. In partially observable settings, imitation policies must
rely on observation histories, but many seemingly
paradoxical results show better performance for
policies that only access the most recent observation. Recent solutions ranging from causal graph
learning to deep information bottlenecks have
shown promising results, but failed to scale to realistic settings such as visual imitation. We propose
a solution that outperforms these prior approaches
by upweighting demonstration keyframes corresponding to expert action changepoints. This simple approach easily scales to complex visual imitation settings. Our experimental results demonstrate consistent performance improvements over
all baselines on image-based Gym MuJoCo continuous control tasks. Finally, on the CARLA
photorealistic vision-based urban driving simulator, we resolve a long-standing issue in behavioral cloning for driving by demonstrating effective imitation from observation histories. Supplementary materials and code at: https://
tinyurl.com/imitation-keyframes.

1. Introduction
Learning controllers for complex, unmodeled agents and
environments is a challenging problem. For tasks where at
least one “expert” controller exists, such as a human driver
for autonomous driving, imitation learning offers a simple,
powerful family of solutions that exploit demonstrations
provided by this expert to bootstrap control policy learning. Many imitation approaches employ a straightforward
“behavioral cloning” (BC) strategy, to train policies completely “offline”, i.e., with no environmental interaction, by
simply mapping expert observations to expert actions on
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 University of Texas at Austin
3
University of Pennsylvania 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Correspondence to: Dinesh Jayaraman <dineshj@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the demonstration data. While BC has well-documented
distributional shift issues due to compounding imitation errors when executed in the environment, several effective
approaches have been proposed to address them, and BC
remains widely used in practice (Pomerleau, 1989; Schaal,
1999; Muller et al., 2006; Mülling et al., 2013; Bojarski
et al., 2016a; Giusti et al., 2015).
We focus on the open problem of effectively extending BC
to realistic partially observed settings such as driving, where
the agent cannot observe all task-relevant information instantaneously. This is commonly resolved in other controller
design paradigms by integrating historical information in
the control policy, but this has proven challenging in BC.
For over 15 years now, researchers have reported seemingly
paradoxical results that show performance drops in some
POMDP settings from allowing BC agents to access history
information, compared to when they are restricted to instantaneous observations alone (Muller et al., 2006; Bansal et al.,
2019; de Haan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). Recently,
Wen et al. (2020) coined the phrase “copycat problem” to
describe the issue, and show that the problem is wider still:
even when history information does improve BC performance, the learned policies often perform suboptimally and
have room to improve if the copycat problem is correctly
addressed.
Figure 1 shows a snippet of an expert driving demonstration
from the imitation dataset CARLA100 (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2017; Codevilla et al., 2019), where a car waiting at a red
traffic light starts to move when the light turns green. We
can see that the expert’s action at is identical to its previous
action at−1 , except at one moment when the light turns
green (figure shows throttle). Thus, a “copycat” policy that
repeated the previous action without paying any attention to
the images would only commit one imitation error on the
expert data. Upon execution in the environment however,
since no expert would be available, it would repeat its own
previous action at each step, and never move at all! Indeed,
Codevilla et al. (2019) report this special case of the copycat
problem as the “inertia” problem.
We study the reasons for the copycat problem and identify one key reason that can be algorithmically addressed:
when expert actions are highly temporally correlated, the
demonstration dataset has a very tiny fraction of important

