How to Learn when Data Reacts to Your Model: Performative Gradient
Descent
Zachary Izzo 1 Lexing Ying 1 2 James Zou 3

Abstract
Performative distribution shift captures the setting
where the choice of which ML model is deployed
changes the data distribution. For example, a bank
which uses the number of open credit lines to determine a customer’s risk of default on a loan may
induce customers to open more credit lines in order to improve their chances of being approved.
Because of the interactions between the model
and data distribution, finding the optimal model
parameters is challenging. Works in this area
have focused on finding stable points, which can
be far from optimal. Here we introduce performative gradient descent (PerfGD), an algorithm
for computing performatively optimal points. Under regularity assumptions on the performative
loss, PerfGD is the first algorithm which provably
converges to an optimal point. PerfGD explicitly
captures how changes in the model affects the
data distribution and is simple to use. We support
our findings with theory and experiments.

1. Introduction
A common paradigm in machine learning is to assume access to training and test datasets which are drawn independently from a fixed distribution. In practice, however, this
is frequently not the case, and changes in the underlying
data distribution can lead to suboptimal model performance.
This problem is referred to as distribution shift or dataset
shift.
While there is an extensive body of literature on distribution shift (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009), most prior works
have focused on exogenous changes in the data distribution due to e.g. temporal or spatial changes. For instance,
such changes may occur when a model trained on medical
1

Department of Mathematics, Stanford University 2 Institute for
Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
3
Department of Biomedical Data Science. Correspondence to:
Zachary Izzo <zizzo@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

imaging data from one hospital is deployed at a different
hospital due to the difference in imaging devices. Time
series analysis is another plentiful source of these types of
dataset shift. A model trained on stock market data from
50 years ago is unlikely to perform well in the modern market due to changing economic trends; similarly, a weather
forecasting model trained on old data will likely have poor
performance without accounting for macroscopic changes
in climate patterns.
More recently, researchers have sought to address endogenous sources of distribution shift, i.e. where the change in
distribution is induced by the choice of model. This setting, first explored in (Perdomo et al., 2020), is known as
performative distribution shift. Such effects can arise for
a variety of reasons. The modeled population may try to
“game the system,” causing individuals to modify some of
their features to receive a more favorable classification (e.g.
opening more credit lines to improve one’s likelihood of being approved for a loan). Performative effects may also arise
when viewing model output as a treatment. For instance, if a
bank predicts a customer’s default risk is high, the bank may
assign that customer a higher interest rate, thereby increasing the customer’s chance of defaulting (Drusvyatskiy &
Xiao, 2020). As ML systems play an ever-increasing role in
daily life, accounting for performative effects will naturally
become more and more critical for both the development of
effective models and understanding the societal impact of
ML.
The original paper (Perdomo et al., 2020) and much of the
follow-up research (Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Drusvyatskiy & Xiao, 2020; Brown et al., 2020) has viewed the
performative setting as a dynamical system. The modeler
repeatedly observes (samples from) the distribution arising
from her choice of model parameters, then, treating this
induced distribution as fixed, updates her model by reducing
its loss on that fixed distribution. The primary question addressed by these works is under what conditions this process
stabilizes, i.e. when will this process converge to a model
which is optimal for the distribution it induces? A model
with this property is known as a performatively stable point.
While performatively stable points may be interesting from
a theoretical standpoint, focusing on this objective misses

