Stability and Generalization of Stochastic Gradient Methods for Minimax
Problems
Yunwen Lei * 1 Zhenhuan Yang * 2 Tianbao Yang 3 Yiming Ying 2

Abstract
Many machine learning problems can be formulated as minimax problems such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), AUC maximization and robust estimation, to mention but a few. A
substantial amount of studies are devoted to studying the convergence behavior of their stochastic
gradient-type algorithms. In contrast, there is
relatively little work on understanding their generalization, i.e., how the learning models built from
training examples would behave on test examples.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive generalization analysis of stochastic gradient methods
for minimax problems under both convex-concave
and nonconvex-nonconcave cases through the lens
of algorithmic stability. We establish a quantitative connection between stability and several
generalization measures both in expectation and
with high probability. For the convex-concave setting, our stability analysis shows that stochastic
gradient descent ascent attains optimal generalization bounds for both smooth and nonsmooth
minimax problems. We also establish generalization bounds for both weakly-convex-weaklyconcave and gradient-dominated problems. We
report preliminary experimental results to verify
our theory.

1. Introduction
In machine learning we often encounter minimax optimization problems, where the decision variables are partitioned
into two groups: one for minimization and one for maximization. This framework covers many important problems as specific instantiations, including adversarial learn*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, University
of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Correspondence to: Yiming Ying
<yying@albany.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ing (Goodfellow et al., 2014), robust optimization (Chen
et al., 2017; Namkoong & Duchi, 2017), reinforcement
learning (Dai et al., 2018; Du et al., 2017) and AUC maximization (Gao et al., 2013; Lei & Ying, 2021b; Liu et al.,
2018; Ying et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2011). To solve these
problems, researchers have proposed various efficient optimization algorithms, for which a representative algorithm
is the stochastic gradient descent ascent (SGDA) due to its
simplicity and widespread use in real-world applications.
There is a large amount of work on the convergence analysis of minimax optimization algorithms in different settings such as convex-concave (Nemirovski et al., 2009),
strongly-convex-strongly-concave (SC-SC) (Balamurugan
& Bach, 2016), nonconvex-concave (Rafique et al., 2018)
and nonconvex-nonconcave (Liu et al., 2020; Yang et al.,
2020) cases. However, there is relatively little work on
studying the generalization, i.e., how the model trained
based on the training examples would generalize to test examples. Indeed, a model with good performance on training
data may not generalize well if the models are too complex. It is imperative to study the generalization error of
the trained models to foresee their prediction behavior. This
often entails the investigation of the tradeoff between optimization and estimation for an implicit regularization.
To our best knowledge, there is only two recent work on
the generalization analysis for minimax optimization algorithms (Farnia & Ozdaglar, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020).
The argument stability for the specific empirical saddle
point (ESP) was studied (Zhang et al., 2020), which implies weak generalization and strong generalization bounds.
However, the discussion there ignored optimization errors
and nonconvex-nonconcave cases, which can be restrictive in practice. For SC-SC, convex-concave, nonconvexnonconcave objective functions, the uniform stability of
several gradient-based minimax learners was developed in
a smooth setting (Farnia & Ozdaglar, 2020), including gradient descent ascent (GDA), proximal point method (PPM)
and GDmax. While they developed optimal generalization
bounds for PPM, their discussions did not yield vanishing risk bounds for GDA in the general convex-concave
case since their generalization bounds grow exponentially
in terms of the iteration number. Furthermore, the above
mentioned papers only study generalization bounds in ex-

