Doubly Robust Off-Policy Actor-Critic: Convergence and Optimality

Tengyu Xu 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Yingbin Liang 1

Abstract
Designing off-policy reinforcement learning algorithms is typically a very challenging task, because a desirable iteration update often involves
an expectation over an on-policy distribution.
Prior off-policy actor-critic (AC) algorithms have
introduced a new critic that uses the density ratio
for adjusting the distribution mismatch in order to
stabilize the convergence, but at the cost of potentially introducing high biases due to the estimation
errors of both the density ratio and value function.
In this paper, we develop a doubly robust offpolicy AC (DR-Off-PAC) for discounted MDP,
which can take advantage of learned nuisance
functions to reduce estimation errors. Moreover,
DR-Off-PAC adopts a single timescale structure,
in which both actor and critics are updated simultaneously with constant stepsize, and is thus more
sample efficient than prior algorithms that adopt
either two timescale or nested-loop structure. We
study the finite-time convergence rate and characterize the sample complexity for DR-Off-PAC to
attain an -accurate optimal policy. We also show
that the overall convergence of DR-Off-PAC is
doubly robust to the approximation errors that
depend only on the expressive power of approximation functions. To the best of our knowledge,
our study establishes the first overall sample complexity analysis for a single time-scale off-policy
AC algorithm.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), policy gradient and its variant actor-critic (AC) algorithms have
achieved enormous success in various domains such as game
playing (Mnih et al., 2016), Go (Silver et al., 2016), robotic
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University 2 Departments of Industrial Engineering &
Management Sciences, Northwestern University 3 Department of
Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Tengyu Xu <xu.3260@osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Haarnoja et al., 2018), etc. However, these successes usually rely on the access to on-policy samples, i.e., samples
collected online from on-policy visitation (or stationary)
distribution. However, in many real-world applications,
online sampling during a learning process is costly and unsafe (Gottesman et al., 2019). This necessitates the use of
off-policy methods, which use dataset sampled from a behavior distribution. Since the policy gradient is expressed
in the form of the on-policy expectation, it is challenging
to estimate the policy gradient with off-policy samples. A
common approach to implement actor-critic algorithms in
the off-policy setting is to simply ignore the distribution
mismatch between on- and off-policy distributions (Degris
et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2016; Houthooft et al., 2018;
Meuleau et al., 2001) but it has been demonstrated that such
distribution mismatch can often result in divergence and
poor empirical performance (Liu et al., 2019).
Several attempts have been made to correct the distribution mismatch in off-policy actor-critic’s update by introducing a reweighting factor in policy update (Imani et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019c; Maei, 2018), but so far only COF-PAC (Zhang et al.,
2019c) and OPPOSD (Liu et al., 2019) have been theoretically shown to converge without making strong assumptions about the estimation quality. Specifically, COF-PAC
reweights the policy update with emphatic weighting approximated by a linear function, and OPPOSD reweights the
policy with a density correction ratio learned by a method
proposed in (Liu et al., 2018). Although both COF-PAC
and OPPOSD show much promise by stabilizing the convergence, the convergence results in (Zhang et al., 2019c)
and (Liu et al., 2019) indicate that both algorithms may
suffer from a large bias error induced by estimations of
both reweighting factor and value function.
The doubly robust method arises as a popular technique to
reduce such a bias error, in which the bias vanishes as long
as some (but not necessarily the full set of) estimations are
accurate. Such an approach has been mainly applied to the
off-policy evaluation problem (Tang et al., 2019; Jiang &
Li, 2016; Dudı́k et al., 2011; 2014), and the development of
such a method for solving the policy optimization problem
is rather limited. (Huang & Jiang, 2020) derives a doubly
robust policy gradient for finite-horizon Markov Decision

