Adaptive Sampling for Best Policy Identification
in Markov Decision Processes
Aymen Al Marjani 1 Alexandre Proutiere 2

Abstract
We investigate the problem of best-policy identification in discounted Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) when the learner has access to a generative model. The objective is to devise a learning algorithm returning the best policy as early
as possible. We first derive a problem-specific
lower bound of the sample complexity satisfied
by any learning algorithm. This lower bound
corresponds to an optimal sample allocation that
solves a non-convex program, and hence, is hard
to exploit in the design of efficient algorithms.
We then provide a simple and tight upper bound
of the sample complexity lower bound, whose
corresponding nearly-optimal sample allocation
becomes explicit. The upper bound depends on
specific functionals of the MDP such as the suboptimality gaps and the variance of the next-state
value function, and thus really captures the hardness of the MDP. Finally, we devise KLB-TS (KL
Ball Track-and-Stop), an algorithm tracking this
nearly-optimal allocation, and provide asymptotic
guarantees for its sample complexity (both almost
surely and in expectation). The advantages of
KLB-TS against state-of-the-art algorithms are
discussed and illustrated numerically.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms are designed to
interact with an unknown stochastic dynamical system, and
through this interaction, to identify, as fast as possible, an
optimal control policy. The efficiency of these algorithms
is usually measured through their sample complexity, defined as the number of samples (the number of times the
algorithm interacts with the system) required to identify an
optimal policy with some prescribed levels of accuracy and
1
UMPA, ENS Lyon. This work was done while Aymen Al Marjani was at KTH. 2 KTH Royal institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Aymen Al Marjani <aymen.al marjani@ens-lyon.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

certainty. This paper, as most related work in this field, focuses on systems and control objectives that are modelled as
a standard discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
with finite state and action spaces. Various interaction models have been investigated, but sample complexity analyses
have been mainly conducted under the so-called generative
model, where in each step, the algorithm may sample a transition and a reward from any given (state, action) pair. We
also restrict our attention to this model.
We investigate the design of RL algorithms with minimal
sample complexity. This problem has attracted a lot of
attention over the last two decades. Most studies follow
a minimax approach. For example, it is known (Azar
et al., 2013) that for the worst possible MDP, identifying
an ε-optimal policy with probability 1 − δ requires at least
SA
SA
ε2 (1−γ)3 log( δ ) samples, where S and A are the number
of states and actions, respectively, and γ is the discount
factor. Note that to obtain this sample complexity lower
bound, one needs to design a very specific worst-case MDP
(in particular, its transition probabilities must depend on ε
and γ). Since the aforementioned minimax lower bound
appeared, most researchers have been aiming at devising
algorithms matching this bound. In contrast, we are interested in analyzing the minimal problem-specific sample
complexity. Specifically, we seek to understand the dependence of the sample complexity on the MDP that has to
be learnt. Problem-specific performance metrics are much
more informative than their minimax counterparts, because
they encode and express the inherent hardness of the MDP.
Minimax metrics just represent the hardness of the worst
MDP. In particular, establishing that the sample complexity
of an algorithm does not exceed the minimax lower bound
just reveals that the algorithm performs well for this worst
MDP. However, it does not indicate whether the algorithm
adapts to the hardness of the MDP, i.e., whether the optimal
policy of a very easy MDP would be learnt very quickly.
As a matter of fact, an algorithm with sample complexity
matching the minimax lower bound just consists in sampling (state, action) pairs uniformly at random, and is not
adapting to the MDP.
The problem-specific sample complexity of identifying the
best arm in stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) prob-

