Better Training using Weight-Constrained Stochastic Dynamics
Benedict Leimkuhler 1 Tiffany Vlaar 1 Timothée Pouchon 1 Amos Storkey 2

Abstract
We employ constraints to control the parameter
space of deep neural networks throughout training.
The use of customized, appropriately designed
constraints can reduce the vanishing/exploding
gradients problem, improve smoothness of classification boundaries, control weight magnitudes
and stabilize deep neural networks, and thus enhance the robustness of training algorithms and
the generalization capabilities of neural networks.
We provide a general approach to efficiently incorporate constraints into a stochastic gradient
Langevin framework, allowing enhanced exploration of the loss landscape. We also present
specific examples of constrained training methods motivated by orthogonality preservation for
weight matrices and explicit weight normalizations. Discretization schemes are provided both
for the overdamped formulation of Langevin dynamics and the underdamped form, in which momenta further improve sampling efficiency. These
optimization schemes can be used directly, without needing to adapt neural network architecture
design choices or to modify the objective with regularization terms, and see performance improvements in classification tasks.

1. Introduction
We study stochastic training methods based on Langevin
dynamics combined with algebraic constraints. Our general
framework allows for incorporating constraints into standard
training schemes and sampling methods for neural networks.
Constraints provide direct control of the parameter space of
a model and hence afford a means to improve its generalization performance. As applications, we consider magnitude
control and orthogonality of neural network weights.
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom 2 Department of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Tiffany Vlaar
<Tiffany.Vlaar@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Current approaches to enhance the generalization performance of overparameterized neural networks consist of both
explicit and implicit regularization techniques (Neyshabur
et al., 2015). Examples of the former are L1 (Williams,
1995; Tibshirani, 1996) and L2 (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970)
regularization, which modify the loss by adding a parameter norm penalty term. Batch normalization (BatchNorm)
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) is a technique that causes an implicit regularization effect. BatchNorm can be viewed as
tantamount to a constraint imposed on the network’s parameters during training. Although BatchNorm is widely
used, explanations for the method’s success remain elusive
(Santurkar et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2019). The reliance on
increasingly complex strategies does little to enhance the
explainability of neural networks, so robust simplification of
all aspects of training is desirable. The constrained approach
proposed in this paper provides a conceptually straightforward and interpretable framework that offers direct control
of parameter spaces, without requiring modifications to the
neural network architecture or objective. The transparency
of this approach allows for drawing a direct connection between the use of weight constraints and the generalisation
performance of the resulting neural network.
In neural network (NN) training one aims to minimize the
loss LX (✓) for parameters ✓ 2 Rn and data X. Constraints
can be seen as limiting cases of penalty-based regularization
which replaces minimization of the loss LX (✓) by that of
the augmented loss LcX (✓) = LX (✓) + "12 g(✓)2 , where
g(·) is a suitable smooth function of the parameters. In the
limit " ! 0, these penalty terms introduce an undesirable
stiffness and consequent stability restriction in gradientbased training, which limits the choice of step size (see
Figure 5 for an illustration). It is therefore natural to relate
the above system to a constrained optimization task subject
to g(✓) = 0 (see Section 3).
A popular NN training scheme is stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). SGD may be improved by incorporating momenta
(Sutskever et al., 2013) and additive noise (Welling & Teh,
2011; Wenzel et al., 2020), or more generally by embedding
the loss gradient in a Langevin dynamics (LD) framework
(Cheng et al., 2017). We will combine the resulting discretized stochastic differential equation (SDE) approach
with constraints (Sec. 4). The benefit of using constrained
SDEs for NN training is illustrated in Figure 1, where the

