Hyperparameter Selection for Imitation Learning

Léonard Hussenot * 1 2 Marcin Andrychowicz * 1 Damien Vincent * 1 Robert Dadashi 1 Anton Raichuk 1
Lukasz Stafiniak 1 Sertan Girgin 1 Raphael Marinier 1 Nikola Momchev 1 Sabela Ramos 1 Manu Orsini 1
Olivier Bachem 1 Matthieu Geist 1 Olivier Pietquin 1

Abstract
We address the issue of tuning hyperparameters
(HPs) for imitation learning algorithms in the context of continuous-control, when the underlying
reward function of the demonstrating expert cannot be observed at any time. The vast literature
in imitation learning mostly considers this reward
function to be available for HP selection, but this
is not a realistic setting. Indeed, would this reward function be available, it could then directly
be used for policy training and imitation would
not be necessary. To tackle this mostly ignored
problem, we propose a number of possible proxies to the external reward. We evaluate them in
an extensive empirical study (more than 10’000
agents across 9 environments) and make practical
recommendations for selecting HPs. Our results
show that while imitation learning algorithms are
sensitive to HP choices, it is often possible to
select good enough HPs through a proxy to the
reward function.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Reinforcement Learning (RL) now allow
optimizing control policies with respect to a given reward
function even for high-dimensional observation and action
spaces (Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019). However,
in many cases it is impossible or impractical to design a reward function which captures the desired outcomes (Popov
et al., 2017). One of the approaches to overcome this issue is Imitation Learning (IL), which relies on a set of
demonstrations presenting the desired behaviour instead of
a reward signal (Schaal, 1999; Argall et al., 2009). IL can
be achieved through pure supervised learning (Pomerleau,
1991) but many IL approaches leverage the assumption that
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 Univ. de
Lille, CNRS, Inria Scool, UMR 9189 CRIStAL. Correspondence
to: Léonard Hussenot <hussenot@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the expert implements an optimal policy according to an
unknown reward function. This approach, also known as
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), tries to recover this
unknown reward function and use an RL algorithm to train a
policy to maximize it (Russell, 1998; Ng et al., 2000; Ziebart
et al., 2008). Both approaches have their advantages and
drawbacks (Piot et al., 2013).
While all machine learning approaches require some degree
of hyperparameter (HP) tuning, the issue is especially pronounced in RL. Indeed, RL algorithms are known to be very
sensitive to the values of their numerous HPs (Henderson
et al., 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2020). RL algorithms’
HPs are usually chosen by letting different agents interact
with the environment and selecting the one which performed
best as measured with the environment reward.
Surprisingly, this is also a common practice in the IL domain
where one does not have access to an environment reward
function which accurately describes the task. If such a
reward were known, it could be directly used to train a
controller via RL. Although expert trajectories can also be
useful in this case, this is not the setting of IL, but of RL
with demonstrations where both the expert demonstrations
and reward signals are used (Kim et al., 2013; Piot et al.,
2014; Hester et al., 2018). This constitutes a gap between
the IL framework and the experimental design of IL agents
that hinders the practical utility of IL. It is indeed unclear
how to tune the imitation agent without access to the reward
function.
In some cases, although a per-step reward function is not
available, a success signal can be computed or given by a
human rater. We focus on the tasks for which (1) such signal
is not available or (2) the cost of such signal is prohibitive
or (3) such signal could bias the resulting policy. Indeed,
just as the reward-engineering problem leads to policies
maximizing a reward in an unexpected way (Sims, 1994;
Feldt, 1998; Ecoffet et al., 2021), selecting policies on the
basis of an incautiously designed metric or of a biased human judgement can lead to biased policies (Henderson et al.,
2018).
We present a thorough empirical study of this question in
a number of challenging domains with high dimensional

