A Structured Observation Distribution for Generative
Biological Sequence Prediction and Forecasting

Eli N. Weinstein 1 Debora S. Marks 2 3

Abstract
Generative probabilistic modeling of biological
sequences has widespread existing and potential
application across biology and biomedicine, from
evolutionary biology to epidemiology to protein
design. Many standard sequence analysis methods preprocess data using a multiple sequence
alignment (MSA) algorithm, one of the most
widely used computational methods in all of science (Van Noorden et al., 2014). However, as
we show in this article, training generative probabilistic models with MSA preprocessing leads to
statistical pathologies in the context of sequence
prediction and forecasting. To address these problems, we propose a principled drop-in alternative
to MSA preprocessing in the form of a structured
observation distribution (the “MuE” distribution).
We prove theoretically that the MuE distribution
comprehensively generalizes popular methods for
inferring biological sequence alignments, and provide a precise characterization of how such biological models have differed from natural language latent alignment models. We show empirically that models that use the MuE as an observation distribution outperform comparable methods
across a variety of datasets, and apply MuE models to a novel problem for generative probabilistic
sequence models: forecasting pathogen evolution.

1. Introduction
High-throughput sequencing is pervasive across biology and
biomedicine, and critical to both past and ongoing discoveries and technological advancements. Analyzing large scale
1

Program in Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA 2 Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA 3 Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Eli N. Weinstein <eweinstein@g.harvard.edu>, Debora S. Marks <debbie@hms.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sequence data, making predictions about unobserved or future sequences, and generating new functional sequences,
are major and growing challenges with relevance to epidemiology (predicting pathogen evolution), immunology
(characterizing antibody repertoires), molecular evolution
(mapping substructure within protein families), protein design, and many more subﬁelds of biology and biomedicine.
In principal, generative probabilistic modeling enables (a)
modular and uncertainty-aware data analysis, (b) formal
mathematical statement of underlying assumptions, and (c)
generation of new samples, which in the case of sequences
can be synthesized and tested in the laboratory (taking advantage of recent rapid progress in high-throughput synthesis) (Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Russ et al., 2020). However,
although machine learning and statistics offer an extraordinary array of generative probabilistic models, extending
existing methods to apply to biological sequences while accounting for domain-speciﬁc prior knowledge is nontrivial.
When analyzing biological sequence data, a standard approach is to preprocess the data before building any models
by constructing a multiple sequence alignment (MSA). MSA
algorithms are among the most widely used methods in all
of science; according to a 2014 analysis, the 10th most cited
scientiﬁc article of all time is an MSA algorithm, ahead of
all other computational data analysis and statistics articles
(Van Noorden et al., 2014; Thompson et al., 1994; 1997).
Recent major advances in machine learning and statistical
methods for protein structure prediction, variant effect prediction for clinical genetics, protein design, epidemiological
tracking, and more have continued to rely on MSAs (Marks
et al., 2011; Frazer et al., 2020; Russ et al., 2020; Hadﬁeld
et al., 2018). Although MSAs are a powerful tool for understanding sequence evolution, in Section 4.1 of this article
we show that employing MSAs as preprocessing introduces
statistical pathologies in the context of generative sequence
prediction and forecasting.
As a principled, drop-in alternative to MSA preprocessing, this article provides a structured observation distribution for biological sequences, the “mutational emission”
(“MuE”) distribution. Observation distributions are a common general-purpose technique for extending continuousspace models to other types of data, perhaps most familiar

