A Scalable Deterministic Global Optimization Algorithm for Clustering
Problems
Kaixun Hua 1 Mingfei Shi 1 Yankai Cao 1

Abstract
The minimum sum-of-squares clustering (MSSC)
task, which can be treated as a Mixed Integer Second Order Cone Programming (MISOCP) problem, is rarely investigated in the literature through
deterministic optimization to find its global optimal value. In this paper, we modelled the MSSC
task as a two-stage optimization problem and proposed a tailed reduced-space branch and bound
(BB) algorithm. We designed several approaches
to construct lower and upper bounds at each node
in the BB scheme, including a scenario grouping
based Lagrangian decomposition approach. One
key advantage of this reduced-space algorithm is
that it only needs to perform branching on the
centers of clusters to guarantee convergence, and
the size of centers is independent of the number
of data samples. Moreover, the lower bounds
can be computed by solving small-scale sample
subproblems, and upper bounds can be obtained
trivially. These two properties enable our algorithm easy to be paralleled and can be scalable to
the dataset with up to 200,000 samples for finding
a global -optimal solution of the MSSC task. We
performed numerical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets and compared our
proposed algorithms with the off-the-shelf global
optimal solvers and classical local optimal algorithms. The results reveal a strong performance
and scalability of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Clustering is the prototypical unsupervised learning activity
that identifies cohesive and well-differentiated groups of
records in data (Jain, 2010). The target to get a clustering
result can always be treated as an optimization problem.
1
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Correspondence to: Yankai Cao <yankai.cao@ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The different definitions of cost function induce different
types of clustering algorithms. In this paper, we focus on
a fundamental target of the clustering problems that minimize the within-cluster sum-of-squared-error or in short
the minimum sum-of-squares criteria. It tends to minimize
the distance between points to their corresponding cluster
centers to achieve the best cohesion and separation of the
resulted clusters (Späth, 1980). There are many heuristic
methods proposed for solving the minimum sum-of-squares
clustering (MSSC) task. For instance, the k-means clustering algorithm (Lloyd, 1982) provides a coordinate descent
based method to produce a result for the MSSC task. However, due to the non-convexity of the MSSC objectives, the
classic k-means algorithm is sensitive to the initialization
and easy to fall under the local minimum (Xu & Lange,
2019). To overcome this limitation, several modifications
to the classical k-means clustering algorithm have been proposed in order to obtain the global optimal solutions for
the MSSC task (Likas et al., 2003; Tzortzis & Likas, 2014;
Xu & Lange, 2019; Agarap & Azcarraga, 2020). However,
none of these works provide the deterministic guarantee of
locating the global minimum. Investigating directly on the
global solution of the MSSC problem is still in deficiency.
One direction to solve the MSSC problem to global optimality deterministically starts from the work of (Peng & Wei,
2007) who modeled the MSSC problem as a 0-1 semidefinite programming (SDP) problem. (Aloise & Hansen, 2009)
applied this discovery and proposed a branch-and-cut SDP
algorithm for MSSC problem. Their algorithm can solve
problems with dataset up to 200 samples.
Another direction applies the column generation to MSSC
problem. Indeed, a column generation based clustering
algorithm proposed by (Du Merle et al., 1999) is, for the
first time, capable to solve the MSSC problem with median
size of sample (100-200 samples). This method was further
improved by (Aloise et al., 2012) which used a geometricbased approach to solve the auxiliary problem. Their work
improved the solvable problem size to 2300, which is currently the state of the art. However, column generation
method could face the exponential growth of the size of
master problem with the growth of the number of iterations.
Therefore, the method cannot scale further to problems with
even larger datasets. Moreover, Aloise’s method is more

