Improved Confidence Bounds for the Linear Logistic Model
and Applications to Bandits

Kwang-Sung Jun 1 Lalit Jain 2 Blake Mason 3 Houssam Nassif 4

Abstract
We propose improved fixed-design confidence
bounds for the linear logistic model. Our bounds
significantly improve upon the state-of-the-art
bound by Li et al. (2017) via recent developments
of the self-concordant analysis of the logistic loss
(Faury et al., 2020). Specifically, our confidence
bound avoids a direct dependence on 1/κ, where
κ is the minimal variance over all arms’ reward
distributions. In general, 1/κ scales exponentially
with the norm of the unknown linear parameter
θ∗ . Instead of relying on this worst case quantity, our confidence bound for the reward of any
given arm depends directly on the variance of that
arm’s reward distribution. We present two applications of our novel bounds to pure exploration and
regret minimization logistic bandits, improving
upon state-of-the-art performance guarantees. For
pure exploration we also provide a lower bound
highlighting a dependence on 1/κ for a family of
instances.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits algorithms offer a principled approach
to solve sequential decision problems under limited feedback (Thompson, 1933). In bandit problems, at each time
step, an agent chooses an arm to pull from an available
pool of arms and receives an associated reward. Under this
setting, two major objectives arise: pure exploration (aka
best-arm identification) where the goal is to identify the
arm with the highest average reward; and regret minimization where the goal is to maximize the total rewards gained.
Bandit algorithms are widely deployed in industry, with applications spanning news recommendation (Li et al., 2010),
ads (Sawant et al., 2018; Nabi et al., 2021), online retail
(Teo et al., 2016), and drug discovery (Kazerouni & Wein,
2019). In such applications, the agent often has access to
1

2

3

University of Arizona University of Washington University
of Wisconsin 4 Amazon Inc. Correspondence to: Kwang-Sung Jun
<kjun@cs.arizona.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a feature vector for each arm. A common assumption is
that the reward is a noisy linear measurement of the underlying feature vector of the arm being pulled. In other words,
the binary reward received from a pull of the arm x ∈ Rd
is yt = x> θ∗ + , where θ∗ is a latent parameter vector,
and  is subGaussian noise. In this case, there are several
algorithms that are near-optimal and/or practical for pure
exploration (Xu et al., 2018; Fiez et al., 2019) and for regret
minimization (Auer, 2002; Chu et al., 2011; Dani et al.,
2008; Russo & Van Roy, 2014).
Unfortunately, in abundant real-world use-cases the linear
reward model is not realistic and instead rewards are binary.
For example, the prevalent form of data arising from user
interactions is binary click/no-click feedback in the web and
e-commerce domains (Geng et al., 2020). Another example
is the problem of learning the best candidate from binary
pairwise comparisons, used in matching recommender systems (Biswas et al., 2019). In this setting, the agent has
access to a set of items (e.g., shoes), and repeatedly chooses
a pair of items to present to the user to choose from. The
goal of the agent is to infer the user’s favorite shoe. In
this paper, we use the linear logistic model for binary feedback. In other words, the binary reward received from a
pull of the arm x ∈ Rd is yt ∼ Bernoulli(µ(x> θ∗ )), where
µ(z) := (1 + e−z )−1 is the logistic link function.
Existing effective bandit algorithms in the linear feedback
setting attempt to estimate θ∗ to drive sampling. To do
so, they require tight confidence intervals on the estimated
mean reward x> θ∗ of arm x. To adapt these algorithms
to the logistic model, we require confidence intervals that
account for the non-linearity introduced by the link function
µ. However, there is a lack of tight confidence intervals
in this setting. Our work builds on previous attempts in
this area to a) provide tight confidence intervals, b) adapt
existing linear bandit algorithms to the logistic setting. We
now detail our contributions.
The first variance-dependent fixed design confidence interval for the linear logistic model. We first consider
the fixed design setting. Assume we have access to data
(xs , ys ) ⊂ Rd × {0, 1} for 1 ∈ [t] := {1, . . . , t} where the
reward ys is generated according to the logistic model. In
addition we assume ys is conditionally independent from

