Rissanen Data Analysis:
Examining Dataset Characteristics via Description Length

Ethan Perez 1 Douwe Kiela 2 Kyunghyun Cho 1 3

Abstract
We introduce a method to determine if a certain
capability helps to achieve an accurate model of
given data. We view labels as being generated
from the inputs by a program composed of
subroutines with different capabilities, and we
posit that a subroutine is useful if and only if the
minimal program that invokes it is shorter than
the one that does not. Since minimum program
length is uncomputable, we instead estimate
the labels’ minimum description length (MDL)
as a proxy, giving us a theoretically-grounded
method for analyzing dataset characteristics. We
call the method Rissanen Data Analysis (RDA)
after the father of MDL, and we showcase its
applicability on a wide variety of settings in NLP,
ranging from evaluating the utility of generating
subquestions before answering a question, to
analyzing the value of rationales and explanations,
to investigating the importance of different parts
of speech, and uncovering dataset gender bias.1

1. Introduction
In many practical learning scenarios, it is useful to know
what capabilities would help to achieve a good model of the
data. According to Occam’s Razor, a good model is one that
provides a simple explanation for the data (Blumer et al.,
1987), which means that the capability to perform a task
is helpful when it enables us to ﬁnd simpler explanations
of the data. Kolmogorov complexity (Kolmogorov, 1968)
formalizes the notion of simplicity as the length of the
shortest program required to generate the labels of the data
given the inputs. In this work, we estimate the Kolmogorov
complexity of the data by approximately computing the
1
New York University 2 Facebook AI Research 3 CIFAR Fellow
in Learning in Machines & Brains. Correspondence to: Ethan
Perez <perez@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code at https://github.com/ethanjperez/rda
along with a script to conduct RDA on your own dataset.

1

2

Figure 1. A capability f is useful if it shortens the minimum
program needed to perform a task, as measured by Minimum
Description Lengths L1 and L2 . To give a concrete example, if
x is a question and y is an answer, then f can be an oracle that
answers relevant subquestions.

data’s Minimum Description Length (MDL; Rissanen,
1978), and we examine how the data complexity changes as
we add or remove different features from the input. We name
our method Rissanen Data Analysis (RDA) after the father
of the MDL principle, and we use it to examine several open
questions about popular datasets, with a focus on NLP.
We view a capability as a function f (x) that transforms x
in some way (e.g., adding a feature), and we say that f is
helpful if invoking it leads to a shorter minimum program
for mapping x to the corresponding label in a dataset (see
Fig. 1 for an illustration). Finding a short program is
equivalent to ﬁnding a compressed version of the labels
given the inputs, since the program can be run to generate
the labels. Thus, we can measure the shortest program’s
length by estimating the labels’ maximally compressed
length, or Minimum Description Length (MDL; Rissanen,
1978; Gr¨unwald, 2004). While prior work in machine
learning uses MDL for model optimization (Hinton & van
Camp, 1993), selection (Yogatama et al., 2019), and model
probing (Voita & Titov, 2020; Lovering et al., 2021), we use
MDL for a very different end: to understand the data itself
(“dataset probing”).
RDA addresses empirical and theoretical inadequacies of
prior data analysis methods. For example, two common
approaches are to evaluate the performance of a model
when the inputs are modiﬁed or ablated (1) at training
and test time or (2) at test time only. Training time input
modiﬁcation has been used to evaluate the usefulness of the

