Regularizing towards Causal Invariance: Linear Models with Proxies

Michael Oberst 1 Nikolaj Thams 2 Jonas Peters 2 David Sontag 1

Abstract
We propose a method for learning linear models whose predictive performance is robust to
causal interventions on unobserved variables,
when noisy proxies of those variables are available. Our approach takes the form of a regularization term that trades off between in-distribution
performance and robustness to interventions. Under the assumption of a linear structural causal
model, we show that a single proxy can be used to
create estimators that are prediction optimal under
interventions of bounded strength. This strength
depends on the magnitude of the measurement
noise in the proxy, which is, in general, not identifiable. In the case of two proxy variables, we
propose a modified estimator that is prediction optimal under interventions up to a known strength.
We further show how to extend these estimators to
scenarios where additional information about the
“test time” intervention is available during training. We evaluate our theoretical findings in synthetic experiments and using real data of hourly
pollution levels across several cities in China.

1. Introduction
Ideally, predictive models would generalize beyond the distribution on which they are trained, e.g., across geographic
regions, across time, or across individual users. However,
models often learn to rely on signals in the training distribution that are not stable across domains, causing a drop-off
in predictive performance. This problem is broadly known
as dataset shift (Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2009).
Tackling this problem requires a formalization of how
dataset shift arises, and how that shift impacts the conditional distribution of our target Y given features X. One
way to formalize this shift is in terms of an underlying causal
graph (Pearl, 2009), where changes between distributions
1
EECS, MIT, Cambridge, USA 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Correspondence to: Michael Oberst <moberst@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

βx
X

A
α

βy
Y

Figure 1. Conceptual Example: A represents an (unobserved) socioeconomic variable, X represents current health status, and Y
represents a long-term health outcome. All relationships are assumed to be linear, and coefficients are given. We consider a
broader class of graphs in this work, see Figure 2.

are seen as arising from causal interventions on variables.
Conceptual example: In the causal graph given in Figure 1,
the variable A serves as a confounder. In a medical setting,
A could represent smoking habits or socioeconomic status,
which have a causal effect on current health status (X) as
well as longer-term outcomes (Y ). Importantly, A may not
be recorded in our training data, and the distribution of A
could vary across geography and time.
In the context of this causal graph, interventions which
change the distribution of A will also alter the conditional
mean E(Y | X). Under the linear relationships in Figure 1,
the optimal least-squares predictor Ŷ = γ ∗ X under the test
distribution depends on the test-time variance in A, in that
(
α,
if after intervention A = 0
∗
γ =
βY
α + βX , if after intervention Var(A) → ∞.
The first predictor encodes the direct causal effect of X on
Y , but is only optimal in the setting where the correlations
induced by A are removed by fixing it to a constant value
of zero (the same holds when including intercepts and allowing for non-zero means). The second predictor, on the
other hand, renders the distribution of the residual Y − Ŷ
independent of A, and is therefore robust to arbitrary interventions upon A. However, this is only optimal under
arbitrarily strong interventions on A.
Balancing performance and invariance: Instead of seeking an invariant predictor that is robust to arbitrary interventions on A (like the second predictor above), we instead seek
to minimize a worst-case loss under bounded interventions
of a given strength. We contrast this with work that seeks to
discover causal relationships as a route to invariance (RojasCarulla et al., 2018; Magliacane et al., 2018), optimize for

