Explanations for Monotonic Classifiers

Joao Marques-Silva 1 Thomas Gerspacher 1 Martin Cooper 1 Alexey Ignatiev 2 Nina Narodytska 3

Abstract
In many classification tasks there is a requirement of monotonicity. Concretely, if all else remains constant, increasing (resp. decreasing) the
value of one or more features must not decrease
(resp. increase) the value of the prediction. Despite comprehensive efforts on learning monotonic classifiers, dedicated approaches for explaining monotonic classifiers are scarce and classifierspecific. This paper describes novel algorithms
for the computation of one formal explanation of
a (black-box) monotonic classifier. These novel
algorithms are polynomial in the run time complexity of the classifier and the number of features.
Furthermore, the paper presents a practically efficient model-agnostic algorithm for enumerating
formal explanations.

1

Introduction

Monotonicity is an often required constraint in practical
applications of machine learning. Broadly, a monotonicity constraint requires that increasing (resp. decreasing) the
value of one or more features, while keep the other features constant, will not cause the prediction to decrease
(resp. increase). Monotonicity has been investigated in
the context of classification (Cano et al., 2019), including
neural networks (Sill, 1997; Magdon-Ismail & Sill, 2008;
Bonakdarpour et al., 2018; Sivaraman et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2020), random forests (Bartley et al., 2019) and rule ensembles (Bartley et al., 2018), decision trees (Ben-David
et al., 1989; Ben-David, 1995), decision lists (Potharst &
Bioch, 2000) and decision rules (Verbeke et al., 2017),
support vector machines (Bartley et al., 2016), nearestneighbor classifiers (Duivesteijn & Feelders, 2008), among
others (Fard et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2016; You et al., 2017;
Bonakdarpour et al., 2018). Monotonicity has been studied
in bayesian networks (van der Gaag et al., 2004; Shih et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 IRIT, CNRS, Université Paul Sabatier,
Toulouse, France 2 Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
VMware Research, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Joao MarquesSilva <joao.marques-silva@irit.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018), active learning (Barile & Feelders, 2012) and, more
recently, in fairness (Wang & Gupta, 2020).
To a much lesser extent, monotonicity has also been studied from the perspective of explainability, with one recent
example being the study of the explainability of monotonic bayesian networks (Shih et al., 2018). This work
proposes to compile different families of bayesian networks,
including naive bayes and monotonic networks, into a decision diagram, which can then be used for computing PIexplanations2 . Approaches based on an intermediate (knowledge) compilation step are characterized by two main drawbacks, namely their worst-case complexity, which is exponential both in time and in the size of the representation, but
also the fact that these approaches are not model-agnostic,
i.e. some formal logic representation of the model must be
known and reasoned about. Clearly, model-agnostic heuristic approaches, which include LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016),
SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), or Anchor (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017), can also be applied to explaining monotonic
classifiers. However, these approaches do not readily exploit monotonicity, and both the theoretical and practical
performance may be discouraging3 . Furthermore, heuristic
approaches offer no formal guarantees of rigor, e.g. an Anchor explanation may be consistent with points in feature
space for which the model’s prediction differ from the target
prediction (Ignatiev, 2020).
On a more positive note, recent work proposed polynomialtime exact algorithms for computing PI-explanations explanations of different classes of classifiers (Marques-Silva
et al., 2020), namely linear and naive bayes classifiers.
These results were complemented by the observation that,
for ML models related with some classes of knowledge
representation languages, PI-explanations can also be computed in polynomial time (Audemard et al., 2020).
This paper extends these initial results to the case of monotonic classifiers, in a number of ways. First, the paper proposes model-agnostic algorithms for computing PIexplanations and contrastive explanations (Miller, 2019) for
2
Given some feature space point v, a PI-explanation is a subsetminimal subset of features which, the assignment of the corresponding coordinate value in v, is sufficient for the prediction.
3
In fact, there are recent negative results on the tractability of
exact SHAP learning (Van den Broeck et al., 2020).

