Meta-Learning Bidirectional Update Rules

Mark Sandler 1 Max Vladymyrov 1 Andrey Zhmoginov 1 Nolan Miller 1 Andrew Jackson 1 Tom Madams 1
Blaise Agüera y Arcas 1

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new type of generalized neural network where neurons and synapses
maintain multiple states. We show that classical gradient-based backpropagation in neural networks can be seen as a special case of a twostate network where one state is used for activations and another for gradients, with update
rules derived from the chain rule. In our generalized framework, networks have neither explicit notion of nor ever receive gradients. The
synapses and neurons are updated using a bidirectional Hebb-style update rule parameterized by a
shared low-dimensional “genome”. We show that
such genomes can be meta-learned from scratch,
using either conventional optimization techniques,
or evolutionary strategies, such as CMA-ES. Resulting update rules generalize to unseen tasks
and train faster than gradient descent based optimizers for several standard computer vision and
synthetic tasks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks revolutionized the way ML systems are
built today. Advances in neural design patterns, training
techniques, and hardware performance allowed ML to solve
tasks that seemed hopelessly out of reach less than ten years
ago. However, despite the rapid progress, their basic neuronsynapse design has remained fundamentally unchanged for
nearly six decades, since the introduction of perceptron models in the 50s and 60s (Minsky & Papert, 1969; Rosenblatt,
1957) that modeled the complex biology of a synapse firing
as a simple combination of a weight and a bias combined
with a non-linear activation function.
With such models, the next question was “How should we
best find the optimal weights and biases?” and great successes have come from the use of stochastic gradient descent,
1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Mark Sandler <sandler@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

traced back to Robbins & Monro (1951). Since its introduction, many of the more recent remarkable improvements
can be attributed to improving the efficiency of the gradient
signal: adjusting connectivity patterns such as in convolutional neural networks and residual layers (He et al., 2015),
improved optimizer design (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Duchi
et al., 2011; Schmidt et al., 2020), and normalization methods such as (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Ulyanov et al., 2016).
All these methods improve the learning characteristics of
the networks and enable scaling to larger networks and more
complex problems.
However the underlying principle behind these methods
remained the same: minimize an engineered loss function
using gradient descent. Instead, we propose a different
approach. While we still follow the general strategy of forwards and backwards signal transmission, we learn the rules
governing both forward and back-propagation of neuron
activation from scratch. The key enabling factor here is a
generalization where each neuron can have multiple states.
We define a space of possible transformations that specify
the interaction between neurons’ feed-forward and feedback signals. The matrices controlling these interactions
are meta-parameters that are shared across both layers and
tasks. We term these meta-parameters a “genome”. This
reframing opens up a new, more generalized space of neural
networks, allowing the introduction of arbitrary numbers
of states and channels into neurons and synapses, which
have their analogues in biological systems, such as the multiple types of neurotransmitters, or chemical vs. electrical
synapse transmission.
Our framework, which we call BLUR (Bidirectional
Learned Update Rules) describes a general set of multi-state
update rules that are capable to train networks to learn new
tasks without ever having access to explicit gradients. We
demonstrate that through meta-learning BLUR can learn
effective genomes with just a few training tasks. Such
genomes can be learned using off-the-shelf optimizers or
evolutionary strategies. We show that such genomes can
train networks on unseen tasks faster than comparably sized
gradient networks. The learned genomes can also generalize
to architectures unseen during the meta-training.

