Auto-NBA: Efficient and Effective Search Over the Joint Space of
Networks, Bitwidths, and Accelerators

Yonggan Fu

1

Yongan Zhang

1

Yang Zhang

Abstract
While maximizing deep neural networks’
(DNNs’) acceleration efficiency requires a joint
search/design of three different yet highly coupled aspects, including the networks, bitwidths,
and accelerators, the challenges associated with
such a joint search have not yet been fully
understood and addressed. The key challenges
include (1) the dilemma of whether to explode
the memory consumption due to the huge joint
space or achieve sub-optimal designs, (2) the
discrete nature of the accelerator design space
that is coupled yet different from that of the
networks and bitwidths, and (3) the chicken and
egg problem associated with network-accelerator
co-search, i.e., co-search requires operation-wise
hardware cost, which is lacking during search as
the optimal accelerator depending on the whole
network is still unknown during search. To tackle
these daunting challenges towards optimal and
fast development of DNN accelerators, we propose a framework dubbed Auto-NBA to enable
jointly searching for the Networks, Bitwidths, and
Accelerators, by efficiently localizing the optimal
design within the huge joint design space for each
target dataset and acceleration specification. Our
Auto-NBA integrates a heterogeneous sampling
strategy to achieve unbiased search with constant
memory consumption, and a novel joint-search
pipeline equipped with a generic differentiable
accelerator search engine. Extensive experiments
and ablation studies validate that both Auto-NBA
generated networks and accelerators consistently
outperform state-of-the-art designs (including
co-search/exploration techniques, hardwareaware NAS methods, and DNN accelerators),
in terms of search time, task accuracy, and
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice Uni2
versity MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Yingyan
Lin <yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2

David Cox

2

Yingyan Lin

1

accelerator efficiency. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/RICE-EIC/Auto-NBA.

1. Introduction
The prohibitive complexity of deep neural networks (DNNs)
have fueled a tremendous demand for efficient DNN accelerators which could boost the acceleration efficiency by
orders-of-magnitude. In response, extensive research efforts
have been devoted to developing DNN accelerators. Early
works decouple the design of efficient DNN algorithms
(Liu et al., 2018b; Wu et al., 2018b; You et al., 2020) and
their accelerators (Du et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2020a; Zhao et al., 2020). On the algorithms level,
pruning, quantization, or neural architecture search (NAS)
have been adopted; On the hardware level, various FPGA/ASIC-based accelerators customize the micro-architectures
(e.g., memory hierarchies/size and network-on-chip design)
and algorithm-to-hardware mapping methods (e.g., loop
tiling strategies and loop orders) to optimize the acceleration efficiency for given DNNs. Later, hardware-aware
NAS (HA-NAS) was proposed to further improve DNNs’
acceleration efficiency (Tan et al., 2019; Fu et al.).
It has been recently recognized that (1) optimal DNN accelerators require a joint consideration for three different yet
coupled aspects: the network structure, network precision,
and their accelerators, and (2) merely exploring a subset of
these aspects will lead to sub-optimal hardware efficiency
or task accuracy. For example, the optimal accelerators for
DNNs with different structures (e.g., width/depth/kernelsize) can be very different; while the optimal networks and
their bitwidths for different accelerators can differ a lot (Wu
et al., 2019). However, the direction of jointly designing or
searching for all three aspects has only been slightly touched
on. For example, (Chen et al., 2018; Gong et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2020) proposed to jointly search for DNNs’ structure
and precision for a fixed target hardware; (Abdelfattah et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020a;c) proposed to
jointly search for the networks and their accelerators, yet
either their network or accelerator choices are limited, due
to the prohibitive time cost required by their adopted reinforcement learning (RL) based methods; and EDD (Li et al.,
2020b) formulated a differentiable joint search framework,

