Self-supervised Graph-level Representation Learning
with Local and Global Structure
Minghao Xu 1 Hang Wang 1 Bingbing Ni 1 Hongyu Guo 2 Jian Tang 3 4 5

Abstract
This paper studies unsupervised/self-supervised
whole-graph representation learning, which is critical in many tasks such as molecule properties prediction in drug and material discovery. Existing
methods mainly focus on preserving the local similarity structure between different graph instances
but fail to discover the global semantic structure
of the entire data set. In this paper, we propose
a unified framework called Local-instance and
Global-semantic Learning (GraphLoG) for selfsupervised whole-graph representation learning.
Specifically, besides preserving the local similarities, GraphLoG introduces the hierarchical prototypes to capture the global semantic clusters. An
efficient online expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm is further developed for learning the
model. We evaluate GraphLoG by pre-training
it on massive unlabeled graphs followed by finetuning on downstream tasks. Extensive experiments on both chemical and biological benchmark data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Learning informative representations of whole graphs is
a fundamental problem in a variety of domains and tasks,
such as molecule properties prediction in drug and material
discovery (Gilmer et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018), protein
function forecast in biological networks (Alvarez & Yan,
2012; Jiang et al., 2017), and predicting the properties of circuits in circuit design (Zhang et al., 2019). Recently, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have attracted a surge of interest
and showed the effectiveness of learning graph representations (Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Shi et al.,
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 National Research Council
Canada 3 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 4 CIFAR AI Research Chair
5
HEC Montréal. Correspondence to: Minghao Xu <xuminghao118@sjtu.edu.cn>, Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020). These methods are usually trained in a supervised
fashion, which requires a large number of labeled data. Nevertheless, in many scientific domains, labeled data are very
limited and expensive to obtain. Therefore, it is becoming
increasingly important to learn the representations of graphs
in an unsupervised or self-supervised fashion.
Self-supervised learning has recently achieved profound success for both natural language processing, e.g. GPT (Radford et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and image understanding, e.g. MoCo (He et al., 2019) and SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020). However, how to effectively learn
the representations of graphs in a self-supervised way is
still an open problem. Intuitively, a desirable graph representation should be able to preserve the local-instance
structure, so that similar graphs are embedded close to each
other and dissimilar ones stay far apart. In addition, the
representations of the entire set of graphs should also reflect
the global-semantic structure of the data, so that the graphs
with similar semantic properties are compactly embedded,
which is able to benefit various downstream tasks such as
graph classification or regression. Such global structure can
be effectively captured by semantic clusters (Caron et al.,
2018; Ji et al., 2019), which can be further organized hierarchically (Li et al., 2020).
There are some recent works that learn graph representation
in a self-supervised manner, such as local-global mutual information maximization (Velickovic et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2019), structural-similarity/context prediction (Navarin
et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; You et al., 2020b), contrastive
learning (Hassani & Ahmadi, 2020; Qiu et al., 2020; You
et al., 2020a) and meta-learning (Lu et al., 2021). However,
all these methods are able to model only the local structure
between different graph instances but fail to discover the
global-semantic structure. To address this shortcoming, we
are seeking for an approach that is sufficient to model both
the local and global structure of a set of graphs.
To attain this goal, we propose a Local-instance and
Global-semantic Learning (GraphLoG) framework for selfsupervised graph representation learning. Specifically,
for preserving the local similarity between various graph
instances, we seek to align the embeddings of correlated graphs/subgraphs by discriminating the correlated

