Nonparametric Hamiltonian Monte Carlo

Carol Mak 1 Fabian Zaiser 1 Luke Ong 1

Abstract

essential to automate the inference of latent variables in the
model, conditioned on the observed data.

Probabilistic programming uses programs to express generative models whose posterior probability is then computed by built-in inference engines.
A challenging goal is to develop general purpose
inference algorithms that work out-of-the-box for
arbitrary programs in a universal probabilistic
programming language (PPL). The densities defined by such programs, which may use stochastic
branching and recursion, are (in general) nonparametric, in the sense that they correspond to models on an infinite-dimensional parameter space.
However standard inference algorithms, such as
the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) algorithm,
target distributions with a fixed number of parameters. This paper introduces the Nonparametric
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (NP-HMC) algorithm
which generalises HMC to nonparametric models.
Inputs to NP-HMC are a new class of measurable
functions called “tree representable”, which serve
as a language-independent representation of the
density functions of probabilistic programs in a
universal PPL. We provide a correctness proof
of NP-HMC, and empirically demonstrate significant performance improvements over existing
approaches on several nonparametric examples.

Church (Goodman et al., 2008) introduced universal probabilistic programming, the idea of writing probabilistic models in a Turing-complete functional programming language.
Typically containing only a handful of basic programming
constructs such as branching and recursion, universal probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) can nonetheless
specify all computable probabilistic models (Vákár et al.,
2019). In particular, nonparametric models—models with
an unbounded number of random variables—can be described naturally in universal PPLs using recursion. These
include probabilistic models with an unknown number of
components, like Bayesian nonparametric models (Richardson & Green, 1997), variable selection in regression (Ratner,
2010), signal processing (Murray et al., 2018); and models
that are defined on infinite-dimensional spaces, such as probabilistic context free grammars (Manning & Schütze, 1999),
birth-death models of evolution (Kudlicka et al., 2019) and
statistical phylogenetics (Ronquist et al., 2021). Examples
of practical universal PPL include Anglican (Wood et al.,
2014), Venture (Mansinghka et al., 2014), Web PPL (Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2014), Hakaru (Narayanan & Shan,
2020), Pyro (Bingham et al., 2019), Turing (Ge et al., 2018)
and Gen (Cusumano-Towner et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Probabilistic programming is a general purpose means of
expressing probabilistic models as programs, and automatically performing Bayesian inference. Probabilistic programming systems enable data scientists and domain experts to
focus on designing good models; the task of developing
efficient inference engines can be left to experts in Bayesian
statistics, machine learning and programming languages. To
realise the full potential of probabilistic programming, it is
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Carol Mak
<pui.mak@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, because universal PPLs are expressively complete,
it is a challenging problem to design and implement general
purpose inference engines for them. The parameter space
of a nonparametric model is a union of spaces of varying
dimensions. To approximate the posterior via an Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm, the transition kernel will have to efficiently switch between a potentially
unbounded number of configurations of different dimensions. This difficulty explains why there are so few general
purpose MCMC algorithms for universal PPLs (Wingate
et al., 2011; Wood et al., 2014; Tolpin et al., 2015; Hur et al.,
2015). We believe it is also the reason why these algorithms
struggle with nonparametric models, as we show in Sec. 5.
A case in point is the widely used universal PPL Pyro. Even
though it allows the specification of nonparametric models, its HMC and No-U-Turn Sampler (Hoffman & Gelman,
2014) inference engines do not support them reliably: in one
of our benchmark tests, they produced a wrong posterior
(Fig. 6).

