Improving Ultrametrics Embeddings Through Coresets

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Rémi de Joannis de Verclos * 2 Guillaume Lagarde * 3

Abstract
To tackle the curse of dimensionality in data analysis and unsupervised learning, it is critical to
be able to efficiently compute “simple” faithful
representations of the data that helps extract information, improves understanding and visualization
of the structure. When the dataset consists of ddimensional vectors, simple representations of the
data may consist in trees or ultrametrics, and the
goal is to best preserve the distances (i.e.: dissimilarity values) between data elements. To circumvent the quadratic running times of the most popular methods for fitting ultrametrics, such as average, single, or complete linkage, Cohen-Addad
et al. (2020) recently presented a new algorithm
2
that for any c ≥ 1, outputs in time n1+O(1/c ) an
ultrametric ∆ such that for any two points u, v,
∆(u, v) is within a multiplicative factor of 5c to
the distance between u and v in the “best” ultrametric representation. We improve the above
result and show how
√ to improve the above guarantee from 5c to 2c + ε while achieving the
same asymptotic running time. To complement
the improved theoretical bound, we additionally
show that the performances of our algorithm are
significantly better for various real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Simplifying, sparsifying or sketching datasets so as to retain
the most crucial information and preserve the quality of the
signal is a central question in machine learning, statistics and
data analysis. In this context, reducing the size of the dataset,
by for example reducing the dimension, has to be done in
such a way that the essential properties of the dataset are
preserved. An iconic example is the principal component
analysis which leads to a representation of the dataset in
a lower dimensional space that helps identify underlying
*
1
Equal contribution
Google Research,
Zurich
remi.de.joannis.de.verclos@ens-lyon.org 3 LaBRI, CNRS. Correspondence to: Guillaume Lagarde <guillaume.lagarde@labri.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cluster structures. Since the 50s, a large toolkit of metric
embedding techniques have been developed in a variety of
communities so as to “simplify” datasets while preserving
some relevant structure of the input dataset.
In this paper, we aim at computing embedding of highdimensional Euclidean data into ultrametrics1 . Ultrametrics are simple hierarchical representations of metric spaces
which are particularly useful in clustering settings when
very little is known about the data (i.e.: if the target number
of clusters is unknown). They could for example be used for
finding hierarchical clustering, unveiling global hierarchical
structure over data elements (such as phylogenic trees), or
as visualization tools (the reader may refer to the extensive
work of Carlsson & Mémoli (2010)).
The most popular approaches for computing ultrametrics
are arguably the linkage algorithms, average-linkage, singlelinkage, Ward’s method and complete-linkage. These methods build a hierarchical clustering by iteratively merging the
clusters at minimum distance, and only differ by their definitions of cluster distance. Unfortunately, for all the above
algorithms, finding the closest clusters incurs a quadratic
running time for somewhat high dimensional inputs (i.e.:
Ω(log n)-dimensional inputs). This is a major roadblock
even when dealing with moderate size datasets (as shown
in the experiments, going above 50 000 points dataset is
infeasible for regular computers) and so designing efficient
ultrametric embeddings has been an important research problem.
In this paper, we follow the approach of Farach et al. (1995);
Cohen-Addad et al. (2020) and measure the quality of
an ultrametric by how much it distorts the distances between the input vectors. Namely, we aim at designing
an ultrametric ∆ such that for each pair of points a, b,
||a − b||2 ≤ ∆(a, b) ≤ α||a − b||2 for the smallest possible α (we defer the reader to Section 2 for a formal definition). This indeed approximately preserves the hierarchical structure of the data: Given three points p1 , p2 , p3 , if
||p1 − p2 ||2 < α||p1 − p3 ||2 , then ∆(p1 , p2 ) ≤ ∆(p1 , p3 )
and so the natural distance ordering is thus approximately
preserved. The problem of computing the optimal ultrametric for the above objective function, which we refer
1
An ultrametric (X, d) is a metric space where for each
x, y, z ∈ X, ∆(x, y) ≤ max(∆(x, z)(, z, y))

