Multiplicative Noise and Heavy Tails in Stochastic Optimization

Liam Hodgkinson 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1

Abstract
Although stochastic optimization is central to
modern machine learning, the precise mechanisms underlying its success, and in particular,
the precise role of the stochasticity, still remain
unclear. Modeling stochastic optimization algorithms as discrete random recurrence relations,
we show that multiplicative noise, as it commonly arises due to variance in local rates of convergence, results in heavy-tailed stationary behaviour in the parameters. Theoretical results
are obtained characterizing this for a large class
of (non-linear and even non-convex) models and
optimizers (including momentum, Adam, and
stochastic Newton), demonstrating that this phenomenon holds generally. We describe dependence on key factors, including step size, batch
size, and data variability, all of which exhibit
similar qualitative behavior to recent empirical
results on state-of-the-art neural network models.
Furthermore, we empirically illustrate how multiplicative noise and heavy-tailed structure improve capacity for basin hopping and exploration
of non-convex loss surfaces, over commonlyconsidered stochastic dynamics with only additive noise and light-tailed structure.

1. Introduction
Relatively simple stochastic optimization procedures—
in particular, those based on stochastic gradient descent
(SGD)—have become the backbone of machine learning
(ML) (Ma et al., 2018). To improve understanding of
stochastic optimization in ML, and particularly why SGD
and its extensions work so well, recent theoretical work
has sought to study its properties and dynamics. Such
analyses typically approach the problem through one of
two perspectives. The first perspective, an optimization
*
Equal contribution 1 ICSI and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Liam
Hodgkinson <liam.hodgkinson@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(or quenching) perspective, examines convergence either
in expectation (Chen et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2018; Gower
et al., 2019; Nagaraj et al., 2019; Fontaine et al., 2020) or
with some positive (high) probability (Roosta-Khorasani &
Mahoney, 2016; Du et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2018;
Ward et al., 2019) through the lens of a deterministic counterpart. This perspective inherits some limitations of deterministic optimizers, including assumptions (e.g., convexity, Polyak-Łojasiewicz criterion, etc.) that are either
not satisfied by state-of-the-art problems, or not strong
enough to imply convergence to a quality (global) optimum. More concerning, however, is the inability to explain what has come to be known as the “generalization
gap” phenomenon: increasing stochasticity by reducing
batch size appears to improve generalization performance
(Keskar et al., 2017; Martin & Mahoney, 2018). Empirically, existing strategies tend to break down for inference tasks when using large batch sizes (Golmant et al.,
2018). The second perspective, a probabilistic (annealing) perspective, examines algorithms through the lens of
Markov process theory (Freidlin & Wentzell, 1998; Henderson et al., 2003; Nemirovski et al., 2009). Here, stochastic optimizers are interpreted as samplers from probability distributions concentrated around optima, and annealing
the optimizer (by reducing step size) increasingly concentrates probability mass around global optima. Traditional
analyses trade restrictions on the objective for precise annealing schedules that guarantee adequate mixing and ensure convergence. However, it is uncommon in practice
to consider step size schedules that decrease sufficiently
slowly as to guarantee convergence to global optima with
probability one (Li et al., 2020). In fact, SGD based methods with poor initialization can easily get stuck near poor
local minima using a typical step decay schedule (Liu et al.,
2019).
More recent efforts conduct a distributional analysis, directly examining the probability distribution that a stochastic optimizer targets for each fixed set of hyperparameters
(Mandt et al., 2016; Babichev & Bach, 2018; Dieuleveut
et al., 2017; Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2020). Here, one can
assess a stochastic optimizer according to its capacity to
reach and then occupy neighbourhoods of high-quality optima in the initial stages, where the step size is large and
constant. As the step size is then rapidly reduced, tighter

