Prioritized Level Replay

Minqi Jiang 1 2 Edward Grefenstette 1 2 Tim Rocktäschel 1 2

Abstract
Environments with procedurally generated content serve as important benchmarks for testing
systematic generalization in deep reinforcement
learning. In this setting, each level is an algorithmically created environment instance with a
unique configuration of its factors of variation.
Training on a prespecified subset of levels allows
for testing generalization to unseen levels. What
can be learned from a level depends on the current
policy, yet prior work defaults to uniform sampling of training levels independently of the policy. We introduce Prioritized Level Replay (PLR),
a general framework for selectively sampling
the next training level by prioritizing those with
higher estimated learning potential when revisited
in the future. We show TD-errors effectively estimate a level’s future learning potential and, when
used to guide the sampling procedure, induce an
emergent curriculum of increasingly difficult levels. By adapting the sampling of training levels,
PLR significantly improves sample-efficiency and
generalization on Procgen Benchmark—matching
the previous state-of-the-art in test return—and
readily combines with other methods. Combined
with the previous leading method, PLR raises the
state-of-the-art to over 76% improvement in test
return relative to standard RL baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) easily overfits to training
experiences, making generalization a key open challenge
to widespread deployment of these methods. Procedural
content generation (PCG) environments have emerged as a
promising class of problems with which to probe and address this core weakness (Risi & Togelius, 2020; ChevalierBoisvert et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2020a; Juliani et al., 2019;
1
Facebook AI Research, London, United Kingdom 2 University
College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Minqi Jiang <msj@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Zhong et al., 2020; Küttler et al., 2020). Unlike singleton
environments, like the Arcade Learning Environment games
(Bellemare et al., 2013), PCG environments take on algorithmically created configurations at the start of each training
episode, potentially varying the layout, asset appearances, or
even game dynamics. Each environment instance generated
this way is called a level. In mapping an identifier, such as a
random seed, to each level, PCG environments allow us to
measure a policy’s generalization to held-out test levels. In
this paper, we assume only a blackbox generation process
that returns a level given an identifier. We avoid the strong
assumption of control over the generation procedure itself,
explored by several prior works (see Section 6). Further, we
assume levels follow common latent dynamics, so that in
aggregate, experiences collected in individual levels reveal
general rules governing the entire set of levels.
Despite its humble origin in games, the PCG abstraction
proves far-reaching: Many control problems, such as teaching a robotic arm to stack blocks in a specific formation,
easily conform to PCG. Here, each level may consist of a
unique combination of initial block positions, arm state, and
target formation. In a vastly different domain, Hanabi (Bard
et al., 2020) also conforms to PCG, where levels map to initial deck orderings. These examples illustrate the generality
of the PCG abstraction: Most challenging RL problems entail generalizing across instances (or levels) differing along
some underlying factors of variation and thereby can be
aptly framed as PCG. This highlights the importance of
effective deep RL methods for PCG environments.
Many techniques have been proposed to improve generalization in the PCG setting (see Section 6), requiring changes
to the model architecture, learning algorithm, observation
space, or environment structure. Notably, these approaches
default to uniform sampling of training levels. We instead
hypothesize that the variation across levels implies that at
each point of training, each level likely holds different potential for an agent to learn about the structure shared across
levels to improve generalization. Inspired by this insight
and selective sampling methods from active learning, we
investigate whether sampling the next training level weighed
by its learning potential can improve generalization.
We introduce Prioritized Level Replay (PLR), illustrated in
Figure 1, a method for sampling training levels that exploits

