Low-Rank Sinkhorn Factorization
Meyer Scetbon 1 Marco Cuturi 1 2 Gabriel Peyré 3 4

Abstract
Several recent applications of optimal transport
(OT) theory to machine learning have relied on
regularization, notably entropy and the Sinkhorn
algorithm. Because matrix-vector products are
pervasive in the Sinkhorn algorithm, several
works have proposed to approximate kernel matrices appearing in its iterations using low-rank
factors. Another route lies instead in imposing
low-nonnegative rank constraints on the feasible set of couplings considered in OT problems,
with no approximations on cost nor kernel matrices. This route was first explored by Forrow
et al. (2018), who proposed an algorithm tailored
for the squared Euclidean ground cost, using a
proxy objective that can be solved through the
machinery of regularized 2-Wasserstein barycenters. Building on this, we introduce in this work a
generic approach that aims at solving, in full generality, the OT problem under low-nonnegative
rank constraints with arbitrary costs. Our algorithm relies on an explicit factorization of lowrank couplings as a product of sub-coupling factors linked by a common marginal; similar to an
NMF approach, we alternatively updates these
factors. We prove the non-asymptotic stationary
convergence of this algorithm and illustrate its
efficiency on benchmark experiments.

1. Introduction
By providing a simple and comprehensive framework to
compare probability distributions, optimal transport (OT)
theory has inspired many developments in machine learning (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019). A flurry of works have recently
connected it to other trending topics, such as normalizing
flows or convex neural networks (Makkuva et al., 2020; Ko1

CREST, ENSAE 2 Google Brain 3 Ecole Normale Supérieure,
PSL University 4 CNRS. Correspondence to: Meyer Scetbon
<meyer.scetbon@ensae.fr>, Marco Cuturi <cuturi@google.com>,
Gabriel Peyré <gabriel.peyre@ens.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rotin et al., 2021; Tong et al., 2020), while the scope of its
applications has now reached several fields of science such
as single-cell biology (Schiebinger et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2020), imaging (Schmitz et al., 2018; Heitz et al., 2020) or
neuroscience (Janati et al., 2020; Koundal et al., 2020).
Challenges when computing OT. Solving optimal transport problems at scale poses, however, formidable challenges. The most obvious among them is computational:
Instantiating the Kantorovich (1942) problem on discrete
measures of size n can be solved with a linear program (LP)
of complexity O(n3 log n). A second and equally important
challenge lies in the statistical performance of using that
LP to estimate OT between densities: the LP solution between i.i.d samples converges very slowly to that between
densities (Fournier & Guillin, 2015). It is now increasingly
clear that regularizing OT in some way or another is the
only way to mitigate these two issues (Genevay et al., 2018;
Chizat et al., 2020; Clason et al., 2021). A popular approach
consists in penalizing the OT problem with a strongly convex function of the coupling (Cuturi, 2013; Dessein et al.,
2018). We explore in this work an alternative, and more
direct approach to add regularity: we restrict, instead, the
set of feasible couplings to have a small nonnegative rank.
Low-Rank Kernel Factorization. Low-rank factorizations
are not new to regularized OT. They have been used to
speed-up the resolution of entropy regularized OT with the
Sinkhorn algorithm, pending some approximations: Given
a data-dependent n ⇥ m cost matrix C, the Sinkhorn iterations consist in matrix-vector products of the form Kv
or K T u where K , exp( C/") and u, v are n, m- vectors. Altschuler et al. (2018) and Altschuler & Boix-Adsera
(2020) have proposed to approximate the kernel K with
e = AB T . Naturally,
a product of thin rank r matrices, K
e degrades
the ability to approximate K with a low-rank K
as " decreases, making this approach valid only for sufficiently large ". Thanks to this approximation, however, each
Sinkhorn iteration is linear in n or m, and the coupling outputted by the Sinkorn algorithm is of the form Pe = CDT
where C = diag(u)A, D = diag(v)B. This approximation
results therefore in a low-rank solution that is not, however,
rigorously optimal for the original problem as defined by K
e However the solution obtained
but rather that defined by K.
e
with K can be arbitrary close to the true solution by increasing the rank considered. Similarly, Scetbon & Cuturi (2020)

