AGENT: A Benchmark for Core Psychological Reasoning

Tianmin Shu 1 Abhishek Bhandwaldar 2 Chuang Gan 2 Kevin A. Smith 1 Shari Liu 1 Dan Gutfreund 2
Elizabeth Spelke 3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 Tomer D. Ullman 3

Abstract
For machine agents to successfully interact with
humans in real-world settings, they will need to
develop an understanding of human mental life.
Intuitive psychology, the ability to reason about
hidden mental variables that drive observable actions, comes naturally to people: even pre-verbal
infants can tell agents from objects, expecting
agents to act efficiently to achieve goals given constraints. Despite recent interest in machine agents
that reason about other agents, it is not clear if
such agents learn or hold the core psychology
principles that drive human reasoning. Inspired
by cognitive development studies on intuitive psychology, we present a benchmark consisting of
a large dataset of procedurally generated 3D animations, AGENT (Action, Goal, Efficiency, coNstraint, uTility), structured around four scenarios
(goal preferences, action efficiency, unobserved
constraints, and cost-reward trade-offs) that probe
key concepts of core intuitive psychology. We
validate AGENT with human-ratings, propose
an evaluation protocol emphasizing generalization, and compare two strong baselines built on
Bayesian inverse planning and a Theory of Mind
neural network. Our results suggest that to pass
the designed tests of core intuitive psychology
at human levels, a model must acquire or have
built-in representations of how agents plan, combining utility computations and core knowledge
of objects and physics.1

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in building socially-aware agents that can interact with humans in
1

2

Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Tianmin Shu
<tshu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
The dataset and the supplementary material are available at
https://www.tshu.io/AGENT.

A

Goal objects

Obstacles

Agent

Occluder

Scenario 1: Goal Preferences
Familiarization

Test

B

Normal Path
Surprising Path

Scenario 2: Action Eﬃciency
Familiarization

Test

C Scenario 3: Unobserved Constraints D Scenario 4: Cost-Reward Trade-oﬀs
Familiarization

Test

Familiarization

Test

Figure 1. Schematic of the four key scenarios of core intuitive psychology evaluated in AGENT. Each scenario is color coded. Solid
arrows show the typical behavior of the agent in the familiarization
video(s) or in the expected test video. Dashed arrows show agent
behavior in the surprising test video. In Unobserved Constraints
trials (C), a surprising test video shows an unexpected outcome
(e.g. no barrier) behind the occluder.

the real world (Dautenhahn, 2007; Sheridan, 2016; Puig
et al., 2020). This requires agents that understand the motivations and actions of their human counterparts, an ability
that comes naturally to people. Humans have an earlydeveloping intuitive psychology, the ability to reason about
other people’s mental states from observed actions. From
infancy, we can easily differentiate agents from objects, expecting agents to not only follow physical constraints, but
also to act efficiently to achieve their goals given constraints.
Even pre-verbal infants can recognize other people’s costs
and rewards, infer unobserved constraints given partially observed actions, and predict future actions (Baillargeon et al.,
2016; Gergely & Csibra, 2003; Liu et al., 2017; Woodward,
1998). This early core psychological reasoning develops
with limited experience, yet generalizes to novel agents and
situations, and forms the basis for commonsense psychological reasoning later in life.
Like human infants, it is critical for machine agents to develop an adequate capacity of understanding human minds,
in order to successfully engage in social interactions. Recent
work has demonstrated promising results towards building
agents that can infer the mental states of others (Baker et al.,
2017; Rabinowitz et al., 2018), predict people’s future actions (Kong & Fu, 2018), and even work with human partners (Rozo et al., 2016; Carroll et al., 2019). However, to

