Heterogeneity for the Win: One-Shot Federated Clustering

Don Kurian Dennis 1 Tian Li 1 Virginia Smith 1

Abstract
In this work, we explore the unique challenges—
and opportunities—of unsupervised federated
learning (FL). We develop and analyze a one-shot
federated clustering scheme, k-FED, based on the
widely-used Lloyd’s method for k-means clustering. In contrast to many supervised problems,
we show that the issue of statistical heterogeneity in federated networks can in fact benefit our
analysis. We analyse k-FED under a center separation assumption and compare it to the best
known requirements of its centralized counterpart.
Our analysis shows that in heterogeneous regimes
where the number of clusters per device pk 1 q is
smaller than the total
? number of clusters over the
network k, pk 1 ď kq, we can use heterogeneity to our advantage—significantly weakening the
cluster separation requirements for k-FED. From
a practical viewpoint, k-FED also has many desirable properties: it requires only one round of
communication, can run asynchronously, and can
handle partial participation or node/network failures. We motivate our analysis with experiments
on common FL benchmarks, and highlight the
practical utility of one-shot clustering through usecases in personalized FL and device sampling.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) aims to perform machine learning
over large, heterogeneous networks of devices such as mobile phones or wearables (McMahan et al., 2017). While
significant attention has been given to the problem of supervised learning in such settings, the problem of unsupervised
federated learning has been relatively unexplored (Kairouz
et al., 2019). In this work, we show that unsupervised learning presents unique opportunities for FL, specifically for the
task of clustering data that resides in a federated network.
Clustering is a crucial first step in many learning tasks.
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Don Dennis <dondennis@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the case of federated learning, clustering has found applications in client-selection (Cho et al., 2020), personalization (Ghosh et al., 2020) and exploratory data analysis.
While many works have explored techniques for distributed
clustering (Section 2), most do not take into account the
unique challenges of federated learning, such as statistical
heterogeneity, systems heterogeneity, and stringent communication constraints (Li et al., 2020a)1 . These challenges
can complicate analyses, reduce efficiency, and lead to practical issues with stragglers and device failures. In this work,
we study communication-efficient distributed clustering in
settings where the data is non-identically distributed across
the network (i.e., heterogeneous), and devices can join and
leave the network abruptly. For such settings, we develop
and analyse a one-shot clustering scheme, k-FED, based on
the classical Lloyd’s heuristic (Lloyd, 1982) for clustering.
The method we propose, k-FED, requires only one round of
communication with a central server. Each device, indexed
by z, solves a local k pzq -means problem and then communicates its local cluster means via a message of size Opdk pzq q.
As we show in Section 3, this allows for device failures,
only requiring that there are enough devices available in the
network such that k target clusters exist in the data. Moreover, it is possible to cluster points in previously unavailable
devices via a simple recomputation at the central server.
Beyond the practical benefits of k-FED, our work is unique
in rigorously demonstrating a problem setting where possible benefits of statistical heterogeneity exist for federated
learning. In particular, in supervised learning, many works
have highlighted detrimental effects of statistical heterogeneity, observing that heterogeneity can lead to poor convergence for federated optimization methods (McMahan et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2020b), result in unfair models (Mohri et al.,
2019), or necessitate novel forms of personalization (Smith
et al., 2017; Mansour et al., 2020). In contrast to these
works, we show that for the specific notion of heterogeneity
considered herein (provided in Definition 3.2 and motivated
by the application of clustering), heterogeneity can in fact
have measurable benefits for our approach.
1

Privacy, while an important concern for many federated applications, is not the main focus of our work. However, a possible
benefit of the one-shot nature of k-FED is that it requires significantly fewer messages to be shared over the network relative to
standard iterative techniques such as distributed k-means.

