Cumulants of Hawkes Processes are Robust to Observation Noise
William Trouleau* 1 Jalal Etesami* 2 Matthias Grossglauser 1 Negar Kiyavash 2 Patrick Thiran 1

Abstract
Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHPs) are
widely used in a variety of fields to model the
occurrence of causally related discrete events in
continuous time. Most state-of-the-art approaches
address the problem of learning MHPs from perfect traces without noise. In practice, the process
through which events are collected might introduce noise in the timestamps. In this work, we
address the problem of learning the causal structure of MHPs when the observed timestamps of
events are subject to random and unknown shifts,
also known as random translations. We prove that
the cumulants of MHPs are invariant to random
translations, and therefore can be used to learn
their underlying causal structure. Furthermore,
we empirically characterize the effect of random
translations on state-of-the-art learning methods.
We show that maximum likelihood-based estimators are brittle, while cumulant-based estimators
remain stable even in the presence of significant
time shifts.

1. Introduction
From modeling the price change in financial markets (Bacry
et al., 2015), to analyzing epidemic pathways in global
outbreaks of infectious diseases (Colizza et al., 2007), or
yet uncovering the dynamics of information on social media (Gomez-Rodriguez et al., 2011), extracting the diffusion
patterns of sequences of discrete events is a problem that is
of interest in many fields. Event data typically consists of a
set of marked timestamps, where the mark of an occurrence
denotes its type, such as its geographical location.
To model such event data, temporal point processes, which
model the probability of occurrence of a set of events in continuous time, are rising as a popular framework. In finance,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Communication
Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 College of Management
of Technology, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
William Trouleau <william.trouleau@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

they are used to model the stochastic time evolution of limit
order books (Da Fonseca & Zaatour, 2014; Abergel & Jedidi,
2015). In neuroscience, they are used to model networks of
stochastic spiking neurons (Truccolo et al., 2005; ReynaudBouret et al., 2013; Gerhard et al., 2017). In epidemiology,
they enable to get beyond the mean-field assumptions of
classic epidemic models based on differential equations,
and to capture the self and mutual excitation nature of disease spread across heterogeneous social systems (Kim et al.,
2019).
In practice, the process through which the sequences of
events are collected often introduces noise in the observed
timestamps. For instance, in neuroscience, the activity of
neurons is typically collected by measuring a continuous
signal coming from the action potential of neurons using
electrode micro-arrays. The signal is then converted into a
discrete sequence of events of firing neurons, called spike
trains, which are the times when the action potential exceeds a threshold. This procedure is inherently noisy and
prone to introduce inaccuracies in the measured timestamps.
Another example is in epidemiology, where the reported
times of infection have an approximate granularity, and do
not account for the latent incubation period. This could
lead to inaccuracies in the measured timestamps. As a result, a secondary case might be reported before the primary
case, which could interfere with learning the true causation
structure.
The current literature for learning temporal point-processes
assumes perfect information regarding the observation. In
this work, we consider inferring the causal network of a popular class of temporal point-processes, called multivariate
Hawkes processes (MHPs), when the observations are subject to a particular form of noise, called random translation.
In a randomly translated point process, every event within
a dimension is shifted randomly and independently in time
according to a fixed but unknown distribution. We show
that the cumulants of an MHP are invariant with respect to
random translations. Therefore, any inference method that
can obtain the causal network of an MHP from its cumulants
can also be used to learn its causal network under random
translation noise.

