TempoRL: Learning When to Act

André Biedenkapp 1 Raghu Rajan 1 Frank Hutter 1 2 Marius Lindauer 3

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is a powerful approach
to learn behaviour through interactions with an
environment. However, behaviours are usually
learned in a purely reactive fashion, where an
appropriate action is selected based on an observation. In this form, it is challenging to learn
when it is necessary to execute new decisions.
This makes learning inefficient, especially in environments that need various degrees of fine and
coarse control. To address this, we propose a
proactive setting in which the agent not only selects an action in a state but also for how long to
commit to that action. Our TempoRL approach
introduces skip connections between states and
learns a skip-policy for repeating the same action
along these skips. We demonstrate the effectiveness of TempoRL on a variety of traditional and
deep RL environments, showing that our approach
is capable of learning successful policies up to an
order of magnitude faster than vanilla Q-learning.

1. Introduction
Although reinforcement learning (RL) has celebrated many
successes in the recent years (see e.g., Mnih et al., 2015;
Lillicrap et al., 2016; Baker et al., 2020), in its classical
form it is limited to learning policies in a mostly reactive
fashion, i.e., observe a state and react to that state with
an action. Guided by the reward signal, policies that are
learned in such a way can decide which action is expected
to yield maximal long-term rewards. However, these policies generally do not learn when a new decision has to be
made. A more proactive way of learning, in which agents
proactively commit to playing an action for multiple steps
could further improve RL by (i) potentially providing better exploration compared to common one-step exploration;
(ii) faster learning as proactive policies provide a form of
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg,
Germany 2 BCAI, Renningen, Germany 3 Information Processing
Institute (tnt), Leibniz University Hannover, Germany. Correspondence to: André Biedenkapp <biedenka@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

temporal abstraction by requiring fewer decisions; (iii) explainability as learned agents can indicate when they expect
new decisions are required.
Temporal abstractions are a common way to simplify learning of policies with potentially long action sequences. Typically, the temporal abstraction is learned on the highest
level of a hierarchy and the required behaviour on a lower
level (see e.g. Sutton et al., 1999; Eysenbach et al., 2019).
For example, on the highest level a goal policy learns which
states are necessarily visited and on the lower level the behaviour to reach goals is learned. Spacing goals far apart
still requires to learn complex behaviour policies whereas a
narrow goal spacing requires to learn complex goal policies.
Another form of temporal abstraction is to use actions that
work at different time-scales (Precup et al., 1998). Take
for example an agent that is tasked with moving an object. On the highest level the agent would follow a policy
with abstract actions, such as pick-up object, move object,
put-down object, whereas on the lower level actions could
directly control actuators to perform the abstract actions.
Such hierarchical approaches are still reactive, but instead
of reacting to an observation on only one level, reactions are
learned on multiple levels. Though these approaches might
allow us to learn which states are necessarily traversed in
the environment, they do not enable us to learn when a new
decision has to be made on the behaviour level.
In this work, we propose an alternative approach: a proactive
view on learning policies that allows us to jointly learn a
behaviour and how long to carry out that behaviour. To
this end, we re-examine the relationship between agent and
environment, and the dependency on time. This allows us
to introduce skip connections for an environment. These
skip connections do not change the optimal policy or stateaction-values but allow us to propagate information much
faster. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
which we dub TEMPO RL with tabular and deep function
approximation on a variety of environments with discrete
and continuous action spaces. Our contributions are:
1. We propose a proactive alternative to classical RL.
2. We introduce skip-connections for MDPs by playing
an action for several consecutive states, which leads to
faster propagation of information about future rewards.

