Instabilities of Offline RL with Pre-Trained Neural Representation
Ruosong Wang 1 Yifan Wu 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Sham M. Kakade 2 3

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning (RL), we seek to
utilize offline data to evaluate (or learn) policies
in scenarios where the data are collected from
a distribution that substantially differs from that
of the target policy to be evaluated. Recent theoretical advances have shown that such sampleefficient offline RL is indeed possible provided
certain strong representational conditions hold,
else there are lower bounds exhibiting exponential error amplification (in the problem horizon)
unless the data collection distribution has only a
mild distribution shift relative to the target policy.
This work studies these issues from an empirical
perspective to gauge how stable offline RL methods are. In particular, our methodology explores
these ideas when using features from pre-trained
neural networks, in the hope that these representations are powerful enough to permit sample efficient offline RL. Through extensive experiments
on a range of tasks, we see that substantial error
amplification does occur even when using such
pre-trained representations (trained on the same
task itself); we find offline RL is stable only under
extremely mild distribution shift. The implications of these results, both from a theoretical and
an empirical perspective, are that successful offline RL (where we seek to go beyond the low
distribution shift regime) requires substantially
stronger conditions beyond those which suffice
for successful supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) seeks to utilize offline
data to alleviate the sample complexity burden in challenging sequential decision making settings where sampleefficiency is crucial (Mandel et al., 2014; Gottesman et al.,
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Microsoft
Research, New York, NY, USA 3 University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Ruosong Wang <ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018; Wang et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019); it is seeing much
recent interest due to the large amounts of offline data already available in numerous scientific and engineering domains. The goal is to efficiently evaluate (or learn) policies,
in scenarios where the data are collected from a distribution
that (potentially) substantially differs from that of the target
policy to be evaluated. Broadly, an important question here
is to better understand the practical challenges we face in
offline RL problems and how to address them.
Let us start by considering when we expect offline RL to
be successful from a theoretical perspective (Munos, 2003;
Szepesvári and Munos, 2005; Antos et al., 2008; Munos
and Szepesvári, 2008; Tosatto et al., 2017; Chen and Jiang,
2019; Duan et al., 2020). For the purpose of evaluating
a given target policy, Duan et al. (2020) showed that under a (somewhat stringent) policy completeness assumption
with regards to a linear feature mapping 1 along with data
coverage assumption, then Fitted-Q iteration (FQI) (Gordon, 1999) — a classical offline Bellman backup based
method — can provably evaluate a policy with low sample complexity (in the dimension of the feature mapping).
While the coverage assumptions here are mild, the representational conditions for such settings to be successful are
more concerning; they go well beyond simple realizability
assumptions, which only requires the representation to be
able to approximate the state-value function of the given
target policy.
Recent theoretical advances (Wang et al., 2021) show that
without such a strong representation condition, there are
lower bounds exhibiting exponential error amplification (in
the problem horizon) unless the data collection distribution
has only a mild distribution shift relative to the target policy.
2
It is worthwhile to emphasize that this “low distribution
condition” is a problematic restriction, since in offline RL,
we seek to utilize diverse data collection distributions. As an
intuitive example to contrast the issue of distribution shift vs.
coverage, consider offline RL for spatial navigation tasks
(e.g. (Chang et al., 2020)): coverage in our offline dataset
would seek that our dataset has example transitions from a
1

A linear feature mapping is said to be complete if Bellman
backup of a linear function remains in the span of the given features.
See Assumption 2 for a formal definition.
2
We discuss these issues in more depth in Section 4, where we
give a characterization of FQI in the discounted setting

