Connecting Sphere Manifolds Hierarchically for Regularization

Damien Scieur * 1 Youngsung Kim * 2

Abstract
This paper considers classification problems with
hierarchically organized classes. We force the
classifier (hyperplane) of each class to belong to a
sphere manifold, whose center is the classifier of
its super-class. Then, individual sphere manifolds
are connected based on their hierarchical relations.
Our technique replaces the last layer of a neural
network by combining a spherical fully-connected
layer with a hierarchical layer. This regularization
is shown to improve the performance of widely
used deep neural network architectures (ResNet
and DenseNet) on publicly available datasets (CIFAR100, CUB200, Stanford dogs, Stanford cars,
and Tiny-ImageNet).

1. Introduction
Applying inductive biases or prior knowledge to inference
models is a popular strategy to improve their generalization performance (Battaglia et al., 2018). For example,
a hierarchical structure can be found based on the similarity or shared characteristics between samples, and thus
becomes a basic criterion to categorize particular objects.
The known hierarchical structures provided by the datasets
(e.g., birds taxonomy (Welinder et al., 2010) and WordNet
hierarchy (Deng et al., 2009)) can help the network identify
the similarity between the given samples.
In classification tasks, the last layer of neural networks
maps embedding vectors to a discrete space (class). This
mapping with a fully-connected layer has no mechanism
forcing similar classes to be distributed close to each other
in the embedding. Therefore, we may observe classes to
be uniformly distributed after training, as this simplifies
the categorization by the last fully-connected layer. This
behavior is a consequence of seeing the label structure as
‘flat,’ i.e., it omits to consider the hierarchical relationships
*

Equal contribution 1 Samsung SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT). Correspondence to: Youngsung Kim <yskim.ee@gmail.com>, Damien
Scieur <damien.scieur@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

between classes (Bilal et al., 2017).
To alleviate this problem, in this study, we force similar
classes to be closer in the embedding by forcing their hyperplanes to follow a given hierarchy. One way to realize that
is by making child nodes dependent on parent nodes and
constraining their distance through a regularization term.
However, the norm itself does not give relevant information
on the closeness between hyperplanes (classifiers). Indeed,
two classifiers are close if they classify two similar points
in the same (super-)class. This means similar classifiers (hyperplanes) have to indicate a similar direction. Therefore,
we have to focus on the angle between classifiers, which
can be achieved through spherical constraints.
Contributions. In this paper, we propose a simple strategy to incorporate hierarchical information in deep neural
network architectures with minimal changes to the training
procedure, by modifying only the last layer. Given a hierarchical structure in the labels under the form of a tree, we explicitly force the individual classifiers to belong to a sphere,
whose center is the classifier of their super-class, recursively
until reaching the root (see Figure 2). We introduce the
spherical fully-connected layer and the hierarchically connected layer, whose combination implements our proposed
technique. We investigate the impact of Riemannian optimization instead of simple norm normalization. Finally,
we empirically show that our proposed method makes embedding vectors distributed closely (clearly grouped) along
similar classes with superior classification performances.
By its nature, our technique is quite versatile because it
only affects the structure of last fully-connected layer of the
neural network. Thus, it can be combined with many other
strategies (like spherical CNN from Xie et al. (2017), or
other deep neural network architectures).
Related works. Hierarchical structures are well-studied,
and their properties can be effectively learned using manifold embedding. The design of the optimal embedding to
learn the latent hierarchy is a complex task, and was extensively studied in the past decade. For example, Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013b;a) and Poincaré embedding (Nickel
& Kiela, 2017) showed a remarkable performance in hierarchical representation learning. (Du et al., 2018) forced the
representation of sub-classes to “orbit” around the representation of their super-class to find similarity based embed-

