PsiPhi-Learning: Reinforcement Learning with Demonstrations using
Successor Features and Inverse Temporal Difference Learning

Angelos Filos 1 Clare Lyle 1 Yarin Gal 1 Sergey Levine 2 Natasha Jaques * 2 3 Gregory Farquhar * 4

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) with noreward demonstrations, a setting in which an RL
agent has access to additional data from the interaction of other agents with the same environment.
However, it has no access to the rewards or goals
of these agents, and their objectives and levels of
expertise may vary widely. These assumptions
are common in multi-agent settings, such as autonomous driving. To effectively use this data,
we turn to the framework of successor features.
This allows us to disentangle shared features and
dynamics of the environment from agent-specific
rewards and policies. We propose a multi-task
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) algorithm,
called inverse temporal difference learning (ITD),
that learns shared state features, alongside peragent successor features and preference vectors,
purely from demonstrations without reward labels. We further show how to seamlessly integrate ITD with learning from online environment
interactions, arriving at a novel algorithm for reinforcement learning with demonstrations, called
ΨΦ-learning (pronounced ‘Sci-Fi’). We provide
empirical evidence for the effectiveness of ΨΦlearning as a method for improving RL, IRL, imitation, and few-shot transfer, and derive worstcase bounds for its performance in zero-shot transfer to new tasks.

1. Introduction
If artificial agents are to be effective in the real world,
they will need to thrive in environments populated by other
agents. Agents are typically goal-directed, sometimes by
definition (Franklin & Graesser, 1996). While their goals
can be different, they often depend on shared salient fea*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Google Research, Brain team 4 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Angelos Filos <angelos.filos@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The ΨΦ-learning algorithm for RL with no-reward
demonstrations. Demonstrations D contain data from other
agents for unknown tasks. We employ inverse temporal difference
learning (ITD, cf. Section 3.1) to recover other agents’ successor
features (SFs) Ψk and preferences wk . The ego-agent combines
the estimated SFs of others along with its own preferences wego
and SFs Ψego with generalised policy improvement (GPI, cf. Section 2.2), generating experience. Both the demonstrations and the
ego-experience are used to learn the shared cumulants Φ.

tures of the environment, and may be able to interact with
and affect the environment in similar ways. Humans and
other animals make ready use of these similarities to other
agents while learning (Henrich, 2017; Laland, 2018). We
can observe the goal-directed behaviours of other humans,
and combine these observations with our own experiences,
to quickly learn how to achieve our own goals. If reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) agents could
similarly interpret the behaviour of others, they could learn
more efficiently, relying less on solitary trial and error.
To this end, we formalise and address a problem setting in
which an agent (the ‘ego-agent’) is given access to observations and actions drawn from the experiences of other
goal-directed agents interacting with the same environment,
but pursuing distinct goals. These observed trajectories are
unlabelled in the sense that they lack the goals or rewards
of the other agents. This type of data is readily available
in many real-world settings, either from (i) observing other
agents acting simultaneously with the ego-agent in the same
(multi-agent) environment, or (ii) multi-task demonstrations
collected independently from the ego-agent’s experiences.

