Understanding Self-Supervised Learning Dynamics without Contrastive Pairs

Yuandong Tian 1 Xinlei Chen 1 Surya Ganguli 1 2

Abstract
While contrastive approaches of self-supervised
learning (SSL) learn representations by minimizing the distance between two augmented views
of the same data point (positive pairs) and maximizing views from different data points (negative pairs), recent non-contrastive SSL (e.g.,
BYOL and SimSiam) show remarkable performance without negative pairs, with an extra
learnable predictor and a stop-gradient operation. A fundamental question arises: why do
these methods not collapse into trivial representations? We answer this question via a simple
theoretical study and propose a novel approach,
DirectPred, that directly sets the linear predictor
based on the statistics of its inputs, without gradient training. On ImageNet, it performs comparably with more complex two-layer non-linear
predictors that employ BatchNorm and outperforms a linear predictor by 2.5% in 300-epoch
training (and 5% in 60-epoch). DirectPred is
motivated by our theoretical study of the nonlinear learning dynamics of non-contrastive SSL in
simple linear networks. Our study yields conceptual insights into how non-contrastive SSL
methods learn, how they avoid representational
collapse, and how multiple factors, like predictor networks, stop-gradients, exponential moving averages, and weight decay all come into
play. Our simple theory recapitulates the results
of real-world ablation studies in both STL-10 and
ImageNet. Code is released1 .

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a powerful method for learning useful representations without re1

Facebook AI Research 2 Stanford University. Correspondence
to: Yuandong Tian <yuandong@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/facebookresearch/
luckmatters/tree/master/ssl

quiring expensive target labels (Devlin et al., 2018). Many
state-of-the-art SSL methods in computer vision employ
the principle of contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018; Tian
et al., 2019; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a; Bachman et al., 2019) whereby the hidden representations of
two augmented views of the same object (positive pairs)
are brought closer together, while those of different objects (negative pairs) are encouraged to be further apart.
Minimizing differences between positive pairs encourages
modeling invariances, while contrasting negative pairs is
thought to be required to prevent representational collapse
(i.e., mapping all data to the same representation).
However, some recent SSL work, notably BYOL (Grill
et al., 2020) and SimSiam (Chen & He, 2020), have shown
the remarkable capacity to learn powerful representations
using only positive pairs, without ever contrasting negative pairs. These methods employ a dual pair of Siamese
networks (Bromley et al., 1994) (Fig. 1): the representation of two views are trained to match, one obtained by the
composition of an online and predictor network, and the
other by a target network. The target network is not trained
via gradient descent; and either employs a direct copy of
the online network (e.g., SimSiam (Chen & He, 2020)), or
a momentum encoder that slowly follows the online network in a delayed fashion through an exponential moving
average (EMA) (e.g., MoCo (He et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020b) and BYOL (Grill et al., 2020)). Compared to contrastive learning, these non-contrastive SSL methods do not
require large batch size (e.g., 4096 in SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a)) or memory queue (e.g., MoCo (He et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020b)) to provide negative pairs. Therefore,
they are generally more efficient and conceptually simple
while maintaining state-of-the-art performance.
Since the entire procedure in non-contrastive SSL encourages the online+predictor network and the target network to become similar to each other, this overall scheme
raises several fundamental unsolved theoretical questions.
Why/how does it avoid collapsed representations? What is
the nature of the learned representations? How do multiple
design choices and hyperparameters interact nonlinearly in
the learning dynamics? While there are interesting theoretical studies of contrastive SSL (Arora et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2020; Tosh et al., 2020), any theoretical understanding of the nonlinear learning dynamics of non-contrastive

