Is Pessimism Provably Efficient for Offline RL?
Ying Jin * 1 Zhuoran Yang * 2 Zhaoran Wang * 3

Abstract
We study offline reinforcement learning (RL),
which aims to learn an optimal policy based on
a dataset collected a priori. Due to the lack of
further interactions with the environment, offline
RL suffers from the insufficient coverage of the
dataset, which eludes most existing theoretical
analysis. In this paper, we propose a pessimistic
variant of the value iteration algorithm (PEVI),
which incorporates an uncertainty quantifier as
the penalty function. Such a penalty function
simply flips the sign of the bonus function for promoting exploration in online RL, which makes it
easily implementable and compatible with general
function approximators.
Without assuming the sufficient coverage of the
dataset, we establish a data-dependent upper
bound on the suboptimality of PEVI for general Markov decision processes (MDPs). When
specialized to linear MDPs, it matches the
information-theoretic lower bound up to multiplicative factors of the dimension and horizon.
In other words, pessimism is not only provably
efficient but also minimax optimal. In particular, given the dataset, the learned policy serves as
the “best effort” among all policies, as no other
policies can do better. Our theoretical analysis
identifies the critical role of pessimism in eliminating a notion of spurious correlation, which
emerges from the “irrelevant” trajectories that are
less covered by the dataset and not informative
for the optimal policy.

1. Introduction
The empirical success of online (deep) reinforcement learning (RL) (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017;
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Statistics, Stanford University 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University 3 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences, Northwestern University . Correspondence to: Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Vinyals et al., 2017) relies on two ingredients: (i) expressive
function approximators, e.g., deep neural networks (LeCun
et al., 2015), which approximate policies and values, and
(ii) efficient data generators, e.g., game engines (Bellemare
et al., 2013) and physics simulators (Todorov et al., 2012),
which serve as environments. In particular, learning the deep
neural network in an online manner often necessitates millions to billions of interactions with the environment. Due to
such a barrier of sample complexity, it remains notably more
challenging to apply online RL in critical domains, e.g., precision medicine (Gottesman et al., 2019) and autonomous
driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), where interactive data
collecting processes can be costly and risky. To this end,
we study offline RL in this paper, which aims to learn an
optimal policy based on a dataset collected a priori without
further interactions with the environment. Such datasets
are abundantly available in various domains, e.g., electronic
health records for precision medicine (Chakraborty and Murphy, 2014) and human driving trajectories for autonomous
driving (Sun et al., 2020).
In comparison with online RL (Lattimore and Szepesvári,
2020; Agarwal et al., 2020a), offline RL remains even less
understood in theory (Lange et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020),
which hinders principled developments of trustworthy algorithms in practice. In particular, as active interactions with
the environment are infeasible, it remains unclear how to
maximally exploit the dataset without further exploration.
Due to such a lack of continuing exploration, which plays a
key role in online RL, any algorithm for offline RL possibly
suffers from the insufficient coverage of the dataset (Wang
et al., 2020a). Specifically, as illustrated in Section 3, two
challenges arise:
(i) the intrinsic uncertainty, that is, the dataset possibly
fails to cover the trajectory induced by the optimal policy, which however carries the essential information;
(ii) the spurious correlation, that is, the dataset possibly
happens to cover a trajectory unrelated to the optimal
policy, which by chance induces a large cumulative
reward and hence misleads the learned policy.
See Figures 1 and 2 for illustrations. As the dataset is
collected a priori, which is often beyond the control of the
learner, any assumption on the sufficient coverage of the

