Demonstration-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning for Few-Shot Imitation

Théo Cachet 1 Julien Perez 1 Christopher R. Dance 1

Abstract
In few-shot imitation, an agent is given a few
demonstrations of a previously unseen task, and
must then successfully perform that task. We
propose a novel approach to learning few-shotimitation agents that we call demonstrationconditioned reinforcement learning (DCRL).
Given a training set consisting of demonstrations,
reward functions and transition distributions for
multiple tasks, the idea is to define a policy that
takes demonstrations and current state as inputs,
and to train this policy to maximize the average
of the cumulative reward over the set of training tasks. Compared to concurrent approaches,
DCRL has several advantages, such as the ability
to improve upon suboptimal demonstrations, to
operate given state-only demonstrations, and to
cope with a domain shift between the demonstrator and the agent. Moreover, we show that DCRL
outperforms methods based on behaviour cloning
by a large margin, on navigation tasks and on
robotic manipulation tasks from the Meta-World
benchmark.

1. Introduction
We humans owe our success to our uniquely developed ability to learn from others (Boyd et al., 2011), a core component of which is our capacity to imitate (Hoehl et al., 2019;
Charpentier et al., 2020). While humans often only need a
few demonstrations to learn to perform a task, state-of-theart imitation learning methods often require prohibitively
many demonstrations even to learn simple tasks (Arora et al.,
2020). This has motivated the study of few-shot imitation,
in which the aim is to maximize the expected performance
of an agent that must complete a previously unseen task,
having only seen a few demonstrations of that task. For
instance, a person might demonstrate how to close a specific
1
NAVER LABS Europe, 6 chemin de Maupertuis, Meylan,
38240, France. Website:europe.naverlabs.com. Correspondence
to: Théo Cachet <theo.cachet@naverlabs.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The proposed DCRL algorithm, which uses both expert
demonstrations and environment interactions to train. The notation
is defined in Section 3.

window and then expect a robot to close that window, even
though the robot has never been trained on this task before,
and even though the window’s initial state may not be the
same as it was in the demonstration.
Few-shot imitation has been studied since Duan et al. (2017),
motivated by the desire to enable artificial agents to perform
a diverse range of tasks, and the hope that a single few-shot
imitation agent, trained on a representative set of tasks, can
build a representation that enables it to generalize to large
numbers of new tasks with acceptable numbers of demonstrations. Existing few-shot imitation algorithms either use
behaviour cloning (BC), in which the agent is trained to
minimize an action-prediction loss (Finn et al., 2017b), or
they use inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) to infer a
reward function from the demonstrations (Goo & Niekum,
2019; Yu et al., 2019a) and then train a policy for that reward function. Unfortunately, as discussed in Section 2,
these existing algorithms suffer from one or more of the
following limitations. They assume actions are part of the
demonstration or that different tasks share a common transition distribution, they ignore domain shift between the agent
and the demonstrator, they cannot improve upon suboptimal
demonstrators, or they must train a policy each time they
are presented with demonstrations of a new task. All these
limitations are practically important to address, for instance
for robots inferring policies from human demonstrations.
Proposed Approach. A key insight of our work is that
imitation learning is not a necessary component of few-shot
imitation. While the two existing approaches to few-shot imitation (BC and IRL) are also the main approaches to single-

