Kernel-Based Reinforcement Learning: A Finite-Time Analysis

Omar D. Domingues 1 2 Pierre Ménard 3 Matteo Pirotta 4 Emilie Kaufmann 1 5 Michal Valko 1 5 6

Abstract
We consider the exploration-exploitation dilemma
in finite-horizon reinforcement learning problems
whose state-action space is endowed with a metric.
We introduce Kernel-UCBVI, a model-based optimistic algorithm that leverages the smoothness of
the MDP and a non-parametric kernel estimator of
the rewards and transitions to efficiently balance
exploration and exploitation. For problems with
K episodesand horizon H, we provide a regret
2d
e H 3 K 2d+1
bound of O
, where d is the covering
dimension of the joint state-action space. This is
the first regret bound for kernel-based RL using
smoothing kernels, which requires very weak assumptions on the MDP and has been previously
applied to a wide range of tasks. We empirically
validate our approach in continuous MDPs with
sparse rewards.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a learning paradigm in
which an agent interacts with an environment by taking
actions and receiving rewards. At each time step t, the
environment is characterized by a state variable xt ∈ X ,
which is observed by the agent and influenced by its actions at ∈ A. In this work, we consider the online learning
problem where the agent has to learn how to act optimally
by interacting with an unknown environment. To learn efficiently, the agent has to trade-off exploration to gather
information about the environment and exploitation to act
optimally with respect to the current knowledge. The performance of the agent is measured by the regret, i.e., the
difference between the rewards that would be gathered by an
optimal agent and the rewards obtained by the agent. This
problem has been extensively studied for Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) with finite state-action space. Optimism

in the face of uncertainty (OFU, Jaksch et al. 2010) and
Thompson Sampling (Strens, 2000; Osband et al., 2013)
principles have been used to design algorithms with sublinear regret. However, the guarantees for these approaches
cannot be naturally extended to an arbitrarily large stateaction space since the regret depends on the number of
states and actions. When the state-action space is continuous, additional structure in MDP is required to efficiently
solve the exploration-exploitation dilemma.
In this paper, we focus on the online learning problem in
MDPs with large or continuous state-action spaces. We
suppose that the state-action set X × A is equipped with
a known metric. For instance, this is typically the case
in continuous control problems in which the state space
is a subset of Rd equipped with the Euclidean metric. As
shown by Ormoneit & Sen (2002) and Barreto et al. (2016),
smoothing-kernel approaches converge asymptotically to
an optimal policy and perform well empirically in a wide
range of continuous MDPs. In this paper, we tackle the
problem of exploration in such approaches, by proposing an
optimistic algorithm based on smoothing-kernel estimators
of the reward and transition functions of the underlying
MDP. The advantages of this approach are: (i) it requires
weak assumptions on the MDP, (ii) it allows us to easily
provide expert knowledge to the algorithm through kernel
design, and (iii) it applies to problems with possibly infinite
states without relying on any kind of discretization.

Inria Lille 2 Université de Lille 3 Otto von Guericke University 4 Facebook AI Research, Paris 5 CNRS 6 DeepMind
Paris. Correspondence to: Omar D. Domingues <omar.darwichedomingues@inria.fr>.

Related work Kernel-based RL (KBRL) using smoothing kernels has been initially proposed by Ormoneit & Sen
(2002), who analyzed the algorithm assuming that transitions are generated from independent samples, and provide
asymptotic convergence guarantees. Barreto et al. (2016)
propose a stochastic factorization technique to reduce the
computational complexity of KBRL. In this paper, we provide a modification of KBRL that collects data online and
for which we prove finite-time regret guarantees under weak
conditions on the MDP. Under stronger conditions, that use
positive-define kernels defining reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHS) or Gaussian Processes, regret bounds are
provided by Chowdhury & Gopalan (2019), Chowdhury &
Oliveira (2020) and Yang et al. (2020).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Regret minimization in finite MDPs has been extensively
studied both in model-based and model-free settings. While

1

