Offline Reinforcement Learning
with Fisher Divergence Critic Regularization

Ilya Kostrikov 1 2 Jonathan Tompson 2 Rob Fergus 1 3 Ofir Nachum 2

Abstract
Many modern approaches to offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) utilize behavior regularization, typically augmenting a model-free actor
critic algorithm with a penalty measuring divergence of the policy from the offline data. In this
work, we propose an alternative approach to encouraging the learned policy to stay close to the
data, namely parameterizing the critic as the logbehavior-policy, which generated the offline data,
plus a state-action value offset term, which can
be learned using a neural network. Behavior regularization then corresponds to an appropriate regularizer on the offset term. We propose using a
gradient penalty regularizer for the offset term
and demonstrate its equivalence to Fisher divergence regularization, suggesting connections to
the score matching and generative energy-based
model literature. We thus term our resulting algorithm Fisher-BRC (Behavior Regularized Critic).
On standard offline RL benchmarks, Fisher-BRC
achieves both improved performance and faster
convergence over existing state-of-the-art methods.1

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) describes the field of machine
learning concerned with learning a policy to solve a task
through stochastic trial-and-error experience in an environment. The default setting typically assumed in RL is of
online access to the environment; i.e., the learned policy
may collect new trial-and-error experience directly from
the environment. However, in many practical scenarios,
1

New York University, USA 2 Google Research, USA
Google DeepMind, USA. Correspondence to: Ilya Kostrikov
<kostrikov@cs.nyu.edu>.

where deploying a new policy to interact with the live environment is expensive or associated with risks or safety
concerns (Thomas, 2015), it is more common to have only
offline access to the environment. That is, the trial-and-error
experience available for learning a task-solving policy is
a static, offline dataset of experience collected by some
other behavior policy. This setting is known as offline RL
and has attracted a significant amount of interest in recent
years (Levine et al., 2020; Lange et al., 2012).
Many of the recent approaches to offline RL utilize some
form of behavior regularization, in which the learned policy
is compelled to stay close to the data-generating behavior
policy (Wu et al., 2019). For example, in model-free actor critic algorithms, behavior regularization is typically
done by augmenting the actor loss with a penalty measuring the divergence of the learned policy from the behavior
policy (Jaques et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2019), reminiscent of KL-control methods in related literature (Kappen et al., 2012; Jaques et al., 2017). While
straightforward, a disadvantage of this approach is that it
does little to regularize the critic itself, and thus, it is common for the critic to take on wildly extrapolated values on
actions unseen in the training data, which may dominate any
behavior regularization applied to the actor, as we demonstrate in this work.
In this work, we propose an alternative approach to encouraging the learned policy to stay close to the offline data.
Focusing on the critic, we propose parameterizing the critic
values as the logits of the behavior policy plus an additional
offset term. When the actor (the learned policy) is then
trained to choose actions which maximize the critic value,
it will be compelled to stay close to the behavior policy
as long as the offset term is suitably ‘small’. Thus, behavior regularization in this setting corresponds to augmenting
the standard Bellman error critic loss with an appropriate
regularization on the offset term.

3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code to reproduce our results is available at
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/fisher_brc.

What should this regularization term be? After noting that,
in continuous control, the offset term’s effect on the learned
policy is via the gradients of the offset with respect to actions, we propose regularizing the offset term with a gradient
penalty. While this may appear heuristic at first, we present
mathematical derivations establishing a connection between

