Revisiting Point Cloud Shape Classification
with a Simple and Effective Baseline

Ankit Goyal 1 Hei Law 1 Bowei Liu 1 Alejandro Newell 1 Jia Deng 1

Abstract
Processing point cloud data is an important component of many real-world systems. As such, a
wide variety of point-based approaches have been
proposed, reporting steady benchmark improvements over time. We study the key ingredients
of this progress and uncover two critical results.
First, we find that auxiliary factors like different evaluation schemes, data augmentation strategies, and loss functions, which are independent
of the model architecture, make a large difference in performance. The differences are large
enough that they obscure the effect of architecture. When these factors are controlled for, PointNet++, a relatively older network, performs competitively with recent methods. Second, a very
simple projection-based method, which we refer to as SimpleView, performs surprisingly well.
It achieves on par or better results than sophisticated state-of-the-art methods on ModelNet40
while being half the size of PointNet++. It also
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on ScanObjectNN, a real-world point cloud benchmark, and
demonstrates better cross-dataset generalization.
Code is available at https://github.com/
princeton-vl/SimpleView.

1. Introduction
Processing 3D point cloud data accurately is crucial in
many applications including autonomous driving (NavarroSerment et al., 2010; Kidono et al., 2011), robotics (Rusu
et al., 2009; Correll et al., 2016; Mousavian et al., 2019) and
scene understanding (Aldoma et al., 2012). In these settings,
sensors like LIDAR produce unordered sets of points that
correspond to object surfaces. Correctly classifying objects
from this data is important for 3D scene understanding (Uy
et al., 2019). While classical approaches for this problem
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, NJ,
USA. Correspondence to: Ankit Goyal <agoyal@priceton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Performance of different models on ModelNet40. Those
using > 1024 points or normals are marked with star. We reevaluate top-performing models across times based on reported
results which include PointNet, PointNet++, DGCNN and RSCNN.
Green points shows performance when the models are evaluated
under the same protocol. Since the code for multi-scale version
of RSCNN (RSCNN-MS) is not released, we are using the singlescale version (RSCNN-SS) in our evaluation.

have relied on hand-crafted features (Arras et al., 2007),
recent efforts have focused on the design of deep neural
networks (DNNs) to learn features directly from raw point
cloud data (Qi et al., 2017a). Similar to image classification (Yalniz et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Szegedy
et al., 2016), deep learning-based methods have proven effective in point cloud classification.
The most widely adopted benchmark for comparing methods for point cloud classification has been ModelNet40 (Wu
et al., 2015b). The accuracy on ModelNet40 has steadily
improved over the last few years from 89.2% by PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) to 93.6% by RSCNN (Liu et al.,
2019c) (Fig. 1). This progress is commonly perceived to
be a result of better designs of network architectures. However, after performing a careful analysis of recent works
we find two surprising results. First, we find that auxiliary
factors including differing evaluation schemes, data augmentation strategies, and loss functions affect performance
to such a degree that it can be difficult to disentangle improvements due to the network architecture. Second, we
find that a very simple projection-based architecture works

