Emphatic Algorithms for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ray Jiang 1 Tom Zahavy 1 Zhongwen Xu 1 Adam White 1 2
Matteo Hessel 1 Charles Blundell 1 Hado van Hasselt 1

Abstract
Off-policy learning allows us to learn about possible policies of behavior from experience generated by a different behavior policy. Temporal
difference (TD) learning algorithms can become
unstable when combined with function approximation and off-policy sampling—this is known as
the “deadly triad”. Emphatic temporal difference
(ETD(λ)) algorithm ensures convergence in the
linear case by appropriately weighting the TD(λ)
updates. In this paper, we extend the use of emphatic methods to deep reinforcement learning
agents. We show that naively adapting ETD(λ) to
popular deep reinforcement learning algorithms,
which use forward view multi-step returns, results
in poor performance. We then derive new emphatic algorithms for use in the context of such
algorithms, and we demonstrate that they provide
noticeable benefits in small problems designed
to highlight the instability of TD methods. Finally, we observed improved performance when
applying these algorithms at scale on classic Atari
games from the Arcade Learning Environment.

Off-policy learning, whereby an agent learns from behavior
that differs from its current policy, affords an agent opportunities to accumulate rich knowledge (Degris & Modayil,
2012) by learning about the effect of different policies of
behaviors. This can also be extended to learn about different
goals, e.g., by learning general value functions (Sutton et al.,
2011) for cumulants that differ from the main task reward.
Unfortunately, it is well known that reinforcement learning
algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 2018) can become unstable
when combining function approximation, off-policy learning, and bootstrapping (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997)—for
this reason such combination is referred to as the deadly
triad (Sutton & Barto, 2018; van Hasselt et al., 2018).
1
DeepMind, London, UK. 2 Amii, Department of Computing
Science, University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Ray Jiang
<rayjiang@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Many reinforcement learning (RL) agents learn off-policy
to some extent, to learn about the greedy policy while exploring (Watkins, 1989), to make predictions about policies
simultaneously (Sutton et al., 2011; Zahavy et al., 2020;
Jaderberg et al., 2017), to improve sample complexity via
experience replay (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015), or even just
to correct for the latency introduced by distributed computation (Espeholt et al., 2018). Since these algorithms make
use of bootstrapping and function approximation, they may
suffer from deadly triad symptoms of “soft divergence” and
slow convergence (van Hasselt et al., 2018).
The ETD(λ) algorithm (Sutton et al., 2016) ensures convergence with linear function approximation (Yu, 2015) by
weighting the updates of TD(λ) (in the backward view, with
eligibility traces). However, combining eligibility traces and
deep neural networks can be challenging (Sutton, 1987)1 ,
and thus widely used deep RL systems instead typically use
n-step forward view methods. Overall, none of the existing solutions to the deadly triad (Sutton et al., 2009; 2016)
have become standard practice in deep RL. In this paper, we
extend the emphatic method to multi-step deep RL learning targets, including an off-policy value-learning method
known as ‘V-trace’ (Espeholt et al., 2018) that is often used
in actor-critic systems.
The structure of this paper is the following. Sec. 1 explains the background on forward view learning targets and
ETD(λ). Next we adapt ETD(λ) to the forward view in
Sec. 2.1, and derive a new multi-step emphatic trace for
n-step TD in Sec. 2.2. We discuss further algorithmic considerations in Sec. 2.3, including extensions for variance
reduction, for the V-trace value learning target and for the
actor critic learning algorithms. Empirically, we provide an
in-depth comparison of their qualitative properties on small
diagnostic MDPs in Sec. 3. Finally, we demonstrate that
combining emphatic trace with deep neural networks can
improve performance on classic Atari video games in Sec. 4,
reporting the highest score to date for an RL agent without
experience replay in the 200M frames data regime: 497%
median human normalized score across 57 games, improved
from the baseline performance of 403%.
1

See van Hasselt et al. (2021) for recent developments.

