Provable Meta-Learning of Linear Representations

Nilesh Tripuraneni 1 Chi Jin 2 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
Meta-learning, or learning-to-learn, seeks to design algorithms that can utilize previous experience to rapidly learn new skills or adapt to new
environments. Representation learning—a key
tool for performing meta-learning—learns a data
representation that can transfer knowledge across
multiple tasks, which is essential in regimes where
data is scarce. Despite a recent surge of interest
in the practice of meta-learning, the theoretical
underpinnings of meta-learning algorithms are
lacking, especially in the context of learning transferable representations. In this paper, we focus on
the problem of multi-task linear regression—in
which multiple linear regression models share a
common, low-dimensional linear representation.
Here, we provide provably fast, sample-efficient
algorithms to address the dual challenges of (1)
learning a common set of features from multiple,
related tasks, and (2) transferring this knowledge
to new, unseen tasks. Both are central to the general problem of meta-learning. Finally, we complement these results by providing informationtheoretic lower bounds on the sample complexity
of learning these linear features.

1. Introduction
The ability of a learner to transfer knowledge between tasks
is crucial for robust, sample-efficient inference and prediction. One of the most well-known examples of such transfer
learning has been in few-shot image classification where
the idea is to initialize neural network weights in early layers using ImageNet pre-training/features, and subsequently
re-train the final layers on a new task (Donahue et al., 2014;
Vinyals et al., 2016). However, the need for methods that
can learn data representations that generalize to multiple,
unseen tasks has also become vital in other applications,
1

Department of EECS, University of California,
Berkeley 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Nilesh Tripuraneni
<nilesh tripuraneni@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ranging from deep reinforcement learning (Baevski et al.,
2019) to natural language processing (Ando & Zhang, 2005;
Liu et al., 2019). Accordingly, researchers have begun to
highlight the need to develop (and understand) generic algorithms for transfer (or meta) learning applicable in diverse
domains (Finn et al., 2017). Surprisingly, however, despite
a long line of work on transfer learning, there is limited theoretical characterization of the underlying problem. Indeed,
there are few efficient algorithms for feature learning that
provably generalize to new, unseen tasks. Sharp guarantees
are even lacking in the linear setting.
In this paper, we study the problem of meta-learning of
features in a linear model in which multiple tasks share
a common set of low-dimensional features. Our aim is
twofold. First, we ask: given a set of diverse samples from
t different tasks how we can efficiently (and optimally)
learn a common feature representation? Second, having
learned a common feature representation, how can we use
this representation to improve sample efficiency in a new
(t + 1)st task where data may be scarce?1
Formally, given an (unobserved) linear feature matrix B =
(b1 , . . . , br ) ∈ Rd×r with orthonormal columns, our statistical model for data pairs (xi , yi ) is:
yi = x>
i Bαt(i) + i

;

βt(i) = Bαt(i) ,

(1)

where there are t (unobserved) underlying task parameters
αj for j ∈ {1, . . . , t}. Here t(i) ∈ {1, . . . , t} is the index
of the task associated with the ith datapoint, xi ∈ Rd is a
random covariate, and i is additive noise. We assume the
sequence {αt(i) }∞
i=1 is independent of all other randomness
in the problem. In this framework, the aforementioned
questions reduce to recovering B from data from the first
{1, . . . , t} tasks, and using this feature representation to
recover a better estimate of a new task parameter, βt+1 =
Bαt+1 , where αt+1 is also unobserved.
Our main result targets the problem of learning-to-learn
(LTL), and shows how a feature representation B̂ learned
from t diverse tasks can improve learning on an unseen
(t + 1)st task which shares the same underlying linear representation. We informally state this result below.2
1

This is sometimes referred to as learning-to-learn (LTL).
Theorem 1 follows immediately from combining Theorems 3
and 4; see Theorem 6 for a formal statement.
2

