Exact Gap between Generalization Error and Uniform Convergence in
Random Feature Models
Zitong Yang 1 Yu Bai 2 Song Mei 3

Abstract
Recent work showed that there could be a large
gap between the classical uniform convergence
bound and the actual test error of zero-trainingerror predictors (interpolators) such as deep neural
networks. To better understand this gap, we study
the uniform convergence in the nonlinear random
feature model and perform a precise theoretical
analysis on how uniform convergence depends
on the sample size and the number of parameters.
We derive and prove analytical expressions for
three quantities in this model: 1) classical uniform convergence over norm balls, 2) uniform
convergence over interpolators in the norm ball
(recently proposed by Zhou et al. (2020)), and
3) the risk of minimum norm interpolator. We
show that, in the setting where the classical uniform convergence bound is vacuous (diverges to
∞), uniform convergence over the interpolators
still gives a non-trivial bound of the test error
of interpolating solutions. We also showcase a
different setting where classical uniform convergence bound is non-vacuous, but uniform convergence over interpolators can give an improved
sample complexity guarantee. Our result provides
a first exact comparison between the test errors
and uniform convergence bounds for interpolators
beyond simple linear models.

1. Introduction
Uniform convergence—the supremum difference between
the training and test errors over a certain function class—is
a powerful tool in statistical learning theory for understanding the generalization performance of predictors.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley. 2 Salesforce Re3
search.
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Zitong Yang <zitong@berkeley.edu>, Yu Bai <yu.bai@salesforce.com>, Song
Mei <songmei@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Bounds on uniform convergence usually take the form of
p
complexity/n (Vapnik, 1995), where the numerator represents the complexity of the function class, and n is the
sample size. If such a bound is tight, then the predictor is
not going to generalize well whenever the function class
complexity is too large.
However, it is shown in recent theoretical and empirical work that overparametized models such as deep neural networks could generalize well, even in the interpolating regime in which the model exactly memorizes the
data (Zhang et al., 2016; Belkin et al., 2019a). As interpolation (especially for noisy training data) usually requires
the predictor to be within a function class with high complexity, this challenges the classical methodology of using
uniform convergence to bound generalization. For example,
Belkin et al. (2018c) showed that interpolating noisy data
with kernel machines requires exponentially large norm
in fixed dimensions. The large norm
p would effectively
make the uniform convergence bound complexity/n vacuous. Nagarajan & Kolter (2019a) empirically measured the
spectral-norm bound in Bartlett et al. (2017) and find that
for interpolators, the bound increases with n, and is thus
vacuous at large sample size. Towards a more fine-grained
understanding, we ask the following
Question: How large is the gap between uniform
convergence and the actual generalization errors
for interpolators?
In this paper, we study this gap in the random features model
from Rahimi & Recht (2007). This model can be interpreted as a linearized version of two-layer neural networks
(Jacot et al., 2018) and exhibit some similar properties to
deep neural networks such as double descent (Belkin et al.,
2019a). We consider two types of uniform convergence in
this model:
• U : The classical
√ uniform convergence over a norm
ball of radius A.
• T : The modified√uniform convergence over the same
norm ball of size A but only include the interpolators,
proposed in Zhou et al. (2020).

