Poisson-Randomised DirBN:
Large mutation is needed in Dirichlet belief networks

Xuhui Fan 1 Bin Li 2 Yaqiong Li 3 Scott A. Sisson 1

Abstract

The Dirichlet Belief Network (DirBN) was recently proposed as a promising deep generative
model to learn interpretable deep latent distributions for objects. However, its current representation capability is limited since its latent distributions across different layers is prone to form
similar patterns and can thus hardly use multilayer structure to form flexible distributions. In
this work, we propose Poisson-randomised Dirichlet Belief Networks (Pois-DirBN), which allows
large mutations for the latent distributions across
layers to enlarge the representation capability.
Based on our key idea of inserting Poisson random variables in the layer-wise connection, PoisDirBN first introduces a component-wise propagation mechanism to enable latent distributions
to have large variations across different layers.
Then, we develop a layer-wise Gibbs sampling
algorithm to infer the latent distributions, leading to a larger number of effective layers compared to DirBN. In addition, we integrate out
latent distributions and form a multi-stochastic
deep integer network, which provides an alternative view on Pois-DirBN. We apply Pois-DirBN to
relational modelling and validate its effectiveness
through improved link prediction performance
and more interpretable latent distribution visualisations. The code can be downloaded at https:
//github.com/xuhuifan/Pois_DirBN.

1

UNSW Data Science Hub, and School of Mathematics
and Statistics, University of New South Wales 2 Shanghai Key
Laboratory of IIP, School of Computer Science, Fudan University 3 Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University
of Technology, Sydney. Correspondence to: Scott A. Sisson
<scott.sisson@unsw.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The Dirichlet Belief Network (DirBN) (Zhao et al., 2018)
is a promising approach for learning easily interpretable
and meaningful deep latent distributions for objects. In
comparison to existing deep generative models (e.g., Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014)), which usually use parameterised functions to
build deep architectures, the DirBN uses a multi-stochasticlayers (Zhou et al., 2016) structure to generate deep latent
distributions. Each node is affiliated with a latent distribution at each layer, with these latent distributions again
generated through Dirichlet distributions, forming DirichletDirichlet connections. The DirBN is claimed to be interpretable as these latent distributions can be regarded as categorical distributions over latent components. The DirBN
has been used in two scenarios: topic modelling (Zhao
et al., 2018), in which the latent distributions correspond
to topic-word distributions; and relational modelling (Fan
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020), in which nodes’ membership
distributions over communities are modelled through these
latent distributions.
However, the current modelling capability of the DirBN, especially in the relational modelling setting, is limited since
the latent distributions share similar patterns across different
layers. Figure 1 shows an example visualisation of the latent distributions at layer 2 and layer 3 of the SDREM (Fan
et al., 2019) (a DirBN based relational model) on the PPI
dataset (Zitnik & Leskove, 2017). There are no obvious
variations in the patterns of the latent distributions from
layer 2 to layer 3. This phenomenon may be due to the fact
that the DirBN uses scaled latent distributions to constitute
the concentration parameters of the Dirichlet distribution
for the next layer. Accordingly, the generated latent distributions at the next layer will have similar expectations to
those at the current layer, and so it may be difficult to generate new latent distribution patterns. As it is constructed
using similar patterns, the application of DirBN into relational modelling therefore appears unable to make full use
of deep structure to form flexible distributions and enhanced
modelling capability.
In this work, we propose a Poisson-randomised Dirichlet

