Joint Online Learning and Decision-making via Dual Mirror Descent

Alfonso Lobos 1 Paul Grigas 1 Zheng Wen 2

Abstract
We consider an online revenue maximization
problem over a finite time horizon subject to lower
and upper bounds on cost. At each period, an
agent receives a context vector sampled i.i.d. from
an unknown distribution and needs to make a decision adaptively. The revenue and cost functions
depend on the context vector as well as some
fixed but possibly unknown parameter vector to
be learned. We propose a novel offline benchmark and a new algorithm that mixes an online
dual mirror descent scheme with a generic parameter learning process. When the parameter
vector
√
is known, we demonstrate
an
O(
T
)
regret
re√
sult as well an O( T ) bound on the possible
constraint violations. When the parameter is not
known and must be learned, we demonstrate that
the regret and constraint
violations are the sums
√
of the previous O( T ) terms plus terms that directly depend on the convergence of the learning
process.

1. Introduction
We consider an online revenue maximization problem over
a finite time horizon, subject to multiple lower and upper
bound cost constraints. At each time period, an agent receives a context vector and needs to make a real-time decision. After making a decision, the agent earns some revenue
and also incurs multiple costs, which may alternatively be
interpreted as the consumption of multiple resources. Unlike the typical situation in online optimization and learning
(see, e.g., Hazan (2019)), the agent has estimates of the revenue and cost functions available before making a decision.
These estimates are updated sequentially via an exogenous
learning process. Thus, there are three major challenges in
this online learning and decision-making environment: (i)
balancing the trade-off between revenue earned today and
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Google DeepMind, Mountain view, California. Correspondence to: Alfonso Lobos <alobos@berkeley.edu>, Paul Grigas <pgrigas@berkeley.edu>, Zheng
Wen <zhengwen@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ensuring that we do not incur too many costs too early, (ii)
ensuring that enough costs are incurred to meet the lower
bound constraints over the full time horizon, and (iii) understanding the effects of the parameter learning process.
Examples of this online learning and decision-making setup
occur in revenue management, online advertising, and online recommendation. In revenue management, pricing and
allocation decisions for goods and services with a limited
supply need to be made in real-time as customer arrivals
occur (Bertsimas & Popescu, 2003; Boyd & Bilegan, 2003).
This setup is also prevalent in online advertising, for example, in the case of a budget-constrained advertiser who bids
in real-time auctions in order to acquire valuable impressions. Importantly, each arrival typically has associated a
feature vector to it, for example, the cookie history of a user
to which an ad can be shown. How that feature may relate
to useful quantities, e.g., the probability of a user clicking
an ad, may need to be learned. Finally, our setting considers
lower bounds on cost since in many industries minimum
production or marketing goals are desired. Also, our setup
allows the cost and revenue functions to take negative values
which is key for some problems in chemistry or finance.
1.1. Contributions
Our contributions may be summarized as follows:
(1) We propose a novel family of algorithms to tackle a
joint online learning and decision making problem. Our
setting considers both lower and upper bound constraints
on cost functions and does not require strong assumptions
over the revenue and cost functions used, such as convexity.
Our work can be understood as an extension of an online
optimization problem in which we may also need to learn a
generic parameter. Furthermore, our work can be considered
as in a 1-lookup ahead setting as the agent can observe the
current context vector before taking a decision.
(2) We propose a novel benchmark used to measure the
regret of our algorithm. Our benchmark is considerably
stricter in comparison to the expected best optimal solution in hindsight. Our benchmark is specially well suited
to handle settings with an “infeasible sequence of context
vector arrivals" for which it is impossible to satisfy the
lower cost constraints. These infeasible context vector sequences may occur even if non-positive cost lower bounds

