Spectral Smoothing Unveils Phase Transitions
in Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders
Adeel Pervez 1 Efstratios Gavves 1

Abstract
Variational autoencoders with deep stochastic hierarchies are known to suffer from the problem of
posterior collapse, where the top layers fall back
to the prior and become independent of input. We
suggest that the hierarchical VAE objective explicitly includes the variance of the function parameterizing the mean and variance of the latent
Gaussian distribution which itself is often a high
variance function. Building on this we generalize
VAE neural networks by incorporating a smoothing parameter motivated by Gaussian analysis to
reduce higher frequency components and consequently the variance in parameterizing functions.
We show this helps to solve the problem of posterior collapse. We further show that under such
smoothing the VAE loss exhibits a phase transition, where the top layer KL divergence sharply
drops to zero at a critical value of the smoothing parameter that is similar for the same model
across datasets. We validate the phenomenon
across model configurations and datasets.

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
are a popular latent variable model for unsupervised learning that simplifies learning by the introduction of a learned
approximate posterior. Given data x and latent variables
z, we specify the conditional distribution p(x|z) by parameterizing the distribution parameters by a neural network.
Since it is difficult to learn such a model directly, another
conditional distribution q(z|x) is introduced to approximate
the posterior distribution. During learning the goal is to
maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO), which lower
bounds the log likelihood,
 log p(x) ≥ Eq(z|x) log p(x|z) +
log p(z) − log q(z|x) . In their simplest form, the genera1
QUVA Lab, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Adeel Pervez
<a.a.pervez@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tive model p(x|z) and the approximate posterior q(z|x) are
Gaussian distributions optimized in unison.
A natural way to increase the modeling capacity of VAE is
to incorporate a hierarchy of stochastic variables. Such models, however, turn out to be difficult to train and higher levels
in the hierarchy tend to remain independent of input data –
a problem termed posterior collapse. Posterior collapse in
VAEs manifests itself by the latent distribution tending to
fall back to the prior. With hierarchical VAEs the effect is
found to be more pronounced in the top layers farther from
the output. For the purpose of the paper and for clarity of exposition, we focus on the simplest extension of hierarchical
variational autoencoders where stochastic layers are stacked
serially on top of each other (Burda etQal., 2016; Sønderby
L−1
et al., 2016) , p(x, z) = p(x|z1 )p(zL ) i=1 p(zi |zi+1 ) and
QL−1
q(z|x) = q(z1 |x) i=1 q(zi+1 |zi ). The intermediate distributions in this model are commonly taken to be Gaussian distributions parameterized by neural network functions, so that p(zi |zi+1 ) = N (zi |µ(zi+1 ), σ(zi+1 )), where
µ(z), σ(z) are neural networks computing the mean and
variance of the Gaussian distribution. We refer to them
as vanilla hierarchical variational autoencoders. For each
stochastic layer in this model there is a corresponding KL
divergence term in the objective given by
E[KL(q(zi |zi−1 )||p(zi |zi+1 )].

(1)

As described later, expression 1 can be easily decomposed to
show an explicit dependence on the variance of the parameterizing functions µ(zi ), σ(zi ) of the intermediate Gaussian
distribution. We further show the KL divergence term to
be closely related to the harmonics of the parameterizing
function. For complex parameterizing functions the KL divergence term has large high frequency components (and
thus high variance) which leads to unstable training causing
posterior collapse.
Building on this, we suggest a method for training the simplest hierarchical extension of VAE that avoids the problem
of posterior collapse without introducing further architectural complexity (Maaløe et al., 2019; Sønderby et al., 2016).
Given a hierarchical variational autoencoder, our training
method incorporates a smoothing parameter (we denote this
by ρ) in the neural network functions used to parameterize

