Unified Robust Semi-Supervised Variational Autoencoder

Xu Chen 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel noise-robust
semi-supervised deep generative model by jointly
tackling noisy labels and outliers simultaneously
in a unified robust semi-supervised variational autoencoder (URSVAE). Typically, the uncertainty
of of input data is characterized by placing the
uncertainty prior on the parameters of probability density distributions in order to ensure the
robustness of the variational encoder towards outliers. Subsequently, a noise transition model is
integrated naturally into our model to alleviate the
detrimental effects of noisy labels. Moreover, a
robust divergence measure is employed to further
enhance the robustness, where a novel variational
lower bound is derived and optimized to infer
the network parameters. By proving that the influence function of the proposed evidence lower
bound is bounded, the enormous potential of the
proposed model in the classification in the presence of the compound noise is demonstrated. The
experimental results highlight the superiority of
the proposed framework by the evaluating on image classification tasks and comparing with the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
The recent success of training deep neural network has
been heavily relying on the collection of large datasets of
high quality labels. Semi-supervised deep neural network
(Kingma et al., 2014) serves as an effective alternative approach to alleviate the challenges of labeling large datasets
(Tanno et al., 2019)(Maaløe et al., 2017). However, these
alternative solutions inevitably introduce the label noise
due to human fatigue and the subjective nature of annotators, which can deteriorate the performance of deep neural
network. Moreover, the problem of semi-supervised deep
learning with noisy labels becomes more complicated when
1

Cary, NC, USA. Correspondence to:
<steven.xu.chen@gmail.com>.

Xu Chen

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the input image contains outliers where their behaviors are
far away from normal samples (Bora et al., 2018). For
instance, due to radiation or patient motions during the
imaging process, the deviations in neuroimaging data are
generated. In parallel, Bayesian deep learning (BDL) (Li
& Gal, 2017)(Huang et al., 2018) has drawn extensive attention due to its capability of transforming the problem of
posterior inference of a BDL model into the optimization of
an objective function, which is expressed as an expectation
of an analytic function of latent variables. The question
that is then asked is: how can we design a unified deep generative model in order to counter noisy labels and outliers
in one shot simultaneously in a semi-supervised Bayesian
deep learning ? In this paper, we address this challenging
problem by developing a unified robust semi-supervised
variational autoencoder.
Towards learning with noisy labels, semi-supervised learning with noisy labels have achieved remarkable success including the work at (Malach & Shwartz, 2017)(Jiang et al.,
2018)(Patrini et al., 2017a). In (Kaneko et al., 2019), labelnoise robust generative adversarial network is proposed by
incorporating a noise transition model to learn a clean label conditional generative distribution even when training
labels are noisy. Targeting at reducing the noise on the input data with generative models, AmbientGAN (Bora et al.,
2018) considered the task of learning an implicit generative model given only lossy measurements of samples from
the distribution of interest. Despite the separate progress
of learning with noisy labels and outliers, their connection
has not been well explored in semi-supervised learning settings. Previous work on learning with noisy labels (Patrini
et al., 2017a) usually focuses on correcting the loss function
based on estimation of the noise transition matrix. However, the limitations of these approaches is that they can not
handle the case with high noise ratio for corrupted labels.
Moreover, none of them has considered the influences of
sample outliers. To overcome these challenges, our work
take a different perspective by proposing a robust solution
with variational Bayesian approaches. In (Hou & Galata,
2008), a variational Bayesian approach has been applied to
the problem of robust estimation of gaussian mixtures from
noisy input data. However, the method described in (Hou &
Galata, 2008) is mainly designed for clustering in an unsupervised learning setting and therefore it does not take into

