Dataset Dynamics via Gradient Flows in Probability Space

David Alvarez-Melis 1 Nicolò Fusi 1

Abstract
Various machine learning tasks, from generative
modeling to domain adaptation, revolve around
the concept of dataset transformation and manipulation. While various methods exist for transforming unlabeled datasets, principled methods
to do so for labeled (e.g., classification) datasets
are missing. In this work, we propose a novel
framework for dataset transformation, which we
cast as optimization over data-generating joint
probability distributions. We approach this class
of problems through Wasserstein gradient flows
in probability space, and derive practical and
efficient particle-based methods for a flexible
but well-behaved class of objective functions.
Through various experiments, we show that this
framework can be used to impose constraints
on classification datasets, adapt them for transfer learning, or to re-purpose fixed or blackbox models to classify —with high accuracy—
previously unseen datasets.

1. Introduction
One of the hallmarks of machine learning practice is the
relative scarcity of domain- and task-specific data, compared to the abundance of general-purpose data. Thus,
many problems in machine learning involve dataset manipulation or transformation to re-weight, sub-sample, augment, compress, or build generative models of data.
Recent work on these problems has focused on unlabeled
datasets, either by considering only unsupervised learning
settings or ignoring labels in supervised ones. Manipulation of labeled datasets, while less explored, is appealing
for its various potential applications. On the one hand,
it can unify, formalize, and cast under a new light various data manipulation heuristics core to state-of-the-art
supervised learning pipelines, such as data augmentation
(Simard et al., 2003; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Cubuk et al.,
1

Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: David AlvarezMelis <alvarez.melis@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2019), dataset pooling, or instance mixing (Zhang et al.,
2018). On the other hand —and our principal motivation in
this work— is the potential of such a framework to tackle
less explored or entirely novel problems, such as ‘shaping’
datasets by imposing certain (e.g., geometric or privacy)
constraints, or transforming them from one domain to the
other to recast transfer learning as transfer of data to the
domain of expertise of a model, rather than the other way
around. Current data transformation methods are ill suited
for these tasks, since they either operate exclusively on features or use labels sparingly and heuristically. In addition,
most of them are tailored to specific problems and cannot
be easily generalized. Thus, a unified framework for transforming and manipulating datasets is missing.
In response to this, in this work we propose a principled,
flexible, and computationally feasible approach to labeled
dataset transformation. Based on the motivating applications described above, we seek a framework that is modelindependent, depending only on intrinsic geometric properties of the data, and applicable to any classification dataset,
regardless of size, dimensionality, or number of classes.
Our first step towards achieving this is to view datasets as
samples from a joint distribution, and to focus on manipulating these distributions instead. Indeed, while a dataset
might consist of finitely many samples, the precise number
is seldom relevant and often unspecified (e.g., in streaming
settings). Instead, the true object of interest is the generative process that gives rise to the dataset. Thus, we characterize a dataset as a collection of samples from an (unknown) joint probability distribution ρ(x, y), and cast its
transformation as an optimization problem in probability
space P(X × Y). Formally, we seek to solve problems of
the form minρ∈P(X ×Y) F (ρ), for some functional F over
distributions that encodes the transformation of interest.
Formalizing and solving optimization problems over
such —infinite dimensional, non-euclidean— probability
spaces is conceptually challenging. In this work, we do
so by means of gradient flows, a linchpin of applied mathematics for modeling dynamics in very general infinitedimensional spaces (Ambrosio et al., 2005), which have in
fact been extensively studied in the context of metric measure spaces (Santambrogio, 2017), and have deep connections to partial differential equations (PDE) (Jordan et al.,
1998). Gradient flows come with various appealing proper-

