Parametric Graph for Unimodal Ranking Bandit

Camille-Sovanneary Gauthier * 1 2 Romaric Gaudel * 3 Elisa Fromont 4 5 2 Boammani Aser Lompo 6

Abstract
We tackle the online ranking problem of assigning
L items to K positions on a web page in order to
maximize the number of user clicks. We propose
an original algorithm, easy to implement and with
strong theoretical guarantees to tackle this problem in the Position-Based Model (PBM) setting,
well suited for applications where items are displayed on a grid. Besides learning to rank, our
algorithm, GRAB (for parametric Graph for unimodal RAnking Bandit), also learns the parameter
of a compact graph over permutations of K items
among L. The logarithmic regret bound of this
algorithm is a direct consequence of the unimodality property of the bandit setting with respect to
the learned graph. Experiments against state-ofthe-art learning algorithms which also tackle the
PBM setting, show that our method is more efficient while giving regret performance on par with
the best known algorithms on simulated and real
life datasets.

1. Introduction
Online Recommendation Systems are used to choose relevant items, such as songs, adds or movies on a website.
At each call, they select K items among L potential ones,
K ≤ L. User feedbacks are collected for each displayed
items, reflecting how relevant these choices are: listening
time, clicks, rates, etc. These feedbacks are available only
for the items which were presented to the user. This corresponds to an instance of the multi-armed bandit problem
with semi-bandit feedback (Gai et al., 2012; Chen et al.,
2013). Another problem, related to ranking, is to display
the K chosen items at the right positions to maximize the
*
Equal contribution 1 Louis Vuitton, F-75001 Paris, France
IRISA UMR 6074 / INRIA rba, F-35000 Rennes, France 3 Univ
Rennes, Ensai, CNRS, CREST - UMR 9194, F-35000 Rennes,
France 4 Univ. Rennes 1, F-35000 Rennes, France 5 Institut Universitaire de France, M.E.S.R.I., F-75231 Paris 6 ENS Rennes,
F-35000 Rennes, France. Correspondence to: Camille-Sovanneary
Gauthier <camille-sovanneary.gauthier@louisvuitton.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

user attention. Typical examples of such displays are (i) a
list of news, visible one by one by scrolling; (ii) a list of
products, arranged by rows; or (iii) advertisements spread
in a web page. Numerous approaches have been proposed
to jointly learn how to choose the best positions for the corresponding best items (Radlinski et al., 2008; Combes et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2019) referred as multiple-play bandit or
online learning to rank (OLR). To take into account the user
behaviour while facing such a list of items, several models
exist (Richardson et al., 2007; Craswell et al., 2008) and
have been transposed to the bandit framework (Kveton et al.,
2015a; Komiyama et al., 2017) such as the Position-Based
Model (PBM) (Richardson et al., 2007). PBM allows to take
into account displays where the best position is a priori unknown. This is typically the case when items are displayed
on a grid and not in an ordered list. PBM assumes that the
click probability on an item i at position k results from the
product of two independent factors: the item relevance and
its position’s visibility. Items displayed at other positions
do not impact the probability to consider the item i at position k. According to PBM, a user may give more than one
feedbacks: she may click on all items relevant for her, e.g.
when looking for product on commercial websites. PBM is
also particularly interesting when the display is dynamic, as
often on modern web pages, and may depend on the reading direction of the user (which varies from one country to
another) and on the ever-changing layout of the page.
In this paper, we tackle an online learning to rank bandit
setting, which mainly covers PBM click model, with an unimodal bandits point of view (Combes & Proutière, 2014).
First, we expose a family of parametric graphs of degree
L − 1 over permutations, such that the PBM setting is unimodal w.r.t. one graph in this family. While the corresponding graph is unknown from the learner, graphs of this family
enable an efficient exploration strategy of the set of potential
recommendations. Secondly, we introduce a new bandit algorithm, GRAB, which learns online the appropriate graph
in this family and bases its recommendations on the learned
graph. From an application point of view, this algorithm
has several interesting features: it is simple to implement
and efficient in terms of computation time; it handles the
PBM bandit setting without any knowledge on the impact
of positions (contrarily to many competitors); and it empirically exhibits a regret on par with other theoretically proven

