Aggregating From Multiple Target-Shifted Sources

Changjian Shui 1 Zijian Li 2 Jiaqi Li 3 Christian Gagné 1 4 Charles X. Ling 3 Boyu Wang 3 5

Abstract
Multi-source domain adaptation aims at leveraging the knowledge from multiple tasks for predicting a related target domain. A crucial aspect
is to properly combine different sources based
on their relations. In this paper, we analyzed
the problem for aggregating source domains with
different label distributions, where most recent
source selection approaches fail. Our proposed
algorithm differs from previous approaches in two
key ways: the model aggregates multiple sources
mainly through the similarity of semantic conditional distribution rather than marginal distribution; the model proposes a unified framework to
select relevant sources for three popular scenarios,
i.e., domain adaptation with limited label on target domain, unsupervised domain adaptation and
label partial unsupervised domain adaption. We
evaluate the proposed method through extensive
experiments. The empirical results significantly
outperform the baselines.

1. Introduction
Domain Adaptation (DA) (Pan & Yang, 2009) is based on
the motivation that learning a new task is easier after having
learned a similar task. By learning the inductive bias from
a related source domain S and then leveraging the shared
knowledge upon learning the target domain T , the prediction performance can be significantly improved. Based on
this, DA arises in tremendous deep learning applications
such as computer vision (Zhang et al., 2019; Hoffman et al.,
2018b), natural language processing (Ruder et al., 2019;
Houlsby et al., 2019) and biomedical engineering (Raghu
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).
In various real-world applications, we want to transfer
knowledge from multiple sources (S1 , . . . , ST ) to build a
1

Université Laval 2 Guangdong University of Technology
Western University 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Mila 5 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Boyu Wang <bwang@csd.uwo.ca>,
Christian Gagné <christian.gagne@gel.ulaval.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Limitation of merely considering marginal distribution
P(x) in the source selection. In a binary classification, we have
S1 (x) = S2 (x) = T (x), however adopting S2 is worse than S1
for predicting target T due to different decision boundaries.

model for the target domain, which requires an effective
selection and leveraging the most useful sources. Clearly,
solely combining all the sources and applying one-to-one
single DA algorithm can lead to undesired results, as it
can include irrelevant or even untrusted data from certain sources, which can severely influence the performance
(Zhao et al., 2020).
To select related sources, most existing works (Zhao et al.,
2018; Peng et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018a; Shui et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2019b; Wen et al., 2020) used the marginal distribution similarity (St (x), T (x)) to search the similar tasks.
However, this can be problematic if their label distributions
are different. As illustrated in Fig. 1, in a binary classification, the source-target marginal distributions are identical
(S1 (x) = S2 (x) = T (x)), however, using S2 for helping
predict target domain T will lead to a negative transfer since
their decision boundaries are rather different. This is not
only theoretically interesting but also practically demanding.
For example, in medical diagnostics, the disease distribution between the countries can be drastically different (Liu
et al., 2004; Geiss et al., 2014). Thus applying existing
approaches for leveraging related medical information from
other data abundant countries to the destination country will
be problematic.
In this work, we aim to address multi-source deep DA under
different label distributions with St (y) 6= T (y), St (x|y) 6=
T (x|y), which is more realistic and challenging. In this
case, if label information on T is absent (unsupervised DA),
it is known as a underspecified problem and unsolvable in

