A Gradient Based Strategy for Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Hyperparameter Optimization

Andrew Campbell * 1 Wenlong Chen * 2 Vincent Stimper * 3 4 Jos´e Miguel Hern´andez-Lobato 3 Yichuan Zhang 5

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is one of the
most successful sampling methods in machine
learning. However, its performance is signifcantly affected by the choice of hyperparameter
values. Existing approaches for optimizing the
HMC hyperparameters either optimize a proxy
for mixing speed or consider the HMC chain as
an implicit variational distribution and optimize
a tractable lower bound that can be very loose
in practice. Instead, we propose to optimize an
objective that quantifes directly the speed of convergence to the target distribution. Our objective
can be easily optimized using stochastic gradient
descent. We evaluate our proposed method and
compare to baselines on a variety of problems
including sampling from synthetic 2D distributions, reconstructing sparse signals, learning deep
latent variable models and sampling molecular
confgurations from the Boltzmann distribution
of a 22 atom molecule. We fnd that our method
is competitive with or improves upon alternative
baselines in all these experiments.

1. Introduction
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a very popular Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method for generating approximate samples from complex probability distributions. It
fnds wide use in machine learning (Neal, 2011) and across
the broader statistical community (Carpenter et al., 2017).
Unfortunately, HMC’s performance depends heavily on the
choice of hyperparameters such as the proposal step size.
A step size that is too large can lead to unstable dynamics,
while a step size that is too small may result in random walk
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford 2 Baidu, Inc. 3 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge 4 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
5
Boltzbit Ltd. Correspondence to: Andrew Campbell <campbell@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

behaviour and highly correlated samples. Furthermore, the
step sizes may need to be tuned on a dimension by dimension basis depending on the scale and shape of the target
distribution (Neal, 2011).
Traditionally, samples are produced by running a single
HMC chain for a long time compensating for imperfect hyperparameter choices through ergodicity. However, it is becomingly increasingly attractive to run many short MCMC
chains in parallel to make better use of parallel compute
hardware (Hoffman & Ma, 2020). In this case, it is even
more important to choose good hyperparameters that encourage fast mixing. This approach also offers the novel
opportunity to choose different hyperparameter values for
each step in the chain, providing more tuning fexibility.
Fully exploiting this opportunity in practice is a challenge.
MCMC hyperparameters are commonly tuned according
to the average acceptance probability but it is unclear how
this can scale up to tuning every hyperparameter individually. Looking to backpropagation’s success in training
neural networks, a gradient based method would seem most
appropriate. Unfortunately, there is no universal tractable
metric to quantify the performance of HMC that we can
optimize for. We must therefore make a choice about which
approximate metric is best suited for this application.
One approach is to use a proxy for the mixing speed of the
chain. Levy et al. (2018) make use of a variation of the expected squared jumped distance (Pasarica & Gelman, 2010)
to encourage proposals to make large moves in space. Alternatively, one can draw upon ideas from Variational Inference
(VI) (Jordan et al., 1999), which matches an approximate
distribution q to the target distribution p by maximizing
the Evidence Lower Bound or ELBO. This is equivalent to
minimizing the KL-divergence between q and p.
Salimans et al. (2015); Wolf et al. (2016) use VI to obtain a
training objective in which q is the joint distribution of all
HMC samples along the chain. For tractability, they introduce an auxiliary inference distribution approximating the
reverse dynamics of the chain. The looseness of their ELBO
then depends on the KL-divergence between the auxiliary
inference distribution and the true reverse dynamics. As
the chain length increases so does the dimensionality of

