Not All Memories are Created Equal:
Learning to Forget by Expiring

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 1 Da Ju 1 Spencer Poff 1 Stephen Roller 1 Arthur Szlam 1 Jason Weston 1 Angela Fan 1 2

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have shown promising results in sequence modeling tasks that require longterm memory. Recent work investigated mechanisms to reduce the computational cost of preserving and storing memories (Rae et al., 2020).
However, not all content in the past is equally important to remember. We propose Expire-Span, a
method that learns to retain the most important
information and expire the irrelevant information.
This forgetting of memories enables Transformers
to scale to attend over tens of thousands of previous timesteps efﬁciently, as not all states from
previous timesteps are preserved. We demonstrate
that Expire-Span can help models identify and retain critical information and show it can achieve
strong performance on reinforcement learning
tasks speciﬁcally designed to challenge this functionality. Next, we show that Expire-Span can
scale to memories that are tens of thousands in
size, setting a new state of the art on incredibly
long context tasks such as character-level language modeling and a frame-by-frame moving
objects task. Finally, we analyze the efﬁciency
of Expire-Span compared to existing approaches
and demonstrate that it trains faster and uses less
memory.

1. Introduction
Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) have
demonstrated strong performance across a variety of
tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Roller et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020), including those that require learning long term relationships (Zhang et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019a; Izacard &
Grave, 2020). Recent work has focused on scaling attention
mechanisms efﬁciently to longer memory sizes, enabling
large improvements on long context tasks (Dai et al., 2019;
1

Facebook AI Research 2 LORIA. Correspondence to: Sainbayar Sukhbaatar <sainbar@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Sukhbaatar et al., 2019a). However, a critical component
of human memory is not just the ability to remember, but
also forgetting irrelevant information to focus on the salient,
relevant bits. Most studies of long-term memory in humans indicate that not everything is remembered (Murre
& Dros, 2015; Bahrick et al., 2008) — instead, only vivid,
remarkable memories are retained from the far past (Wixted,
2004).
Standard Transformer architectures lack the ability to search
over extremely large memories, as the self-attention mechanism is computationally intensive and the storage cost
of preserving the large memory grows quickly. Recent
work (Child et al., 2019; Rae et al., 2020) has proposed
learning how to extend to greater context through sparse
mechanisms or through compression, to more compactly
represent the past. However, there exists a fundamental
problem with large memories beyond strict computational
concerns: as the amount of information stored increases,
deciding which information is relevant becomes more challenging. Other work (Lample et al., 2019) approaches this
by considering how to efﬁciently search large memories.
We focus on an efﬁcient way to learn what to forget, thereby
reducing the computational burden of the model and easing
the challenges of the search problem.
We propose E XPIRE -S PAN, a straightforward extension to
attention mechanisms that learns when to expire unneeded
memories. By expiring memories that are no longer useful, E XPIRE -S PAN enables scaling to tens of thousands of
timesteps into the past. This learnable mechanism allows
the model to adjust the span size as needed, selecting which
information is critical to retain and forgetting the rest. More
concretely, we augment the self-attention with a simple predictor that outputs an expiration value for each hidden state
that determines how long a memory should be retained and
accessible to the model. After the E XPIRE -S PAN runs out,
the memory will be forgotten, but in a gradually differentiable way to retain end-to-end training with backpropagation. This process is done independently for each layer, allowing different layers to specialize at different time-scales.
As E XPIRE -S PAN can ﬂexibly adjust its span based on context, it is more efﬁcient in terms of memory and training
time compared to existing long memory approaches.

