Stability and Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Clipping:
Beyond Lipschitz Continuity and Smoothness

Vien V. Mai 1 Mikael Johansson 1

Abstract
Stochastic gradient algorithms are often unstable when applied to functions that do not have
Lipschitz-continuous and/or bounded gradients.
Gradient clipping is a simple and effective technique to stabilize the training process for problems that are prone to the exploding gradient
problem. Despite its widespread popularity, the
convergence properties of the gradient clipping
heuristic are poorly understood, especially for
stochastic problems. This paper establishes both
qualitative and quantitative convergence results
of the clipped stochastic (sub)gradient method
(SGD) for non-smooth convex functions with
rapidly growing subgradients. Our analyses show
that clipping enhances the stability of SGD and
that the clipped SGD algorithm enjoys finite convergence rates in many cases. We also study the
convergence of a clipped method with momentum, which includes clipped SGD as a special
case, for weakly convex problems under standard
assumptions. With a novel Lyapunov analysis,
we show that the proposed method achieves the
best-known rate for the considered class of problems, demonstrating the effectiveness of clipped
methods also in this regime. Numerical results
confirm our theoretical developments.

1. Introduction
We study stochastic optimization problems on the form
Z
minimize
f
(x)
:=
E
[f
(x;
S)]
=
f (x; s)dP (s), (1)
P
n
x∈R

S

where S ∼ P is a random variable; f (x; s) is the instantaneous loss parameterized by x on a sample s ∈ S. Such
1

Division of Decision and Control Systems, EECS, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to:
V. V. Mai <maivv@kth.se>, M. Johansson <mikaelj@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

problems are at the core of many machine-learning applications, and are often solved using stochastic (sub)gradient
methods. In spite of their successes, stochastic gradient
methods can be sensitive to their parameters (Nemirovski
et al., 2009; Asi & Duchi, 2019a) and have severe instability (unboundedness) problems when applied to functions
that grow faster than quadratically in the decision vector x
(Andradöttir, 1996; Asi & Duchi, 2019a). Consequently, a
careful (and sometimes time-consuming) parameter tuning
is often required for these methods to perform well in practice. Even so, a good parameter selection is not sufficient to
circumvent the instability issue on steep functions.
Gradient clipping and the closely related gradient normalization technique are simple modifications to the underlying
algorithm to control the step length that an update can make
relative to the current iterate. These techniques enhance
the stability of the optimization process, while adding essentially no extra cost to the original update. As a result,
gradient clipping has been a common choice in many applied domains of machine learning (Pascanu et al., 2013).
In this work, we consider gradient clipping applied to the
classical SGD method. Throughout the paper, we frequently
use the following clipping operator


γ
n
n
x,
clipγ : R → R : x 7→ min 1,
kxk2
which is nothing else but the orthogonal projection onto the
γ-ball. It is important to note that for noiseless gradients,
clipping just changes the magnitude and does not effect the
search direction. However, in the stochastic setting, the
expected value of the clipped stochastic gradient may point
in a completely different direction than the true gradient.
Clipped SGD To solve problem (1), we use an iterative
procedure that starts from x0 ∈ Rn and g0 ∈ ∂f (x0 , S0 )
and generates a sequence of points xk ∈ Rn by repeating
the following steps for k = 0, 1, 2, . . .:
xk+1 = xk − αk dk ,

dk = clipγk (gk ) .

(2)

We refer to αk as the kth stepsize and γk as the kth clipping
threshold, while gk = f 0 (xk , Sk ) is the kth
subPstochastic
mk 0
f (xk , Ski )
gradient or its mini-batch version, gk = m1k i=1
if multiple samples are used in each iteration.

