Neural Symbolic Regression that Scales

Luca Biggio * 1 2 Tommaso Bendinelli * 2 Alexander Neitz 3 Aurelien Lucchi 1 Giambattista Parascandolo 1 3

Abstract
Symbolic equations are at the core of scientific
discovery. The task of discovering the underlying
equation from a set of input-output pairs is called
symbolic regression. Traditionally, symbolic regression methods use hand-designed strategies
that do not improve with experience. In this paper,
we introduce the first symbolic regression method
that leverages large scale pre-training. We procedurally generate an unbounded set of equations,
and simultaneously pre-train a Transformer to predict the symbolic equation from a corresponding
set of input-output-pairs. At test time, we query
the model on a new set of points and use its output to guide the search for the equation. We show
empirically that this approach can re-discover a
set of well-known physical equations, and that it
improves over time with more data and compute.

1. Introduction
Since the early ages of Natural Sciences in the sixteenth
century, the process of scientific discovery has rooted in
the formalization of novel insights and intuitions about the
natural world into compact symbolic representations of such
new acquired knowledge, namely, mathematical equations.
Mathematical equations encode both objective descriptions
of experimental data and our inductive biases about the
regularity we attribute to natural phenomena. When seen
under the perspective of modern machine learning, they
present a number of appealing properties: (i) They provide
compressed and explainable representations of complex phenomena. (ii) They allow to easily incorporate prior knowledge. (iii) When relevant aspects about the data generating
process are captured, they often generalize well beyond
the distribution of the observations from which they were
derived.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH,
Zürich, Switzerland 2 CSEM SA, Alpnach, Switzerland 3 Max
Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Luca Biggio <luca.biggio@inf.ethz.ch>, Tommaso Bendinelli <tommaso.bendinelli@csem.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The process of discovering symbolic expressions from experimental data is hard and has traditionally been one of the
hallmarks of human intelligence. Symbolic regression is a
branch of regression analysis that tries to emulate such a
process. More formally, given a set of n input-output pairs
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 ∼ X × Y, the goal is to find a symbolic equation e and corresponding function fe such that y ≈ fe (x)
for all (x, y) ∈ X × Y. In other words, the goal of symbolic regression is to infer both model structure and model
parameters in a data-driven fashion. Even assuming that the
vocabulary of primitives — e.g. {sin, exp, +, ...} — is sufficient to express the correct equation behind the observed
data, symbolic regression is a hard problem to tackle. The
number of functions associated with a string of symbols
grows exponentially with the string length, and the presence
of numeric constants further exacerbates its difficulty.
Due to its challenging combinatorial nature, existing approaches to symbolic regression are mainly based on searchtechniques whose goal is typically to minimize a prespecified fitness function measuring the distance between
the predicted expression and the available data. The two
main drawbacks of such methods are that: (i) They do not
improve with experience. As every equation is regressed
from scratch, the system does not improve if access to more
data from different equations is given. (ii) The inductive
bias is opaque. It is difficult for the user to steer the prior
towards a specific class of equations (e.g. polynomials, etc.).
In other words, even though most symbolic regression algorithms generate their prediction starting from a fixed set of
primitives reflecting the user’s prior knowledge, such elementary building blocks can be combined in many arbitrary
ways, providing little control over the equation distribution.
To overcome both drawbacks, in this paper we take a step
back, and let the model learn the task of symbolic regression
over time, on a user-defined prior over equations.
Building on the recent successes of large models trained on
large datasets (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2020a;b), we show that a strong symbolic regressor
can be purely learned from data. The key factor behind our
approach is that computers can generate unbounded amounts
of data with perfect accuracy and at virtually no cost. The
distribution over equations used during pre-training strongly
influences the prior over equations of the final system. Such
a prior thus becomes easy to understand and control.

