Generalised Lipschitz Regularisation Equals Distributional Robustness
Zac Cranko * 1 Zhan Shi * 2 Xinhua Zhang 2 Richard Nock 3 Simon Kornblith 3

Abstract
The problem of adversarial examples has highlighted the need for a theory of regularisation
that is general enough to apply to exotic function
classes, such as universal approximators. In response, we have been able to significantly sharpen
existing results regarding the relationship between
distributional robustness and regularisation, when
defined with a transportation cost uncertainty set.
The theory allows us to characterise the conditions
under which the distributional robustness equals a
Lipschitz-regularised model, and to tightly quantify, for the first time, the slackness under very
mild assumptions. As a theoretical application
we show a new result explicating the connection
between adversarial learning and distributional
robustness. We then give new results for how to
achieve Lipschitz regularisation of kernel classifiers, which are demonstrated experimentally.

1. Introduction
When learning a statistical model, it is rare that one has
complete access to the distribution. More often it is the case
that one approximates the risk minimisation by an empirical
risk, using sequence of samples from the distribution. In
practice this can be problematic — particularly when the
curse of dimensionality is in full force — to a) know with
certainty that one has enough samples, and b) guarantee
good performance away from the data. Both of these two
problems can, in effect, be cast as problems of ensuring
generalisation. A remedy for both of these problems has
been proposed in the form of a modification to the risk
minimisation framework, wherein we integrate a certain
amount of distrust of the distribution. This distrust results
in a guarantee of worst case performance if it turns out later
that the distribution was specified imprecisely, improving
generalisation.
*
Equal contribution 1 Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA 3 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Xinhua Zhang <zhangx@uic.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In order to make this notion of distrust concrete, we introduce some mathematical notation. The set of Borel probability measures on an outcome space ⌦ is P(⌦). A loss
function is a mapping f : ⌦ ! R̄ so that f (!) is the loss
incurred with some prediction under the outcome ! 2 ⌦.
For example, if ⌦ = X ⇥ Y then fv (x, y) = (v(x) y)2
could be a loss function for regression or classification with
some classifier v : X ! Y . For a distribution µ 2 P(⌦)
we replace the objective in the classical risk minimisation
minv Eµ [fv ] with the robust Bayes risk:
sup⌫2Bc (µ,r) E⌫ [f ]

(rB)

where Bc (µ, r) ✓ P(⌦) is a set containing µ, called the
uncertainty set (viz. Berger, 1993; Vidakovic, 2000, Grünwald & Dawid, 2004, §4). It is in this way that we introduce
distrust into the classical risk minimisation, by instead minimising the worst case risk over a set of distributions.
It is sometimes the case that for an uncertainty set,
Bc (µ, r) ✓ P(⌦), there is a function, r lipc : R̄⌦ ! R̄ 0
(not necessarily the usual Lipschitz constant), so that
sup⌫2Bc (µ,r) E⌫ [f ]  Eµ [f ] + r lipc (f ).

(L)

Results like (L) have been studied in the literature, however
these usually make onerous assumptions on the structure of
the loss function/model class (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al.,
2019; Blanchet et al., 2019) or on the cost function underpinning the uncertainty set (Kuhn et al., 2019). Thus ruling out
application to many common machine learning and statistical techniques. Therefore, in §3, our first major contribution
is to revisit such a result using a new proof technique that
relies on the difference-convex optimization literature to
strictly generalise and improve upon several well-known
related results (summarised in Table 1). In particular, a
major novelty of our approach lies with the characterisation
of when (L) holds as an equality, and when the bound is
tight. These are quite involved and are as important as the
inequality (L) itself.
In practice, however, the evaluation of Lipschitz constant is
NP-hard for neural networks (Scaman & Virmaux, 2018),
compelling approximations of it, or the explicit engineering
of Lipschitz layers and analysing the resulting expressiveness in specific cases (e.g., 1-norm, Anil et al., 2019). By

