Lenient Regret and Good-Action Identification in Gaussian Process Bandits

Xu Cai 1 Selwyn Gomes 1 Jonathan Scarlett 1 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of Gaussian
process (GP) bandits under relaxed optimization
criteria stating that any function value above a certain threshold is “good enough”. On the theoretical side, we study various lenient regret notions in
which all near-optimal actions incur zero penalty,
and provide upper bounds on the lenient regret for
GP-UCB and an elimination
algorithm, circum√
venting the usual O( T ) term (with time horizon
T ) resulting from zooming extremely close towards the function maximum. In addition, we
complement these upper bounds with algorithmindependent lower bounds. On the practical side,
we consider the problem of finding a single “good
action” according to a known pre-specified threshold, and introduce several good-action identification algorithms that exploit knowledge of the
threshold. We experimentally find that such algorithms can often find a good action faster than
standard optimization-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Process (GP) methods have recently gained popularity as a highly effective tool in finding the optimum
f (x∗ ) of a black-box function f (Shahriari et al., 2016),
with a particularly notable advantage being sample efficiency. Alongside the practical developments, the theory of
GP bandits has also seen several interesting advances. The
results can broadly be classified according to whether the
mathematical model adopted is Bayesian (i.e., the function
is assumed to be random and drawn from a GP) or nonBayesian (i.e., the function is deterministic and assumed
to have a bounded norm in a suitably-defined Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS)), and the same GP-based al1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore 2 Department of Mathematics & Institute of Data Science,
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Xu Cai
<caix@u.nus.edu>, Selwyn Gomes <selwyn@comp.nus.edu.sg>,
Jonathan Scarlett <scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

gorithms can often be applied in a unified manner in these
two settings.
Perhaps the most prominent class of existing results concerns cumulative
regret bounds that scale with the time hori√
zon as T or higher, and simple regret bounds that show
convergence to the optimum at a rate of √1T or slower (Bogunovic et al., 2016; Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017; Contal
et al., 2013; Janz et al., 2020; Srinivas et al., 2010). While
algorithm-independent lower bounds show such behavior to
be unavoidable (Scarlett, 2018; Scarlett et al., 2017), their
proofs suggest these regret terms are predominantly dictated
by the hardness of zooming increasingly close to the locallyquadratic maximum (Bayesian setting), or of finding a very
small and narrow bump hidden in an otherwise flat function
(RKHS setting). In practice, one may not be concerned with
the distinction between being “very close” vs. “extremely
close” to the maximum, or one may not mind missing the
existence of a very small bump. In this sense, there is potentially a wide gap between standard theoretical guarantees
and practical desiderata.
Motivated by these considerations, we investigate theory
and algorithms for Gaussian process bandits under various
notions that only seek to find “good enough” actions, where
an action x is considered good if f (x) is within a certain
threshold ∆ > 0 of the optimum f (x∗ ). In particular, following a recent work in the multi-armed bandit literature
(Merlis & Mannor, 2021) and focusing on the non-Bayesian
RKHS setting, we study lenient regret notions that incur no
penalty
√ for good-actions. We show that this circumvents
the T term appearing (and being unavoidable) in the standard cumulative regret, and that GP-UCB (Srinivas et al.,
2010) and an elimination algorithm (Contal et al., 2013)
can instead incur a significantly smaller lenient regret such
as poly(log T ), or even just a constant value (i.e, O(1))
depending on ∆.
In addition, we consider the related problem of finding a single point whose function value exceeds some pre-specified
threshold η > 0 (we may set η = f (x∗ ) − ∆), which we
call the good-action identification problem. This problem
may be of interest, for example, in the context of hyperparameter tuning, where narrowing down a near-optimal
configuration may be prohibitively expensive, so one may
instead resort to seeking a “sufficiently good” configuration.

