How Important is the Train-Validation Split in Meta-Learning?

Yu Bai 1 Minshuo Chen 2 Pan Zhou 1 Tuo Zhao 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Sham Kakade 4
Huan Wang 1 Caiming Xiong 1

Abstract
Meta-learning aims to perform fast adaptation
on a new task through learning a “prior” from
multiple existing tasks. A common practice in
meta-learning is to perform a train-validation split
(train-val method) where the prior adapts to the
task on one split of the data, and the resulting
predictor is evaluated on another split. Despite its
prevalence, the importance of the train-validation
split is not well understood either in theory or in
practice, particularly in comparison to the more
direct train-train method, which uses all the pertask data for both training and evaluation.
We provide a detailed theoretical study on whether
and when the train-validation split is helpful in
the linear centroid meta-learning problem. In the
agnostic case, we show that the expected loss of
the train-val method is minimized at the optimal
prior for meta testing, and this is not the case for
the train-train method in general without structural assumptions on the data. In contrast, in the
realizable case where the data are generated from
linear models, we show that both the train-val
and train-train losses are minimized at the optimal prior in expectation. Further, perhaps surprisingly, our main result shows that the train-train
method achieves a strictly better excess loss in
this realizable case, even when the regularization
parameter and split ratio are optimally tuned for
both methods. Our results highlight that sample
splitting may not always be preferable, especially
when the data is realizable by the model. We
validate our theories by experimentally showing
that the train-train method can indeed outperform
the train-val method, on both simulations and real
meta-learning tasks.
1
Salesforce Research 2 Georgia Tech 3 Princeton University 4 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Yu Bai
<yu.bai@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, also known as “learning to learn”, has recently emerged as a powerful paradigm for learning to
adapt to unseen tasks (Schmidhuber, 1987). The high-level
methodology in meta-learning is akin to how human beings
learn new skills, which is typically done by relating to certain prior experience that makes the learning process easier.
More concretely, meta-learning does not train one model
for each individual task, but rather learns a “prior” model
from multiple existing tasks so that it is able to quickly
adapt to unseen new tasks. Meta-learning has been successfully applied to many real problems, including few-shot
image classification (Finn et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2017),
hyper-parameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018), lowresource machine translation (Gu et al., 2018) and short
event sequence modeling (Xie et al., 2019).
A common practice in meta-learning algorithms is to perform a sample splitting, where the data within each task is
divided into a training split which the prior uses to adapt
to a task-specific predictor, and a validation split on which
we evaluate the performance of the task-specific predictor (Vinyals et al., 2016; Nichol et al., 2018; Rajeswaran
et al., 2019; Fallah et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a). For
example, in a 5-way k-shot image classification task, standard meta-learning algorithms such as MAML (Finn et al.,
2017) use 5k examples within each task as training data,
and use additional examples (e.g. k images, one for each
class) as validation data. This sample splitting is believed to
be crucial as it matches the evaluation criterion at meta-test
time, where we perform adaptation on training data from a
new task but evaluate its performance on unseen data from
the same task.
Despite the aforementioned importance, performing the
train-validation split has a potential drawback from the data
efficiency perspective — Because of the split, neither the
training nor the evaluation stage is able to use all the available per-task data. In the few-shot image classification example, each task has a total of 6k examples available, but the
train-validation split forces us to use these data separately in
the two stages. Meanwhile, performing the train-validation
split is also not the only option in practice: there exist algorithms such as Reptile (Nichol & Schulman, 2018) and

