Low-Precision Reinforcement Learning:
Running Soft Actor-Critic in Half Precision

Johan Bjorck 1 Xiangyu Chen 1 Christopher De Sa 1 Carla P. Gomes 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract
Low-precision training has become a popular approach to reduce compute requirements, memory
footprint, and energy consumption in supervised
learning. In contrast, this promising approach
has not yet enjoyed similarly widespread adoption within the reinforcement learning (RL) community, partly because RL agents can be notoriously hard to train even in full precision. In this
paper we consider continuous control with the
state-of-the-art SAC agent and demonstrate that a
naı̈ve adaptation of low-precision methods from
supervised learning fails. We propose a set of six
modifications, all straightforward to implement,
that leaves the underlying agent and its hyperparameters unchanged but improves the numerical stability dramatically. The resulting modified
SAC agent has lower memory and compute requirements while matching full-precision rewards,
demonstrating that low-precision training can substantially accelerate state-of-the-art RL without
parameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising paradigm for
constructing autonomous agents for transportation (Kendall
et al., 2019), robotics (Zhu et al., 2020), scientific applications (Bellemare et al., 2020) and beyond (Silver et al.,
2016). To enable such impressive feats, RL often requires large amounts of computation and samples from
the underlying environments (Silver et al., 2016; Jaderberg
et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019). Consequently, many approaches for scaling RL have been proposed, including
distributed (Horgan et al., 2018; Wijmans et al., 2019) and
asynchronous training (Mnih et al., 2016), GPU-accelerated
environments (Dalton et al., 2019) and many others (Petrenko et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020a). Within supervised
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA.
Correspondence to: Johan Bjorck <njb225@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learning, an emerging trend for accelerating deep learning
is low-precision training, where one uses fewer than 32
bits to represent individual parameters, activations, and gradients (Gupta et al., 2015). This speeds up computations
and decreases latency, memory footprint, and energy consumption (De Sa et al., 2017; Reuther et al., 2019; Gong
et al., 2018). Such benefits can accelerate RL research, allow longer deployment before recharging batteries (Tomy
et al., 2019), lower latency in high-speed applications (Liu
et al., 2020b), and is especially relevant in RL from raw
pixel observations which can be compute-intensive (Zhan
et al., 2020). Despite such upsides, the RL community has
not adopted low-precision training, in part as RL agents are
notoriously hard to train even in full precision (Henderson
et al., 2017; Engstrom et al., 2020; Jordan et al., 2020).
The goal of this paper is to demonstrate the feasibility of
RL in low precision without changing hyperparameters or
the underlying RL algorithm. Specifically, we focus on
continuous control environments (Tassa et al., 2020) and
consider the state-of-the-art soft actor-critic (SAC) algorithm (Haarnoja et al., 2018). We demonstrate that strategies developed for supervised learning, such as loss scaling
and mixed-precision (Micikevicius et al., 2017), fail in this
context. To enable RL in low precision, we propose a set
of six methods that improve the numerical stability without
changing the underlying agent. Some of these are novel, for
example, we propose to store the square root of the second
moment in Adam to decrease the needed dynamic range.
Others have more of an engineering flavor, e.g. reordering
arithmetic operations, but are nonetheless crucially needed
for performant agents.
We experimentally verify that with these methods it is possible to train SAC agents in low precision with comparable
performance to full-precision agents, thus demonstrating
the feasibility of low-precision RL. We further benchmark
compute time and memory consumption and find dramatic
improvements in both aspects. We perform experiments
on RL from both environment state representations and
pixel observations, and also perform ablation experiments
and simulate various numerical formats with qtorch (Zhang
et al., 2019). Finally, we release our code to encourage
future work on RL in low precision. Debugging numerical

