Adversarial Option-Aware Hierarchical Imitation Learning

Mingxuan Jing 1 Wenbing Huang 1 Fuchun Sun† 1 2 Xiaojian Ma 3 Tao Kong 4 Chuang Gan 5 Lei Li 4

Abstract
It has been a challenge to learning skills for an
agent from long-horizon unannotated demonstrations. Existing approaches like Hierarchical Imitation Learning(HIL) are prone to compounding errors or suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we propose Option-GAIL, a novel method to learn skills
at long horizon. The key idea of Option-GAIL is
modeling the task hierarchy by options and train
the policy via generative adversarial optimization. In particular, we propose an ExpectationMaximization(EM)-style algorithm: an E-step
that samples the options of expert conditioned
on the current learned policy, and an M-step that
updates the low- and high-level policies of agent
simultaneously to minimize the newly proposed
option-occupancy measurement between the expert and the agent. We theoretically prove the
convergence of the proposed algorithm. Experiments show that Option-GAIL outperforms other
counterparts consistently across a variety of tasks.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical Imitation Learning (HIL) has exhibited
promises on acquiring long-term skills directly from demonstrations (Le et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Byrne & Russon,
1998; Sharma et al., 2019; Hamidi et al., 2015). It contends
the nature of sub-task decomposition in long-horizontal
tasks, enjoying richer expressivity on characterizing complex decision-making than canonical Imitation Learning
(IL). In general, HIL designs micro-policies for accomplishing the specific control for each sub-task, and employs a
macro-policy for scheduling the switching of micro-policies.
Such a two-level decision-making process is usually formu1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China (Mingxuan Jing <jingmingxuan@outlook.com>; Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>;
Fuchun Sun <fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn>) 2 THU-Bosch JCML center 3 University of California, Los Angeles, USA 4 Bytedance AI
Lab, Beijing, China 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA. Correspondence to: † Fuchun Sun <fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

lated by an Option model (Sutton et al., 1999) or goal-based
framework (Le et al., 2018). Although some works (Fei
et al., 2020) have assumed the help of sub-task segmentation annotations, this paper mainly focuses on learning from
unsegmented demonstrations to allow more practicability.
Plenty of HIL methods have been proposed, including the
Behavior-Cloning(BC) based and the Inverse Reinforcement Learning(IRL) based approaches. For the first avenue,
Zhang & Paschalidis (2020); Le et al. (2018) customize
BC to hierarchical modeling (Daniel et al., 2016), which,
unfortunately, is prone to compounding errors (Ross et al.,
2011) in case that the demonstrations are limited in practice.
On the contrary, IRL is potential to avoid compounding
errors by agent self-explorations. However, addressing IRL
upon the Option model, by no means, is non-trivial considering the temporal coupling of the high-level and low-level
policies. The works by Sharma et al. (2018); Lee & Seo
(2020) relax this challenge by training the two-level policies
separately. Nevertheless, this two-stage method potentially
leads to sub-optimal solutions in the absence of training
collaboration between the two stages.
To overcome the aforementioned issues, this work proposes
a novel Hierarchical IRL framework—Option-GAIL, which
is theoretically elegant, free of compounding errors, and
end-to-end trainable. Basically, it is built upon GAIL (Ho &
Ermon, 2016) with two nutritive enhancements: 1) replacing
Markov Decision Process (MDP) with the Option model;
2) augmenting the occupancy measurement matching with
options. Note that GAIL is a popular IL method that casts
policy learning upon MDP into an occupancy measurement
matching problem. Therefore, it is natural to replace the
MDP with the Option model for hierarchical modeling. Besides, GAIL mimicking a policy from an expert is equivalent
to matching its occupancy measurement. This equivalence
holds when the policy is one-to-one corresponding to its
induced occupancy measurement, which, yet, is not valid
in our hierarchical context. As we will depict in the paper,
the policy of HIL is related to options, and its one-to-one
correspondence only exists with regard to option-extended
occupancy measurement other than traditional occupancy
measurement without options. Hence, it is indispensable
to involve options into the matching goal in our second
enhancement. Notably, the option switching is inherently
guaranteed in our model, without extra regulators such as

