Generative Particle Variational Inference via Estimation of Functional
Gradients
Neale Ratzlaff * 1 Qinxun Bai * 2 Li Fuxin 1 Wei Xu 2

Abstract
Recently, particle-based variational inference
(ParVI) methods have gained interest because
they can avoid arbitrary parametric assumptions
that are common in variational inference. However, many ParVI approaches do not allow arbitrary sampling from the posterior, and the few
that do allow such sampling suffer from suboptimality. This work proposes a new method for
learning to approximately sample from the posterior distribution. We construct a neural sampler
that is trained with the functional gradient of the
KL-divergence between the empirical sampling
distribution and the target distribution, assuming the gradient resides within a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. Our generative ParVI (GPVI)
approach maintains the asymptotic performance
of ParVI methods while offering the flexibility
of a generative sampler. Through carefully constructed experiments, we show that GPVI outperforms previous generative ParVI methods such
as amortized SVGD, and is competitive with
ParVI as well as gold-standard approaches like
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for fitting both exactly
known and intractable target distributions.

1. Introduction
Bayesian inference provides a powerful framework for reasoning and prediction under uncertainty. However, computing the posterior is tractable with only a few parametric
distributions, making wider applications of Bayesian inference difficult. Traditionally, MCMC and variational inference methods are utilized to provide tractable approximate
inference, but these approaches face their own difficulties if
the dimensionality of the space is extremely high. For example, a recent case of interest is Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs), which applies Bayesian inference to deep neural
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon
2
Horizon Robotics, Cupertino, California. Correspondence to:
Neale Ratzlaff <ratzlafn@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

network training in order to provide a principled way to assess model uncertainty. The goal in this regime is to model
the posterior of every parameter in all the weight tensors
from every layer of a deep network. However, developing efficient computational techniques for approximating
this intractable posterior with extremely high dimensionality remains challenging.
Recently, particle-based variational inference (ParVI)
methods (Liu & Wang, 2016; Liu et al., 2019; Liu, 2017)
have been proposed to represent the variational distribution by a set of particles and update them through a deterministic optimization process to approximate the posterior.
While achieving both asymptotic accuracy and computational efficiency, ParVI methods are restricted by the fixed
number of particles and lack the ability of drawing new
samples beyond the initial set of particles. To address this
issue, amortized ParVI methods (Wang & Liu, 2016) have
been proposed to amortize the ParVI gradients in training
a neural sampler. While being flexible in drawing samples,
in Sec. 4 we show that amortized ParVI methods cannot
match the convergence behavior of ParVI methods.
In this work, we propose a generative particle variational
inference (GPVI) approach that addresses those issues.
GPVI trains a neural sampler network by directly estimating the functional gradient w.r.t. the KL-divergence between the distribution of generated particles and the target distribution, and pulls it back to update the neural sampler. As such it allows the neural sampler to directly generate particles that match the posterior distribution, hence
achieving the asymptotic accuracy and computational efficiency of ParVI methods. In figure 1, we show that the
predictive distribution of 1D regression functions sampled
from GPVI nearly matches that from the ParVI solution,
while amortized ParVI fails.
The main computational challenge lies in a reliable estimate of the functional gradient that involves the inverse of
the input-output Jacobian of the neural sampler. Instead of
directly computing this term and paying a high computational cost, we introduce a helper network to estimate the
inverse Jacobian vector product and train the helper network via gradient descent. By alternating between this gradient step and the gradient update of the sampler network,
the computational cost is distributed over the whole train-

