Align, then memorise:
the dynamics of learning with feedback alignment

Maria Refinetti * 1 2 Stéphane d’Ascoli * 1 3 Ruben Ohana 1 4 Sebastian Goldt 5

Abstract
Direct Feedback Alignment (DFA) is emerging
as an efficient and biologically plausible alternative to backpropagation for training deep neural
networks. Despite relying on random feedback
weights for the backward pass, DFA successfully
trains state-of-the-art models such as Transformers. On the other hand, it notoriously fails to train
convolutional networks. An understanding of the
inner workings of DFA to explain these diverging results remains elusive. Here, we propose
a theory of feedback alignment algorithms. We
first show that learning in shallow networks proceeds in two steps: an alignment phase, where the
model adapts its weights to align the approximate
gradient with the true gradient of the loss function,
is followed by a memorisation phase, where the
model focuses on fitting the data. This two-step
process has a degeneracy breaking effect: out of
all the low-loss solutions in the landscape, a network trained with DFA naturally converges to the
solution which maximises gradient alignment. We
also identify a key quantity underlying alignment
in deep linear networks: the conditioning of the
alignment matrices. The latter enables a detailed
understanding of the impact of data structure on
alignment, and suggests a simple explanation for
the well-known failure of DFA to train convolutional neural networks. Numerical experiments
on MNIST and CIFAR10 clearly demonstrate degeneracy breaking in deep non-linear networks
and show that the align-then-memorize process
occurs sequentially from the bottom layers of the
network to the top.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Physics, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, Paris, France 2 IdePHICS laboratory, EPFL 3 Facebook
AI Research, Paris, France 4 LightOn, Paris, France 5 International
School of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy. Correspondence to: Sebastian Goldt <sgoldt@sissa.it>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Introduction
Training a deep neural network on a supervised learning
task requires solving the credit assignment problem: how
should weights deep in the network be changed, given only
the output of the network and the target label of the input?
Today, almost all networks from computer vision to natural
language processing solve this problem using variants of
the back-propagation algorithm (BP) popularised several
decades ago by Rumelhart et al. (1986). For concreteness,
we illustrate BP using a fully-connected deep network of
depth L with weights Wl in the lth layer. Given an input x ≡
h0 , the output ŷ of the network is computed sequentially as
ŷ = fy (aL ), with al = Wl hl−1 and hl = g(al ), where g is
a pointwise non-linearity. For regression, the loss function
J is the mean-square error and fy is the identity. Given the
error e ≡ ∂J/∂aL = ŷ − y of the network on an input x, the
update of the last layer of weights reads
δWL = −ηeh>
L−1

(1)

for a learning rate η. The updates of the layers below are
given by δWl = −ηδal hTl−1 , with factors δal defined sequentially as

T
δaBP
= ∂J/∂al = Wl+1
δal+1
g 0 (al ) ,
(2)
l
with denoting the Hadamard product. BP thus solves the
credit assignment problem for deeper layers of the network
by using the transpose of the network’s weight matrices to
transmit the error signal across the network from one layer
to the next, see Fig. 1.
Despite its popularity and practical success, BP suffers from
several limitations. First, it relies on symmetric weights
for the forward and backward pass, which makes it a biologically implausible learning algorithm (Grossberg, 1987;
Crick, 1989). Second, BP updates layers sequentially during
the backward pass, preventing an efficient parallelisation of
training, which becomes ever more important as state-ofthe-art networks grow larger and deeper.
In light of these shortcomings, algorithms which only approximate the gradient of the loss are attracting increasing
interest. Lillicrap et al. (2016) demonstrated that neural
networks can be trained successfully even if the transpose

