Massively Parallel and Asynchronous Tsetlin Machine Architecture Supporting
Almost Constant-Time Scaling

Kuruge Darshana Abeyrathna * 1 Bimal Bhattarai * 1 Morten Goodwin * 1 Saeed Rahimi Gorji * 1
Ole-Christoffer Granmo * 1 Lei Jiao * 1 Rupsa Saha * 1 Rohan Kumar Yadav * 1

Abstract
Using logical clauses to represent patterns, Tsetlin
machines (TMs) have recently obtained competitive performance in terms of accuracy, memory
footprint, energy, and learning speed on several
benchmarks. Each TM clause votes for or against
a particular class, with classification resolved using a majority vote. While the evaluation of
clauses is fast, being based on binary operators,
the voting makes it necessary to synchronize the
clause evaluation, impeding parallelization. In
this paper, we propose a novel scheme for desynchronizing the evaluation of clauses, eliminating
the voting bottleneck. In brief, every clause runs
in its own thread for massive native parallelism.
For each training example, we keep track of the
class votes obtained from the clauses in local voting tallies. The local voting tallies allow us to
detach the processing of each clause from the rest
of the clauses, supporting decentralized learning.
This means that the TM most of the time will operate on outdated voting tallies. We evaluated the
proposed parallelization across diverse learning
tasks and it turns out that our decentralized TM
learning algorithm copes well with working on
outdated data, resulting in no significant loss in
learning accuracy. Furthermore, we show that the
proposed approach provides up to 50 times faster
learning. Finally, learning time is almost constant
for reasonable clause amounts (employing from
20 to 7, 000 clauses on a Tesla V100 GPU). For
sufficiently large clause numbers, computation
time increases approximately proportionally. Our
parallel and asynchronous architecture thus allows
processing of massive datasets and operating with
more clauses for higher accuracy.
*

Equal contribution (The authors are ordered alphabetically by
last name.) 1 Department of Information and Communication Technology, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway. Correspondence
to: Ole-Christoffer Granmo <ole.granmo@uia.no>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Tsetlin machines (TMs) (Granmo, 2018) have recently
demonstrated competitive results in terms of accuracy, memory footprint, energy, and learning speed on diverse benchmarks (image classification, regression, natural language
understanding, and speech processing) (Berge et al., 2019;
Yadav et al., 2021a; Abeyrathna et al., 2020; Granmo et al.,
2019; Wheeldon et al., 2020; Abeyrathna et al., 2021; Lei
et al., 2021). They use frequent pattern mining and resource
allocation principles to extract common patterns in the data,
rather than relying on minimizing output error, which is
prone to overfitting. Unlike the intertwined nature of pattern representation in neural networks, a TM decomposes
problems into self-contained patterns, expressed as conjunctive clauses in propositional logic (i.e., in the form if input
X satisfies condition A and not condition B then output
y = 1). The clause outputs, in turn, are combined into a
classification decision through summation and thresholding,
akin to a logistic regression function, however, with binary
weights and a unit step output function. Being based on
the human-interpretable disjunctive normal form (Valiant,
1984), like Karnaugh maps (Karnaugh, 1953), a TM can
map an exponential number of input feature value combinations to an appropriate output (Granmo, 2018).
Recent progress on TMs Recent research reports several
distinct TM properties. The TM can be used in convolution,
providing competitive performance on MNIST, FashionMNIST, and Kuzushiji-MNIST, in comparison with CNNs,
K-Nearest Neighbor, Support Vector Machines, Random
Forests, Gradient Boosting, BinaryConnect, Logistic Circuits and ResNet (Granmo et al., 2019). The TM has also
achieved promising results in text classification (Berge et al.,
2019), word sense disambiguation (Yadav et al., 2021b),
novelty detection (Bhattarai et al., 2021c;b), fake news detection (Bhattarai et al., 2021a), semantic relation analysis
(Saha et al., 2020), and aspect-based sentiment analysis (Yadav et al., 2021a) using the conjunctive clauses to capture
textual patterns. Recently, regression TMs compared favorably with Regression Trees, Random Forest Regression, and
Support Vector Regression (Abeyrathna et al., 2020). The
above TM approaches have further been enhanced by vari-

