Conditional Temporal Neural Processes with Covariance Loss

Boseon Yoo 1 Jiwoo Lee 2 Janghoon Ju 2 Seijun Chung 1 Soyeon Kim 1 Jaesik Choi 1 3

Abstract
We introduce a novel loss function, Covariance
Loss, which is conceptually equivalent to conditional neural processes and has a form of regularization so that is applicable to many kinds of neural networks. With the proposed loss, mappings
from input variables to target variables are highly
affected by dependencies of target variables as
well as mean activation and mean dependencies
of input and target variables. This nature enables
the resulting neural networks to become more robust to noisy observations and recapture missing
dependencies from prior information. In order to
show the validity of the proposed loss, we conduct extensive sets of experiments on real-world
datasets with state-of-the-art models and discuss
the benefits and drawbacks of the proposed Covariance Loss.

1. Introduction
The goal of regression problems is to find relationships
or functions from input features to continuous outputs (or
target variables), such as stock price prediction or weather
forecasting. For such problems, Gaussian processes (GPs)
(Rasmussen, 2003) are promising solutions. In theory, GPs
can represent any arbitrary smooth functions that satisfy
mean square continuity and differentiability (Williams &
Rasmussen, 2006). With the Gaussian kernel function, GPs
map input variables to an infinite polynomial space and
estimate the covariance of target variables. The optimization
of GPs is a procedure to find a feature space in which all
of the target variables can be properly explained by the
covariance of target variables estimated by corresponding
points in the feature space.
Recently, conditional neural processes (CNPs) are intro1
Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, Republic of Korea. 2 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and
Technology, Republic of Korea. 3 Ineeji Inc., Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Jaesik Choi <jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

duced in (Garnelo et al., 2018a), which are the novel efforts
that implement such GPs with neural networks. In CNPs,
neural networks experience various target points for the
same input points to learn distributions of target variables.
CNPs predict the mean and variance of each target variable
and share the optimization scheme of GPs which find the
feature space (the space of basis function) in which all the
target variables have linear relations with the covariance
matrix of the target variables, which is a direct measure of
the dependencies among the target variables. This is the
key component behind the success of GPs and CNPs. This
optimization strategy of GPs and CNPs enables more accurate prediction even under situations in which only a small
volume of training data is available.
To take the main principle of GPs and CNPs into the learning of neural networks, we propose a novel loss function,
called Covariance Loss. Covariance Loss consists of i) the
traditional mean square error (MSE) term for minimizing
prediction error and ii) a regularization term for minimizing
MSE between the covariance matrix of the basis functions
and empirical covariance matrix of target variables. Thus,
by optimizing a neural network with the proposed Covariance Loss, we aim the network to find the basis function
space that reflects dependencies of target variables. The resulting network takes benefit from the main principle of GPs
and CNPs as well as mean dependencies between input and
target variables. Theoretically, the Wishart distance is the
correct mean for optimizing the covariance matrix of target
variables, but we decide to use MSE to reflect dependencies
of target variables more explicitly for finding basis function
spaces and to make the proposed loss function more applicable to neural network based approaches by minimizing
computational complexity.
With extensive sets of experiments, we show that considering dependencies of target variables for finding feature
mapping allows for predictions that are more robust to not
only noisy observations but also missing dependencies from
prior information. To demonstrate the validity of the proposed Covariance Loss, we employ neural networks that
are designed to explicitly consider the spatial and temporal
dependencies, namely, spatio-temporal graph convolutional
network (STGCN) (Yu et al., 2018) and graph wavenet
(GWNET) (Wu et al., 2019), and conduct extensive sets of
experiment on well-known benchmark datasets.

