On Robust Mean Estimation under Coordinate-level Corruption

Zifan Liu * 1 Jongho Park * 1 Theodoros Rekatsinas 1 Christos Tzamos 1

Abstract
We study the problem of robust mean estimation
and introduce a novel Hamming distance-based
measure of distribution shift for coordinate-level
corruptions. We show that this measure yields adversary models that capture more realistic corruptions than those used in prior works, and present
an information-theoretic analysis of robust mean
estimation in these settings. We show that for
structured distributions, methods that leverage the
structure yield information theoretically more accurate mean estimation. We also focus on practical algorithms for robust mean estimation and
study when data cleaning-inspired approaches
that first fix corruptions in the input data and
then perform robust mean estimation can match
the information theoretic bounds of our analysis.
We finally demonstrate experimentally that this
two-step approach outperforms structure-agnostic
robust estimation and provides accurate mean estimation even for high-magnitude corruption.

1. Introduction
Data corruption is an impediment to modern machine learning deployments. Corrupted data samples, i.e., data vectors
with either noisy or missing values, can severely skew the
statistical properties of a data set, and hence, lead to invalid
inferences. Robust statistics seek to provide methods for
problems such as estimating the mean and covariance of a
data set that are resistant to data corruptions.
Much of the existing robust estimation methods assume that
a data sample is either completely clean or completely corrupted; Huber contamination model (Huber, 1992) and the
strong contamination model considered by Diakonikolas &
Kane (2019) are typical examples of such corruption models.
Under this kind of model, robust estimators rely either on
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Zifan Liu <zliu676@wisc.edu>, Jongho Park
<jongho.park@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

filtering or down-weighting corrupted data vectors to reduce
their influence (Diakonikolas et al., 2019a; 2017). In many
applications, however, we can have partially corrupted data
samples and even all data vectors can be partially corrupted.
For example, in DNA microarrays, measurement errors or
dropouts can occur for batches of genes (Troyanskaya et al.,
2001b). Filtering or down-weighting an entire data vector
can waste the information contained in the clean coordinates
of the vector.
Moreover, recent works (Rekatsinas et al., 2017; Wu et al.,
2020; Khosravi et al., 2019) show that to obtain state-ofthe-art empirical results for predictive tasks over noisy data,
one needs to leverage the redundancy in data samples introduced by statistical dependencies among the coordinates
of the data (referred to as structure hereafter) to learn an
accurate distribution of the clean data and use that to repair corruptions. This work aims to promote theoretical
understanding as to why leveraging statistical dependencies is key in dealing with data corruption. To this end,
we study the connections between robust statistical estimation under worst-case (e.g., adversarial) corruptions and
structure-aware recovery of corrupted data.
Problem Summary We consider robust mean estimation
under coordinate-level corruptions (either missing entries
or value replacements). We study worst-case, adversarial
corruption, i.e., we assume that corruption is systematic
and cannot be modeled as random noise. We consider the
adversarial model for which a given data set generated
from an unknown distribution can have up to α-fraction of
its coordinates corrupted adversarially, i.e., the adversary
can strategically hide or modify individual coordinates of
samples. The goal is to find an estimate µ̂ of the true mean
µ of the data set that is accurate even in the worst case.
Main Contributions First, we present a new information
theoretic analysis of robust mean estimation for coordinatelevel corruptions, i.e., both replacement-based corruptions
and missing-data corruptions. Our analysis introduces a
model for coordinate-level corruptions, and dENTRY , a new
measure of distribution shift for coordinate-level corruption.
We base dENTRY on the Hamming distance between samples
from the original and the corrupted distribution. The reason
is that the Hamming distance between the original and the
corrupted samples is at most the amount of corruption in

