Provably Strict Generalisation Benefit for Equivariant Models

Bryn Elesedy 1 Sheheryar Zaidi 2

Abstract
It is widely believed that engineering a model to
be invariant/equivariant improves generalisation.
Despite the growing popularity of this approach,
a precise characterisation of the generalisation
benefit is lacking. By considering the simplest
case of linear models, this paper provides the first
provably non-zero improvement in generalisation
for invariant/equivariant models when the target
distribution is invariant/equivariant with respect
to a compact group. Moreover, our work reveals
an interesting relationship between generalisation,
the number of training examples and properties
of the group action. Our results rest on an
observation of the structure of function spaces
under averaging operators which, along with its
consequences for feature averaging, may be of
independent interest.

1. Introduction
There is significant and growing interest in models,
especially neural networks, that are invariant or equivariant
to the action of a group on their inputs. It is widely
believed that these models enjoy improved generalisation
when the group is correctly specified. The intuition being
that if the salient aspects of a task are unchanged by
some transformation, then more flexible models would
need to learn (as opposed to being hard-coded) to ignore
these transformations, requiring more samples to generalise.
Work in this area has progressed quickly (Cohen & Welling,
2016; Cohen et al., 2018; 2019) and has found application in
domains where the symmetry is known a priori, for instance
in particle physics (Pfau et al., 2020).
In contrast with practical successes, our theoretical
understanding of invariant/equivariant models is limited.
Many previous works that have attempted to address
the generalisation of invariant/equivariant models, such
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Bryn
Elesedy <bryn@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

as Sokolic et al. (2017); Sannai & Imaizumi (2019), cover
only the worst case performance of algorithms. These works
use complexity measures to find tighter upper bounds on
the test risk for invariant/equivariant models, but a strict
benefit is not demonstrated. The VC dimension governs
distribution independent generalisation, so these complexity
measures can show no more than a separation between the
VC dimensions of a model and its invariant/equivariant
version. This would imply the existence of a distribution on
which the model with smaller VC dimension will generalise
better, but would not rule out that on many common
distributions training an invariant/equivariant model using
standard procedures provides no benefit. For instance,
there could be many invariant/equivariant distributions on
which SGD automatically favours parameters that result in
(possibly approximately) invariant/equivariant predictors,
regardless of architecture.
The results of this paper move to address this issue,
by quantifying exactly the generalisation benefit of
invariant/equivariant linear models. We do this in the case of
the minimum L2 -norm least-squares solution, which reflects
the implicit bias of gradient descent in overparameterised
linear models. While the linear model provides a tractable
first-step towards understanding more complex models such
as neural networks, the underlying ideas of this paper are
equally applicable to non-linear predictors. We emphasise
this by providing new perspectives on feature averaging
and suggestions for how to apply the ideas of this paper to
find new methods for training invariant/equivariant neural
networks.
1.1. Our Contributions
The main result of this paper is Theorem 13, which
quantifies the generalisation benefit of equivariance in a
linear model. We define the generalisation gap ∆(f, f 0 )
between predictors f and f 0 to be the difference in their
test errors on a given task. A positive generalisation
gap ∆(f, f 0 ) > 0 means that f 0 has strictly smaller test
error than f . Theorem 13 concerns ∆(f, f 0 ) in the case
that f : Rd → Rk is the minimum-norm least-squares
predictor and f 0 is its equivariant version. Let a compact
group G act via orthogonal representations φ and ψ on
inputs X ∼ N (0, Id ) and outputs Y = h(X) + ξ ∈ Rk
respectively, where h : Rd → Rk is an equivariant linear

