GMAC: A Distributional Perspective on Actor-Critic Framework

Daniel Wontae Nam 1 Younghoon Kim 1 Chan Y. Park 1

Abstract
In this paper, we devise a distributional framework on actor-critic as a solution to distributional
instability, action type restriction, and conflation
between samples and statistics. We propose a new
method that minimizes the Cramér distance with
the multi-step Bellman target distribution generated from a novel Sample-Replacement algorithm
denoted SR(λ), which learns the correct value
distribution under multiple Bellman operations.
Parameterizing a value distribution with Gaussian
Mixture Model further improves the efficiency
and the performance of the method, which we
name GMAC. We empirically show that GMAC
captures the correct representation of value distributions and improves the performance of a conventional actor-critic method with low computational cost, in both discrete and continuous action spaces using Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE) and PyBullet environment.

1. Introduction
The ability to learn complex representations via neural networks has enjoyed success in various applications of reinforcement learning (RL), such as pixel-based video gameplays (Mnih et al., 2015), the game of Go (Silver et al.,
2016), robotics (Levine et al., 2016), and high dimensional
controls like humanoid robots (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015). Starting from the seminal work of Deep
Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015), the advance in value
prediction network, in particular, has been one of the main
driving forces for the breakthrough.
Among the milestones of the advances in value function
approximation, distributional reinforcement learning (DRL)
further develops the scalar value function to a distributional
representation. The distributional perspective offers various
benefits by providing more information on the characteristics and the behavior of the value. One such benefit is the
1

KC Machine Learning Lab, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Daniel <dwtnam@kc-ml2.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) The observation input

(b) The evaluated value distributions
Figure 1: Modality of value distribution during the learning process
of Breakout-v4. (a) An arrow is added in the inset to indicate the
ball’s direction of travel. The episode reaches a terminal state if the
paddle misses the ball. (b) Learned probability density functions of
the value distributions of IQN + Huber-quantile (left) vs. GMAC
(Gaussian mixture model + energy distance) (right) for a same
policy when trained on {0.2, 0.4, 1.2}M frames. As the policy
improves, the probability of losing a turn (V = 0) should decrease
while the probability of earning scores (V > 0) increases. Note
that the modality transition from V = 0 is clearly captured by
GMAC.

preservation of multimodality in value distributions, which
leads to more stable learning of the value function (Bellemare et al., 2017a).
Despite the development, several issues remain, hindering
DRL from becoming a robust framework. First, a theoretical
instability exists in the control setting of value-based DRL
methods (Bellemare et al., 2017a). Second, previous DRL
algorithms are limited to a single type of action space, either
discrete (Bellemare et al., 2017a; Dabney et al., 2018b;a) or
continuous (Barth-Maron et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2020).
Third, a common choice of loss function for DRL is the
Huber quantile regression loss, which is vulnerable to conflation between samples and statistics without an imputation

