Marginalized Stochastic Natural Gradients for Black-Box Variational Inference

Geng Ji 1 2 Debora Sujono 2 Erik B. Sudderth 2

Abstract
Black-box variational inference algorithms use
stochastic sampling to analyze diverse statistical models, like those expressed in probabilistic
programming languages, without model-specific
derivations. While the popular score-function estimator computes unbiased gradient estimates, its
variance is often unacceptably large, especially in
models with discrete latent variables. We propose
a stochastic natural gradient estimator that is as
broadly applicable and unbiased, but improves
efficiency by exploiting the curvature of the variational bound, and provably reduces variance
by marginalizing discrete latent variables. Our
marginalized stochastic natural gradients have intriguing connections to classic coordinate ascent
variational inference, but allow parallel updates
of variational parameters, and provide superior
convergence guarantees relative to naive Monte
Carlo approximations. We integrate our method
with the probabilistic programming language Pyro
and evaluate real-world models of documents, images, networks, and crowd-sourcing. Compared
to score-function estimators, we require far fewer
Monte Carlo samples and consistently convergence orders of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Variational inference is widely used to estimate the posterior distributions of hidden variables in probabilistic models
(Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). Many previous studies have
found that variational inference can have dramatic computational advantages compared to MCMC methods like
Gibbs samplers (Gopalan & Blei, 2013; Gan et al., 2015;
Gopalan et al., 2016; Ji et al., 2019). Variational bounds are
usually optimized via coordinate ascent variational inference (CAVI, Jordan et al. (1999)) algorithms that iteratively
1
Facebook AI 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Irvine. Correspondence to: Geng Ji <gji@fb.com>,
Debora Sujono <dsujono@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

update single (or small blocks of) variational parameters,
while holding all others fixed to their current values. Although CAVI updates can be effective for simple models
composed from conjugate priors, for many models the expectations required for exact CAVI updates are intractable:
they may require complex integrals for continuous variables,
or computation scaling exponentially with the number of
dependent discrete variables.
Variational algorithms for models with non-conjugate conditionals have been derived via hand-crafted auxiliary variables that induce looser, but more tractable, bounds on the
data log-likelihood (Jordan et al., 1999; Winn & Bishop,
2005). Such bounds typically require complex derivations
specialized to the parametric structure of specific distributions (Albert & Chib, 1993; Jaakkola & Jordan, 1999;
Polson et al., 2013), and thus do not easily integrate with
general-purpose probabilistic inference systems.
To address these limitations, several authors have explored
stochastic gradient algorithms that directly optimize a reparameterized bound involving the log-likelihood gradient
or score function (Paisley et al., 2012; Wingate & Weber,
2013; Ranganath et al., 2014), as in the classic REINFORCE
policy gradient algorithm (Williams, 1992). Unlike other
black-box variational methods such as automatic differentiation variational inference (ADVI, Kucukelbir et al. (2017))
that require specific variable reparameterizations (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), REINFORCE provides unbiased gradients for all models including the many
practically important ones with discrete latent variables.
Due to its simplicity and generality, REINFORCE has become the “standard” variational inference algorithm for a
number of probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) including Edward and TensorFlow Probability (Tran et al.,
2016; 2018), WebPPL (Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2014;
Ritchie et al., 2016), Pyro (Bingham et al., 2019), and
Gen (Cusumano-Towner et al., 2019). However, its gradient
estimates may have extremely high variance. An official
WebPPL tutorial1 warns that REINFORCE will produce
poor results for the LDA topic model (Blei et al., 2003) due
to its discrete assignment variables: “Because WebPPL’s
implementation of variational inference works much bet1
http://probmods.github.io/ppaml2016/chapters/
4-3-variational.html

