S PREADSHEET C ODER: Formula Prediction from Semi-structured Context
Xinyun Chen 1 Petros Maniatis 2 Rishabh Singh 2 Charles Sutton 2 Hanjun Dai 2 Max Lin 2 Denny Zhou 2

Abstract
Spreadsheet formula prediction has been an important program synthesis problem with many
real-world applications. Previous works typically
utilize input-output examples as the specification
for spreadsheet formula synthesis, where each
input-output pair simulates a separate row in the
spreadsheet. However, this formulation does not
fully capture the rich context in real-world spreadsheets. First, spreadsheet data entries are organized as tables, thus rows and columns are not necessarily independent from each other. In addition,
many spreadsheet tables include headers, which
provide high-level descriptions of the cell data.
However, previous synthesis approaches do not
consider headers as part of the specification. In
this work, we present the first approach for synthesizing spreadsheet formulas from tabular context,
which includes both headers and semi-structured
tabular data. In particular, we propose S PREAD SHEET C ODER, a BERT-based model architecture
to represent the tabular context in both row-based
and column-based formats. We train our model on
a large dataset of spreadsheets, and demonstrate
that S PREADSHEET C ODER achieves top-1 prediction accuracy of 42.51%, which is a considerable
improvement over baselines that do not employ
rich tabular context. Compared to the rule-based
system, S PREADSHEET C ODER assists 82% more
users in composing formulas on Google Sheets.

1. Introduction
Spreadsheets are ubiquitous for data storage, with hundreds
of millions of users. Helping users write formulas in spreadsheets is a powerful feature for data analysis. Although
spreadsheet formula languages are relatively simpler than
general-purpose programming languages for data manipulation, writing spreadsheet formulas could still be tedious and
1

UC Berkeley 2 Google. Correspondence to: Xinyun Chen
<xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

error-prone for end users (Gulwani, 2011; Hermans et al.,
2012b; Cheung et al., 2016). Systems such as FlashFill (Gulwani, 2011; Gulwani et al., 2012) help end-users perform
string transformation tasks in spreadsheets using a few inputoutput examples by automatically synthesizing a program in
a domain-specific language (DSL). Recently, several learning approaches based on different neural architectures have
been developed for learning such programs from examples,
and have demonstrated promising results (Parisotto et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2017; Vijayakumar et al., 2018).
All these previous works formalize the spreadsheet program
prediction problem as a programming by example task, with
the goal of synthesizing programs from a small number of
input-output examples. We argue that this choice engenders
three key limitations. First, this setup assumes that each
data row is independent, and each formula is executed on
data cells of the same row. However, real spreadsheets are
less structured than this. Data in spreadsheets is typically
organized as semi-structured tables, and cells in different
rows could be correlated. As shown in Figure 1, in the
same table, different data blocks could have different structures, and formulas can take cell values in other rows as
function arguments. Second, because spreadsheets are semistructured, they also contain rich metadata. In particular,
many spreadsheet tables include headers that provide highlevel descriptions of the data, which could provide important
clues for formula prediction. However, table headers are not
utilized in prior work. Finally, programming-by-example
methods output programs in a DSL, which is typically designed to facilitate synthesis, and is much less flexible than
the language in which users write formulas. For example,
the FlashFill DSL only covers a subset of spreadsheet functions for string processing, and it does not support rectangular ranges, a common feature of spreadsheet formulas. In
contrast, spreadsheet languages also support a wide variety
of functions for numerical calculation, while the argument
selection is more flexible and takes the spreadsheet table
structure into account. In total, these limitations can compromise the applicability of such prior efforts to more diverse
real-world spreadsheets and to richer language functionality.
Instead, we propose synthesizing spreadsheet formulas without an explicit specification. To predict a formula in a given
cell, the context of data and metadata is used as an implicit
(partial) specification of the desired program. For example

