Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Advantage Weighting

Eric Mitchell 1 Rafael Rafailov 1 Xue Bin Peng 2 Sergey Levine 2 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
This paper introduces the offline metareinforcement learning (offline meta-RL)
problem setting and proposes an algorithm that
performs well in this setting. Offline meta-RL is
analogous to the widely successful supervised
learning strategy of pre-training a model on a
large batch of fixed, pre-collected data (possibly
from various tasks) and fine-tuning the model
to a new task with relatively little data. That
is, in offline meta-RL, we meta-train on fixed,
pre-collected data from several tasks in order to
adapt to a new task with a very small amount
(less than 5 trajectories) of data from the new
task. By nature of being offline, algorithms for
offline meta-RL can utilize the largest possible
pool of training data available and eliminate
potentially unsafe or costly data collection during
meta-training. This setting inherits the challenges
of offline RL, but it differs significantly because
offline RL does not generally consider a) transfer
to new tasks or b) limited data from the test
task, both of which we face in offline meta-RL.
Targeting the offline meta-RL setting, we propose
Meta-Actor Critic with Advantage Weighting
(MACAW), an optimization-based meta-learning
algorithm that uses simple, supervised regression objectives for both the inner and outer
loop of meta-training. On offline variants of
common meta-RL benchmarks, we empirically
find that this approach enables fully offline
meta-reinforcement learning and achieves notable
gains over prior methods. Code available at
https://sites.google.com/view/macaw-metarl.

1. Introduction
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) has emerged as a
promising strategy for tackling the high sample complexity
1

Stanford University 2 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Eric Mitchell <eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of reinforcement learning algorithms, when the goal is to
ultimately learn many tasks. Meta-RL algorithms exploit
shared structure among tasks during meta-training, amortizing the cost of learning across tasks and enabling rapid
adaptation to new tasks during meta-testing from only a
small amount of experience. Yet unlike in supervised learning, where large amounts of pre-collected data can be pooled
from many sources to train a single model, existing meta-RL
algorithms assume the ability to collect millions of environment interactions online during meta-training. Developing
offline meta-RL methods would enable such methods, in
principle, to leverage existing data from any source, making them easier to scale to real-world problems where large
amounts of data might be necessary to generalize broadly.
To this end, we propose the offline meta-RL problem setting and a corresponding algorithm that uses only offline
(or batch) experience from a set of training tasks to enable
efficient transfer to new tasks without requiring any further
interaction with either the training or testing environments.
See Figure 1 for a comparison of offline meta-RL and standard meta-RL.
Because the offline setting does not allow additional data
collection during training, it highlights the desirability of
a consistent meta-RL algorithm. A meta-RL algorithm is
consistent if, given enough diverse data on the test task,
adaptation can find a good policy for the task regardless
of the training task distribution. Such an algorithm would
provide a) rapid adaptation to new tasks from the same distribution as the train tasks while b) allowing for improvement
even for out of distribution test tasks. However, designing
a consistent meta-RL algorithm in the offline setting is difficult: the consistency requirement suggests we might aim
to extend the model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) algorithm (Finn et al., 2017a), since it directly corresponds to
fine-tuning at meta-test time. However, existing MAML approaches use online policy gradients, and only value-based
approaches have proven effective in the offline setting. Yet
combining MAML with value-based RL subroutines is not
straightforward: the higher-order optimization in MAMLlike methods demands stable and efficient gradient-descent
updates, while TD backups are both somewhat unstable
and require a large number of steps to propagate reward
information across long time horizons.
To address these challenges, one might combine MAML

