T-SCI: A Two-Stage Conformal Inference
Algorithm with Guaranteed Coverage for Cox-MLP

Jiaye Teng * 1 Zeren Tan * 1 Yang Yuan 1 2

Abstract
It is challenging to deal with censored data, where
we only have access to the incomplete information
of survival time instead of its exact value. Fortunately, under linear predictor assumption, people
can obtain guaranteed coverage for the confidence
band of survival time using methods like Cox Regression. However, when relaxing the linear assumption with neural networks (e.g., Cox-MLP
(Katzman et al., 2018; Kvamme et al., 2019)),
we lose the guaranteed coverage. To recover the
guaranteed coverage without linear assumption,
we propose two algorithms based on conformal
inference under strong ignorability assumption.
In the first algorithm WCCI, we revisit weighted
conformal inference and introduce a new nonconformity score based on partial likelihood. We
then propose a two-stage algorithm T-SCI, where
we run WCCI in the first stage and apply quantile conformal inference to calibrate the results in
the second stage. Theoretical analysis shows that
T-SCI returns guaranteed coverage under milder
assumptions than WCCI. We conduct extensive
experiments on synthetic data and real data using
different methods, which validate our analysis.

1. Introduction
In survival analysis, censoring indicates that the value of
interest (survival time) is only partially known (e.g., the
information can be t > 5 instead of t = 7). It is common
and inevitable in numerous fields, including medical care
(Robins & Finkelstein, 2000; Klein & Moeschberger, 2006),
astronomy (Feldmann, 2019), finance (Bellotti & Crook,
2009), etc. It is an annoying issue since ignoring or deleting
censored data causes bias and inefficiency (Nakagawa &
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Shanghai Qi
Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yuan
<yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Bias in censoring. Ignoring or deleting censored data
(light green points) causes bias compared to the ground truth linear
approximation (red line), where the linear approximation under
censoring (black line) does not overlap the ground truth (red line).

Freckleton, 2008), as illustrated in Figure 1.
When dealing with censored data, we usually focus on the
confidence band of the survival time since confidence bands
give a more conservative estimation than point estimation.
Under linear assumptions on covariate effect (See Assumption 1), one can derive the survival time distribution using
Cox regression by asymptotic normality of linear coefficient.
It further leads to guaranteed coverage, meaning that survival time provably falls into the confidence band with high
probability (larger than the given confidence level).
However, the linear assumption broadly harms its performances and restricts its applications. After all, the reality is
not always entirely linear. To relax the linear assumption,
Katzman et al. (2018); Kvamme et al. (2019) applies neural
networks into Cox regression (Cox-MLP), yielding the best
performance in terms of some metrics such as Brier score
and binomial log-likelihood. Unfortunately, the confidence
band in Cox-MLP has no guaranteed coverage since one
cannot expect neural network converges to the expected

