A New Representation of Successor Features for Transfer across Dissimilar
Environments
Majid Abdolshah 1 Hung Le 1 Thommen Karimpanal George 1 Sunil Gupta 1 Santu Rana 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Transfer in reinforcement learning is usually
achieved through generalisation across tasks.
Whilst many studies have investigated transferring
knowledge when the reward function changes,
they have assumed that the dynamics of the environments remain consistent. Many real-world RL
problems require transfer among environments
with different dynamics. To address this problem, we propose an approach based on successor features in which we model successor feature
functions with Gaussian Processes permitting the
source successor features to be treated as noisy
measurements of the target successor feature function. Our theoretical analysis proves the convergence of this approach as well as the bounded error on modelling successor feature functions with
Gaussian Processes in environments with both
different dynamics and rewards. We demonstrate
our method on benchmark datasets and show that
it outperforms current baselines.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a computational approach
that learns how to attain a complex goal by maximising
rewards over time. Successful applications range from Atari
games (Mnih et al., 2015), to robotics (Zhang et al., 2017),
and self-driving cars (Liang et al., 2018). However, this
success is based on solving each task from scratch, and thus
training these agents requires vast amounts of data.
Several solutions have been proposed to address this problem. Most works in transfer RL such as Progressive Neural
Networks (Rusu et al., 2016) and Inter-Task Mapping setups
(Ammar & Taylor, 2011; Gupta et al., 2017; Konidaris &
Barto, 2006; Yin & Pan, 2017) assume that the state-action
space, or reward distribution space can be disentangled
1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. Correspondence to: Majid Abdolshah
<majid@deakin.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

into independent sub-domains. However, learning interpretable, disentangled representations is challenging (Zhu
et al., 2020). The dynamics and the reward was decoupled
for the first time in (Barreto et al., 2017). Building upon an
elegant formulation called the successor function (Dayan,
1993), the method allowed flexible transfer learning across
tasks that differ in their reward structure. The underlying
assumption was that the environmental dynamics remains
unchanged and using a Generalised Policy Improvement
(GPI) method, the optimal policy is determined. Such successor feature based methods have been shown to efficiently
transfer knowledge across RL tasks (Barreto et al., 2018;
2019; 2020). Other works that have built upon successor
features include generalised policy updates on successor
features (Barreto et al., 2020), a universal type of successor
feature based on the temporal difference method (Ma et al.,
2020), and Variational Universal Successor Features (Siriwardhana et al., 2019) that perform target driven navigation.
Option Keyboard (Barreto et al., 2019) leveraged successor
features to combine skills to define and manipulate options.
This allows for change in reward, but a slight change of the
environment can deteriorate the performance of a new task.
If however both the environmental dynamics and the reward
differs across tasks, these methods are unable to handle this
challenge.
In real-world problems when environment dynamics and
rewards change across tasks, both these aspects need careful
modelling. Failing to do so can lead to negative transfer
of knowledge from the previously seen tasks. Thus RL
methods using successor features need to be extended to
handle the changes in environmental dynamics. Such work
is limited. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2017) aim to address
this problem by considering a linear relationship between
the source and target successor features. This modelling is
restrictive and may fall short in capturing the complexity of
the changed environment dynamics. Thus, the problem of designing a method using a successor feature based approach
to transfer knowledge from source to target environment
where the dynamics are dissimilar, is still open.
Our new approach enables the efficient learning of novel
successor features to cater to the new target environmental
dynamics. This is done by using the distribution of the previous (source) task successor features as a prior for the new tar-

