A large-scale benchmark for few-shot program induction and synthesis

Ferran Alet * 1 Javier Lopez-Contreras * 1 James Koppel 1 Maxwell Nye 1 Armando Solar-Lezama 1
Tomás Lozano-Pérez 1 Leslie Pack Kaelbling 1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1

Abstract
A landmark challenge for AI is to learn fexible,
powerful representations from small numbers of
examples. On an important class of tasks, hypotheses in the form of programs provide extreme generalization capabilities from surprisingly few examples. However, whereas large real
image benchmarks have spurred progress in metalearning for deep networks, there is no comparably big, real program-synthesis dataset. This
is because, while images are relatively easy to
label from internet meta-data or annotated by nonexperts, generating meaningful input-output tests
for program induction has proven hard to scale.
In this work, we propose a new way of leveraging a collection of programs with associated unit
tests to create a much larger collection of testprogram pairs. We do so by extracting subprograms of each program and using the inputs of the
overall program to get tests for each subprogram.
This allows us to create P ROG RES, a large-scale
few-shot program-induction benchmark of real
programs and propose new challenges in this domain. We analyze the effect of multiple design
choices on transformer-based program induction
and synthesis algorithms, pointing to shortcomings of current methods and suggesting multiple
avenues for future work.

Figure 1. Extracting interesting subprograms from the Sieve of
Erathostenes. Some subprograms, like j = max (p, dn/pe) p,
are byproducts that are not directly used by the overall program,
but still implement purposeful functions. Line sub-sequences that
break the nesting structure result in invalid subprograms.

1. Introduction
Note: since the camera-ready, we have made a fnal version of the dataset with more programs and increased
diversity. The dataset description is the same, but metrics and statistics change, and get more detailed. You
can fnd it the updated PDF and materials at: https:
//lis.csail.mit.edu/progres.
*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Ferran Alet
<alet@mit.edu>, Javier Lopez-Contreras <javierlc@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 2. Example of a task corresponding to the fltering subprogram in fgure 1. The text context describes the overall program in
which the subprogram is embedded. The C++ function provides
a possible implementation. Even though we standardize variable
names, there are still alternative implementations, such as using
while instead of for. The Program Expression Graph (only a
portion shown) provides a more canonical notation.

