Kernel Stein Discrepancy Descent

Anna Korba 1 Pierre-Cyril Aubin-Frankowski 2 Szymon Majewski 3 Pierre Ablin 4

Abstract
Among dissimilarities between probability distributions, the Kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD) has
received much interest recently. We investigate
the properties of its Wasserstein gradient flow to
approximate a target probability distribution π on
Rd , known up to a normalization constant. This
leads to a straightforwardly implementable, deterministic score-based method to sample from π,
named KSD Descent, which uses a set of particles to approximate π. Remarkably, owing to a
tractable loss function, KSD Descent can leverage robust parameter-free optimization schemes
such as L-BFGS; this contrasts with other popular
particle-based schemes such as the Stein Variational Gradient Descent algorithm. We study
the convergence properties of KSD Descent and
demonstrate its practical relevance. However, we
also highlight failure cases by showing that the
algorithm can get stuck in spurious local minima.

1. Introduction
An important problem in machine learning and computational statistics is to sample from an intractable target distribution π. In Bayesian inference for instance, π corresponds
to the posterior probability of the parameters, which is required to compute the posterior predictive distribution. It
is known only up to an intractable normalization constant.
In Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs, Goodfellow
et al., 2014), the goal is to generate data which distribution is similar to the training set defined by samples of π.
In the first setting, one has access to the score of π (the
gradient of its log density), while in the second, one has
access to samples of π. Assessing how different the target π and a given approximation µ are can be performed
through a dissimilarity function D(µ|π). As summarized
1
CREST, ENSAE, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 2 CAS,
MINES ParisTech, Paris, France 3 CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris 4 CNRS and DMA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Anna Korba
<anna.korba@ensae.fr>.

Proceedings of the38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning,PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

by Simon-Gabriel (2018), classical dissimilarities include
f -divergences such as the KL (Kullback-Leibler) or the χ2
(Chi-squared), the Wasserstein distances in Optimal Transport (OT), and Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs), such
as the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD, Gretton et al.,
2012). Dissimilarity functions can hence be used to characterize π since, under mild assumptions, they only vanish at
µ = π. Setting F(µ) = D(µ|π), assuming also in our case
that π ∈ P2 (Rd ), the set
R of probability measures µ with
finite second moment ( kxk2 dµ(x) < ∞), the sampling
task can then be recast as an optimization problem over
P2 (Rd )
min F(µ).
(1)
µ∈P2 (Rd )

Starting from an initial distribution µ0 , one can then apply
a descent scheme to (1) to converge to π. In particular,
one can consider the Wasserstein gradient flow of F over
P2 (Rd ). This operation can be interpreted as a vector field
continuously displacing the particles constituting µ.
Among dissimilarities, the Kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD,
introduced independently by Liu et al., 2016; Chwialkowski
et al., 2016; Gorham & Mackey, 2017) writes as follows
ZZ
KSD(µ|π) =
kπ (x, y)dµ(x)dµ(y),
(2)
where kπ is the Stein kernel, defined through the score of
π, s(x) = ∇ log π(x), and through a positive semi-definite
kernel k (see Section 2.1 for the meaning of ∇·1 or of ∇2 )
kπ (x, y) = s(x)T s(y)k(x, y) + s(x)T ∇2 k(x, y)
+ ∇1 k(x, y)T s(y) + ∇ ·1 ∇2 k(x, y). (3)
The great advantage of the KSD is that it can be readily
computed when one has access to the score of π and uses a
discrete measure µ̂, since (2) writes as a finite double sum of
kπ in this case. Furthermore the definition of the KSD was
inspired by Stein’s method (see Anastasiou et al., 2021, for a
review) and no sampling over π is required in (2). This motivated the use of the KSD in a growing number of problems.
The KSD has been widely used in nonparametric statistical
tests for goodness-of-fit (e.g. Xu & Matsuda, 2020; Kanagawa et al., 2020). It was also used for sampling tasks: to
select a suitable set of static points to approximate π, adding
a new one at each iteration (Chen et al., 2018; 2019); to compress (Riabiz et al., 2020) or reweight (Hodgkinson et al.,

