Attention is not all you need:
pure attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth

Yihe Dong 1 Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier 2 Andreas Loukas 3

Abstract
Attention-based architectures have become ubiquitous in machine learning. Yet, our understanding of the reasons for their effectiveness remains
limited. This work proposes a new way to understand self-attention networks: we show that their
output can be decomposed into a sum of smaller
terms—or paths—each involving the operation
of a sequence of attention heads across layers.
Using this path decomposition, we prove that selfattention possesses a strong inductive bias towards
“token uniformity”. Specifically, without skip connections or multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), the
output converges doubly exponentially to a rank-1
matrix. On the other hand, skip connections and
MLPs stop the output from degeneration. Our experiments verify the convergence results on standard transformer architectures.

1. Introduction
The attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2015) was initially developed to better learn long-range sequential knowledge, and found effective use in transformer networks
(Vaswani et al., 2017). Since then, attention-based architectures have permeated across data domains machine learning
applications, such as in natural language processing (Devlin
et al., 2018), speech recognition (Luo et al., 2020), and computer vision (Ramachandran et al., 2019; Bello et al., 2019).
As such, it is vital to develop tools to understand the inner
workings of transformers and attention in general, both to
shed light on existing models, and to design more effective
future models.
This work provides new insights about the operation and
inductive bias of networks built by stacking multiple self1
2
Google.
yihed@google.com.
EPFL. jeanbaptiste.cordonnier@epfl.ch. 3 EPFL. andreas.loukas@epfl.ch.
1,3
Equal contribution.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

attention layers. Surprisingly, we find that pure selfattention networks (SANs), i.e., transformers with skip connections and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) disabled, lose
expressive power doubly exponentially with respect to network depth. More specifically, we prove that the output
converges with a cubic rate to a rank one matrix that has
identical rows. While we derive the convergence bounds
in part by using properties of stochastic matrices, our results go beyond what one would expect based on standard
results. In particular, by leveraging the cascading effects
of specifically stacking self-attention modules, we show exponentially faster convergence than what standard theory
prescribes. Furthermore, while previous studies have considered the rank of individual self-attention matrices (Wang
et al., 2020; Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Cordonnier et al.,
2020b), our results are the first to address conditions under
which the entire network converges to rank one.
This raises the question, why do transformers work? Our
analysis indicates that skip connections play a key role in
mitigating rank collapse, and MLPs can slow down the
convergence by increasing their Lipschitz constant. We
characterize these counteracting forces by proving upper
bounds of this convergence behavior under SAN architectural variants that resemble transformers. Our results reveal
a previously unknown vital utility of skip connections, beyond facilitating optimization and gradient flow (He et al.,
2016a; Balduzzi et al., 2018).
In the process, we develop a new path decomposition to
study self-attention networks. Namely, we decompose a
SAN into a linear combination of weakly-interdependent
paths, where each ‘path’ corresponds to a deep single-head
SAN. Intuitively, one can view the self-attention heads in
each layer of the original network as different gateways, and
a path follows a sequence of gateway choices, one gateway
per layer (Figure 1). Coupled with the rank collapse analysis,
our results suggest that deep SANs with skip connections
should rely more on short paths.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We present a
systematic study of building blocks of the transformer, revealing opposing impacts between self-attention and the
counteracting forces: skip connections and MLP, in con-

