Taylor Expansions of Discount Factors

Yunhao Tang 1 Mark Rowland 2 Rémi Munos 3 Michal Valko 3

Abstract
In practical reinforcement learning (RL), the discount factor used for estimating value functions
often differs from that used for defining the evaluation objective. In this work, we study the effect
that this discrepancy of discount factors has during learning, and discover a family of objectives
that interpolate value functions of two distinct discount factors. Our analysis suggests new ways for
estimating value functions and performing policy optimization updates, which demonstrate empirical performance gains. This framework also
leads to new insights on commonly-used deep
RL heuristic modifications to policy optimization
algorithms.

1. Introduction
One of the most popular models for reinforcement learning
(RL) is the Markov decision process (MDP) with exponential discounting over an infinite horizon (Sutton and Barto,
2018; Puterman, 2014), with discounted objectives of the
following form
"∞
#
X
π
t
Vγ (x) = Eπ
γ rt x0 = x .
t=0

Discounted models enjoy favorable theoretical properties,
and are also the foundation of many practical RL algorithms
that enjoy empirical success (e.g. see (Mnih et al., 2015;
Schulman et al., 2015a; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2017)). However, in most applications of RL, the
objective of interest is the expected undiscounted cumulative
return,
" T
#
X
Eπ
rt x0 = x ,
(1)
t=0

where T < ∞ is a (possibly random) evaluation horizon,
which usually also denotes the end of the trajectory. For
1
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 DeepMind, London, UK 3 DeepMind, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
yt2541@columbia.edu <Yunhao>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

example, T could be the first time the MDP gets into a terminal state (e.g., a robot falls); when the MDP does not have a
natural terminal state, T could be enforced as a deterministic
horizon. This creates a technical gap between algorithmic
developments and implementations: it is tempting to design
algorithms that optimize Vγπ (x), however, further heuristics
are often needed to get strong practical performance. This
issue manifests itself with the policy gradient (PG) theorem
(Sutton et al., 2000). Let πθ be a parameterized policy. The
policy gradient (PG) ∇θ Vγπθ (x) is computed as
"∞
#
X
t πθ
Eπθ
γ Qγ (xt , at )∇θ log πθ (at |xt ) x0 = x .
t=0

(2)
However, the practical implementation of PG updates
usually omits the discount factors (see for example the
high-quality open source packages (Dhariwal et al., 2017;
Achiam and OpenAI, 2018), leading to an approximate gradient of the form
" T
#
X
πθ
Eπθ
Qγ (xt , at )∇θ log πθ (at |xt ) x0 = x . (3)
t=0

Most prior work on PG algorithms rely on this heuristic update to work properly in deep RL applications. The intuitive
argument for dropping the factor γ t is that Eqn (2) optimizes
Vγπθ (x), which is very myopic compared to the objective in
Eqn (1). Consequently, the exponential discount γ t is too
aggressive for weighting updates with large t. As a concrete
example, in many MuJoCo control tasks (Brockman et al.,
2016), the most commonly used discount factor is γ = 0.99.
1
This leads to an effective horizon of 1−γ
= 100, which
is much smaller than the evaluation horizon T = 1000.
This technical gap between theory and practice has been
alluded to previously (by e.g., O’Donoghue et al., 2016) and
is explicitly discussed by Nota and Thomas (2019).
To bypass this gap, a straightforward solution would be to
naı̈vely increase the discount factor γ ≥ 1 − T1 and apply
the PG in Eqn (2). In the example above, this implies using
γ ≥ 0.999. Unfortunately, this rarely works well in practice,
as we will also see in experiments. The failure might be due
to the higher variance of the estimation (Schulman et al.,
2015b) or the collapse of the action gaps (Lehnert et al.,
2018; Laroche and van Seijen, 2018), which is aggravated
when combined with function approximations.

