Unitary Branching Programs: Learnability and Lower Bounds

Fidel Ernesto Dı́az Andino 1 Maria Kokkou 2 Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira 3 Farhad Vadiee 3

Abstract
Bounded width branching programs are a formalism that can be used to capture the notion
of non-uniform constant-space computation. In
this work, we study a generalized version of
bounded width branching programs where instructions are defined by unitary matrices of bounded
dimension. We introduce a new learning framework for these branching programs that leverages on a combination of local search techniques
with gradient descent over Riemannian manifolds.
We also show that gapped, read-once branching
programs of bounded dimension can be learned
with a polynomial number of queries in the presence of a teacher. Finally, we provide explicit
near-quadratic size lower-bounds for boundeddimension unitary branching programs, and exponential size lower-bounds for bounded-dimension
read-once gapped unitary branching programs.
The first lower bound is proven using a combination Nečiporuk’s lower bound technique with
classic results from algebraic geometry. The second lower bound is proven within the framework
of communication complexity theory.

1. Introduction
Bounded width branching programs, also known as nonuniform finite automata, may be regarded as model of
computation that generalizes the notion of constant space
computation to the non-uniform setting (Nakanishi et al.,
2000; Barrington, 1989; Ergün et al., 1995). A celebrated
result due to Barrington states that any Boolean function
f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} that can be computed by a Boolean
circuit of depth d can also be computed by a width-5 branching program of length 4d (Barrington, 1989). As a consequence, functions that can be computed by logarithmic
1

University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil 2 Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden 3 University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway. Correspondence to: Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira
<mateus.oliveira@uib.no>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

depth Boolean circuits can be computed by width-5 branching programs of polynomial length.
The problem of constructing branching programs consistent with a given dataset has been studied under a large
variety of paradigms (Bergadano et al., 1997; Mansour &
McAllester, 2002; Ergün et al., 1995; Raghavan & Wilkins,
1993; Bshouty et al., 1998). In this work, we address the
problem of constructing bounded-width branching programs
consistent with a given input dataset from the perspective
of continuous optimization theory. We formalize branching programs according to Barrington’s M -program model,
where branching programs are viewed as a sequence of tuples of elements of a monoid M (i.e., a semigroup with
identity) (Bédard et al., 1993; Cleve, 1991; Caussinus, 1996;
Barrington, 1989). This point of view allows us to consider
branching programs over matrix groups, and in particular
over the unitary group U (k), i.e., the group of k × k unitary
matrices with matrix multiplication as the operation.
For each fixed k ∈ N, the unitary group U (k) is a compact
and connected topological group, that has has the structure
of a Riemannian manifold, known as the complex Stiefel
manifold (Adams & Walker, 1965). This allows us to view
the problem of searching for a branching program consistent
with a given dataset as the problem of minimizing function
with unitary constraints (Abrudan et al., 2008; 2009; 2008).
The caveat is that such problems can be reformulated as
minimization problems in the Stiefel manifold, and therefore
one can leverage on the machinery of Riemannian gradient
descent to search for optimal solutions.
Still, when the number of variables become too large (meaning a few hundreds), state-of-the-art tools that implement
Riemannian gradient descent algorithms become impractical. To mitigate this computational intractability, we combine Riemannian gradient descent with a simple local optimization technique inspired on the paradigm of waveform
relaxation (Lelarasmee et al., 1982; Janssen & Vandewalle,
1997; Crow & Ilic, 1990). More precisely, we start by fixing
the values of a large number of variables in the system. Subsequently, we compute an optimal solution with respect to
the remaining variables. At this point, the values of the optimized variables are fixed, and a new small set of variables to
be optimized is selected. The process is repeated until no improvement is observed. Interestingly, this algorithm works

