Confidence Scores Make Instance-dependent Label-noise Learning Possible

Antonin Berthon 1 2 Bo Han 3 1 Gang Niu 1 Tongliang Liu 4 Masashi Sugiyama 1 5

Abstract
In learning with noisy labels, for every instance,
its label can randomly walk to other classes following a transition distribution which is named
a noise model. Well-studied noise models are
all instance-independent, namely, the transition
depends only on the original label but not the instance itself, and thus they are less practical in the
wild. Fortunately, methods based on instancedependent noise have been studied, but most
of them have to rely on strong assumptions on
the noise models. To alleviate this issue, we
introduce confidence-scored instance-dependent
noise (CSIDN), where each instance-label pair is
equipped with a confidence score. We find that
with the help of confidence scores, the transition
distribution of each instance can be approximately
estimated. Similarly to the powerful forward correction for instance-independent noise, we propose a novel instance-level forward correction for
CSIDN. We demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of our method through multiple experiments
on datasets with synthetic label noise and realworld unknown noise.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep neural networks has increased
the need for high-quality labeled data. However, such a
labelling process can be time-consuming and costly. A compromise is to resort to weakly supervised annotations, using
crowdsourcing platforms or trained classifiers that annotate
the data automatically. These weakly supervised annotations tend to be low-quality and noisy, which negatively
affects the accuracy of high-capacity models due to mem1
RIKEN 2 ENS Paris-Saclay 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
University of Sydney 5 University of Tokyo.
Correspondence to: Antonin Berthon <berthon.antonin@gmail.com>,
Bo
Han
<bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>,
Gang
Niu
<gang.niu@riken.jp>,
Tongliang
Liu
<tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>, Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.utokyo.ac.jp>.

4

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

orization effects (Zhang et al., 2017). Thus, learning with
noisy labels has often drawn a lot of attention.
Early works on noisy labels studied random classification
noise (RCN) for binary classification (Angluin & Laird,
1988; Kearns, 1993). In the RCN model, each instance
has its label flipped with a fixed noise rate ρ ∈ [0, 12 ). A
natural extension of RCN is class-conditional noise (CCN)
for multi-class classification (Stempfel & Ralaivola, 2009;
Natarajan et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2013; Menon et al., 2015;
van Rooyen & Williamson, 2018; Patrini et al., 2016; Yao
et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021) (Appendix A). In the CCN model, each instance from class i has
a fixed probability ρi,j of being assigned to class j. Thus, it
is possible to encode some similarity information between
classes. For example, we expect that the image of a “dog” is
more likely to be erroneously labelled as “cat” than “boat”.
To handle the CCN model, a common method is the loss
correction, which aims to correct the prediction or the loss
of the classifier using an estimated noise transition matrix
(Patrini et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Goldberger &
Ben-Reuven, 2017; Ma et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2021). Another common approach is the label correction,
which aims to improve the label quality during training. For
example, (Reed et al., 2015) introduced a bootstrapping
scheme. Similarly, (Tanaka et al., 2018) proposed to update
the weights of a classifier iteratively using noisy labels, and
use the updated classifier to yield more high-quality pseudolabels for the training set. Although these methods are able
to handle the simplified CCN model, they are unable to cope
with real-world noise, e.g., instance-dependent noise (IDN).
The IDN model considers a more general noise (Manwani
& Sastry, 2013; Ghosh et al., 2014; Menon et al., 2018;
Cheng et al., 2020; Menon et al., 2018; Scott, 2019; Cheng
et al., 2021; Xia et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), where the
probability that an instance is mislabeled depends on both
its class and features. Intuitively, this noise is quite realistic,
as poor-quality or ambiguous instances are more likely to
be mislabeled in real-world datasets. However, it is much
more complex to formulate the IDN model, since the probability of a mislabeled instance is a function of not only
the label space but also the input space that can be very
high-dimensional.
As a result, several pioneer works have considered stronger

