ASAM: Adaptive Sharpness-Aware Minimization
for Scale-Invariant Learning of Deep Neural Networks

Jungmin Kwon 1 Jeongseop Kim 1 Hyunseo Park 1 In Kwon Choi 1

Abstract
Recently, learning algorithms motivated from
sharpness of loss surface as an effective measure
of generalization gap have shown state-of-the-art
performances. Nevertheless, sharpness defined in
a rigid region with a fixed radius, has a drawback
in sensitivity to parameter re-scaling which leaves
the loss unaffected, leading to weakening of the
connection between sharpness and generalization
gap. In this paper, we introduce the concept of
adaptive sharpness which is scale-invariant and
propose the corresponding generalization bound.
We suggest a novel learning method, adaptive
sharpness-aware minimization (ASAM), utilizing
the proposed generalization bound. Experimental
results in various benchmark datasets show that
ASAM contributes to significant improvement of
model generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Generalization of deep neural networks has recently been
studied with great importance to address the shortfalls of
pure optimization, yielding models with no guarantee on
generalization ability. To understand the generalization phenomenon of neural networks, many studies have attempted
to clarify the relationship between the geometry of the
loss surface and the generalization performance (Hochreiter et al., 1995; McAllester, 1999; Keskar et al., 2017;
Neyshabur et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2019). Among many
proposed measures used to derive generalization bounds,
loss surface sharpness and minimization of the derived generalization bound have proven to be effective in attaining
state-of-the-art performances in various tasks (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Mobahi, 2016; Chaudhari et al., 2019;
Sun et al., 2020; Yue et al., 2020).
Especially, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret
1

Samsung Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jeongseop Kim <jisean.kim@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2021) as a learning algorithm based on PAC-Bayesian
generalization bound, achieves a state-of-the-art generalization performance for various image classification tasks benefiting from minimizing sharpness of loss landscape, which
is correlated with generalization gap. Also, they suggest a
new sharpness calculation strategy, which is computationally efficient, since it requires only a single gradient ascent
step in contrast to other complex generalization measures
such as sample-based or Hessian-based approach.
However, even sharpness-based learning methods including
SAM and some of sharpness measures suffer from sensitivity to model parameter re-scaling. Dinh et al. (2017)
point out that parameter re-scaling which does not change
loss functions can cause a difference in sharpness values
so this property may weaken correlation between sharpness
and generalization gap. We call this phenomenon scaledependency problem.
To remedy the scale-dependency problem of sharpness,
many studies have been conducted recently (Liang et al.,
2019; Yi et al., 2019; Karakida et al., 2019; Tsuzuku et al.,
2020). However, those previous works are limited to proposing only generalization measures which do not suffer from
the scale-dependency problem and do not provide sufficient
investigation on combining learning algorithm with the measures.
To this end, we introduce the concept of normalization operator which is not affected by any scaling operator that
does not change the loss function. The operator varies depending on the way of normalizing, e.g., element-wise and
filter-wise. We then define adaptive sharpness of the loss
function, sharpness whose maximization region is determined by the normalization operator. We prove that adaptive sharpness remains the same under parameter re-scaling,
i.e., scale-invariant. Due to the scale-invariant property,
adaptive sharpness shows stronger correlation with generalization gap than sharpness does.
Motivated by the connection between generalization metrics and loss minimization, we propose a novel learning
method, adaptive sharpness-aware minimization (ASAM),
which adaptively adjusts maximization regions thus acting uniformly under parameter re-scaling. ASAM mini-

