Accuracy, Interpretability, and Differential Privacy via Explainable Boosting

Harsha Nori 1 Rich Caruana 1 Zhiqi Bu 2 Judy Hanwen Shen 3 Janardhan Kulkarni 1

Abstract
We show that adding differential privacy to
Explainable Boosting Machines (EBMs), a
recent method for training interpretable ML
models, yields state-of-the-art accuracy while
protecting privacy. Our experiments on multiple
classification and regression datasets show
that DP-EBM models suffer surprisingly little
accuracy loss even with strong differential privacy
guarantees. In addition to high accuracy, two
other benefits of applying DP to EBMs are:
a) trained models provide exact global and
local interpretability, which is often important in
settings where differential privacy is needed; and
b) the models can be edited after training without
loss of privacy to correct errors which DP noise
may have introduced.

1. Introduction
Security researchers have repeatedly shown that machine
learning models can leak information about training data
(Carlini et al., 2018; Melis et al., 2019). In industries like
healthcare, finance and criminal justice, models are trained
on sensitive information, and this form of leakage can be
especially disastrous. To combat this, researchers have
embraced differential privacy, which establishes a strong
mathematical standard for privacy guarantees on algorithms
(Dwork et al., 2006; 2014). In many of these high-stakes
situations, model interpretability is also important to provide
audits, help domain experts such as doctors vet the models,
and to correct unwanted errors before deployment (Caruana
et al., 2015; Rudin, 2019). In this paper, we address both
concerns by developing a private algorithm for learning
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) (Hastie & Tibshirani,
1990). We show that this method can provide strong
privacy guarantees, high accuracy, and exact global and
local interpretability on tabular datasets.
1
Microsoft, Redmond, USA. 2 University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA. 3 Stanford University, Palo Alto, USA.
Correspondence to: Harsha Nori <hanori@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While GAMs were traditionally fit using smooth loworder splines (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1990), we focus
on Explainable Boosting Machines (EBMs), a modern
implementation that learns shape functions using boosted
decision trees (Lou et al., 2012; Nori et al., 2019). EBMs are
especially interesting because they often match the accuracy
of complex blackbox algorithms like XGBoost and random
forests, while having a simple optimization procedure and
final structure (Chang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020).
Our main contributions for this paper are:
• We introduce DP-EBMs, a differentially private
version of EBMs, and provide a rigorous privacy
analysis of this algorithm using the recently introduced
GDP framework (Dong et al., 2019).
• Our experimental results on tabular classification and
regression problems show that DP-EBMs significantly
outperform other DP learning methods. For example,
at ε = 0.5, DP-EBMs have at most a 0.05 loss in AUC
compared to non-private EBMs on benchmark datasets.
• We demonstrate how combining interpretability with
differential privacy can address common concerns with
DP in practice by enabling users to repair some of the
impact of noise on the model and enforce desirable
constraints like monotonicity.
Before diving into details in the following sections, Figure 1
provides a quick peek at the empirical results. In summary,
DP-EBMs outperform other differentially private learning
methods on a variety of classification and regression tasks
for many reasonable values of ε.

2. Preliminaries
2.1. Explainable Boosting Machines
Explainable Boosting Machines belong to the family of
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs), which are restricted
machine learning models that have the form:
g(E[y]) = β + f0 (x0 ) + f1 (x1 ) + ...fk (xk )
where β is an intercept, each fj is a univariate function that
operates on a single input feature xj , and g is a link function
that adapts the model to different settings like classification
and regression (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1990).

