LIME: Learning Inductive Bias for Primitives of Mathematical Reasoning
Yuhuai Wu 1 2 Markus Rabe 3 Wenda Li 4 Jimmy Ba 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2 Christian Szegedy 3

Abstract
While designing inductive bias in neural architectures has been widely studied, we hypothesize
that transformer networks are flexible enough to
learn inductive bias from suitable generic tasks.
Here, we replace architecture engineering by encoding inductive bias in the form of datasets. Inspired by Peirce’s view that deduction, induction,
and abduction are the primitives of reasoning, we
design three synthetic tasks that are intended to
require the model to have these three abilities.
We specifically design these tasks to be synthetic
and devoid of mathematical knowledge to ensure
that only the fundamental reasoning biases can
be learned from these tasks. This defines a new
pre-training methodology called “LIME” (Learning Inductive bias for Mathematical rEasoning).
Models trained with LIME significantly outperform vanilla transformers on four very different
large mathematical reasoning benchmarks. Unlike dominating the computation cost as traditional pre-training approaches, LIME requires
only a small fraction of the computation cost
of the typical downstream task. The code for
generating LIME tasks is available at https:
//github.com/tonywu95/LIME.

1. Introduction
Inductive bias is essential for successful neural network
learning. Many of the breakthroughs in machine learning
are accompanied by new neural architectures with better
inductive biases, such as locality bias in convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al., 1999), recurrence and memory
in LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), and structural bias in graph neural networks (Scarselli et al., 2008).
However, explicitly encoding inductive biases as new neural
architectures can be difficult for abstract concepts such as
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Google Research 4 University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Yuhuai Wu
<ywu@cs.toronto.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

mathematical reasoning. Attempts to design elaborate architectures for reasoning often fall short of the performance
of the more generic transformer architecture. In this work,
we aim to avoid the search for new architectures and investigate whether one can learn useful inductive bias for
mathematical reasoning through pretraining.
Large-scale unsupervised pretraining of language models revolutionized the field of natural language processing
(NLP), improving the state-of-the-art in question answering,
name entity recognition, text classification, and other domains, e.g. (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2020). As a result, pretraining has become a common
practice for modern neural network based NLP. A popular
explanation for the benefit of pretraining is that the model
can learn world knowledge by memorizing the contents of
the natural language corpus, which can be useful in downstream tasks, such as question answering and text classification. However, there is another potential advantage of
pretraining—it may distill inductive biases into the model
that are helpful for training on downstream tasks (Brown
et al., 2020; Warstadt & Bowman, 2020). We focus on the
latter and design pretraining tasks that are intentionally devoid of world knowledge and only allow the model to learn
inductive bias for reasoning.
Inspired by the logician Charles Peirce (Peirce, 1992), we
consider the following three reasoning primitives:
1. Deduction: the ability to deduce new truths from given
facts and inference rules.
2. Induction: the ability to induce general inference rules
from a set of known facts.
3. Abduction: the ability to explain the relationship between the evidences and inference rules.
To endow the models with an inductive bias for mathematical reasoning, we design a synthetic task for each of the three
reasoning primitives. We hypothesize that the transformer
networks are flexible enough to learn strong inductive bias
from the three synthetic reasoning tasks, which helps to
improve the performance on downstream tasks. Although
such inductive bias may be useful in general reasoning tasks
(e.g., NLP tasks), in this work, we focus on mathematical
reasoning benchmarks, for which we expect to observe the

