Acceleration via Fractal Learning Rate Schedules

Naman Agarwal 1 Surbhi Goel 2 Cyril Zhang 2

Abstract
In practical applications of iterative first-order
optimization, the learning rate schedule remains
notoriously difficult to understand and expensive
to tune. We demonstrate the presence of these
subtleties even in the innocuous case when the
objective is a convex quadratic. We reinterpret an
iterative algorithm from the numerical analysis
literature as what we call the Chebyshev learning rate schedule for accelerating vanilla gradient
descent, and show that the problem of mitigating instability leads to a fractal ordering of step
sizes. We provide some experiments to challenge
conventional beliefs about stable learning rates
in deep learning: the fractal schedule enables
training to converge with locally unstable updates
which make negative progress on the objective.

1. Introduction
In the current era of large-scale machine learning models,
a single deep neural network can cost millions of dollars
to train. Despite the sensitivity of gradient-based training
to the choice of learning rate schedule, no clear consensus
has emerged on how to select this high-dimensional hyperparameter, other than expensive end-to-end model training
and evaluation. Prior literature indirectly sheds some light
on this mystery, showing that the learning rate schedule governs tradeoffs between accelerated convergence and various
forms of algorithmic stability.
In this work, we highlight the surprising consequences of
these tradeoffs in a very simple setting: first-order optimization of a convex quadratic function. We start by pointing out
the existence of a non-adaptive step size schedule, derived
from the roots of Chebyshev polynomials, which allows
plain gradient descent to obtain accelerated convergence
rates without momentum. These learning rates overshoot
the region of guaranteed local progress, resulting in unsta*
Equal contribution 1 Google AI Princeton, Princeton, NJ, USA
Microsoft Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Cyril Zhang <cyrilzhang@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Chebyshev nodes γt

step sizes γt−1

fractal schedule ηt

Figure 1: Visualization of the Chebyshev nodes γt , their
corresponding step sizes γt−1 , and the fractal permutation
(Lebedev & Finogenov, 1971) studied in this paper.

ble optimization trajectories. Extending a relatively obscure
line of work motivated by numerical imprecision in PDE
solvers (Lebedev & Finogenov, 1971), we show that stable
acceleration is achieved by selecting a fractal permutation
of the Chebyshev step sizes.
Acceleration via large step sizes may provide an useful alternative to momentum: it is less stable according to our
worst-case bounds, but inherits the memory-efficiency and
statelessness of vanilla gradient descent. More broadly,
we discuss how this form of acceleration might implicitly
present itself in settings like deep learning, introducing hidden entanglements and experimental confounds. We hope
that these ideas will lead to new adaptive algorithms which
overstep the “edge of stability” (the largest constant learning
rate at which model training converges) (Giladi et al., 2019;
Cohen et al., 2021), and accelerate training via carefully
scheduled negative progress. We provide some supporting
experiments towards bridging the theory-practice gap, as
well as open questions for future investigation.
1.1. Our contributions
Provably stable acceleration without momentum. We
revisit an oft-neglected variant of the Chebyshev iteration
method for accelerating gradient descent on convex quadratics. In lieu of momentum, it uses a recursively-defined
sequence of large step sizes derived from Chebyshev polynomials, which we call the fractal Chebyshev schedule. We
prove a new stability guarantee for this algorithm: under
bounded perturbations to all the gradients, no iterate changes
by more than O(poly(κ)), where κ is the condition number of the problem. We also some provide theoreticallygrounded practical variants of the schedule, and negative
results for function classes beyond convex quadratics.

