Active Deep Probabilistic Subsampling

Hans van Gorp 1 Iris A.M. Huijben 1 Bastiaan S. Veeling 2 Nicola Pezzotti 3 4 Ruud J.G. van Sloun 1 4

Abstract
Subsampling a signal of interest can reduce costly
data transfer, battery drain, radiation exposure
and acquisition time in a wide range of problems.
The recently proposed Deep Probabilistic Subsampling (DPS) method effectively integrates subsampling in an end-to-end deep learning model,
but learns a static pattern for all datapoints. We
generalize DPS to a sequential method that actively picks the next sample based on the information acquired so far; dubbed Active-DPS (A-DPS).
We validate that A-DPS improves over DPS for
MNIST classifcation at high subsampling rates.
Moreover, we demonstrate strong performance
in active acquisition Magnetic Resonance Image
(MRI) reconstruction, outperforming DPS and
other deep learning methods.

1. Introduction
Present-day technologies produce and consume vast
amounts of data, which is typically acquired using an analogto-digital converter (ADC). The amount of data digitized by
an ADC is determined not only by the temporal sampling
rate, but also by the manner in which spatial acquisitions
are taken, e.g., by using a specifc design of sensor arrays.
Reducing the number of sample acquisitions needed, can
lead to meaningful reductions in scanning time, e.g., in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), radiation exposure, e.g., in
Computed Tomography (CT), battery drain, and bandwidth
requirements. While the Nyquist theorem is traditionally
used to provide theoretical bounds on the sampling rate, in
recent years signal reconstruction from sub-Nyquist sampled data has been achieved through a framework called
Compressive Sensing (CS).
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 3 Department of Computer Science, Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 4 Philips Research,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Hans van Gorp
<h.v.gorp@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

First proposed by Donoho (2006), and later applied for
MRI by Lustig et al. (2007), CS leverages structural signal
priors, specifcally sparsity under some known transform.
By taking compressive measurements followed by iterative
optimization of a linear system under said sparsity prior,
reconstruction of the original signal is possible while sampling at sub-Nyquist rates. Researchers have employed CS
with great success in a wide variety of applications, such
as radar (Baraniuk & Steeghs, 2007; Ender, 2010), seismic
surveying (Herrmann et al., 2012), spectroscopy (Sanders
et al., 2012), and medical imaging (Han et al., 2016; Lai
et al., 2016).
However, both the need to know the sparsifying basis of
the data, and the iterative nature of the reconstruction algorithms, still hamper practical applicability of CS in many
situations. These limitations can be overcome by the use of
deep learning reconstruction models that make the sparsity
assumption implicit, and facilitate non-iterative inference
once trained. Moreover, the (typically random) nature of
the measurement matrix in CS does, despite adhering to
the given assumptions, not necessarily result in an optimal
measurement given the underlying data statistics and the
downstream system task. This has recently been tackled
by algorithms that learn the sampling scheme from a data
distribution.
In general, these data-driven sampling algorithms can be
divided into two categories: algorithms that learn sampling schemes which are fxed once learned (Huijben et al.,
2020a;b;c; Ravishankar & Bresler, 2011; Sanchez et al.,
2020; Bahadir et al., 2019; Bahadir et al., 2020; Weiss et al.,
2019), and algorithms that learn to actively sample (Ji et al.,
2008; Zhang et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Pineda et al., 2020;
Bakker et al., 2020); selecting new samples based on sequential acquisition of the information. The former type
of algorithms learn a sampling scheme that - on average
- selects informative samples of all instances originating
from the training distribution. However, when this distribution is multi-modal, using one globally optimized sampling
scheme, can easily be sub-optimal on instance-level.
Active acquisition algorithms deal with such shifts in underlying data statistics by conditioning sampling behavior on
previously acquired information from the instance (e.g. the
image to be sampled). This results in a sampling sequence

