High-Dimensional Gaussian Process Inference with Derivatives

Filip de Roos 1 2 Alexandra Gessner 1 2 Philipp Hennig 1 2

Abstract
Although it is widely known that Gaussian processes can be conditioned on observations of the
gradient, this functionality is of limited use due to
the prohibitive computational cost of O(N 3 D3 )
in data points N and dimension D. The dilemma
of gradient observations is that a single one of
them comes at the same cost as D independent function evaluations, so the latter are often preferred. Careful scrutiny reveals, however,
that derivative observations give rise to highly
structured kernel Gram matrices for very general
classes of kernels (inter alia, stationary kernels).
We show that in the low-data regime N < D, the
Gram matrix can be decomposed in a manner that
reduces the cost of inference to O(N 2 D +(N 2 )3 )
(i.e., linear in the number of dimensions) and, in
special cases, to O(N 2 D+N 3 ). This reduction in
complexity opens up new use-cases for inference
with gradients especially in the high-dimensional
regime, where the information-to-cost ratio of
gradient observations significantly increases. We
demonstrate this potential in a variety of tasks
relevant for machine learning, such as optimization and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with predictive
gradients.

1. Introduction
The closure of Gaussian processes (GPs) under linear operations is well-established (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006,
Ch. 9.4). Given a Gaussian process f ∼ GP(µ, k), with
mean and covariance function µ and k, respectively, a linear
operator L acting on f induces another Gaussian process
Lf ∼ GP(Lµ, LkL0 ) for the operator L and its adjoint L0 .
The linearity of GPs has found extensive use both for conditioning on projected data, and to perform inference on linear
transformations of f . Differentiation is a linear operation
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Tüebingen,
Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Filip de Roos
<filip.de.roos@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

which has caused considerable interest in GP modeling due
to the wide variety of applications in which derivative observations are available. However, each gradient observation
of ∇f ∈ RD induces a block Gram matrix ∇k∇0 ∈ RD×D .
As dimension D and number of observations N grow, inference with gradient information quickly becomes prohibitive
with the naı̈ve scaling of O(N 3 D3 ). In other words, one
gradient observation comes at the same computational cost
as D independent function evaluations and thus becomes increasingly disadvantageous as dimensionality grows. This is
not surprising, as the gradient contains D elements and thus
bears information about every coordinate. The unfavorable
scaling has confined GP inference with derivatives to lowdimensional settings in which the information gained from
gradients outweighs the computational overhead (cf. Sec. 3
for a review).
In this work we show that gradient Gram matrices possess
structure that enables inversion at cost linear in D. This
discovery unlocks the previously prohibitive use of gradient
evaluations in high dimensional spaces for nonparametric
models. Numerous machine learning algorithms that operate on high-dimensional spaces are guided by gradient
information and bear the potential to benefit from an inference mechanism that avoids discarding readily available
information. Examples for such applications that we consider in this work comprise optimization, linear algebra, and
gradient-informed Markov chain Monte Carlo.
Contributions We analyze the structure of the Gram matrix with derivative observations for stationary and dot product kernels and report the following discoveries1 :
• The Gram matrix can be decomposed to allow exact
inference in O(N 2 D + (N 2 )3 ) floating point operations, which is useful in the limit of few observations
(N < D).
• We introduce an efficient approximate inference
scheme to include gradient observations in GPs even
as the number of high-dimensional observations increases. It relies on exact matrix-vector multiplication (MVM) and an iterative solver to approximately
invert the Gram matrix. This implicit MVM avoids
1

Code repository: https://github.com/fidero/gp-derivative

