Fixed-Parameter and Approximation Algorithms for PCA with Outliers

Yogesh Dahiya * 1 Fedor Fomin * 2 Fahad Panolan * 3 Kirill Simonov * 2

Abstract
PCA WITH O UTLIERS is the fundamental problem of identifying an underlying low-dimensional
subspace in a data set corrupted with outliers. A
large body of work is devoted to the informationtheoretic aspects of this problem. However, from
the computational perspective, its complexity is
still not well-understood. We study this problem
from the perspective of parameterized complexity by investigating how parameters like the dimension of the data, the subspace dimension, the
number of outliers and their structure, and approximation error, influence the computational
complexity of the problem. Our algorithmic methods are based on techniques of randomized linear
algebra and algebraic geometry.

1. Introduction
Problem statement. We study a fundamental problem in
unsupervised machine learning called PCA WITH O UTLIERS : given a set of n points in Rd with (unknown)
k outliers, the problem is to identify the outliers so that
the remaining set of points fits best into an unknown rdimensional subspace. Without outliers, this is the classical
principal component analysis (PCA), one of the most popular approaches of reducing the dimensionality of the data
(Pearson, 1901; Hotelling, 1933; Eckart & Young, 1936).
PCA is often formulated as the problem of finding the best
low-rank approximation for a data matrix A by solving

Young, 1936), PCA is efficiently solvable via Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD). PCA is used as a preprocessing
step in a great variety of modern applications including
face recognition, data classification, and analysis of social
networks.
However, PCA is very sensitive to outliers, and the presence
of even a small number of outliers can lead to misleading
conclusions, see (Croux & Haesbroeck, 2000). Outliers
detection and PCA with robustness to outliers are the fundamental topics in Machine Learning and Robust Statistics.
Chapter 3.3 of (Vidal et al., 2016) is a nice introduction to
basic approaches to this problem. The handbook of (Bouwmans et al., 2016) on Robust Low-Rank decomposition
provides a thorough overview of different variants and applications of robust PCA. PCA with outliers is strongly related
to another well-studied problem, namely ROBUST S UB SPACE R ECOVERY . Here the task is to identify a subspace
that contains a large portion of data points. See the survey
of (Lerman & Maunu, 2018) for an overview of ROBUST
S UBSPACE R ECOVERY.
In this paper, we study the mathematical model for PCA
with outliers proposed in (Wright et al., 2009; Xu et al.,
2010; Chen et al., 2011; Simonov et al., 2019). We do not
make any assumptions on the distribution of outliers, and
the model covers the worst-case scenarios of adversarial
outliers.
PCA WITH O UTLIERS
Input: Data matrix A ∈ Rn×d and r, k ∈ N.
Task:

minimize kA − Lk2F

minimize

kA − L − Nk2F

subject to rank(L) ≤ r.
P
Here ||A||2F = i,j a2ij is the squared Frobenius norm of
the matrix A. By the Eckart-Young theorem, see (Eckart &

subject to

L, N ∈ Rn×d , rank(L) ≤ r,

Equal contribution 1 The Institute of Mathematical Sciences
(HBNI), Chennai, India 2 Department of Informatics, University of
Bergen, Norway 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Hyderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. Correspondence
to: Yogesh Dahiya <yogeshdahiya@imsc.res.in>, Kirill Simonov
<kirillsimonov@gmail.com>.

and N has at most
k non-zero rows.

*

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

PCA WITH O UTLIERS has a natural geometric interpretation. Given n points in Rd , represented by the rows of A, we
seek for a set of k outliers, represented by the non-zero rows
of N, whose removal from A leaves the remaining n − k
inliers as close as possible to an r-dimensional subspace.
The matrix L contains then the orthogonal projections of
the inliers onto this subspace.

