PC-MLP: Model-based Reinforcement Learning
with Policy Cover Guided Exploration

Yuda Song 1 Wen Sun 2
Hand Egg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) has played
a central role in Reinforcement Learning for decades and
has achieved great empirical performance on tasks such
as robotics (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Levine &
Abbeel, 2014) and video games (Kaiser et al., 2019). However, most existing empirical model-based RL approaches
lack the ability to perform strategic exploration. Thus they
usually can not guarantee any global performance.
In this work, we consider learning to control a nonlinear dynamical system. Specifically, we focus on systems
that can be modeled via Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS). Following (Kakade et al., 2020), we name such
models Kernelized Nonlinear Regulators (KRNs). Such
*

Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca , USA. Correspondence to:
Yuda Song <yudas@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

success rate

Model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a
popular learning paradigm due to its potential
sample efficiency compared to model-free RL.
However, existing empirical model-based RL approaches lack the ability to explore. This work
studies a computationally and statistically efficient model-based algorithm for both Kernelized
Nonlinear Regulators (KNR) and linear Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs). For both models, our algorithm guarantees polynomial sample complexity and only uses access to a planning oracle. Experimentally, we first demonstrate the flexibility and the efficacy of our algorithm on a set of exploration challenging control tasks where existing empirical model-based
RL approaches completely fail. We then show
that our approach retains excellent performance
even in common dense reward control benchmarks that do not require heavy exploration.

Deep PC-MPL
SLBO
MBPO

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0

50000

100000

150000

number of timesteps

200000

Figure 1. Example of the exploration ability of PC-MLP in the
HandEgg Experiment. The environment involves complex dynamics and sparse reward. Left: the HandEgg environment.
Right: PC-MLP can explore strategically and thus learns much
faster than other MBRL (SLBO and MBPO) baselines which rely
on random exploration.

model has been extensively used in the robotics community
in the last two decades due to its flexibility to capture popular models such as linear dynamics (LQRs), piece-wise hybrid linear system, nonlinear models that can be modeled
by higher-order polynomials, and systems that can be captured by Gaussian Processes (GPs) (e.g., (Ko et al., 2007;
Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Bansal et al., 2017; Fisac
et al., 2018; Umlauft et al., 2018; Mania et al., 2020)).
The fact that KNRs have been widely used in real-world
robotics and control problems proves that KNR is capable to model real-world dynamics. Thus it motivates the
development of algorithms that have global performance
guarantees, and are also provably sample and computation
efficient for KNRs.
(Kakade et al., 2020) initiated an information theoretical
analysis for KNRs and provided an algorithm (LC3) that
achieves near-optimal regret. However, the proposed LC3
algorithm relies on an optimistic planning oracle (see Sec. 3
for the detailed definition of an optimistic planning oracle)
which is unfortunately not computationally efficient. Thus
LC3 algorithm cannot be easily implemented using offshelf computational tools developed from the planning and
control community (e.g., highly efficient planning oracles).
While its regret analysis is novel and tight, the computation
inefficiency dramatically limits the practical usage of LC3.
In this work, we develop a Model-based algorithm named
PC-MLP, standing for Model Learning and Planning with

