Structured World Belief for Reinforcement Learning in POMDP

Gautam Singh 1 Skand Peri 1 Junghyun Kim 1 Hyunseok Kim 2 Sungjin Ahn 1 3

Abstract
Object-centric world models provide structured
representation of the scene and can be an important backbone in reinforcement learning and
planning. However, existing approaches suffer
in partially-observable environments due to the
lack of belief states. In this paper, we propose
Structured World Belief, a model for learning
and inference of object-centric belief states. Inferred by Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC), our
belief states provide multiple object-centric scene
hypotheses. To synergize the benefits of SMC
particles with object representations, we also propose a new object-centric dynamics model that
considers the inductive bias of object permanence.
This enables tracking of object states even when
they are invisible for a long time. To further facilitate object tracking in this regime, we allow our
model to attend flexibly to any spatial location in
the image which was restricted in previous models. In experiments, we show that object-centric
belief provides a more accurate and robust performance for filtering and generation. Furthermore,
we show the efficacy of structured world belief
in improving the performance of reinforcement
learning, planning and supervised reasoning.

1. Introduction
There have been remarkable recent advances in objectcentric representation learning (Greff et al., 2020). Unlike
the conventional approaches that provide a single vector
to encode the whole scene, the goal of this approach is to
learn a set of modular representations, one per object in the
scene, via self-supervision. Promising results have been
shown for various tasks such as video modeling (Lin et al.,
2020a), planning (Veerapaneni et al., 2019), and systematic
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research
Institute 3 Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science. Correspondence
to: Gautam Singh <singh.gautam@cs.rutgers.edu>, Sungjin Ahn
<sjn.ahn@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

generalization to novel scenes (Chen et al., 2020).
Of particular interest is whether this representation can
help Reinforcement Learning (RL) and planning. Although
OP3 (Veerapaneni et al., 2019) and STOVE (Kossen et al.,
2019) have investigated the potential, the lack of belief states
and object permanence in the underlying object-centric dynamics models makes it hard for these models to deal with
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP).
While DVRL (Igl et al., 2018) proposes a neural approach
for estimating the belief states using Sequential Monte Carlo
(SMC) for RL in POMDP, we hypothesize that the lack of
object-centric representation and interaction modeling can
make the model suffer in more realistic scenes with multiple stochastic objects interacting under complex partial
observability. It is, however, elusive whether these two associated structures, objectness and partial observability, can
be integrated in synergy, and if yes then how.
In this paper, we present Structured World Belief (SWB),
a novel object-centric world model that provides objectcentric belief for partially observable environments, and
methods for RL and planning utilizing the SWB representation. To this end, we first implement the principle of
object permanence in our model by disentangling the presence of an object file in the belief representation from the
visibility of the object in the observation. Second, we resolve a hard problem that arises when object permanence
is considered under partial observability, i.e., consistently
re-attaching to an object which can re-appear in a distant
and non-deterministic position after a long occlusion. To
solve this, we propose a learning mechanism called file-slot
matching. Lastly, by integrating the object-centric belief
into the auto-encoding SMC objective, our model can gracefully resolve tracking errors while maintaining diverse and
likely explanations (or hypotheses) simultaneously. This
makes our model work robustly with error-tolerance under
the challenging setting of multiple and stochastic objects
interacting under complex partial observability.
Our experiment results show that integrating object-centric
representation with belief representation can be synergetic,
and our proposed model realizes this harmony effectively.
We show in various tasks that our model outperforms other
models that have either only object-centric representation
or only belief representation. We also show that the perfor-

