Neural SDEs as Infinite-Dimensional GANs
Patrick Kidger 1 2 James Foster 1 2 Xuechen Li 3 Harald Oberhauser 1 2 Terry Lyons 1 2

Abstract
Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are a
staple of mathematical modelling of temporal dynamics. However, a fundamental limitation has
been that such models have typically been relatively inflexible, which recent work introducing
Neural SDEs has sought to solve. Here, we show
that the current classical approach to fitting SDEs
may be approached as a special case of (Wasserstein) GANs, and in doing so the neural and classical regimes may be brought together. The input noise is Brownian motion, the output samples are time-evolving paths produced by a numerical solver, and by parameterising a discriminator as a Neural Controlled Differential Equation (CDE), we obtain Neural SDEs as (in modern machine learning parlance) continuous-time
generative time series models. Unlike previous
work on this problem, this is a direct extension of
the classical approach without reference to either
prespecified statistics or density functions. Arbitrary drift and diffusions are admissible, so as
the Wasserstein loss has a unique global minima,
in the infinite data limit any SDE may be learnt.
Example code has been made available as part of
the torchsde repository.

1. Introduction
1.1. Neural differential equations
Since their introduction, neural ordinary differential equations (Chen et al., 2018) have prompted the creation of
a variety of similarly-inspired models, for example based
around controlled differential equations (Kidger et al.,
2020; Morrill et al., 2020), Lagrangians (Cranmer et al.,
2020), higher-order ODEs (Massaroli et al., 2020; Norcliffe
et al., 2020), and equilibrium points (Bai et al., 2019).
In particular, several authors have introduced neural
1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford 2 The Alan Turing Institute, The British Library 3 Stanford. Correspondence to:
Patrick Kidger <kidger@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

stochastic differential equations (neural SDEs), such as
Tzen & Raginsky (2019a); Li et al. (2020); Hodgkinson
et al. (2020), among others. This is our focus here.
Neural differential equations parameterise the vector
field(s) of a differential equation by neural networks. They
are an elegant concept, bringing together the two dominant
modelling paradigms of neural networks and differential
equations.
The main idea – fitting a parameterised differential equation to data, often via stochastic gradient descent – has been
a cornerstone of mathematical modelling for a long time
(Giles & Glasserman, 2006). The key benefit of the neural
network hybridisation is its availability of easily-trainable
high-capacity function approximators.
1.2. Stochastic differential equations
Stochastic differential equations have seen widespread use
for modelling real-world random phenomena, such as particle systems (Coffey et al., 2012; Pavliotis, 2014; Lelièvre
& Stoltz, 2016), financial markets (Black & Scholes, 1973;
Cox et al., 1985; Brigo & Mercurio, 2001), population dynamics (Arató, 2003; Soboleva & Pleasants, 2003) and genetics (Huillet, 2007). They are a natural extension of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for modelling systems
that evolve in continuous time subject to uncertainty.
The dynamics of an SDE consist of a deterministic term
and a stochastic term:
dXt = f (t, Xt ) dt + g(t, Xt ) ◦ dWt ,

(1)

where X = {Xt }t∈[0,T ] is a continuous Rx -valued
stochastic process, f : [0, T ]×Rx → Rx , g : [0, T ]×Rx →
Rx×w are functions and W = {Wt }t≥0 is a w-dimensional
Brownian motion. We refer the reader to Revuz & Yor
(2013) for a rigorous account of stochastic integration.
The notation “◦” in the noise refers to the SDE being understood using Stratonovich integration. The difference between Itô and Stratonovich will not be an important choice
here; we happen to prefer the Stratonovich formulation as
the dynamics of (1) may then be informally interpreted as


∆W
, [t, t+∆t] ,
Xt+∆t ≈ ODESolve Xt , f ( · )+g( · )
∆t

