Learning from History for Byzantine Robust Optimization

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 1 Lie He 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
Byzantine robustness has received significant attention recently given its importance for distributed and federated learning. In spite of this,
we identify severe flaws in existing algorithms
even when the data across the participants is
identically distributed. First, we show realistic
examples where current state of the art robust
aggregation rules fail to converge even in the
absence of any Byzantine attackers. Secondly,
we prove that even if the aggregation rules may
succeed in limiting the influence of the attackers in a single round, the attackers can couple
their attacks across time eventually leading to divergence. To address these issues, we present
two surprisingly simple strategies: a new robust
iterative clipping procedure, and incorporating
worker momentum to overcome time-coupled attacks. This is the first provably robust method for
the standard stochastic optimization setting. Our
code is open sourced at this link2 .

1. Introduction
“Those who cannot remember the past are
condemned to repeat it.” – George Santayana.
Growing sizes of datasets as well as concerns over data
ownership, security, and privacy have lead to emergence
of new machine learning paradigms such as distributed and
federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2019). In both of these
settings, a central coordinator orchestrates many worker
nodes in order to train a model over data which remains decentralized across the workers. While this decentralization
improves scalability security and privacy, it also opens up
the training process to manipulation by the workers (Lamport et al., 2019). These workers may be actively malicious
1

EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Sai Praneeth Karimireddy <sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
2
https://github.com/epfml/
byzantine-robust-optimizer

trying to derail the process, or might simply be malfunctioning and hence sending arbitrary messages. Ensuring
that our training procedure is robust to a small fraction of
such potentially malicious agents is termed Byzantine robust learning and is the focus of the current work.
Given the importance of this problem, it has received significant attention from the community with early works including (Feng et al., 2014; Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018). Most of these approaches
replace the averaging step of distributed or federated SGD
with a robust aggregation rule such as the median. However, a closer inspection reveals that these procedures are
quite brittle: we show that there exist realistic scenarios
where they fail to converge, even if there are no Byzantine
attackers and the data distribution is identical across the
workers (i.i.d.). This turns out to be because on their excessive sensitivity to the distribution of the noise in the gradients. The impractical assumptions made by these methods
are often violated in practice, and lead to the failure of these
aggregation rules.
Further, there have been recent state of the art attacks
(Baruch et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020) which empirically
demonstrate a second source of failure. They show that
even when current aggregation rules may succeed in limiting the influence of the attackers in any single round, they
may still diverge when run for multiple rounds. We prove
that this is inevitable for a wide class of methods—any aggregation rule which ignores history can be made to eventually diverge. This is accomplished by using the inherent
noise in the gradients to mask small perturbations which are
undetectable in a single round, but accumulate over time.
Finally, we show how to circumvent both the issues outlines above. We first describe a simple new aggregator
based on iterative centered clipping which is much more
robust to the distribution of the gradient noise. This aggregator is especially interesting since, unlike most preceding methods, it is very scalable requiring only O(n) computation and communication per round. Further, it is also
compatible with other strategies such as asynchronous updates (Chen et al., 2016) and secure aggregation (Bonawitz
et al., 2017), both of which are crucial for real world applications. Secondly, we show that the time coupled attacks can easily be overcome by using worker momentum.

