Online Optimization in Games via Control Theory:
Connecting Regret, Passivity and Poincaré Recurrence

Yun Kuen Cheung 1 Georgios Piliouras 2

Abstract
We present a novel control-theoretic understanding of online optimization and learning in games,
via the notion of passivity. Passivity is a fundamental concept in control theory, which abstracts
energy conservation and dissipation in physical
systems. It has become a standard tool in analysis of general feedback systems, to which game
dynamics belong. Our starting point is to show
that all continuous-time Follow-the-RegularizedLeader (FTRL) dynamics, which include the wellknown Replicator Dynamic, are lossless, i.e. it is
passive with no energy dissipation. Interestingly,
we prove that passivity implies bounded regret,
connecting two fundamental primitives of control

1
Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, United
Kingdom 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Yun Kuen Cheung <yunkuen.cheung@rhul.ac.uk>, Georgios Piliouras <georgios@sutd.edu.sg>.

theory and online optimization.
The observation of energy conservation in FTRL
inspires us to present a family of lossless learning
dynamics, each of which has an underlying energy
function with a simple gradient structure. This
family is closed under convex combination; as an
immediate corollary, any convex combination of
FTRL dynamics is lossless and thus has bounded
regret. This allows us to extend the framework
of Fox & Shamma (2013) to prove not just global
asymptotic stability results for game dynamics,
but Poincaré recurrence results as well. Intuitively,
when a lossless game (e.g. graphical constant-sum
game) is coupled with lossless learning dynamic,
their interconnection is also lossless, which results in a pendulum-like energy-preserving recurrent behavior, generalizing (Piliouras & Shamma,
2014; Mertikopoulos et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

examples
state
energy
gradient of
energy
invariant
property
another analogue
change of
energy value

Lossless Learning Dynamic
Replicator Dynamic,
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) dynamics
R
q =
p(t) dt = cumulative payoffs
E(q) = storage function
x = ∇E(q) =
mixed strategy of the agent
convex combination (CC):
any CC of storage functions produces
a lossless learning dynamic that
yields the same CC of mixed strategies
p = instantaneous payoffs
R
hx, pi dt

Physical System
gravity
h = vertical height
V (h) = (negative) potential energy
F = ∇V (h) =
gravitational force
linear combination (LC):
any LC of potential energy function is
a potential energy function that yields
the same LC of gravitational forces
v = velocity
R
hF, vi dt

Figure 1. Analogues between lossless online learning dynamic and physical system. The evolution of a system of learning dynamics can
be thought of as capturing the movements of particles, thus tools from control theory can find direct application in the study of learning
dynamics in games.

