Beyond the Pareto Efficient Frontier: Constraint Active Search for
Multiobjective Experimental Design

Gustavo Malkomes 1 Bolong Cheng 1 Eric Hans Lee 1 Michael McCourt 1

Abstract
Many problems in engineering design and simulation require balancing competing objectives under
the presence of uncertainty. Sample-efficient multiobjective optimization methods focus on the objective function values in metric space and ignore
the sampling behavior of the design configurations in parameter space. Consequently, they may
provide little actionable insight on how to choose
designs in the presence of metric uncertainty or
limited precision when implementing a chosen
design. We propose a new formulation that accounts for the importance of the parameter space
and is thus more suitable for multiobjective design problems; instead of searching for the Paretoefficient frontier, we solicit the desired minimum
performance thresholds on all objectives to define
regions of satisfaction. We introduce an active
search algorithm called Expected Coverage Improvement (ECI) to efficiently discover the region
of satisfaction and simultaneously sample diverse
acceptable configurations. We demonstrate our
algorithm on several design and simulation domains: mechanical design, additive manufacturing, medical monitoring, and plasma physics.

1. Introduction
Accelerated design and optimization via machine learning
is receiving increasing interest in multiple science and engineering disciplines, such as materials design, drug discovery,
and chemical engineering (Forrester et al., 2008; Negoescu
et al., 2011; Molesky et al., 2018). Using numerical simulation to study the impact of design decisions prior to
manufacturing has become a common strategy to reduce the
number of fabrications, thus reducing the substantial cost of
development cycles.
1
SigOpt, an Intel company, San Francisco, CA,
USA. Correspondence to:
Gustavo Malkomes <gustavo.malkomes@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In recent years, active learning has gained popularity in
scientific communities. These adaptive methods more efficiently identify promising candidates compared to bruteforce or evolutionary algorithms (Song et al., 2018; Attia
et al., 2020; Haghanifar et al., 2020; Duris et al., 2020).
Bayesian optimization (BO) is arguably the most prominent example of active learning, where the goal is to seek
the optimizer arg maxx f (x) of an expensive-to-evaluate
black-box objective f .
However, in most real world applications, multiple competing objectives need to be investigated (Koziel et al., 2014;
Singh et al., 2016). Optimality of multiobjective problems
is usually defined by the concept of Pareto efficiency, where
no individual objective can be improved without loss in at
least one other objective. Most work on optimizing multiple
objectives focuses on searching for the Pareto efficient frontier (and the corresponding parameters). In general, for an
m-objective problem, the (nearly) Pareto efficient solutions
are assumed to be a dense set of points on an (m − 1)dimensional manifold (Konakovic-Lukovic et al., 2020).
Unfortunately, using the Pareto frontier as the measurement
of success is limiting in engineering and design applications;
candidates near the Pareto frontier, unaccounted for in most
optimization literature, are still of scientific interest in the
real world (del Rosario et al., 2020).
In practice, design objectives can also be formulated as inequality constraints, where the decision makers seek to find
design choices that satisfy known performance thresholds
on each objective. This formulation is related to the topic
of level set estimation (LSE) in the single objective setting.
Its goal is to determine the decision boundary of parameter
space that separates it above and below the threshold on
the objective (Gotovos et al., 2013). However, the notion
of level set does not naturally extend to the multiobjective
settings; a naive approach of identifying the level set for
each objective and taking the intersection is not computationally efficient. In addition, most LSE algorithms focus
on searching for the decision boundary; in the multiobjective setting, this behavior cannot reveal the tradeoff among
objectives, since there are not enough samples within the
region of interest.
Figure 1 illustrates the limitations of multiobjective BO and

