Local Algorithms for Finding Densely Connected Clusters

Peter Macgregor 1 He Sun 1

Abstract
Local graph clustering is an important algorithmic
technique for analysing massive graphs, and has
been widely applied in many research fields of
data science. While the objective of most (local)
graph clustering algorithms is to find a vertex set
of low conductance, there has been a sequence of
recent studies that highlight the importance of the
inter-connection between clusters when analysing
real-world datasets. Following this line of research, in this work we study local algorithms for
finding a pair of vertex sets defined with respect to
their inter-connection and their relationship with
the rest of the graph. The key to our analysis is a
new reduction technique that relates the structure
of multiple sets to a single vertex set in the reduced graph. Among many potential applications,
we show that our algorithms successfully recover
densely connected clusters in the Interstate Disputes Dataset and the US Migration Dataset.

1. Introduction
Given an arbitrary vertex u of a graph G = (V, E) as
input, a local graph clustering algorithm finds some lowconductance set S ⊂ V containing u, while the algorithm
runs in time proportional to the size of the target cluster
and independent of the size of the graph G. Because of
the increasing size of available datasets, which makes centralised computation too expensive, local graph clustering
has become an important learning technique for analysing a
number of large-scale graphs and has been applied to solve
many other learning and combinatorial optimisation problems (Andersen, 2010; Andersen et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017; Yin et al., 2017; Takai et al., 2020; Fountoulakis et al.,
2020; Liu & Gleich, 2020; Zhu et al., 2013).
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Peter Macgregor <peter.macgregor@ed.ac.uk>, He Sun <h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1.1. Our Contribution
We study local graph clustering for learning the structure
of clusters that are defined by their inter-connections, and
present two local algorithms to achieve this objective in both
undirected graphs and directed ones.
Our first result is a local algorithm for finding densely connected clusters in an undirected graph G = (V, E): given
any seed vertex u, our algorithm is designed to find two clusters L, R around u, which are densely connected to each
other and are loosely connected to V \ (L ∪ R). The design
of our algorithm is based on a new reduction that allows
us to relate the connections between L, R and V \ (L ∪ R)
to a single cluster in the resulting graph H, and a generalised analysis of Pagerank-based algorithms for local graph
clustering. The significance of our designed algorithm is
demonstrated by our experimental results on the Interstate
Dispute Network from 1816 to 2010. By connecting two
vertices (countries) with an undirected edge weighted according to the severity of their military disputes and using
the USA as the seed vertex, our algorithm recovers two
groups of countries that tend to have conflicts with each
other, and shows how the two groups evolve over time. In
particular, as shown in Figures 1(a)-(d), our algorithm not
only identifies the changing roles of Russia, Japan, and eastern Europe in line with 20th century geopolitics, but also
the reunification of east and west Germany around 1990.
We further study densely connected clusters in a directed
graph (digraph). Specifically, given any vertex u in a digraph G = (V, E) as input, our second local algorithm
outputs two disjoint vertex sets L and R, such that (i) there
are many edges from L to R, and (ii) L ∪ R is loosely connected to V \ (L ∪ R). The design of our algorithm is based
on the following two techniques: (1) a new reduction that
allows us to relate the edge weight from L to R, as well
as the edge connections between L ∪ R and V \ (L ∪ R),
to a single vertex set in the resulting undirected graph H;
(2) a refined analysis of the ESP-based algorithm for local
graph clustering. We show that our local algorithm is able
to recover densely connected clusters in the US migration
dataset, in which two vertex sets L, R defined as above
could represent a higher-order migration trend. In particular,
as shown in Figures 1(e)–(h), by using different counties as
starting vertices, our algorithm uncovers refined and more

