Disentangling Labeling and Sampling Bias for Learning in Large-output Spaces
Ankit Singh Rawat 1 Aditya Krishna Menon 1 Wittawat Jitkrittum 1 Sadeep Jayasumana 1 Felix X. Yu 1
Sashank J. Reddi 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Negative sampling schemes enable efficient training given a large number of classes, by offering a
means to approximate a computationally expensive loss function that takes all labels into account.
In this paper, we present a new connection between these schemes and loss modification techniques for countering label imbalance. We show
that different negative sampling schemes implicitly trade-off performance on dominant versus rare
labels. Further, we provide a unified means to explicitly tackle both sampling bias, arising from
working with a subset of all labels, and labeling
bias, which is inherent to the data due to label
imbalance. We empirically verify our findings on
long-tail classification and retrieval benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Classification problems with a large number of labels arise
in language modelling (Mikolov et al., 2013; Levy & Goldberg, 2014), recommender systems (Covington et al., 2016;
Xu et al., 2016), and information retrieval (Agrawal et al.,
2013; Prabhu & Varma, 2014). Such large-output problems
pose a core challenge: losses such as the softmax crossentropy can be prohibitive to optimise, as they depend on
the entire set of labels. Several works have thus devised
negative sampling schemes for efficiently and effectively
approximating such losses (Bengio & Senecal, 2003; 2008;
Blanc & Rendle, 2018; Ruiz et al., 2018; Bamler & Mandt,
2020).
Broadly, negative sampling techniques sample a subset of
“negative” labels, which are used to contrast against the
observed “positive” labels. One further applies a suitable
weighting on these “negatives”, which ostensibly corrects
the sampling bias introduced by the dependence on a random subset of labels. Intuitively, such bias assesses how
1
Google Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Ankit
Singh Rawat <ankitsrawat@google.com>, Aditya Krishna Menon
<adityakmenon@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

closely a scheme approximates the unsampled loss on the
full label set. This bias is well understood for sampled
softmax schemes (see, e.g., Bengio & Senecal (2008)); surprisingly, however, far less is understood about other popular
schemes, e.g., within-batch and uniform sampling (cf. §2.2).
In this paper, we systematically study the sampling bias of
generic negative sampling schemes, with two main findings.
First, we precisely characterise the implicit losses optimised
by such schemes (§3). This reveals that, e.g., uniform and
within-batch sampling do not faithfully approximate the
unsampled loss; thus, measured by the yardstick of sampling
bias, such schemes appear woefully sub-optimal.
Intriguingly, however, our analysis further reveals a novel
labeling bias perspective on negative sampling. Specifically,
we show that when the label distribution is skewed — as
is common with a large number of labels (Jain et al., 2016)
— different negative sampling schemes implicitly trade-off
performance on dominant versus rare labels (§4). Consequently, while certain schemes may incur a sampling bias,
they may prove highly effective in modeling rare labels.
Put together, our analysis reveals that negative sampling can
account for both sampling and labeling bias, with the latter
done implicitly. Note that the two concerns fundamentally
differ: the former results from working with a random subset
of labels, while the latter results from an inherent property
of the data. By disentangling these concerns, we arrive at a
unified means to explicitly tackle both biases (§4.2).
In summary, our contributions are:
(i) we precisely characterise the effect of generic negative
sampling schemes by explicating the implicit losses they
optimise (§3; Theorem 3). This shows that popular
schemes such as uniform and within-batch negative
sampling (Hidasi et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017) do
not faithfully approximate the unsampled loss.
(ii) we provide a novel connection between negative sampling and long-tail learning, and show that negative sampling can implicitly trade off performance on dominant
versus rare labels (§4.1; Proposition 4). This implies
that, e.g., within-batch sampling can boost performance
on rare labels despite not approximating the unsampled
loss. Further, this yields a unified means to tailor sam-

