Policy Caches with Successor Features

Mark Nemecek 1 Ronald Parr 1

Abstract
Transfer in reinforcement learning is based on the
idea that it is possible to use what is learned in one
task to improve the learning process in another
task. For transfer between tasks which share transition dynamics but differ in reward function, successor features have been shown to be a useful representation which allows for efficient computation
of action-value functions for previously-learned
policies in new tasks. These functions induce policies in the new tasks, so an agent may not need to
learn a new policy for each new task it encounters,
especially if it is allowed some amount of suboptimality in those tasks. We present new bounds
for the performance of optimal policies in a new
task, as well as an approach to use these bounds to
decide, when presented with a new task, whether
to use cached policies or learn a new policy.

1. Introduction
When an agent learns to perform a set of separate tasks,
one might hope that what the agent learns in one task will
improve learning in subsequent tasks. This is called transfer,
and the improvement may take different forms. Ultimately,
the benefit of transfer is a reduction in the number of samples
or amount of time required for the agent to reach a desired
level of performance in the new task. When collecting
samples is an expensive process – as is true for many realworld problems – such a reduction can be a large boon.
While this impact is often considered during the training of
a new policy, we will show that it also applies when an agent
can avoid learning a new policy entirely because those it has
previously cached are sufficient to meet the performance
requirement.
The extent to which transfer is realized in practice or analyzed in theory depends largely upon the relationship between the tasks involved. We consider transfer between
1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Mark Nemecek
<markn@cs.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tasks which vary in their reward functions, but where the
dynamics remain the same. Although limited in scope, this
range of changes can induce drastically different optimal
behaviors. For example, a change in the reward function for
a driving task could change the optimal policy from a safe
driving policy that avoids collisions to a demolition derby
style policy that seeks them out. While real-world scenarios
may not include such a wide range of behaviors, it is quite
reasonable to expect that an agent will be confronted with
changing costs or rewards that reflect differing priorities
or circumstances over the lifetime of the agent. Even if
the change in reward function is clearly communicated, the
adequacy of previous policies for the new task may not be
obvious. The question we address in this paper is: When
presented with a new task (reward function), can policies
from previous tasks suffice, or should we learn a new policy?
To answer this question, we build upon earlier work of Barreto et al. (2017), which assumes that the reward function
can be decomposed into a linear combination of features,
and uses successor features (SFs), an extension of the successor representation (Dayan, 1993), to learn Q-values that
are parameterized by the reward weights. This permits efficient computation of the Q-values for a known policy under
the reward function from a new task, regardless of which
task was used to learn the policy. Although Barreto et al.
used successor features with Generalized Policy Improvement (GPI) to provide a lower bound on the value of reusing
previous policies in a new task, they did not provide a strong
bound on the gap between this and the optimal policy for
the new task, leaving little practical guidance on when it
would be worth learning a new policy for the new task. Our
work addresses this limitation.
Hunt et al. indirectly include an upper bound for the optimal
soft Q-function in a new task (Hunt et al., 2019) through
their Theorem 3.2 under the assumption that the new reward
function is a convex combination of the base reward functions. As soft Q-learning approaches hard-max Q-learning
in the limit as the temperature parameter goes to zero, intuition might suggest that their theorem would apply in
the same way, but this is not the case. Additionally, their
approach requires estimating the function Cb∞ , which corrects for the divergence between policies, for each new task.
While this can be done off-policy with the same samples
used to estimate the base soft Q-functions, this is not neces-

