Neural Tangent Generalization Attacks

Chia-Hung Yuan 1 Shan-Hung Wu 1

Abstract
The remarkable performance achieved by Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) in many applications is
followed by the rising concern about data privacy
and security. Since DNNs usually require large
datasets to train, many practitioners scrape data
from external sources such as the Internet. However, an external data owner may not be willing
to let this happen, causing legal or ethical issues.
In this paper, we study the generalization attacks
against DNNs, where an attacker aims to slightly
modify training data in order to spoil the training
process such that a trained network lacks generalizability. These attacks can be performed by
data owners and protect data from unexpected use.
However, there is currently no efficient generalization attack against DNNs due to the complexity of
a bilevel optimization involved. We propose the
Neural Tangent Generalization Attack (NTGA)
that, to the best of our knowledge, is the first work
enabling clean-label, black-box generalization attack against DNNs. We conduct extensive experiments, and the empirical results demonstrate the
effectiveness of NTGA. Our code and perturbed
datasets are available at: https://github.
com/lionelmessi6410/ntga.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
performance in many applications, including computer vision, natural language processing, etc. Training a modern
DNN usually requires a large dataset to reach better performance. This encourages many practitioners to scrape data
from external sources such as the Internet. However, an
external data owner may not be willing to let this happen.
For example, many online healthcare or music streaming
services own privacy-sensitive and/or copyright-protected
1
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, R.O.C.. Correspondence to: Shan-Hung Wu
<shwu@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

data. They may not want their data being used to train a
mass surveillance model or music generator that violates
their policies or business interests. In fact, there has been
an increasing amount of lawsuits between data owners and
machine-learning companies recently (Vincent, 2019; Burt,
2020; Conklin, 2020). The growing concern about data privacy and security gives rise to a question: is it possible to
prevent a DNN model from learning on given data?
Generalization attacks are one way to reach this goal. Given
a dataset, an attacker perturbs a certain amount of data with
the aim of spoiling the DNN training process such that
a trained network lacks generalizability. Meanwhile, the
perturbations should be slight enough so legitimate users
can still consume the data normally. These attacks can
be performed by data owners to protect their data from
unexpected use.
Unfortunately, there is currently no practical generalization
attack against DNNs due to the complexity of an involving
bilevel optimization (Demontis et al., 2019), which can be
solved exactly and efficiently only when the learning model
is convex (e.g., SVMs, LASSO, Logistic/Ridge regression,
etc.) (Biggio et al., 2012; Kloft & Laskov, 2012; Mei & Zhu,
2015; Xiao et al., 2015; Koh & Liang, 2017; Jagielski et al.,
2018). The attacks against convex models are shown not
transferrable to non-convex DNNs (Muñoz-González et al.,
2017; Demontis et al., 2019). The studies (Muñoz-González
et al., 2017; Demontis et al., 2019; Chan-Hon-Tong, 2019)
solve relaxations of the bilevel problem with a white-box
assumption where the architecture and exact weights of
the model after training can be known in advance. This
assumption, however, does not hold for the owners serving
data to the public or third parties. Efficient computing of a
black-box generalization attack against DNNs remains an
open problem.
In this paper, we propose the Neural Tangent Generalization
Attacks (NTGAs) that, given a dataset, efficiently compute a
generalization attack against DNNs. NTGAs do not require
the specific knowledge of the learning model and thus can
produce black-box generalization attacks. Furthermore, they
do not change the labels of the examples in the dataset,
allowing legitimate users to consume the dataset as usual.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work enabling
clean-label, black-box generalization attacks against DNNs.

