Finding Relevant Information via a Discrete Fourier Expansion

Mohsen Heidari 1 Jithin K. Sreedharan 2 Gil I. Shamir 3 Wojciech Szpankowski 1

Abstract
A fundamental obstacle in learning information
from data is the presence of nonlinear redundancies and dependencies in it. To address this,
we propose a Fourier-based approach to extract
relevant information in the supervised setting.
We first develop a novel Fourier expansion for
functions of correlated binary random variables.
This expansion is a generalization of the standard Fourier analysis on the Boolean cube beyond
product probability spaces. We further extend our
Fourier analysis to stochastic mappings. As an
important application of this analysis, we investigate learning with feature subset selection. We
reformulate this problem in the Fourier domain
and introduce a computationally efficient measure
for selecting features. Bridging the Bayesian error
rate with the Fourier coefficients, we demonstrate
that the Fourier expansion provides a powerful
tool to characterize nonlinear dependencies in the
features-label relation. Via theoretical analysis,
we show that our proposed measure finds provably
asymptotically optimal feature subsets. Lastly, we
present an algorithm based on our measure and
verify our findings via numerical experiments on
various datasets.

1. Introduction
A central challenge in learning with feature selection is to
jointly identify nonlinear redundancies within the features
and the dependencies in the feature-label relation. Many
well-known feature selection approaches (supervised or unsupervised) are based on measures that capture only linear
relations or focus on the features individually (Guyon &
Elisseeff, 2003; Li et al., 2018; Solorio-Fernández et al.,
2020). Kernel-based methods are on the other hand able to
1
NSF Center for Science of Information, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA 2 Wadhwani AI, Mumbai, India 3 Google Inc., Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to:
Mohsen Heidari <mheidari@purdue.edu>, Jithin K. Sreedharan
<jithin@wadhwaniai.org>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

capture non-linear relations (Gretton et al., 2005; Chen et al.,
2017; Wei et al., 2016). However, they are prohibitive in
large datasets as the computational complexity of computing
a kernel grows super linearly with the number of the samples (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2015). Alternatively, informationtheoretic metrics are powerful candidates in quantifying nonlinear dependencies among the random variables (Vergara
& Estévez, 2014; Koller & Sahami, 1996; Yu & Liu, 2004;
Battiti, 1994; Peng et al., 2005). However, estimating such
quantities usually requires high sample complexity. Other
approaches are wrapper and embedded methods where the
feature subsets are evaluated directly by an induction algorithm (Yamada et al., 2020b). Such approaches are usually
computationally expensive and, hence, prohibitive in large
datasets.
In this work, we take an alternative approach and adapt
discrete Fourier analysis to capture nonlinear relations with
low sample complexity while avoiding kernel computations.
The discrete Fourier expansion (on the Boolean cube) provides an essential tool to characterize different levels of
“nonlinearities” in a function. In this expansion, any realvalued function on the Boolean cube can be written as a
linear combination of parities (O’Donnell, 2014; Wolf,
2008). Highly “nonlinear” functions tend to have Fourier
expansion with large coefficients for high-degree parities —
potentially making the Fourier expansion a powerful tool
in learning problems. However, this expansion has a few
limitations that need to be addressed. First, it is developed
for product probability spaces (mutually independent input
variables). Secondly, this expansion is defined only for deterministic functions. These assumptions are too strong,
as learning problems often involve correlated features with
stochastic labeling. In this work, we intend to address these
challenges by proposing a Fourier-based feature selection
algorithm.
1.1. Main Contributions
We demonstrate, via theoretical analysis and numerical experiments, that the Fourier expansion provides a powerful
tool to characterize nonlinear redundancies and dependencies in the data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
instance of using the Fourier expansion as a measure in supervised feature selection. In what follows, we summarize
the main contributions of this paper.

