Generalization Error Bound for Hyperbolic Ordinal Embedding

Atsushi Suzuki 1 Atsushi Nitanda 2 Jing Wang 1 Linchuan Xu 3 Marc Cavazza 1 Kenji Yamanishi 4

Abstract
Hyperbolic ordinal embedding (HOE) represents
entities as points in hyperbolic space so that they
agree as well as possible with given constraints
in the form of entity i is more similar to entity
j than to entity k. It has been experimentally
shown that HOE can obtain representations of hierarchical data such as a knowledge base and a
citation network effectively, owing to hyperbolic
space’s exponential growth property. However,
its theoretical analysis has been limited to ideal
noiseless settings, and its generalization error in
compensation for hyperbolic space’s exponential
representation ability has not been guaranteed.
The difficulty is that existing generalization error
bound derivations for ordinal embedding based
on the Gramian matrix are not applicable in HOE,
since hyperbolic space is not inner-product space.
In this paper, through our novel characterization
of HOE with decomposed Lorentz Gramian matrices, we provide a generalization error bound of
HOE for the first time, which is at most exponential with respect to the embedding space’s radius.
Our comparison between the bounds of HOE and
Euclidean ordinal embedding shows that HOE’s
generalization error comes at a reasonable cost
considering its exponential representation ability.

1. Introduction
Ordinal embedding, also known as a non-metric multidimensional scaling (Shepard, 1962a;b; Kruskal, 1964a;b),
aims to represent entities as points in a metric space so that
1

School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Faculty
of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of Greenwich, United
Kingdom. 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan. 3 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. 4 Department of Mathematical Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science and
Technology, The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Atsushi Suzuki <atsushi.suzuki.rd@gmail.com>, Jing Wang
<jing.wang@greenwich.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

they are as consistent as possible with given ordinal data in
the form of “entity i is more similar to entity j than to entity
k.” Many ordinal embedding methods have been proposed
to obtain representations in Euclidean space, which we call
Euclidean ordinal embedding (EOE) in this paper, and their
effectiveness has been shown in a variety of machine learning areas such as embedding image data and artist dataset
(Agarwal et al., 2007; Tamuz et al., 2011; van der Maaten &
Weinberger, 2012). However, Euclidean space has a limitation in embedding data with a hierarchical tree-like structure
(Lamping & Rao, 1994; Ritter, 1999; Nickel & Kiela, 2017)
such as knowledge bases and complex networks. This limitation is due to Euclidean space’s polynomial growth property,
which means that the volume or surface of a ball in Euclidean space grows polynomially with respect to its radius.
This Euclidean space’s growth speed is significantly slower
than what embedding hierarchical data such as an r-ary
tree (r ≥ 2) requires, which is exponential. To overcome
this limitation, a few recent papers (Suzuki et al., 2019;
Tabaghi & Dokmanic, 2020) have proposed ordinal embedding methods using hyperbolic space for hierarchical data,
which we call hyperbolic ordinal embedding (HOE) in this
paper. In contrast to Euclidean space’s polynomial growth
property, hyperbolic space has the exponential growth property, that is, the volume of any ball in hyperbolic space
grows exponentially with respect to its radius (Lamping &
Rao, 1994; Ritter, 1999; Nickel & Kiela, 2017). As a result,
we can embed any tree to hyperbolic space with arbitrarily
low distortion (Sarkar, 2011), and conversely, hyperbolic
space’s distance structure is well-approximated by a tree.
By leveraging this hyperbolic space’s advantage, Suzuki
et al. (2019) have proposed an HOE method based on Riemannian stochastic gradient descent and achieved effective
embedding of hierarchical tree-like data in low-dimensional
space. Recently, Tabaghi & Dokmanic (2020) have solved
the hyperbolic distance geometry problem, which includes
HOE as a special case, by semi-definite relaxation of the
problem and projection operation from Minkowski space
to a hyperboloid. These two papers have experimentally
shown HOE’s potential ability to obtain low-dimensional
representations effectively for hierarchical tree-like data
such as a knowledge base and a citation network. However,
the theoretical guarantee of HOE’s performance is limited
to ideal noiseless settings (Suzuki et al., 2019), and HOE’s
generalization performance in general noisy settings has not

