High-Performance Large-Scale Image Recognition Without Normalization

Andrew Brock 1 Soham De 1 Samuel L. Smith 1 Karen Simonyan 1

Abstract
Batch normalization is a key component of most
image classification models, but it has many
undesirable properties stemming from its dependence on the batch size and interactions between
examples. Although recent work has succeeded
in training deep ResNets without normalization
layers, these models do not match the test
accuracies of the best batch-normalized networks,
and are often unstable for large learning rates
or strong data augmentations. In this work, we
develop an adaptive gradient clipping technique
which overcomes these instabilities, and design a
significantly improved class of Normalizer-Free
ResNets. Our smaller models match the test
accuracy of an EfficientNet-B7 on ImageNet
while being up to 8.7× faster to train, and our
largest models attain a new state-of-the-art top-1
accuracy of 86.5%. In addition, Normalizer-Free
models attain significantly better performance
than their batch-normalized counterparts when
fine-tuning on ImageNet after large-scale
pre-training on a dataset of 300 million labeled
images, with our best models obtaining an
accuracy of 89.2%. Code and pretrained models
are available at https://github.com/
deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/
master/nfnets

1. Introduction
The vast majority of recent models in computer vision are
variants of deep residual networks (He et al., 2016b;a),
trained with batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
The combination of these two architectural innovations has
enabled practitioners to train significantly deeper networks
which can achieve higher accuracies on both the training
set and the test set. Batch normalization also smoothens the
loss landscape (Santurkar et al., 2018), which enables stable
1

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Andrew Brock <ajbrock@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. ImageNet Validation Accuracy vs Training Latency.
All numbers are single-model, single crop. Our NFNet-F1 model
achieves comparable accuracy to an EffNet-B7 while being 8.7×
faster to train. Our NFNet-F5 model has similar training latency to
EffNet-B7, but achieves a state-of-the-art 86.0% top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet. We further improve on this using Sharpness Aware
Minimization (Foret et al., 2021) to achieve 86.5% top-1 accuracy.

training with larger learning rates and at larger batch sizes
(Bjorck et al., 2018; De & Smith, 2020), and it can have a
regularizing effect (Hoffer et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2018).
However, batch normalization has three significant practical
disadvantages. First, it is a surprisingly expensive computational primitive, which incurs memory overhead (Rota Bulò
et al., 2018), and significantly increases the time required to
evaluate the gradient in some networks (Gitman & Ginsburg,
2017). Second, it introduces a discrepancy between the behaviour of the model during training and at inference time
(Summers & Dinneen, 2019; Singh & Shrivastava, 2019),
introducing hidden hyper-parameters that have to be tuned.
Third, and most importantly, batch normalization breaks the
independence between training examples in the minibatch.
This third property has a range of negative consequences.
For instance, practitioners have found that batch normalized
networks are often difficult to replicate precisely on different hardware, and batch normalization is often the cause of
subtle implementation errors, especially during distributed
training (Pham et al., 2019). Furthermore, batch normal-

