Differentially Private Correlation Clustering

Mark Bun * 1 Marek Eliáš * 2 Janardhan Kulkarni * 3

Abstract
Correlation clustering is a widely used technique
in unsupervised machine learning. Motivated by
applications where individual privacy is a concern,
we initiate the study of differentially private correlation clustering. We propose an algorithm that
achieves subquadratic additive error compared
to the optimal cost. In contrast, straightforward
adaptations of existing non-private algorithms all
lead to a trivial quadratic error. Finally, we give
a lower bound showing that any pure differentially private algorithm for correlation clustering
requires additive error of Ω(n).

1. Introduction
Correlation clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised
machine learning. Given a set of objects and information
about whether each pair is “similar” or “dissimilar,” the goal
is to partition the objects into clusters that are as consistent
with this information as possible. The correlation clustering
problem was introduced by Bansal et al. (2002) and has
since received significant attention in both the theoretical
and applied machine learning communities. It has been
successfully applied in numerous domains, being used to
perform co-reference resolution (Zheng et al., 2011), image
segmentation (Kim et al., 2014), gene clustering (Ben-Dor
et al., 1999), and cancer mutation analysis (Hou et al., 2016).
In many important settings, the relationships between the
objects we wish to cluster may depend on sensitive personal
information about individuals. For example, suppose we
wish to perform entity resolution on a collection of companies by clustering those that likely belong to the same
organizational structure. For example, we would like to
group Amazon Marketplace, Amazon Fresh, and less obviously, Twitch into the same cluster. The identities of the
companies are public information, but our information about
the relationships between them may come from sensitive
*
Equal contribution 1 Boston University, Boston 2 CWI, Amsterdam 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond. Correspondence to: Marek
Eliáš <marek.elias@cwi.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

information, e.g., from transaction records and personal
communications. Moreover, the information we have on
a relationship could be dramatically affected by individual
data records. We initiate the study of differentially private
correlation clustering, using edge level privacy, to address
individual privacy concerns in such scenarios.
In this work, we design efficient algorithms for several different formulations of the private correlation clustering problem. In all of these variants, objects are represented as a
set of vertices V in a graph. Two vertices are connected
by an edge with either positive or negative label if we have
information about their similarity, e.g., coming from the
output of a comparison classifier. Of special interest is when
the graph is complete, i.e., we possess similarity information about all pairs of vertices, though we also consider the
problem for general graph topologies. Edges in the graph
may be either unweighted or weighted, where the weight
of an edge can be viewed as the confidence with which its
endpoints are similar (positive label) or dissimilar (negative
label).
A perfect clustering of the graph would be a partition of V
into clusters C1 , . . . , Ck such that all positive-labeled edges
connect vertices in the same cluster and all negative-labeled
edges connect vertices in different clusters. In general, similarity information may be inconsistent, so no such clustering
may exist. Thus, we define two problems corresponding to
optimizing two related objective functions. In the Minimum
Disagreement (MinDis) problem, we aim to minimize the
total weight of violated edges, i.e., the sum of the weights of
positive edges that cross clusters plus the sum of the weights
of negative edges within clusters. The Maximum Agreement (MaxAgr) problem is to maximize the sum of weights
of positive edges within clusters plus the sum of weights
of negative edges across clusters. Note that the number of
clusters k is generally not specified in advanced. For both
problems, we study algorithms with mixed multiplicative
and additive guarantees, i.e., algorithms that report clusterings with MinDis ≤ α·OPT +β or MaxAgr ≥ α·OPT −β.
1.1. Our results and techniques
All the formulations of private correlation clustering we consider admit algorithms with low additive error (and no multiplicative error) based on the exponential mechanism (Mc-

