Finite mixture models do not reliably learn the number of components

Diana Cai * 1 Trevor Campbell * 2 Tamara Broderick 3

Abstract
Scientists and engineers are often interested in
learning the number of subpopulations (or components) present in a data set. A common suggestion is to use a finite mixture model (FMM)
with a prior on the number of components. Past
work has shown the resulting FMM componentcount posterior is consistent; that is, the posterior
concentrates on the true, generating number of
components. But consistency requires the assumption that the component likelihoods are perfectly
specified, which is unrealistic in practice. In this
paper, we add rigor to data-analysis folk wisdom
by proving that under even the slightest model
misspecification, the FMM component-count posterior diverges: the posterior probability of any
particular finite number of components converges
to 0 in the limit of infinite data. Contrary to intuition, posterior-density consistency is not sufficient to establish this result. We develop novel sufficient conditions that are more realistic and easily
checkable than those common in the asymptotics
literature. We illustrate practical consequences of
our theory on simulated and real data.

1. Introduction
Mixture modeling is a mainstay of statistical machine learning. In applications where the number of mixture components is unknown in advance, a principal inferential goal is
to estimate and interpret this number. For example, practitioners might wish to find the number of latent genetic
populations (Pritchard et al., 2000; Lorenzen et al., 2006;
Huelsenbeck and Andolfatto, 2007; Tonkin-Hill et al., 2019),
gene tissue profiles (Yeung et al., 2001; Medvedovic and
Sivaganesan, 2002), cell types (Chan et al., 2008; Prab*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 2 Department of Statistics, University of British
Columbia 3 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Diana Cai <dcai@cs.princeton.edu>, Trevor
Campbell <trevor@stat.ubc.ca>, Tamara Broderick <tbroderick@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

hakaran et al., 2016), microscopy groups (Rubin-Delanchy
et al., 2015; Griffié et al., 2016), haplotypes (Xing et al.,
2006), switching Markov regimes in US dollar exchange
rate data (Otranto and Gallo, 2002), gamma-ray burst types
(Mukherjee et al., 1998), segmentation regions in an image (e.g., tissue types in an MRI scan (Banfield and Raftery,
1993)), observed humans in radar data (Teklehaymanot et al.,
2018), basketball shot selection groups (Hu et al., 2020), or
communities in a social network (Geng et al., 2019; Legramanti et al., 2020).
A natural question then is: can we reliably learn the number of latent groups in a data set? To make this question
concrete, we focus on a Bayesian approach. Consider the
case where the true, generating number of components is
known. A natural check on a Bayesian mixture analysis
is to establish that the Bayesian posterior on the number
of components increasingly concentrates near the truth as
the number of data points becomes arbitrarily large. In the
remainder, we will focus on this check—though our work
has practical implications beyond Bayesian analysis.
A standard Bayesian analysis uses a component-count prior
with support on all strictly-positive integers (Miller and Harrison, 2018). Nobile (1994) has shown that the componentcount posterior of the resulting finite mixture model (FMM)
does concentrate at the true number of components. But
crucially, this result depends on the assumption that the
component likelihoods are perfectly specified. In every
application we have listed above, the true generating component likelihoods do not take a convenient parametric form
that might be specified in advance. Indeed, some form of
misspecification, even if slight, is typical in practice. So we
must ask how the component-count posterior behaves when
the component likelihoods are misspecified.
Data science folk wisdom suggests that when component
likelihoods are misspecified, mixture models will tend to
overestimate the number of clusters; see, e.g., Section 7.1 of
Frühwirth-Schnatter (2006). This overestimation is apparent in Figure 1, which shows the component-count posterior
of a Gaussian mixture model applied to two example gene
expression data sets (de Souto et al., 2008; Prabhakaran
et al., 2016). In fact, Figure 1 demonstrates an effect far
worse than just overestimation: the posterior distribution appears to concentrate for any (large enough) fixed amount of

