How could Neural Networks understand Programs?

Dinglan Peng 1 Shuxin Zheng 2 Yatao Li 2 Guolin Ke 2 Di He 2 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Semantic understanding of programs is a fundamental problem for programming language processing (PLP). Recent works that learn representations of code based on pre-training techniques
in NLP have pushed the frontiers in this direction. However, the semantics of PL and NL have
essential differences. These being ignored, we
believe it is difficult to build a model to better
understand programs, by either directly applying
off-the-shelf NLP pre-training techniques to the
source code, or adding features to the model by
the heuristic. In fact, the semantics of a program
can be rigorously defined by formal semantics
in PL theory. For example, the operational semantics, describes the meaning of a valid program as updating the environment (i.e., the memory address-value function) through fundamental
operations, such as memory I/O and conditional
branching. Inspired by this, we propose a novel
program semantics learning paradigm, that the
model should learn from information composed of
(1) the representations which align well with the
fundamental operations in operational semantics,
and (2) the information of environment transition,
which is indispensable for program understanding. To validate our proposal, we present a hierarchical Transformer-based pre-training model
called OSCAR to better facilitate the understanding of programs. OSCAR learns from intermediate representation (IR) and an encoded representation derived from static analysis, which
are used for representing the fundamental operations and approximating the environment transitions respectively. OSCAR empirically shows
the outstanding capability of program semantics
understanding on many practical software engineering tasks. Code and models are released at:
https://github.com/pdlan/OSCAR.

1. Introduction
Modern software typically contains tons of code, functions,
and modules with overwhelmingly complex structure or organization scheme. It poses great challenges for writing,
maintaining, and analyzing such programs. Fortunately, a
series of deep learning-based productivity tools were developed to automatically help programmers by analyzing
program (Ding et al., 2019; Duan et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2020a), security auditing (Zhou et al., 2019; Buratti et al.,
2020), code retrieval (Luan et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020;
Cummins et al., 2020b), and so on.
Inspired by the success of pre-trained representation for
semantics understanding of natural language (Devlin et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2020), there are many
recent attempts to graft the conventional NLP pre-training
techniques to source code (Buratti et al., 2020; Feng et al.,
2020; Lachaux et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2020a), in which the code representation is obtained by capturing contextual information from a substantial amount of
source code text, and is then used for a variety of downstream software engineering tasks after fine-tuning. For
instance, CuBERT (Kanade et al., 2020) leverages the powerful pre-training contextual embedding model BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) to learn informative representations on
a Python corpus; CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) learns
general-purpose representations to bridge natural language
(NL) and high-level programming language (PL) by pretraining on NL-PL pairs. Furthermore, features designed by
experts (e.g., data flow graph) (Guo et al., 2020) are added
to the pre-training model, aiming to provide additional information for program semantics understanding.

1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft
Research Asia. Correspondence to: Shuxin Zheng, Yatao Li, Di
He <{shuz,yatli,dihe}@microsoft.com>.

However, programming languages have many fundamental
differences in essence with natural languages. For example,
the same program may exhibit different behaviors against
its input and memory state, while there is no such explicit
concept in natural language. Therefore, we argue that the
current approaches that attempt to capture the semantic
proprieties directly from the source code, will limit the
semantics understanding of programs, be it applying off-theshelf NLP pre-training techniques, or adding features to the
model by the heuristic.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Indeed, the rigorous mathematical account of the meaning
(i.e., the semantics) of programming languages (Gunter,

