Fast Projection Onto Convex Smooth Constraints

Ilnura Usmanova 1 Maryam Kamgarpour 2 Andreas Krause 3 Kfir Yehuda Levy 4 5

Abstract
The Euclidean projection onto a convex set is
an important problem that arises in numerous
constrained optimization tasks. Unfortunately, in
many cases, computing projections is computationally demanding. In this work, we focus on
projection problems where the constraints are
smooth and the number of constraints is significantly smaller than the dimension. The runtime
of existing approaches to solving such problems
is either cubic in the dimension or polynomial
in the inverse of the target accuracy. Conversely,
we propose a simple and efficient primal-dual
approach, with a runtime that scales only linearly
with the dimension, and only logarithmically in
the inverse of the target accuracy. We empirically
demonstrate its performance, and compare it with
standard baselines.

1. INTRODUCTION
Constrained optimization problems arise naturally in numerous fields such as control theory, communication, signal processing, and machine learning (ML). A common approach
for solving constrained problems is to project onto the set
of constraints in each step of the optimization method. Indeed, in ML the most popular learning method is projected
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Moreover, projections
are employed within projected quasi-Newton (Schmidt et al.,
2009), and projected Newton-type methods.
The projection operation in itself requires solving a
quadratic optimization problem over the original constraints.
In this work, we address the case where we have several
1
Automatic Control Laboratory, D-ITET, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Canada 3 Department of Computer
Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 4 A Viterby fellow 5 Department
of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Ilnura Usmanova <ilnurau@control.ee.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

smooth constraints, i.e., our constraint set K is
K = {x ∈ Rn : hi (x) ≤ 0 ; ∀i ∈ [m]} ,

(1)

where hi ’s are convex and smooth. We focus on the case
where the dimension of the problem n is high, and the number of constraints m is low. This captures several important
ML applications, like multiple kernel learning (Ye et al.,
2007), semi-supervised learning (Zhu et al., 2006), triangulation in computer vision (Aholt et al., 2012), applications
in signal processing (Huang and Palomar, 2014), solving
constrained MDPs (Altman and Asingleutility, 1999; Jin
and Sidford, 2020).
In some special cases like box constraints, `2 or `1 constraints, the projection problem can be solved very efficiently. Nevertheless, in general there does not exist a
unified and scalable approach for projection. One generic
family of approaches for solving convex constrained problems are Interior Point Methods (IPM) (Karmarkar, 1984;
Nemirovski and Todd, 2008). Unfortunately, in
 general the
runtime of IPMs scales as O n3 m log(n/ε) , where ε is
the accuracy of the solution, so these methods are unsuitable
for high dimensional problems.
Our contribution. We propose a generic and scalable
approach for projecting onto a small number of convex
smooth constraints. Our approach applies generally for any
constraint set that can be described by Eq. (1). Moreover,
our approach extends beyond the projection objective to any
strongly convex and smooth objective. The overall runtime
of our method for finding an approximate projection is
O(nm2.5 log2 (1/ε) + m3.5 log(1/ε)) (see Thm. 3.2 and
the discussion afterwards). Thus, the runtime of our method
scales linearly with n, making it highly suitable for solving
high-dimensional problems that are ubiquitous in ML.
Furthermore, in contrast to the Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm
(Frank and Wolfe, 1956), our approach is generic (i.e., does
not require a linear minimization oracle) and depends only
logarithmically on the accuracy.
Moreover, we extend our technique beyond the case of
intersections of few smooth constraints. In particular, we
provide a conversion scheme that enables to efficiently
project onto norm balls using an oracle that projects onto
their dual. One can interpret this result as an algorithmic
equivalence between projections onto norm ball and its

