Bayesian Structural Adaptation for Continual Learning

Abhishek Kumar * 1 Sunabha Chatterjee * 2 Piyush Rai 3

Abstract
Continual Learning is a learning paradigm where
learning systems are trained on a sequence of
tasks. The goal here is to perform well on the
current task without suffering from a performance
drop on the previous tasks. Two notable directions
among the recent advances in continual learning
with neural networks are (1) variational Bayes
based regularization by learning priors from previous tasks, and, (2) learning the structure of deep
networks to adapt to new tasks. So far, these two
approaches have been largely orthogonal. We
present a novel Bayesian framework based on
continually learning the structure of deep neural
networks, to unify these distinct yet complementary approaches. The proposed framework learns
the deep structure for each task by learning which
weights to be used, and supports inter-task transfer
through the overlapping of different sparse subsets of weights learned by different tasks. An appealing aspect of our proposed continual learning
framework is that it is applicable to both discriminative (supervised) and generative (unsupervised)
settings. Experimental results on supervised and
unsupervised benchmarks demonstrate that our
approach performs comparably or better than recent advances in continual learning.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) (Ring, 1997; Parisi et al., 2019)
is the learning paradigm where a single model is required
to learn solving a sequence of tasks. At any point of time,
the model is expected to (i) make predictions for the tasks
it has seen so far, (ii) if subjected to training data for a
new task, adapt to the new task, leveraging the past knowledge if possible (forward transfer), and benefit the previous
tasks if possible (backward transfer). While the desirable
*

Equal contribution ; work done while at IIT Kanpur.
Microsoft, India 2 SAP Labs, India 3 Department of Computer
Science, IIT Kanpur, India. Correspondence to: Piyush Rai
<piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in>.

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

aspects of more mainstream transfer learning (sharing of
bias between related tasks (Pan & Yang, 2009)) might reasonably be expected here too, the principal challenge is to
retain the predictive power for the older tasks even after
learning new tasks, thus avoiding the so-called catastrophic
forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
Real world applications in, for example, robotics or timeseries forecasting, are rife with this challenging learning
scenario, the ability to adapt to dynamically changing environments or evolving data distributions being essential
in these domains. Continual learning is also desirable in
unsupervised learning problems as well (Smith et al., 2019;
Rao et al., 2019b) where the goal is to learn the underlying
structure or latent representation of the data. Also, as a skill
innate to humans (Flesch et al., 2018), it is naturally an interesting scientific problem to reproduce the same capability
in artificial predictive modelling systems.
Existing approaches to continual learning are mainly based
on three foundational ideas. One of them is to constrain
the important parameters of previous tasks to not deviate
significantly from their previously learned values by using
some form of regularization or trade-off between previous
and new learned weights (Schwarz et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017). A natural way to accomplish this is to train a model using online
Bayesian inference, whereby the posterior of the parameters
learned from task t serves as the prior for task t + 1 as in
Nguyen et al. (2018) and Zeno et al. (2018). This new informed prior helps in the forward transfer, and also prevents
catastrophic forgetting by penalizing large deviations from
itself. In particular, VCL (Nguyen et al., 2018) achieves
the state of the art results by applying this simple idea to
Bayesian neural networks.
The second idea is to perform an incremental model selection for every new task. For neural networks, this is done
by evolving the structure as newer tasks are encountered
(Golkar et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019). To this end, structural
learning is a natural scheme for continual learning as a new
task may require a different network (sub)structure than previous (and possibly unrelated) tasks, and even if the tasks
are highly related, their lower-layer representations can be
very different. Another advantage of structural learning is
that while retaining a shared set of parameters (which can be

