G RAD -M ATCH: Gradient Matching based Data Subset Selection for Efficient
Deep Model Training

Krishnateja Killamsetty 1 Durga Sivasubramanian 2 Ganesh Ramakrishnan 2 Abir De 2 Rishabh Iyer 1

Abstract
The great success of modern machine learning
models on large datasets is contingent on extensive computational resources with high financial
and environmental costs. One way to address this
is by extracting subsets that generalize on par with
the full data. In this work, we propose a general
framework, G RAD -M ATCH, which finds subsets
that closely match the gradient of the training
or validation set. We find such subsets effectively using an orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm. We show rigorous theoretical and convergence guarantees of the proposed algorithm and,
through our extensive experiments on real-world
datasets, show the effectiveness of our proposed
framework. We show that G RAD -M ATCH significantly and consistently outperforms several recent
data-selection algorithms and achieves the best
accuracy-efficiency trade-off. G RAD -M ATCH is
available as a part of the CORDS toolkit: https:
//github.com/decile-team/cords.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems, especially deep learning
frameworks, have become very computationally expensive
and data-hungry. Massive training datasets have significantly increased end-to-end training times, computational
and resource costs (Sharir et al., 2020), energy requirements (Strubell et al., 2019), and carbon footprint (Schwartz
et al., 2019). Moreover, most machine learning models
require extensive hyper-parameter tuning, further increasing the cost and time, especially on massive datasets. In
this paper, we study efficient machine learning through the
paradigm of subset selection, which seeks to answer the
following question: Can we train a machine learning model
on much smaller subsets of a large dataset, with negligible
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas
at Dallas, Dallas, USA 2 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India. Correspondence to: Krishnateja Killamsetty <krishnateja.killamsetty@utdallas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

loss in test accuracy?
Data subset selection enables efficient learning at multiple
levels. First, by using a subset of a large dataset, we can
enable learning on relatively low resource computational
environments without requiring a large number of GPU and
CPU servers. Second, since we are training on a subset
of the training dataset, we can significantly improve the
end-to-end turnaround time, which often requires multiple
training runs for hyper-parameter tuning. Finally, this also
enables significant reduction in the energy consumption and
CO2 emissions of deep learning (Strubell et al., 2019), particularly since a large number of deep learning experiments
need to be run in practice. Recently, there have been several efforts to make machine learning models more efficient
via data subset selection (Wei et al., 2014a; Kaushal et al.,
2019; Coleman et al., 2020; Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004;
Clarkson, 2010; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020a; Killamsetty
et al., 2021). Existing approaches either use proxy functions
to select data points, or are specific to particular machine
learning models, or use approximations of quantities such
as gradient error or generalization errors. In this work, we
propose a data selection framework called G RAD -M ATCH,
which exactly minimizes a residual error term obtained by
analyzing adaptive data subset selection algorithms, therefore admitting theoretical guarantees on convergence.
1.1. Contributions of this work
Analyses of convergence bounds of adaptive data subset
selection algorithms.
A growing number of recent
approaches (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020a; Killamsetty et al.,
2021) can be cast within the framework of adaptive data
subset selection, where the data subset selection algorithm
(which selects the data subset depending on specific criteria)
is applied in conjunction with the model training. As the
model training proceeds, the subset on which the model is
being trained is improved via the current model’s snapshots.
We analyze the convergence of this general framework and
show that the convergence bound critically depends on an
additive error term depending on how well the subset’s
weighted gradients match either the full training gradients
or the full validation gradients (c.f., Section 2).
Data selection framework with convergence guarantees.
Inspired by the result above, we present G RAD -M ATCH,

