Provable Lipschitz Certification for Generative Models

Matt Jordan 1 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1

Abstract
We present a scalable technique for upper bounding the Lipschitz constant of generative models.
We relate this quantity to the maximal norm over
the set of attainable vector-Jacobian products of a
given generative model. We approximate this set
by layerwise convex approximations using zonotopes. Our approach generalizes and improves
upon prior work using zonotope transformers and
we extend to Lipschitz estimation of neural networks with large output dimension. This provides
efficient and tight bounds on small networks and
can scale to generative models on VAE and DCGAN architectures.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of bounding the Lipschitz constant
of generative models. The central technical difficulty is that
these are vector-valued functions with high-dimensional
outputs, so the techniques for Lipschitz estimation of scalarvalued neural networks do not directly translate. Our approach is to frame the Lipschitz constant estimation problem as an optimization over the range of attainable vectorJacobian products. We overapproximate this set via layerwise convex approximations, and then solve a relaxed
version of the optimization problem.
The primary challenge is computing the feasible set of
vector-Jacobian products over a range of inputs and vectors. We generate an overapproximation of this set by representing it as a zonotope. While prior work has performed
reachability analysis of neural networks using zonotopes,
these approaches only consider the forward pass. Our technique generalizes this prior work and is able to yield tighter
bounds. Additionally, we are able to apply our approach to
backpropagation, where we pass zonotopes backwards in
place of vectors.
We present a general algorithm for mapping zonotopes
1

University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Matt Jordan
<mjordan@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

through a variety of nonlinear operators and relate this
to a 2-dimensional geometric problem that we solve optimally. The final norm-maximization that arises turns
out to be equivalent to a mathematical question called the
Grothendieck problem. We demonstrate that the linearprogramming relaxation of this problem can be solved in
linear time with our machinery. To fairly compare our work
against existing Lipschitz estimation techniques, we first
compare the estimated Lipschitz value and runtime of our
algorithm on networks of increasing size trained on a toy
dataset. We observe that our approach favorably trades-off
accuracy for efficency and yields tighter bounds compared
to previous techniques. Further, it can significantly improve
the runtime of exact Lipschitz computations. We scale our
technique to generative models on MNIST and CIFAR-10,
using well-known architectures like DCGAN and VAEs with
both fully-connected and convolutional layers (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Radford et al., 2015). Our approach yields
much tighter bounds compared to any other technique that
can handle vector-valued networks and can scale to such
architecture sizes.

2. Related Work
Robustness Certification: Lipschitz estimation is closely
related to robustness certification. Here, the goal is to provide a certificate of robustness against adversarial attacks
for a specified network and input region. The techniques
of interest in this domain are Lipschitz approximation and
reachability analysis. It has been noted multiple times that
an upper bound to the Lipschitz constant can provide a guarantee of robustness against adversarial examples (Hein &
Andriushchenko, 2017; Weng et al., 2018b;a). Reachability
analysis is frequently couched in the language of abstract
interpretations where the goal is to develop sound transformations to map sets through the forward pass of a given
classifier. The classes of sets considered include hyperboxes and zonotopes, as well as polytopes, imageStars, and
linear bounds (Singh et al., 2019a;b; Mirman et al., 2018;
Zico Kolter & Wong, 2017; Weng et al., 2018a; Xu et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018; Tran et al.,
2020).
Lipschitz Approximation: A number of recent works
provide either heuristic estimates or provable upper bounds

