Bias-Robust Bayesian Optimization via Dueling Bandits

Johannes Kirschner 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
We consider Bayesian optimization in settings
where observations can be adversarially biased,
for example by an uncontrolled hidden confounder. Our first contribution is a reduction of the
confounded setting to the dueling bandit model.
Then we propose a novel approach for dueling
bandits based on information-directed sampling
(IDS). Thereby, we obtain the first efficient kernelized algorithm for dueling bandits that comes
with cumulative regret guarantees. Our analysis
further generalizes a previously proposed semiparametric linear bandit model to non-linear reward functions, and uncovers interesting links to
doubly-robust estimation.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (Mockus, 1982) is a model-based
approach for zero-order global optimization with noisy feedback. It has been successfully applied to many applications
such as hyper-parameter tuning of machine learning models, robotics and chemical design. Some variants such as
Expected-Improvement (Bull, 2011) or the GP-UCB algorithm (Srinivas et al., 2010) come with theoretical guarantees, ensuring convergence to the global optimum in finite
time under suitable regularity assumptions. Closely related
is the field of bandit algorithms (Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020), in particular the linear bandit model (Abe & Long,
1999; Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).
Most linear bandit algorithms and Bayesian optimization approaches require that the true function is realized in a known
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) and rely on unbiased evaluations of the objective. The regularity assumptions raise questions of robustness to miss-specification and
adversarial attacks, and addressing these limitations has
been the content of several recent works (Lykouris et al.,
2018; Bogunovic et al., 2020b;a).
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Johannes Kirschner <jkirschner@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

We study a setting where the learner’s objective is to maximize an unknown function f : X → R with additive
confounded feedback,
yt = f (xt ) + bt + t ,

(1)

where xt is the evaluation point chosen by the learner at
time t, t is σ 2 -sub-Gaussian (zero-mean) observation noise,
and bt is an additive confounding term. We assume that bt
is chosen by an adversary, but does not depend on the input
xt . The bias term allows to model the influence of an unobserved and uncontrolled covariate, or a perturbation of the
feedback signal imposed by an adversary. One can also interpret (1) as a contextual model, where bt captures the effect
of a changing (unobserved) context on the reward. We discuss further examples and applications in Section 1.1 below.
The proposed feedback model (1) generalizes the
semi-parametric contextual bandit model studied by
Krishnamurthy et al. (2018), where f (xt ) = hxt , θi is
a linear function defined by a parameter θ ∈ Rd . They
show that a doubly-robust least-squares estimator allows
to recover reward differences hx − x0 , θi for inputs
x, x0 ∈ Rd despite the confounding. They further propose
an elimination-style algorithm, bandit orthogonalized semiparametric estimation (BOSE), which is based on sampling
actions from a distribution that minimizes the variance of
the estimator. However, finding low variance distributions
requires solving a convex-quadratic feasibility problem,
which is computationally demanding and in general leads
to sampling distributions with support that spans Rd .
Contributions Our first contribution is two reductions of
the confounded feedback model (1) to the dueling bandit
setting. This allows us to leverage existing algorithms for dueling bandits in the confounded observation setting. We then
propose the first efficient algorithm for kernelized dueling
bandits that comes with theoretical guarantees on the cumulative regret. The approach is based on information-directed
sampling (IDS), which was recently studied in the context
of linear partial monitoring by Kirschner et al. (2020b). In
particular, we propose an efficient approximation of IDS,
that reduces the computation complexity from O(|X |4 ) to
O(|X |) on finite action sets X . For continuous action sets,
the proposed algorithm requires to optimize a (non-convex)
acquisition function over the input space, akin to standard
Bayesian optimization.

