Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting by Bayesian Generative Regularization

Patrick H. Chen 1 Wei Wei 2 Cho-jui, Hsieh 1 Bo Dai 3

Abstract
The streaming update of Bayesian posterior calculation provides us a natural way for continual
learning. However, the naïve mean-field posterior
parametrization for variational approximation is
inappropiate in neural network, and thus, lock the
full ability for preventing catastrophic forgetting.
To resolve this issue, we introduce a generative
regularization for all given classification models,
which is implemented by leveraging energy-based
models with contrastive loss, to obtain the sufficient features for valid decomposition in posterior approxiamtion. By combining discriminative
and generative loss together, we empirically show
that the proposed method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on a variety of tasks, avoiding
catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. In
particular, the proposed method outperforms baseline methods over 15% on the Fashion-MNIST
dataset and 10% on the CUB dataset.

1. Introduction
Many real-world machine learning applications require classification models to learn a sequence of tasks in an incremental way. For each task, learning system could only access
part of whole data and the previously seen data can not be
assessed. For example, previous customer data usually can
not be accessed due to increasingly more strict data regulations on the user privacy, such as GDPR (Voigt & Von dem
Bussche, 2017). The labelled data of an existing task can be
depleted when new tasks emerge (Sutton et al., 2014; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Thus, an intelligent agent for continual
learning must not only adapt to newly incoming tasks but
also perform well on entire set of all the existing tasks in an
incremental way that avoids revisiting all previous data at
each stage. Previous studies (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Ratcliff, 1990) found that conventional deep learning mod1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA, California, USA
Google Cloud, Sunnyvale, California, USA 3 Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Patrick H. Chen
<patrickchen@g.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

els fail to tackle continual learning with the phenomenon of
catastrophic forgetting, where deep neural networks tend
to lose the information of previous tasks (i.e. classification
accuracy drops significantly) after a new task is introduced.
Apparently, in order to achieve continual learning, catastrophic forgetting is an important issue to be addressed.
A common strategy is to fix parameters used in the previous tasks. When new tasks arrive, based on different
criteria, each method can reuse part of the fixed parameters
(Fernando et al., 2017), expand some model components
(Rusu et al., 2016; Yoon et al., 2018), or search for the
best new model architecture to process new task (Li et al.,
2019). Alternatively, instead of fixing a model, memorybased methods store a subset of previous data and constrain
the update of models by leveraging the distilled knowledge
from previous tasks (Castro et al., 2018; Hou et al., 2018;
Javed & Shafait, 2018; Li & Hoiem, 2017; Rebuffi et al.,
2017; Shin et al., 2017). These methods demonstrate the
capability of alleviating the forgetting in practice on several datasets, however, without investigating and explaining
the potential cause of catastrophic forgetting. More importantly, model adaption methods come at the cost that the
model size expands correspondingly to the number of new
tasks; while keeping data directly violates GDPR regulation.
These drawbacks make existing methods not applicable for
large-scale real-world applications. Therefore, there is a
need to investigate the cause of catastrophic forgetting for
a principled algorithm under the memoryless, fixed model
setup.
Most of the existing literature views the incremental training
as a moving path in parameter space, then the catastrophic
forgetting happens when the update direction obtained based
on partial data leads an inappropriate solution. Therefore, it
is natural to design the search and update directions in training to avoid the catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Nguyen et al., 2018; Zenke et al., 2017; Smola et al.,
2003). Variational Continual Learning (VCL) (Nguyen et al.,
2018), as a representative algorithm, exploits the equivalent
streaming update form of Bayesian posterior calculation,
which by nature only uses part of data, and therefore can
combat forgetting. In practice, the exact posterior is intractable, especially in the Bayesian neural network, then,
variational methods are used for approximation. The VCL
achieves good empirical performance on various bench-

