Almost Optimal Anytime Algorithm for Batched Multi-Armed Bandits

Tianyuan Jin 1 Jing Tang 2 Pan Xu 3 Keke Huang 1 Xiaokui Xiao 1 Quanquan Gu 3

Abstract
In batched multi-armed bandit problems, the
learner can adaptively pull arms and adjust strategy in batches. In many real applications, not
only the regret but also the batch complexity need
to be optimized. Existing batched bandit algorithms usually assume that the time horizon T
is known in advance. However, many applications involve an unpredictable stopping time. In
this paper, we study the anytime batched multiarmed bandit problem. We propose an anytime
algorithm that achieves the asymptotically optimal regret for exponential families of reward distributions with O(log log T · ilogα (T ))1 batches,
where α ∈ OT (1). Moreover, we prove that for
any constant c > 0, no algorithm can achieve the
asymptotically optimal regret within c log log T
batches.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem provides an elementary model for exploration-exploitation tradeoffs and
finds many real applications such as medical trials (Thompson, 1933; Perchet et al., 2016), crowdsourcing (Kittur
et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2014), and marketing (Bertsimas
& Mersereau, 2007; Vaswani et al., 2017). The problem
is typically described as a game between the agent and the
environment. The game proceeds in a total of T time steps.
At each time step t, the agent pulls an arm At from the
arm set [K] with the goal of maximizing the accumulated
reward over T time steps. Ideally, the agent can observe the
immediate feedback of each pull, e.g., reward, and exploit
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Data Science and Analytics Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaokui Xiao <xkxiao@nus.edu.sg>, Quanquan
Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Notation ilogα (T ) is the result of iteratively applying the logarithm function on T for α times, e.g., ilog3 (T ) = log log log T .

it to guide the next action. However, this is impractical for
many real applications where the number of interactions
between the agent and environment is limited. For example,
in clinical trials, typically, it takes some time to test the efficacy of a treatment on a patient. It is thus computationally
prohibitive to conduct the experiments in fully sequential.
Instead, patients are usually grouped into batches, and each
batch of patients are tested in a parallel manner. In such
a case, the outcomes are unavailable till the end of each
batch. As another example, in online advertising, the agent
cannot immediately update her strategy upon receiving the
feedback, since there may be a large amount of responses in
every second.
Perchet et al. (2016) modeled the above problem as the
batched multi-armed bandit problem. In such problems, the
time horizon T is split into a small number of batches, and
the outcomes are only revealed at the end of each batch.
Previous batched bandit algorithms (Perchet et al., 2016;
Gao et al., 2019; Esfandiari et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020) all
assume that the time T is known in advance. However, many
real-world applications involve an unpredictable stopping
time. Again, consider the clinical trials example, T may
correspond to the number of participated patients in the
test for a certain period; and in the online advertisement
example, T may correspond to the number of visitors of a
website for a certain period. In both cases, designing an
anytime bandit algorithm is imperative.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, we study
the anytime batched multi-armed bandit problem, where the
horizon length T is unknown ahead of time. In particular,
we have a set [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K} of K arms, where each
arm i is associated with a reward distribution of some canonical one-dimensional exponential family with mean µi . We
assume the best arm is unique. Without loss of generality,
we assume that arm 1 has the maximum expected reward
throughout the paper, i.e., µ1 > µi for any i ∈ [K]/ \ {1}.
The pulls of each arm yield rewards which are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from the
arm’s distribution. Furthermore, the time horizon T is divided into batches represented by a grid T = {t1 , t2 , . . . },
which means after j-th batch, the total number of pulls of
all arms reaches tj . In this paper, we study the static grid
setting (Perchet et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2019), i.e., t1 , t2 , . . .
are predefined numbers. At each time step t, there exists a

