On Estimation in Latent Variable Models
Guanhua Fang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St Bellevue WA 98004 USA
{guanhuafang, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
Latent variable models have been playing a central role in statistics, econometrics, machine learning with applications to repeated observation
study, panel data inference, user behavior analysis,
etc. In many modern applications, the inference
based on latent variable models involves one or
several of the following features: the presence of
complex latent structure, the observed and latent
variables being continuous or discrete, constraints
on parameters, and data size being large. Therefore, solving an estimation problem for general
latent variable models is highly non-trivial. In
this paper, we consider a gradient based method
via using variance reduction technique to accelerate estimation procedure. Theoretically, we show
the convergence results for the proposed method
under general and mild model assumptions. The
algorithm has better computational complexity
compared with the classical gradient methods and
maintains nice statistical properties. Various numerical results corroborate our theory.

1. Introduction
A latent variable model, as the name suggests, is a statistical
model that contains latent/unobserved variables. Their roots
trace back to Spearman’s 1904 seminal work (Spearman,
1904) on factor analysis, which is arguably the first wellarticulated latent variable model. In past years, latent variable models have been playing an important role in machine
learning, statistics, econometrics, psychometrics, social sciences with applications to repeated observation study, panal
data inference, user behavior analysis, etc (Aigner et al.,
1984; Bishop, 1998; Bartholomew et al., 2011; Ahmed et al.,
2012; Loehlin and Beaujean, 2016). Latent variables serve
to reduce the dimensionality of data. Many observable
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

variables can be aggregated in a model to represent an underlying concept, making it easier to do data analysis.
In many applications, the inference based on latent variable
models involves one or several of the following features: 1)
the presence of complex latent structure, 2) the observed
and latent variables being either continuous or discrete, 3)
constraints on parameters, 4) data size being large. Comparing with models without latent variables (e.g., linear
regression and generalized linear regression), the estimation
problem of latent variable models is typically more involved.
In general, the estimation problem can have the following
three perspectives: both latent variables and parameters are
viewed as fixed quantities, both latent variables and parameters are viewed as random quantities, and latent variables
are random while parameters are fixed.
The first perspective (i.e., fixed latent variables and parameters) leads to the joint maximum likelihood estimator. This
estimator can usually be efficiently computed by alternating minimization-type algorithm (Birnbaum, 1968; Chen
et al., 2020). However such estimator could be statistically
inconsistent and may lead to biased statistical inference.
The second perspective (i.e., random latent variables and parameters) leads to Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods (Metropolis et al., 1953). Metropolis-Hasting
method (Hastings, 1970), Gibbs sampler methods (Gilks
and Wild, 1992; Gilks et al., 1995) and other Bayesian
methods (Gelman et al., 2013) are developed to solve the
estimation problem. However, as data size increases, those
methods can be computationally inefficient and need long
time for Markov chain to be stable.
In this paper, we adopt the third perspective (i.e., fixed
parameters and random latent variables) and develop a
gradient-based computational method where we incorporate
variance-reduced technique to accelerate the estimation procedure. Due to the existence of latent structure, we need
to estimate the gradient via sampling the latent variables
according to posterior distributions. When the analytical formula of posterior distribution is not obtainable, Q-function1
1

Q-function is usually referred to as the objective in the M-step.

