Probabilistic Sequential Shrinking: A Best Arm Identification Algorithm for
Stochastic Bandits with Corruptions

Zixin Zhong 1 Wang Chi Cheung 2 3 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 3 4

Abstract
We consider a best arm identification (BAI)
problem for stochastic bandits with adversarial corruptions in the fixed-budget setting of T
steps. We design a novel randomized algorithm,
P ROBABILISTIC S EQUENTIAL S HRINKING(u)
(PSS(u)), which is agnostic to the amount of corruptions. When the amount of corruptions per
step (CPS) is below a threshold, PSS(u) identifies the best arm or item with probability tending
to 1 as T → ∞. Otherwise, the optimality gap of
the identified item degrades gracefully with the
CPS. We argue that such a bifurcation is necessary.
In PSS(u), the parameter u serves to balance between the optimality gap and success probability.
The injection of randomization is shown to be
essential to mitigate the impact of corruptions.
To demonstrate this, we design two attack strategies that are applicable to any algorithm. We
apply one of them to a deterministic analogue of
PSS(u) known as S UCCESSIVE H ALVING (SH)
by Karnin et al. (2013). The attack strategy results
in a high failure probability for SH, but PSS(u)
remains robust. In the absence of corruptions,
PSS(2)’s performance guarantee matches SH’s.
We show that when the CPS is sufficiently large,
no algorithm can achieve a BAI probability tending to 1 as T → ∞. Numerical experiments
corroborate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Consider a drug company D1 that wants to design a vaccine
for a certain illness, say COVID-19. It has a certain number
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Department of Industrial Systems and Management,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Zixin Zhong <zixin.zhong@u.nus.edu>, Wang Chi Cheung
<isecwc@nus.edu.sg>, Vincent Y. F. Tan <vtan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of options, say L = 10, to design a near-optimal vaccine.
Because D1 has a limited budget, it can only test vaccines for
a fixed number of times, say T = 1000. Using the limited
number of tests, it wants to find the option that will lead
to the “best” outcome, e.g., the shortest average recovery
time of certain model organisms. However, vaccine trials
usually assume that every test subject satisfies a certain
set of criteria, such as having no prior related illnesses. If
a subject who violated the criteria is tested, the observed
recovery time would be corrupted. We assume the total
corruption budget is bounded as a function of the number
of tests. How can D1 find a near-optimal drug design in the
presence of the corruptions and uncertainty of the efficacy
of the drugs? We will show that the utilization of a suitably
randomized algorithm is assumed to be key.
To solve D1 ’s problem, we study the Best Arm Identification (BAI) problem for stochastic bandits with adversarial
corruptions. We note that the effect and mitigation of corruptions were studied for the Regret Minimization problem
by Lykouris et al. (2018) and others. While most existing
works study the BAI problem for stochastic bandits without
corruptions (Auer et al., 2002; Audibert & Bubeck, 2010;
Carpentier & Locatelli, 2016), Altschuler et al. (2019) considers a variation of the classical BAI problem and aims
to identify an item with high median reward, while Shen
(2019) assumes that the amount of corruption per step (CPS)
diminishes as time progresses. Therefore, these studies are
not directly applicable to D1 as we are interested in obtaining a near-optimal item in terms of the mean and we assume
that the CPS does not diminish with time. Our setting dovetails neatly with company D1 ’s problem and D1 can utilize
our algorithm to sequentially and adaptively select different
design options to test the vaccines and to eventually choose
a near-optimal design that results in a short recovery time
even in the presence of adversarial corruptions.
Beyond any specific applications, we believe that this problem is of fundamental theoretical importance in the broad
context of BAI in multi-armed bandits (MAB) and adversarial machine learning. In particular, Gupta et al. (2019)
advanced the theory of regret minimization in MAB; this
work complements Gupta’s work in the BAI setting.
Main Contributions. In stochastic bandits with adversarial

