Finite-Sample Analysis of Off-Policy Natural Actor-Critic Algorithm

Sajad Khodadadian∗ 1 Zaiwei Chen∗ 2 Siva Theja Maguluri 1

Abstract
In this paper, we provide finite-sample convergence guarantees for an off-policy variant of the
natural actor-critic (NAC) algorithm based on Importance Sampling. In particular, we show that
the algorithm converges to a global optimal policy
with a sample complexity of O(−3 log2 (1/))
under an appropriate choice of stepsizes. In order to overcome the issue of large variance due
to Importance Sampling, we propose the Q-trace
algorithm for the critic, which is inspired by the
V-trace algorithm (Espeholt et al., 2018). This
enables us to explicitly control the bias and variance, and characterize the trade-off between them.
As an advantage of off-policy sampling, a major
feature of our result is that we do not need any
additional assumptions, beyond the ergodicity of
the Markov chain induced by the behavior policy.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a paradigm where an agent
aims at maximizing its cumulative reward by searching for
an optimal policy, in an environment modeled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 2018). RL algorithms have achieved tremendous successes in a wide range
of applications such as self-driving cars with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015),
and AlphaGo in the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016). The algorithms in RL can be categorized into value space methods,
such as Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), TD-learning
(Sutton, 1988), and policy space methods, such as actorcritic (AC) (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000). Despite great empirical successes (Wang et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al., 2016),
the finite-sample convergence of AC type of algorithms are
not completely characterized theoretically.
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332,
USA 2 PhD Program in Machine Learning, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA. Correspondence to: Sajad Khodadadian <skhodadadian3@gatech.edu>, Zaiwei Chen
<zchen458@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

An AC algorithm can be thought as a generalized policy iteration (Puterman, 1995), and consists of two phases, namely
actor and critic. The objective of the actor is to improve the
policy, while the critic aims at evaluating the performance
of a specific policy. A step of the actor can be thought as a
step of Stochastic Gradient Ascent (Bottou et al., 2018) with
preconditioning. An identity pre-conditioner corresponds
to regular AC, while a pre-conditioning with fisher information results in natural actor-critic (NAC) (Peters & Schaal,
2008). As for the critic, to perform a policy evaluation
step, it usually uses the TD-learning method and its variants,
such as TD(0), or more generally, n-step TD (Sutton, 1988).
Moreover, such learning process can be done in an on or
off-policy manner (Degris et al., 2012).
Off-policy Actor-Critic. In on-policy AC, the data samples are generated in an online manner, always sampling
based on the current policy at hand. In contrast, in this
paper, we focus on the off-policy AC, where the algorithm
updates the policy based on the data collected (possibly
in the past) by a fixed policy, called the behavior policy.
Off-policy learning is inevitable in high-stakes applications
such as healthcare (Dann et al., 2019), education (Mandel
et al., 2014), robotics (Gu et al., 2017) and clinical trials
(Liu et al., 2018; Gottesman et al., 2020). The agent there
may not have direct access to the environment in order to
perform online sampling, and one has to work with limited
historical data that is collected under a fixed behavior policy. Moreover, off-policy AC enables off-line learning by
decoupling data collection from learning, and is observed to
extract the maximum possible utility out of limited available
data (Levine et al., 2020).
To account for the difference between the behavior policy
and the target policy (Geweke, 1989) in off-policy algorithms, a popular approach is to use Importance Sampling
(IS). The IS ratio, however, can be large in some cases,
which might result in high variance (Glynn & Iglehart, 1989;
Precup, 2000). This phenomenon will be illustrated in detail
in Section 2.3. In order to avoid such high variance, one
idea is to truncate the IS ratio (Ionides, 2008), which leads
to off-policy TD-learning algorithms such as Retrace(λ)
(Munos et al., 2016) and V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018).

