A Tale of Two Efficient and Informative Negative Sampling Distributions
Shabnam Daghaghi 1 Tharun Medini 1 Nicholas Meisburger 2 Beidi Chen 3 Mengnan Zhao 1
Anshumali Shrivastava 2 1

Abstract
Softmax classifiers with a very large number of
classes naturally occur in many applications such
as natural language processing and information
retrieval. The calculation of full softmax is costly
from the computational and energy perspective.
There have been various sampling approaches to
overcome this challenge, popularly known as negative sampling (NS). Ideally, NS should sample
negative classes from a distribution that is dependent on the input data, the current parameters, and
the correct positive class. Unfortunately, due to
the dynamically updated parameters and data samples, there is no sampling scheme that is provably
adaptive and samples the negative classes efficiently. Therefore, alternative heuristics like random sampling, static frequency-based sampling,
or learning-based biased sampling, which primarily trade either the sampling cost or the adaptivity
of samples per iteration are adopted. In this paper, we show two classes of distributions where
the sampling scheme is truly adaptive and provably generates negative samples in near-constant
time. Our implementation in C++ on CPU is significantly superior, both in terms of wall-clock
time and accuracy, compared to the most optimized TensorFlow implementations of other popular negative sampling approaches on powerful
NVIDIA V100 GPU.

1. Introduction
Neural Networks (NN) have successfully pushed the boundaries of many application tasks, such as image or text classification (Wang et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2019), speech
recognition (Dong et al., 2018) and recommendation systems (Zhang et al., 2015; Medini et al., 2019). Many hard
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rice University 2 Department of Computer Science, Rice
University 3 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Shabnam Daghaghi <shabnam.daghaghi@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

AI problems are currently modeled as massive multiclass
or multilabel problems leading to a drastic improvement
over prior work. For example, popular NLP models predict
the best word, given the full context observed so far. Such
models are becoming state-of-the-art. Recommendation systems and related Information Retrieval (IR) problems are
classical examples of machine learning with outrageously
large outputs (Medini et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2019). In
IR, given the user query, the task is to predict few relevant
documents (or products) from among hundreds of millions
of possible documents, a typical machine learning problem
with massive output space.
Owing to the significance of the problem, machine learning
with large output space or alternatively also known as extreme classification is a field in itself (Bengio et al., 2019).
A large number of classes naturally brings a new set of
computational and memory challenges.
Fortunately, with access to powerful Graphics Processing
Unit (GPU) (Owens et al., 2008), the training processes of
large models have been accelerated heavily. That is because
GPUs have a unique advantage for matrix multiplication,
which usually requires a cubic time algebraic operation
(O(N 3 )) and is the major and costly building block of NN
computations. However, the number of concurrent operations required in large matrix multiplications for classification with an extensive number of classes has reached a limit
for further speedups even using GPUs.
1.1. Negative Sampling
The typical approach to address the challenge mentioned
above is known as negative sampling (Pennington et al.,
2014; Jean et al., 2014; Rawat et al., 2019; Mikolov et al.,
2013). In Negative Sampling, we select a small subset of
classes for each input and compute the softmax and crossentropy function. This subset usually includes the positive
(true) and a small set of negative (false) classes. Negative
sampling reduced the computations in the most cumbersome
last layer, thereby making the gradient update procedure
efficient.
However, approximating full softmax with small sub-sample
results in poor convergence if the negative samples are not
chosen appropriately. For instance, let us take the example
of a recommendation system (predicting products relevant

