Exponentially Many Local Minima in Quantum Neural Networks
Xuchen You 1 2 Xiaodi Wu 1 2

Abstract
Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs), or the socalled variational quantum circuits, are important
quantum applications both because of their similar
promises as classical neural networks and because
of the feasibility of their implementation on nearterm intermediate-size noisy quantum machines
(NISQ). However, the training task of QNNs is
challenging and much less understood. We conduct a quantitative investigation on the landscape
of loss functions of QNNs and identify a class
of simple yet extremely hard QNN instances for
training. Speciﬁcally, we show for typical underparameterized QNNs, there exists a dataset that
induces a loss function with the number of spurious local minima depending exponentially on the
number of parameters. Moreover, we show the
optimality of our construction by providing an almost matching upper bound on such dependence.
While local minima in classical neural networks
are due to non-linear activations, in quantum neural networks local minima appear as a result of
the quantum interference phenomenon. Finally,
we empirically conﬁrm that our constructions can
indeed be hard instances in practice with typical
gradient-based optimizers, which demonstrates
the practical value of our ﬁndings.

1. Introduction
Motivations. With the recent establishment of quantum
supremacy (Arute et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2020), the
research of quantum computing has entered a new stage
where near-term Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ)
computers (Preskill, 2018) become the important platform
for demonstrating quantum applications. Quantum Neural
Networks (QNNs) (e.g., Farhi et al. (2020; 2014)), or the
1
Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland 2 Department of Computer Science and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of
Maryland. Correspondence to: X.You <xyou@umd.edu>, X.Wu
<xwu@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

so-called variational quantum method (e.g., Peruzzo et al.
(2014)), are the major candidates of applications that can be
implemented on NISQ machines.
Typical QNNs replace classical neural networks (ClaNNs),
which are just parameterized classical circuits, by quantum circuits with classically parameterized unitary gates.
Instead of a classical mapping in ClaNNs from input to output, QNNs use a quantum one which could be very hard for
classical computation to simulate (e.g., Harrow & Montanaro (2017)) and hence provide potential quantum speedups
for machine learning tasks (e.g., see the survey by Biamonte et al. (2017) and by Harrow & Montanaro (2017)
and examples in Schuld & Killoran (2019) and in Havlíček
et al. (2019)). Moreover, given their quantum-mechanical
nature, QNNs (or the variational quantum method) have
also demonstrated huge promises in attacking problems
in quantum chemistry and material science. Contrary to
quantum supremacy tasks which serve only as a way to
separate quantum and classical computational power but are
not necessarily useful, Google has recently used the same
machine to demonstrate the variational quantum method
in calculating accurate electronic structures – an important
task in quantum chemistry (Arute et al., 2020). Please see
the survey (Benedetti et al., 2019) for more recent exciting
developments of QNNs.
Similar to the classical case, the success of QNN applications will critically depend on the effectiveness of the training procedure which optimizes a loss function in terms of
the read-outs and the parameters of QNNs for speciﬁc applications. The design of effective training methods has been
under intense investigation both empirically and theoretically for ClaNNs. Moreover, understanding the landscape
of the loss functions (e.g., Sagun et al. (2015); Choromanska et al. (2015b;a); Baity-Jesi et al. (2018)) and designing
corresponding training/optimization methods have recently
emerged as a principled approach to tackle this problem:
(Auer et al., 1996; Safran & Shamir, 2018; Yun et al., 2018;
Ding et al., 2019; Venturi et al., 2018) showed the existence
of spurious local minima for ClaNNs; In turn, (Kawaguchi,
2016; Du & Lee, 2018; Soudry & Carmon, 2016; Nguyen
& Hein, 2017; Li et al., 2018) characterized conditions for
benign landscapes in terms of choice of activation, loss
function and (over)-parameterization, providing insights on
the design of ClaNNs and motivating explanations to the

