On Proximal Policy Optimization’s Heavy-tailed Gradients

Saurabh Garg 1 Joshua Zhanson 2 Emilio Parisotto 1 Adarsh Prasad 1 J. Zico Kolter 2 Zachary C. Lipton 1
Sivaraman Balakrishnan 3 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
Modern policy gradient algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) rely on an arsenal
of heuristics, including loss clipping and gradient clipping, to ensure successful learning. These
heuristics are reminiscent of techniques from robust statistics, commonly used for estimation in
outlier-rich (“heavy-tailed”) regimes. In this paper, we present a detailed empirical study to characterize the heavy-tailed nature of the gradients
of the PPO surrogate reward function. We demonstrate that the gradients, especially for the actor
network, exhibit pronounced heavy-tailedness and
that it increases as the agent’s policy diverges
from the behavioral policy (i.e., as the agent goes
further off policy). Further examination implicates the likelihood ratios and advantages in the
surrogate reward as the main sources of the observed heavy-tailedness. We then highlight issues
arising due to the heavy-tailed nature of the gradients. In this light, we study the effects of the
standard PPO clipping heuristics, demonstrating
that these tricks primarily serve to offset heavytailedness in gradients. Thus motivated, we propose incorporating G MOM, a high-dimensional
robust estimator, into PPO as a substitute for three
clipping tricks. Despite requiring less hyperparameter tuning, our method matches the performance of PPO (with all heuristics enabled) on a
battery of MuJoCo continuous control tasks.

1. Introduction
As Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods have
made strides on such diverse tasks as game playing and
continuous control (Berner et al., 2019; Silver et al., 2017;
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Saurabh Garg
<sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Mnih et al., 2015), policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992;
Sutton et al., 2000; Mnih et al., 2016) have risen as a popular alternative to dynamic programming approaches. Since
Mnih et al. (2016)’s breakthrough results demonstrated the
applicability of policy gradients in DRL, a number of popular variants have emerged (Schulman et al., 2017; Espeholt
et al., 2018). Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)—one of the most popular policy gradient
methods—introduced the clipped importance sampling update, an effective heuristic for off-policy learning. However,
while their stated motivation for clipping draws upon trustregion enforcement, the updates in practice tend to deviate
from such trust regions (Ilyas et al., 2018). and exhibit
sensitivity to implementation details such as random seeds
and hyperparameter choices (Engstrom et al., 2019). This
brittleness characterizes not just PPO, but policy gradient
methods more generally (Ilyas et al., 2018; Henderson et al.,
2017; 2018; Islam et al., 2017), raising a broader concern
about our understanding of these methods.
In this work, we take a step towards understanding the workings of PPO, the most prominent and widely used deep
policy gradient method. Noting that the heuristics implemented in PPO are evocative of estimation techniques from
robust statistics in outlier-rich and heavy-tailed settings, we
conjecture that the heavy-tailed distribution of gradients is
the main obstacle addressed by these heuristics. We perform a rigorous empirical study to confirm the existence
of heavy-tailedness in PPO gradients and to investigate its
causes and consequences.
Our first contribution is to analyze the role played by each
component of the PPO objective in the heavy-tailedness of
the gradients. We observe that as training proceeds, gradients of both the actor and the critic loss grow more heavytailed. Our findings show that during on-policy gradient
steps the advantage estimates are the primary contributors
to the heavy-tailed nature of the gradients. Moreover, as offpolicyness increases during training (i.e. as the behavioral
and actor policy diverge), the likelihood ratios that appear
in the surrogate objective exacerbate the heavy-tailedness.
Second, we highlight the consequences of the heavytailedness of PPO’s gradients. Empirically, we find that
heavy-tailedness in likelihood ratios induced during off-

