On Lower Bounds for Standard and Robust
Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization

Xu Cai 1 Jonathan Scarlett 1 2

Abstract
In this paper, we consider algorithm-independent
lower bounds for the problem of black-box
optimization of functions having a bounded
norm is some Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS), which can be viewed as a non-Bayesian
Gaussian process bandit problem. In the standard noisy setting, we provide a novel proof
technique for deriving lower bounds on the regret, with benefits including simplicity, versatility, and an improved dependence on the error
probability. In a robust setting in which every
sampled point may be perturbed by a suitablyconstrained adversary, we provide a novel lower
bound for deterministic strategies, demonstrating an inevitable joint dependence of the cumulative regret on the corruption level and the time
horizon, in contrast with existing lower bounds
that only characterize the individual dependencies. Furthermore, in a distinct robust setting in
which the final point is perturbed by an adversary, we strengthen an existing lower bound that
only holds for target success probabilities very
close to one, by allowing for arbitrary success
probabilities above 23 .

1. Introduction
The use of Gaussian process (GP) methods for black-box
function optimization has seen significant advances in recent years, with applications including hyperparameter tuning, robotics, molecular design, and many more. On the
theoretical side, a variety of algorithms have been developed with provable regret bounds (Srinivas et al., 2010;
Bull, 2011; Contal et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2016; Bo1

Department of Computer Science, National University
of Singapore 2 Department of Mathematics & Institute of
Data Science, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Xu Cai <caix@u.nus.edu>, Jonathan Scarlett <scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

gunovic et al., 2016; Wang & Jegelka, 2017; Janz et al.,
2020), and algorithm-independent lower bounds have been
given in several settings of interest (Bull, 2011; Scarlett
et al., 2017; Scarlett, 2018; Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2019;
Wang et al., 2020).
These theoretical works can be broadly categorized into
one of two types: In the Bayesian setting, one adopts a
Gaussian process prior according to some kernel function,
whereas in the non-Bayesian setting, the function is assumed to lie in some Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) and be upper bounded in terms of the corresponding RKHS norm.
In this paper, we focus on the non-Bayesian setting, and
seek to broaden the existing understanding of algorithmindependent lower bounds on the regret, which have received significantly less attention than upper bounds. Our
main contributions are briefly summarized as follows:
• In the standard noisy GP optimization setting, we
provide an alternative proof strategy for the existing
lower bounds of (Scarlett et al., 2017), which we believe to be of significant importance in itself due to
the lack of techniques in the literature. We additionally show that our approach strengthens the dependence on the error probability, and give scenarios in
which our approach is simpler and/or more versatile.
• We provide a novel lower bound for a robust setting in
which the sampled points are adversarially corrupted
(Bogunovic et al., 2020). Our bound demonstrates
that the cumulative regret of any deterministic algorithm must incur a certain joint dependence on the
corruption level and time horizon, strengthening results from (Bogunovic et al., 2020) stating that certain
separate dependencies are unavoidable.
• We provide an improvement on an existing lower
bound for a distinct robust setting (Bogunovic et al.,
2018a), in which the final point returned is perturbed
by an adversary. While the lower bound of (Bogunovic et al., 2018a) shows that a certain number
of samples is needed to attain a certain level of regret
with probability very close to one, we show that the
same number of samples (up to constant factors) is

