Slot Machines: Discovering Winning Combinations of Random Weights in
Neural Networks
Maxwell Mbabilla Aladago 1 Lorenzo Torresani 1

Abstract
In contrast to traditional weight optimization in a
continuous space, we demonstrate the existence
of effective random networks whose weights are
never updated. By selecting a weight among a
fixed set of random values for each individual
connection, our method uncovers combinations
of random weights that match the performance of
traditionally-trained networks of the same capacity. We refer to our networks as “slot machines”
where each reel (connection) contains a fixed set
of symbols (random values). Our backpropagation algorithm “spins” the reels to seek “winning”
combinations, i.e., selections of random weight
values that minimize the given loss. Quite surprisingly, we find that allocating just a few random
values to each connection (e.g., 8 values per connection) yields highly competitive combinations
despite being dramatically more constrained compared to traditionally learned weights. Moreover,
finetuning these combinations often improves performance over the trained baselines. A randomly
initialized VGG-19 with 8 values per connection contains a combination that achieves 91%
test accuracy on CIFAR-10. Our method also
achieves an impressive performance of 98.2% on
MNIST for neural networks containing only random weights.

1. Introduction
Innovations in how deep networks are trained have played
an important role in the remarkable success deep learning
has produced in a variety of application areas, including
image recognition (He et al., 2016), object detection (Ren
et al., 2015; He et al., 2017), machine translation (Vaswani
et al., 2017) and language modeling (Brown et al., 2020).
1

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH 03755, USA. Correspondence to: Maxwell Mbabilla Aladago <maxwell.m.aladago.gr@dartmouth.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Learning typically involves either optimizing a network
from scratch (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), finetuning a pretrained model (Yosinski et al., 2014) or jointly optimizing
the architecture and weights (Zoph & Le, 2017). Against
this predominant background, we pose the following question: can a network instantiated with only random weights
achieve competitive results compared to the same model
using optimized weights?
For a given task, an untrained, randomly initialized network
is unlikely to produce good performance. However, we
demonstrate that given sufficient random weight options
for each connection, there exist selections of these random
weight values that have generalization performance comparable to that of a traditionally-trained network with the same
architecture. More importantly, we introduce a method that
can find these high-performing randomly weighted configurations consistently and efficiently. Furthermore, we show
empirically that a small number of random weight options
(e.g., 2 − 8 values per connection) are sufficient to obtain
accuracy comparable to that of the traditionally-trained network. Instead of updating the weights, the algorithm simply
selects for each connection a weight value from a fixed set
of random weights.
We use the analogy of “slot machines” to describe how our
method operates. Each reel in a Slot Machine has a fixed set
of symbols. The reels are jointly spinned in an attempt to
find winning combinations. In our context, each connection
has a fixed set of random weight values. Our algorithm
“spins the reels” in order to find a winning combination of
symbols, i.e., selects a weight value for each connection
so as to produce an instantiation of the network that yields
strong performance. While in physical Slot Machines the
spinning of the reels is governed by a fully random process,
in our Slot Machines the selection of the weights is guided
by a method that optimizes the given loss at each spinning
iteration.
More formally, we allocate K fixed random weight values
to each connection. Our algorithm assigns a quality score
to each of these K possible values. In the forward pass a
weight value is selected for each connection based on the
scores. The scores are then updated in the backward pass via
stochastic gradient descent. However, the weights are never

