Self-supervised and Supervised Joint Training for
Resource-rich Machine Translation

Yong Cheng 1 Wei Wang

†

Lu Jiang 1 2 Wolfgang Macherey 1

Abstract
Self-supervised pre-training of text representations has been successfully applied to lowresource Neural Machine Translation (NMT).
However, it usually fails to achieve notable gains
on resource-rich NMT. In this paper, we propose
a joint training approach, F2 -XEnDec, to combine self-supervised and supervised learning to
optimize NMT models. To exploit complementary self-supervised signals for supervised learning, NMT models are trained on examples that
are interbred from monolingual and parallel sentences through a new process called crossover
encoder-decoder. Experiments on two resourcerich translation benchmarks, WMT’14 EnglishGerman and WMT’14 English-French, demonstrate that our approach achieves substantial improvements over several strong baseline methods
and obtains a new state of the art of 46.19 BLEU
on English-French when incorporating back translation. Results also show that our approach is
capable of improving model robustness to input
perturbations such as code-switching noise which
frequently appears on social media.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training of text representations (Peters
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018) has achieved tremendous
success in natural language processing applications. Inspired by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), recent works attempt
to leverage sequence-to-sequence model pre-training for
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Lewis et al., 2019;
Song et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020b). Generally, these methods comprise two stages: pre-training and finetuning. During the pre-training stage, the model is learned with a self1

Google Research, Google LLC, USA 2 Language Technologies
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. †
Work done while at Google Research. Correspondence to: Yong
Cheng <chengyong@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

supervised task on abundant unlabeled data (i.e. monolingual sentences). In the second stage, the full or partial model
is finetuned on a downstream translation task of labeled data
(i.e. parallel sentences). Studies have demonstrated the benefit of pre-training for the low-resource translation task in
which the labeled data is limited (Lewis et al., 2019; Song
et al., 2019). All these successes share the same setup:
pre-training on abundant unlabeled data and finetuning on
limited labeled data.
In many NMT applications, we are confronted with a different setup where abundant labeled data, e.g., millions of
parallel sentences, are available for finetuning. For these
resource-rich translation tasks, the two-stage approach is
less effective and, even worse, sometimes can undermine
the performance if improperly utilized (Zhu et al., 2020), in
part due to the catastrophic forgetting (French, 1999). More
recently, several mitigation techniques have been proposed
for the two-stage approach (Edunov et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2020), such as freezing the pre-trained
representations during finetuning. However, these strategies
hinder uncovering the full potential of self-supervised learning since the learned representations are either held fixed or
slightly tuned in the supervised learning.
In this paper, we study resource-rich machine translation
through a different perspective of joint training where, in
contrast to the conventional two-stage approaches, we train
NMT models in a single stage using the self-supervised
objective (on monolingual sentences) in addition to the supervised objective (on parallel sentences). The challenge for
this single-stage training paradigm is that self-supervised
learning is less useful in joint training because it provides a
much weaker learning signal that can be easily dominated by
the supervised learning signal in joint training. As a result,
conventional approaches such as combining self-supervised
and supervised learning objectives perform not much better
than the supervised learning objective by itself.
This paper aims at exploiting the complementary signals
in self-supervised learning to facilitate supervised learning.
Inspired by chromosomal crossovers (Rieger et al., 2012),
we propose an essential new task called crossover encoderdecoder (or XEnDec) which takes two training examples
as inputs (called parents), shuffles their source sentences,

