Efficient Performance Bounds for Primal-Dual Reinforcement
Learning from Demonstrations

Angeliki Kamoutsi 1 Goran Banjac 1 John Lygeros 1

Abstract
We consider large-scale Markov decision processes with an unknown cost function and address the problem of learning a policy from a
finite set of expert demonstrations. We assume
that the learner is not allowed to interact with the
expert and has no access to reinforcement signal of any kind. Existing inverse reinforcement
learning methods come with strong theoretical
guarantees, but are computationally expensive,
while state-of-the-art policy optimization algorithms achieve significant empirical success, but
are hampered by limited theoretical understanding. To bridge the gap between theory and practice, we introduce a novel bilinear saddle-point
framework using Lagrangian duality. The proposed primal-dual viewpoint allows us to develop
a model-free provably efficient algorithm through
the lens of stochastic convex optimization. The
method enjoys the advantages of simplicity of
implementation, low memory requirements, and
computational and sample complexities independent of the number of states. We further present
an equivalent no-regret online-learning interpretation.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an area in machine learning
with connections to control and optimization that has shown
tremendous success in large-scale real-world applications,
such as robotics, aritificial intelligence, cognitive autonomy,
operations research, and healthcare (Tesauro & Kephart,
2002; Mnih et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017; Vamvoudakis
& Kokolakis, 2020). It studies the problem of learning
to act optimally in a sequential decision-making problem,
while interacting with an unknown environment (Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 1998).
1

Automatic Control Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Angeliki Kamoutsi <kamoutsa@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the standard RL setting a cost signal is given to instruct
agents how to complete the desired task. However, oftentimes encoding preferences using demonstrations provided
by an expert, is easier than designing a cost function (Pomerleau, 1991; Russell, 1998; Bagnell, 2015). In such cases,
the goal of learning from demonstrations (LfD) or imitation learning (IL) is to learn a policy that achieves or even
surpasses the performance of the expert policy.
A lot of methods have been proposed to solve the LfD
problem. The most straightforward approach is behavior
cloning, which casts the problem as a supervised learning
problem, in which the goal is to learn a map from states
to optimal actions (Pomerleau, 1991). Although behavior
cloning is simple and easy to implement, the crucial i.i.d.
assumption made in supervised learning is violated. As a
result, the approach suffers from the problem of cascading
errors, which is related to covariate shift (Bagnell, 2015;
Ho et al., 2016). Later works (Ross et al., 2011) eliminate
this distribution mismatch by formulating the problem as a
no-regret online learning problem, but require interaction
with the expert. On the contrary, in this paper, we consider
the batch LfD scenario, i.e., the learner can observe only a
finite set of expert demonstrations, is not allowed to query
the expert for more data while training, and is not provided
any reinforcement signal.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004)
is a prevalent approach to LfD. In this paradigm, the learner
first infers the unknown cost function that the expert tries to
minimize and then uses it to reproduce the optimal behavior.
IRL algorithms do not suffer from the problem of cascading
errors because the training takes place over entire expert
trajectories, rather than individual actions. In addition, since
the recovered cost function “explains” the expert behavior,
they can easily generalize to unseen states or even new environments. Note however, that most existing IRL algorithms
(Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006; Syed & Schapire,
2007; Neu & Szepesvári, 2007; Ziebart et al., 2008; Abbeel
et al., 2008; Levine et al., 2010; 2011) are computationally
expensive because they use RL as a subroutine.
On the other hand, under the assumption of a linearly parameterized cost class, one can frame the problem as a single
convex program (Syed et al., 2008), bypassing the inter-

