Decoupling Exploration and Exploitation for Meta-Reinforcement Learning
without Sacrifices
Evan Zheran Liu 1 Aditi Raghunathan 1 Percy Liang 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
The goal of meta-reinforcement learning (metaRL) is to build agents that can quickly learn new
tasks by leveraging prior experience on related
tasks. Learning a new task often requires both
exploring to gather task-relevant information and
exploiting this information to solve the task. In
principle, optimal exploration and exploitation
can be learned end-to-end by simply maximizing task performance. However, such meta-RL
approaches struggle with local optima due to a
chicken-and-egg problem: learning to explore
requires good exploitation to gauge the exploration’s utility, but learning to exploit requires information gathered via exploration. Optimizing
separate objectives for exploration and exploitation can avoid this problem, but prior meta-RL exploration objectives yield suboptimal policies that
gather information irrelevant to the task. We alleviate both concerns by constructing an exploitation objective that automatically identifies taskrelevant information and an exploration objective
to recover only this information. This avoids local optima in end-to-end training, without sacrificing optimal exploration. Empirically, D REAM
substantially outperforms existing approaches
on complex meta-RL problems, such as sparsereward 3D visual navigation. Videos of D REAM:
https://ezliu.github.io/dream/

1. Introduction
A general-purpose agent should be able to perform multiple
related tasks across multiple related environments. Our goal
is to develop agents that can perform a variety of tasks in
novel environments, based on previous experience and only
a small amount of experience in the new environment. For
example, we may want a robot to cook a meal (a new task) in
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Evan Zheran Liu <evanliu@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a new kitchen (the environment) after it has learned to cook
other meals in other kitchens. To adapt to a new kitchen,
the robot must both explore to find the ingredients, and
use this information to cook. Existing meta-reinforcement
learning (meta-RL) methods can adapt to new tasks and
environments, but, as we identify in this work, struggle
when adaptation requires complex exploration strategies.
In the meta-RL setting, the agent is presented with a set
of meta-training problems, each in an environment (e.g., a
kitchen) with some task (e.g., make pizza); at meta-test time,
the agent is given a new, but related environment and task. It
is allowed to gather information in a few initial exploration
episodes, and its goal is to then maximize returns on all subsequent exploitation episodes, using this information. A
common meta-RL approach is to learn to explore and exploit
end-to-end by training a policy and updating exploration behavior based on how well the policy later exploits using the
information discovered from exploration (Duan et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2016a; Stadie et al., 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019;
Humplik et al., 2019). With enough model capacity, such
approaches can express optimal exploration and exploitation, but they create a chicken-and-egg problem that leads to
bad local optima and poor sample efficiency: Learning to explore requires good exploitation to gauge the exploration’s
utility, but learning to exploit requires information gathered
via exploration. Therefore, with only final performance as
signal, one cannot be learned without already having learned
the other. For example, a robot chef is only incentivized to
explore and find the ingredients if it already knows how to
cook with those ingredients, but the robot can only learn to
cook if it can already find the ingredients by exploration.
To avoid this chicken-and-egg problem, we propose to optimize separate objectives for exploration and exploitation
by leveraging the problem ID—an easy-to-provide unique
one-hot for each training meta-training task and environment. Such a problem ID can be realistically available in
real-world meta-RL tasks: e.g., in a robot chef factory, each
training kitchen (problem) can be easily assigned a unique
ID, and in a personalized recommendation system, each
user (problem) is typically identified by a unique username.
Some prior works (Humplik et al., 2019; Kamienny et al.,
2020) also use these problem IDs, but not in a way that
avoids the chicken-and-egg problem. Others (Rakelly et al.,

