Multiplying Matrices Without Multiplying

Davis Blalock 1 2 John Guttag 2

Matrix multiplication is among the most fundamental subroutines used in machine learning and scientific computing.
As a result, there has been a great deal of work on implementing high-speed matrix multiplication libraries (Paszke
et al., 2017; Guennebaud et al., 2010; Abadi et al., 2016),
designing custom hardware to accelerate multiplication of
certain classes of matrices (Han et al., 2016; Chen et al.,
2016; Parashar et al., 2017; Jouppi et al., 2017), speeding
up distributed matrix multiplication (Yu et al., 2017; Dutta
et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2020; Irony et al., 2004), and designing efficient Approximate Matrix Multiplication (AMM)
algorithms under various assumptions.
We focus on the AMM task under the assumptions that the
matrices are tall, relatively dense, and resident in a single
machine’s memory. In this setting, the primary challenge
is minimizing the amount of compute time required to approximate linear operations with a given level of fidelity.
1
MosaicML, San Francisco, CA, USA 2 MIT CSAIL,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Davis Blalock
<davis@mosaicml.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

As a concrete example, consider the task of approximating
a softmax classifier trained to predict image labels given
embeddings derived from a neural network. Here, the rows
of A are the embeddings for each image, and the columns
of B are the weight vectors for each class. Classification
is performed by computing the product AB and taking the
argmax within each row of the result. In Figure 1, we see
the results of approximating AB using our method and its
best-performing rivals (Dasgupta et al., 2010; Mairal et al.,
2009) on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets.
Approximating Softmax Classifiers
CIFAR-10
Classification
Accuracy

1. Introduction

This setting arises naturally in machine learning and data
mining when one has a data matrix A whose rows are samples and a linear operator B one wishes to apply to these
samples. B could be a linear classifier, linear regressor, or
an embedding matrix, among other possibilities.

0.75
0.50
0.25

CIFAR-100
Classification
Accuracy

Abstract
Multiplying matrices is among the most fundamental
and compute-intensive operations in machine learning. Consequently, there has been significant work
on efficiently approximating matrix multiplies. We
introduce a learning-based algorithm for this task
that greatly outperforms existing methods. Experiments using hundreds of matrices from diverse domains show that it often runs 100× faster than exact
matrix products and 10× faster than current approximate methods. In the common case that one matrix is
known ahead of time, our method also has the interesting property that it requires zero multiply-adds. These
results suggest that a mixture of hashing, averaging,
and byte shuffling–the core operations of our method–
could be a more promising building block for machine
learning than the sparsified, factorized, and/or scalar
quantized matrix products that have recently been the
focus of substantial research and hardware investment.

0.6
0.4
0.2

10

0

10

1

10

2

Speedup Over Exact Matrix Multiply
Ours
Exact Matrix Multiply

Mairal et al.
Dasgupta et al.

Figure 1: Our method achieves a dramatically better
speed-accuracy tradeoff than the best existing methods
when approximating two linear classifiers.
Our method represents a significant methodological departure from most traditional approaches to this problem.
Traditional AMM methods construct matrices VA , VB ∈
RD×d , d  D such that
AB ≈ (AVA )(VB> B).

(1)

Often, VA and VB are sparse, embody some sort of sampling scheme, or have other structure such that these pro-

