Detection of Signal in the Spiked Rectangular Models

Ji Hyung Jung 1 Hye Won Chung 2 Ji Oon Lee 1 3

Abstract
We consider the problem of detecting signals in
the rank-one signal-plus-noise data matrix models that generalize the spiked Wishart matrices.
We show that the principal component analysis
can be improved by pre-transforming the matrix
entries if the noise is non-Gaussian. As an intermediate step, we prove a sharp phase transition of
the largest eigenvalues of spiked rectangular matrices, which extends the Baik–Ben Arous–Péché
(BBP) transition. We also propose a hypothesis
test to detect the presence of signal with low computational complexity, based on the linear spectral
statistics, which minimizes the sum of the Type-I
and Type-II errors when the noise is Gaussian.

v ∈ RN with kuk = kvk = 1. The parameter λ
corresponds to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
• Rectangular matrix with spiked covariance (multiplicative model): the data matrix is of the form
(I + λuuT )1/2 X,
where X is an M × N random i.i.d. matrix whose
entries are centered with variance N −1 , u ∈ RM with
kuk = 1. The parameter λ corresponds to the SNR.
Note that in the rectangular matrix with spiked covariance,
and also in the rectangular matrix with spiked mean under
an additional assumption that the entries of u and v are
centered, the population covariance is
Σ = I + λuuT .
In the special case where the entries of v are i.i.d. Gaussians,
the two models coincide.

1. Introduction
Detecting a low-rank structure or signal in a highdimensional noisy data is one of the most fundamental
problems in statistics and data science (Johnstone, 2001;
Onatski et al., 2013; 2014; Abbe, 2017). In the case where
the data is a matrix and the signal is a vector, it is natural to
consider spiked random matrices, which includes the spiked
Wigner matrix and the spiked Wishart matrix. In these models, the signal is in the form of rank-1 mean matrix (spiked
Wigner matrix) or rank-1 perturbation of the identity in the
covariance matrix (spiked Wishart matrix). In this paper, we
consider the following rectangular random matrix models
that generalize the spiked Wishart matrix:
• Rectangular matrix with spiked mean (additive model):
the data matrix is of the form
√
λuv T + X,
where X is an M × N random i.i.d. matrix whose
entries are centered with variance N −1 , u ∈ RM ,
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon,
Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 3 School of Mathematics, KIAS, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Hye Won Chung <hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>, Ji Oon Lee
<jioon.lee@kaist.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

If SNR λ is sufficiently large, we can easily detect (and
recover) the signal by methods such as principal component
analysis (PCA). Even under the high-dimensional assumption M, N → ∞ with M/N → d0 ∈√(0, ∞), the signal
can be reliably detected by PCA if λ > d0 . (For the use of
PCA in the high-dimensional setting, we √
refer to (Johnstone,
2007).) On the other hand, if λ ∈ (0, d0 ), the distribution of the largest eigenvalue coincides with that of the null
model λ = 0. This sharp transition in the behavior of the
largest eigenvalue is known as the BBP transition after the
seminal work by Baik, Ben Arous, and Péché (Baik et al.,
2005). (See Section 2.2.)
√
On the other hand, in the subcritical case λ < d0 , if the
noise X is Gaussian and the signal u (and also v for a
rectangular matrix with spiked mean) is drawn uniformly
from the unit sphere, known as the spherical prior, then no
test can reliably detect the signal. (See Section 2.3.) Thus,
it is natural to ask the following questions:
• Is the threshold for reliable detection (i.e., with
√ probability 1 − o(1) as M, N → ∞) lower than d0 if the
noise is non-Gaussian?
• Can we design an efficient algorithm to weakly detect
the signal (i.e., better than a random guess) for the
subcritical case?

