A Policy Gradient Algorithm for Learning to Learn
in Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Dong-Ki Kim 1 2 Miao Liu 2 3 Matthew Riemer 2 3 Chuangchuang Sun 1 2 Marwa Abdulhai 1 2
Golnaz Habibi 1 2 Sebastian Lopez-Cot 1 2 Gerald Tesauro 2 3 Jonathan P. How 1 2

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in multiagent reinforcement learning is to learn beneﬁcial behaviors
in a shared environment with other simultaneously learning agents. In particular, each agent
perceives the environment as effectively nonstationary due to the changing policies of other
agents. Moreover, each agent is itself constantly
learning, leading to natural non-stationarity in the
distribution of experiences encountered. In this
paper, we propose a novel meta-multiagent policy gradient theorem that directly accounts for
the non-stationary policy dynamics inherent to
multiagent learning settings. This is achieved by
modeling our gradient updates to consider both
an agent’s own non-stationary policy dynamics
and the non-stationary policy dynamics of other
agents in the environment. We show that our theoretically grounded approach provides a general solution to the multiagent learning problem, which
inherently comprises all key aspects of previous
state of the art approaches on this topic. We test
our method on a diverse suite of multiagent benchmarks and demonstrate a more efﬁcient ability to
adapt to new agents as they learn than baseline
methods across the full spectrum of mixed incentive, competitive, and cooperative domains.

1. Introduction
Learning in multiagent settings is inherently more difﬁcult
than single-agent learning because an agent interacts both
with the environment and other agents (Buşoniu et al., 2010).
Speciﬁcally, the fundamental challenge in multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) is the difﬁculty of learning
optimal policies in the presence of other simultaneously
1
MIT-LIDS 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 IBM-Research. Correspondence to: Dong-Ki Kim <dkkim93@mit.edu>, Miao Liu
<miao.liu1@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learning agents because their changing behaviors jointly affect the environment’s transition and reward function. This
dependence on non-stationary policies renders the Markov
property invalid from the perspective of each agent, requiring agents to adapt their behaviors with respect to potentially
large, unpredictable, and endless changes in the policies of
fellow agents (Papoudakis et al., 2019). In such environments, it is also critical that agents adapt to the changing
behaviors of others in a sample-efﬁcient manner as it is
likely that their policies could update again after a small
number of interactions. Therefore, effective agents should
consider the learning of other agents and adapt quickly to
their non-stationary behaviors. Otherwise, undesirable outcomes may arise when an agent is constantly lagging in its
ability to deal with the current policies of other agents.
Our paper proposes a new framework based on metalearning to address the inherent non-stationarity of MARL.
Meta-learning (also referred to as learning to learn) was
recently shown to be a promising methodology for fast adaptation in multiagent settings. The framework by Al-Shedivat
et al. (2018), for example, introduces a meta-optimization
scheme in which a meta-agent can adapt more efﬁciently
to changes in a new opponent’s policy after collecting only
a handful of interactions. The key idea is to model the
meta-agent’s own learning process so that its updated policy
performs better than an evolving opponent. However, prior
work does not directly consider the learning processes of
other agents during the meta-optimization process, instead
treating the other agents as external factors and assuming
the meta-agent cannot inﬂuence their future policies. As a
result, prior work on multiagent meta-learning fails to consider an important property of MARL: other agents in the
environment are also learning and adapting their own policies based on interactions with the meta-agent. Thus, the
meta-agent is missing an opportunity to inﬂuence the others’
future policies through these interactions, which could be
used to improve its own performance.
Our contributions. With this insight, we make the following primary contributions in this paper:
1) New theorem: We derive a new meta-multiagent policy gradient theorem (Meta-MAPG) that, for the ﬁrst time,

