When Does Data Augmentation Help With Membership Inference Attacks?

Yigitcan Kaya 1 Tudor Dumitras, 1

Abstract
Deep learning models often raise privacy concerns as they leak information about their training data. This leakage enables membership inference attacks (MIA) that can identify whether
a data point was in a model’s training set.
Research shows that some data augmentation
mechanisms may reduce the risk by combatting
a key factor increasing the leakage, overfitting.
While many mechanisms exist, their effectiveness against MIAs and privacy properties have
not been studied systematically. Employing two
recent MIAs, we explore the lower bound on
the risk in the absence of formal upper bounds.
First, we evaluate 7 mechanisms and differential privacy, on three image classification tasks.
We find that applying augmentation to increase
the model’s utility does not mitigate the risk and
protection comes with a utility penalty. Further,
we also investigate why popular label smoothing mechanism consistently amplifies the risk.
Finally, we propose loss-rank-correlation (LRC)
metric to assess how similar the effects of different mechanisms are. This, for example, reveals
the similarity of applying high-intensity augmentation against MIAs to simply reducing the training time. Our findings emphasize the utilityprivacy trade-off and provide practical guidelines
on using augmentation to manage the trade-off.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has emerged as one of the cornerstones of
large-scale machine learning. However, its fundamental dependence on data forces practitioners to collect and use
private information (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015). This situation has given rise to privacy concerns as deep learning models are shown to leak information about their
data (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2019; Carlini
1

University of Maryland, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to:
Yigitcan Kaya <cankaya@umiacs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Shokri et al., 2017). In particular, this enables
membership inference attacks (MIAs) to find out whether
a data point was in a model’s training set or not. MIAs often represent a serious privacy risk; for example, learning
that an individual was in a hospital’s diagnosis training data
also reveals that this individual was a patient there.
MIAs are possible when the adversary can distinguish between a model’s predictions on training set and test set
samples. Such leakage allows the adversary to infer which
samples were used for training the model. Although differential privacy (DP) provides a formal upper bound for this
risk, applying it often hurts the model’s utility (Abadi et al.,
2016), and its guarantees might be too conservative against
known attacks (Jayaraman & Evans, 2019). Searching for
the root causes of this vulnerability, researchers have proposed overfitting as one factor (Yeom et al., 2017).
Overfitting causes a rift between a model’s performance on
the training samples and its generalization performance on
the test samples. On the other hand, data augmentation, i.e.,
generating new training samples from the existing ones, is
known to shrink this generalization gap (Szegedy et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2018; 2016). In consequence, prior results suggest that augmentation, as well as increasing the
utility, may also reduce the risk (Shokri et al., 2017; Sablayrolles et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). As utility is a key factor for the adoption of security mechanisms in practice,
this raises the intriguing prospect of a free lunch concerning MIAs in deep learning. The abundance of augmentation methods (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Xie et al.,
2016; DeVries & Taylor, 2017) and a lack of work studying
whether there really is a free lunch motivate our study.
Our first contribution is to systematically analyze the effectiveness of data augmentation mechanisms against MIAs.
Data augmentation conventionally refers to randomly generating new training features, such as cropping, however,
we also evaluate techniques that modify the labels, such as
label smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016). Unlike the theoretical upper bound for leakage provided by DP, we explore
the lower bound that three practical MIAs can achieve.
We evaluate 7 popular data augmentation mechanisms using modern convolutional neural networks, on three popular image classification tasks: Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR10, and CIFAR-100. We find that (i) when augmentation is

