Autoencoding Under Normalization Constraints

Sangwoong Yoon 1 Yung-Kyun Noh 2 3 Frank C. Park 1 4

Abstract
Likelihood is a standard estimate for outlier detection. The specific role of the normalization
constraint is to ensure that the out-of-distribution
(OOD) regime has a small likelihood when samples are learned using maximum likelihood. Because autoencoders do not possess such a process of normalization, they often fail to recognize
outliers even when they are obviously OOD. We
propose the Normalized Autoencoder (NAE), a
normalized probabilistic model constructed from
an autoencoder. The probability density of NAE
is defined using the reconstruction error of an
autoencoder, which is differently defined in the
conventional energy-based model. In our model,
normalization is enforced by suppressing the reconstruction of negative samples, significantly improving the outlier detection performance. Our
experimental results confirm the efficacy of NAE,
both in detecting outliers and in generating indistribution samples.

1. Introduction
An autoencoder (Rumelhart et al., 1986) is a neural network
trained to reconstruct samples from a training data distribution. Since in principle the quality of reconstruction is
expected to be poor for inputs that deviate significantly from
the training data, autoencoders are widely used in outlier
detection (Japkowicz et al., 1995), in which an input with a
large reconstruction error is classified as out-of-distribution
(OOD). Autoencoders for outlier detection have been applied in domains ranging from video surveillance (Zhao
et al., 2017) to medical diagnosis (Lu & Xu, 2018).
However, autoencoders have been known to reconstruct
1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3
Korea Institute of Advanced Studies, Seoul, Republic of Korea 4 Saige Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Yung-Kyun Noh <nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr>, Frank C. Park
<fcp@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of reconstructed outliers. The last two rows
show the reconstructions from a conventional autoencoder (AE)
and NAE. Both autoencoders are trained on MNIST, and other
inputs are outliers. The architecture of the two autoencoders is
identical. Successful detection of an outlier is highlighted with blue
solid rectangles, while detection failures due to the reconstruction
of outliers are denoted with an orange dotted rectangle. Note that
AE is not the identity mapping, as it fails to reconstruct the shirt.

outliers consistently across a wide range of experimental
settings (Lyudchik, 2016; Tong et al., 2019; Zong et al.,
2018; Gong et al., 2019). We name this phenomenon outlier
reconstruction. Figure 1 shows examples of some outliers
reconstructed by an autoencoder trained with MNIST data;
the autoencoder is able to reconstruct a wide range of OOD
inputs, including constant black pixels, Omniglot characters, and fragments of MNIST digits. The early works on
regularized autoencoders (Vincent et al., 2008; Rifai et al.,
2011; Ng et al., 2011) focus for the most part on preventing
the autoencoder from turning into the identity mapping that
reconstructs every input. Nonetheless, outlier reconstruction can still occur even when the autoencoder is not the
identity as shown by the non-identity autoencoder in Figure
1. Not surprisingly, outlier reconstruction is a leading cause
of autoencoder’s detection failure.
On the other hand, in a normalized probabilistic model, it
is known that maximum likelihood learning suppresses the
assignment of probability mass in OOD regions in order to
keep the model normalized. Thus, the likelihood is widely
used as a predictor for outlier detection (Bishop, 1994).
Meanwhile, an autoencoder is not a probabilistic model
of the data and does not have a suppression mechanism
corresponding to the normalization in other probabilistic
models. As a result, the reconstruction of outliers are not
inhibited during training of an autoencoder.
This paper formulates an autoencoder as a normalized prob-

