Making Paper Reviewing Robust to Bid Manipulation Attacks

Ruihan Wu * 1 Chuan Guo * 2 Felix Wu 3 † Rahul Kidambi 4 † Laurens van der Maaten 2 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract
Most computer science conferences rely on paper
bidding to assign reviewers to papers. Although
paper bidding enables high-quality assignments
in days of unprecedented submission numbers,
it also opens the door for dishonest reviewers to
adversarially influence paper reviewing assignments. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some
reviewers bid on papers by “friends” or colluding authors, even though these papers are outside
their area of expertise, and recommend them for
acceptance without considering the merit of the
work. In this paper, we study the efficacy of such
bid manipulation attacks and find that, indeed,
they can jeopardize the integrity of the review
process. We develop a novel approach for paper
bidding and assignment that is much more robust
against such attacks. We show empirically that
our approach provides robustness even when dishonest reviewers collude, have full knowledge of
the assignment system’s internal workings, and
have access to the system’s inputs. In addition
to being more robust, the quality of our paper review assignments is comparable to that of current,
non-robust assignment approaches.

1. Introduction
Peer review is a cornerstone of scientific publishing. It
also functions as a gatekeeper for publication in top-tier
computer-science conferences. To facilitate high-quality
peer reviews, it is imperative that paper submissions are reviewed by qualified reviewers. In addition to assessing
a reviewer’s qualifications based on their prior publications (Charlin & Zemel, 2013), many conferences implement a paper bidding phase in which reviewers express
their interest in reviewing particular papers. Facilitating
*
Equal contribution. † Work done while at Cornell University.
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Facebook
AI Research 3 ASAPP 4 Amazon Search & AI. Correspondence
to: Ruihan Wu <rw565@cornell.edu>, Chuan Guo <chuanguo@fb.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

bids is important because the review quality is higher when
reviewers are interested in a paper (Stent & Ji, 2018).
Unfortunately, paper bidding also creates the potential for
difficult-to-detect adversarial behavior by reviewers. In particular, a reviewer may place high bids on papers by “friends”
or colluding authors, even when those papers are outside of
the reviewer’s area of expertise, with the purpose of accepting the papers without merit. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that such bid manipulation attacks may have, indeed, influenced paper acceptance decisions in recent top-tier computer
science conferences (Vijaykumar, 2020; Littman, 2021).
This paper investigates the efficacy of bid manipulation
attacks in a realistic paper-assignment system. We find that
such systems are, indeed, very vulnerable to adversarial
bid, which is corroborated by prior work (Jecmen et al.,
2020). Furthermore, we design a paper-assignment system
that is robust against bid manipulation attacks. Specifically,
our system treats paper bids as supervision for a model
of reviewer preferences, rather than directly using bids to
assign papers. We then detect atypical patterns in the paper
bids by measuring their influence on the model, and remove
such high-influence bids as they are potentially malicious.
We evaluate the efficacy of our system on a novel, synthetic
dataset of paper bids and assignments that we developed
to facilitate the study of robustness of paper-assignment
systems. We carefully designed this dataset to match the
statistics of real bidding data from recent computer-science
conferences. We find that our system produces high-quality
paper assignments on the synthetic dataset, while also providing robustness against groups of colluding, adversarial
reviewers in a white-box setting in which the adversaries
have full knowledge of the system’s inner workings and its
inputs. We hope our findings will help computer-science
conferences in performing high-quality paper assignments
at scale, while also minimizing the surface for adversarial
behavior by a few bad actors in their community.

2. Bid Manipulation Attacks
We start by investigating the effectiveness of bid manipulation attacks on a typical paper assignment system.
Paper assignment system. Most paper assignment systems
utilize a computed score sr,p for each reviewer-paper pair

