Learning Online Algorithms with Distributional Advice

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Vasilis Kontonis * 1 Christos Tzamos * 1 Ali Vakilian * 2 Nikos Zarifis * 1

Abstract
We study the problem of designing online algorithms given advice about the input. While prior
work had focused on deterministic advice, we
only assume distributional access to the instances
of interest, and the goal is to learn a competitive algorithm given access to i.i.d. samples. We
aim to be competitive against an adversary with
prior knowledge of the distribution, while also
performing well against worst-case inputs.
We focus on the classical online problems of skirental and prophet-inequalities, and provide sample complexity bounds for the underlying learning tasks. First, we point out that for general distributions it is information-theoretically impossible to beat the worst-case competitive-ratio with
any finite sample size. As our main contribution, we establish strong positive results for wellbehaved distributions. Specifically, for the broad
class of log-concave distributions, we show that
poly(1/) samples suffice to obtain (1 + )competitive ratio. Finally, we show that this sample upper bound is close to best possible, even for
very simple classes of distributions.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty in the input is a central challenge in the area
of algorithm design. A number of both classical and recent paradigms have been introduced to capture this issue. Online computation is a prototypical domain where
dealing with uncertainty of future data naturally arises.
To get around the inherent uncertainty of the online setting, many different models have been introduced: online algorithms with lookahead (Grove, 1995), with statistical adversary (Raghavan, 1992), or with diffused ad*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTIC), Chicago, Illinois, USA. This
work was done when the author was at University of WisconsinMadison. Correspondence to: Ali Vakilian <vakilian@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

versary (Koutsoupias & Papadimitriou, 2000). A more recent line of work studies online algorithms with predictions
or advice (also known as learning-based/data-driven online
algorithms) (Renault & Rosén, 2015; Angelopoulos et al.,
2015; Lykouris & Vassilvtiskii, 2018; Purohit et al., 2018;
Gollapudi & Panigrahi, 2019; Angelopoulos et al., 2020;
Dütting et al., 2020; Lattanzi et al., 2020; Anand et al.,
2020; Bamas et al., 2020).
In this work, we introduce a new model of learning-based
algorithms. Our goal is to design algorithms that can leverage the learnable structure of the input. Specifically, we
assume sample access to the underlying distribution over
inputs. Given i.i.d. samples from this distribution, we want
to design methods that are competitive against the optimal
performance of any algorithm with exact knowledge of the
distribution over inputs; and at the same time are robust to
model misspecification or adversarial predictions. In other
words, when the predictions are almost perfect, we expect
the algorithm to solve the problem almost optimally; and
if the predictions are misleading, the algorithm is required
to attain guarantees comparable to the best possible worstcase bounds. This work falls in the active domain of beyond worst-case analysis (see the recent book (Roughgarden, 2020) and the related chapter on algorithms with predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2020)).
While most of the existing results in learning-based online algorithms only consider deterministic predictions, in
this work we aim to design such algorithms when predictions are random and drawn from an underlying distribution. This setting can accurately model the type of predictions that arise in real applications. In many scenarios, we
have access to past data, i.e., distributional advice, that can
be used to design an algorithm that performs well on unseen data.
In this paper, we focus on two basic online problems with
distributional information. In particular, we investigate the
trade-off between the efficiency and the sample complexity of the ski-rental and the prophet inequality problems
in an online model when the input distribution is assumed
to belong to a known class of distributions. Unlike the
classical online setting, we consider the diffused adversary
model proposed by Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou (2000),
which assumes that the given input distribution belongs to

