Multiscale Invertible Generative Networks
for High-Dimensional Bayesian Inference

Shumao Zhang 1 Pengchuan Zhang 2 Thomas Y. Hou 1

Abstract

where L is the likelihood given as
L(y|x) = N (y − F(x); 0, Γ) ,

We propose a Multiscale Invertible Generative
Network (MsIGN) and associated training algorithm that leverages multiscale structure to solve
high-dimensional Bayesian inference. To address
the curse of dimensionality, MsIGN exploits the
low-dimensional nature of the posterior, and generates samples from coarse to fine scale (low to
high dimension) by iteratively upsampling and
refining samples. MsIGN is trained in a multistage manner to minimize the Jeffreys divergence,
which avoids mode dropping in high-dimensional
cases. On two high-dimensional Bayesian inverse problems, we show superior performance
of MsIGN over previous approaches in posterior
approximation and multiple mode capture. On
the natural image synthesis task, MsIGN achieves
superior performance in bits-per-dimension over
baseline models and yields great interpret-ability
of its neurons in intermediate layers.

1. Introduction
To infer about hidden system states x ∈ Rd from observed
system data y ∈ Rs , Bayesian inference blends some prior
knowledge, given as a distribution ρ, with data y into a
powerful posterior. Since direct measurement of x can be
inaccessible, the data y is generated through y = F(x) + ε,
where F is a forward map that can be highly nonlinear
and complicated, ε ∈ Rs is random noise modelled by
some distribution. For illustration simplicity, we assume a
Gaussian N (0, Γ) for ε. The posterior is characterized as
1
(1)
q(x|y) = ρ(x)L(y|x) ,
Z
1

Department of Computational & Mathematical Sciences,
Caltech, Pasadena, California, USA 2 MSR AI Lab, Redmond,
Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Shumao Zhang <shumaoz@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(2)

which is the density of ε = y − F(x), and Z is some
normalizing constant that is usually intractable in practice.
For simplicity reason, in the following context we abbreviate
q(x|y) in (1) as q(x) , because the data y only plays the role
of defining the target distribution q(x) in our framework.
A key and long-standing challenge in Bayesian inference is
to approximate, or draw samples from the posterior q, especially in high-dimensional (high-d) cases. An arbitrary distribution can concentrate its density anywhere in the space,
and these concentrations (also called “modes”) become less
connected as d increases. As a result, detecting these modes
requires computational cost that grows exponentially with d.
This intrinsic difficulty of mode collapse is a consequence
of the curse of dimensionality, which all existing Bayesian
inference methods suffer from, e.g., MCMC-based methods
(Neal et al., 2011; Welling & Teh, 2011; Cui et al., 2016),
SVGD-type methods (Liu & Wang, 2016; Chen et al., 2018;
2019a), and generative modeling (Morzfeld et al., 2012;
Parno et al., 2016; Hou et al., 2019).
In this paper, we exploit the multiscale structure to deal
with the high-dimensional Bayesian inference problems.
The multiscale structure means that the forward map F
depends mostly on some low-d structure of x, referred as
coarse scale, instead of the high-d structure, referred as
fine scale. For example, the terrain shape x, given as the
discretization of 2-D elevation map on a 2-D lattice grid,
is a quantity with dimension equal to the number of grid
points. Simulating the 2-D precipitation distribution y using
terrain shape x at the scale of kilometer is a reasonable
approximation to itself at the scale of meter. The former
one is a coarse-scale version of the latter, and has 106 -times
fewer problem dimension (grid points). Such multiscale
structure is very common in high-d problems, especially
when x is some spatial or temporal quantity. The coarsescale approximation to the original fine-scale problem is
low-d and computationally attractive, and can help divideand-conquer the high-d challenge. The multiscale property
is discussed in detail in Section 2.
We approximate the target q by a parametric family of distri-

