A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach to Marginalized Importance
Sampling with the Successor Representation

Scott Fujimoto 1 David Meger 1 Doina Precup 1

Abstract
Marginalized importance sampling (MIS), which
measures the density ratio between the stateaction occupancy of a target policy and that of
a sampling distribution, is a promising approach
for off-policy evaluation. However, current stateof-the-art MIS methods rely on complex optimization tricks and succeed mostly on simple toy problems. We bridge the gap between MIS and deep
reinforcement learning by observing that the density ratio can be computed from the successor
representation of the target policy. The successor representation can be trained through deep
reinforcement learning methodology and decouples the reward optimization from the dynamics
of the environment, making the resulting algorithm stable and applicable to high-dimensional
domains. We evaluate the empirical performance
of our approach on a variety of challenging Atari
and MuJoCo environments.

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is a reinforcement learning
(RL) task where the aim is to measure the performance of
a target policy from data collected by a separate behavior
policy (Sutton & Barto, 1998). As it can often be difficult
or costly to obtain new data, OPE offers an avenue for reusing previously gathered data, making OPE an important
challenge for applying RL to real-world domains (Zhao
et al., 2009; Mandel et al., 2014; Swaminathan et al., 2017;
Gauci et al., 2018).
Marginalized importance sampling (MIS) (Liu et al., 2018;
Xie et al., 2019; Nachum et al., 2019a) is a family of OPE
methods which re-weight sampled rewards by directly learning the density ratio between the state-action occupancy
of the target policy and the sampling distribution. This
1

Mila, McGill University. Correspondence to: Scott Fujimoto
<scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

approach can have significantly lower variance than traditional importance sampling methods (Precup et al., 2001),
which consider a product of ratios over trajectories, and is
amenable to deterministic policies and behavior agnostic
settings where the sampling distribution is unknown. However, the body of MIS work is largely theoretical, and as
a result, empirical evaluations of MIS have mostly been
carried out on simple low-dimensional tasks, such as mountain car (state dim. of 2) or cartpole (state dim. of 4). In
comparison, deep RL algorithms have shown successful
behaviors in high-dimensional domains such as Humanoid
locomotion (state dim. of 376) and Atari (image-based).
In this paper, we present a straightforward approach for
MIS that can be computed from the successor representation (SR) (Dayan, 1993) of the target policy by directly
optimizing the reward function. Our algorithm, the Successor Representation DIstribution Correction Estimation
(SR-DICE), is the first method that allows MIS to scale to
high-dimensional systems, far outperforming previous approaches. In comparison to previous algorithms which rely
on minimax optimization or kernel methods (Liu et al., 2018;
Nachum et al., 2019a; Uehara & Jiang, 2019; Mousavi et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2020), SR-DICE requires only a simple
convex loss applied to a linear function, after computing
the SR. Similar to the deep RL methods which can learn in
high-dimensional domains, the SR can be computed easily
using behavior-agnostic temporal-difference (TD) methods.
This makes our algorithm highly amenable to deep learning
architectures and applicable to complex tasks.
The SR, which measures the expected future occupancy of
states for a given policy, has a clear relationship to MIS
methods, which estimate the ratio between the occupancy
of state-action pairs and the sampling distribution. However,
this relationship is muddied in a deep RL context, where the
deep SR measures the expected future sum of feature vectors. Our approach, SR-DICE, provides a straightforward
and principled method for extracting density ratios from the
SR without any modifications to the standard learning procedure of the SR. Access to these density ratios is valuable
as they have a wide range of possible applications such as
policy regularization (Nachum et al., 2019b; Touati et al.,
2020), imitation learning (Kostrikov et al., 2019), off-policy

