Hierarchical Agglomerative Graph Clustering
in Nearly-Linear Time

Laxman Dhulipala 1 David Eisenstat 2 Jakub Ł ˛
acki 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Jessica Shi 1

Abstract
We study the widely used hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) algorithm on edgeweighted graphs. We define an algorithmic framework for hierarchical agglomerative graph clustering that provides the first efficient Õ(m) time exact algorithms for classic linkage measures, such
as complete- and WPGMA-linkage, as well as
other measures. Furthermore, for average-linkage,
arguably the most popular variant of√HAC, we provide an algorithm that runs in Õ(n m) time. For
this variant, this is the first exact algorithm that
runs in subquadratic time, as long as m = n2−
for some constant  > 0. We complement this
result with a simple -close approximation algorithm for average-linkage in our framework that
runs in Õ(m) time. As an application of our algorithms, we consider clustering points in a metric
space by first using k-NN to generate a graph from
the point set, and then running our algorithms on
the resulting weighted graph. We validate the performance of our algorithms on publicly available
datasets, and show that our approach can speed
up clustering of point datasets by a factor of 20.7–
76.5x.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental and widely used unsupervised
learning technique with numerous applications in data mining, machine learning, and social network analysis. Hierarchical clustering is a popular approach to clustering which
outputs a hierarchy of clusters, where the input data objects
are singleton clusters at the bottom of the tree, with interior
vertices corresponding to merging the two children clusters.
In this paper, we consider the family of hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) algorithms, which have attracted
significant theoretical and practical attention since they were
1

MIT CSAIL 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Laxman
Dhulipala <laxmandhulipala@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

first proposed nearly 50 years ago (King, 1967; Lance &
Williams, 1967; Sneath & Sokal, 1973).
A HAC algorithm takes as input a set of n points and proceeds in n − 1 steps. In each step, it finds two most similar
points and merges them together. Here, the notion of similarity is defined by a configurable linkage measure.
The specific choice of the linkage measure affects both the
clustering quality and the computational complexity of the
HAC algorithm. In the case of a general linkage measure,
HAC can be implemented in O(n3 ) time, assuming that
we are given the similarity between each two points as
input. For the most commonly used linkage measure (single,
average, Ward’s and complete linkage) this complexity can
be improved to O(n2 ) by using the nearest-neighbor chain
algorithm (Benzécri, 1982).
The O(n2 ) time algorithms for HAC are often referred to
as optimal, given that they take the entire n × n similarity
matrix as the input. However, from a practical point of view,
this quadratic lower bound is very pessimistic, as in many
applications only a small fraction of the n × n similarities
are non-negligible. As an example, consider the problem
of clustering search engine queries studied in (Beeferman
& Berger, 2000). Each query is assigned a set of relevant
URLs and the similarity between two queries is based on
the overlap between their URL sets. Clearly, for the vast
majority of query pairs, the similarity is zero.
Knowing that in practice only o(n2 ) pairs of input points
have non-negligible similarity scores results in two natural
questions. First, is it possible to design a subquadratic HAC
algorithm in this case? And if so, does this algorithm lead
to improved running times in practical applications? In this
paper, we answer both these questions affirmatively.
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper we study the HAC algorithm on edge-weighted
graphs. Formally, we consider a graph G(V, E) with n vertices and m edges, where each vertex represents one input
point and edge weights describe the similarities between the
endpoints.
We develop a general framework that encompasses both

