Joining datasets via data augmentation in the label space for neural networks

Jake Zhao (Junbo) * 1 Mingfeng Ou * 2 3 Linji Xue 2 Yunkai Cui 2 Sai Wu 1 Gang Chen 1

Abstract
Most, if not all, modern deep learning systems
restrict themselves to a single dataset for neural
network training and inference. In this article,
we are interested in systematic ways to join
datasets that are made of similar purposes. Unlike
previous published works that ubiquitously
conduct the dataset joining in the uninterpretable
latent vectorial space, the core to our method
is an augmentation procedure in the label space.
The primary challenge to address the label space
for dataset joining is the discrepancy between
labels: non-overlapping label annotation sets,
different labeling granularity or hierarchy and
etc. Notably we propose a new technique
leveraging artificially created knowledge graph,
recurrent neural networks and policy gradient
that successfully achieve the dataset joining in
the label space. Empirical results on both image
and text classification justify the validity of our
approach.

1. Introduction
The advances of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) arise in
many domains, such as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al.,
2017), natural language processing (Sutskever et al., 2014),
speech (Oord et al., 2016), games (Silver et al., 2017) and
etc. In particular, the most popular paradigm to date is
the so-called end-to-end learning paradigm. Its recipe can
normally be summarized as follows: (i)-prepare a dataset
consists of numerous {input-target} groups; (ii)-feed the
dataset to a model, or coupled with a pre-trained model;
(iii)-optimizing the model by a gradient-based method and
finally, (iv)-inference on testing data points. In spite of its
massive successes, we argue that a given dataset should
not be only used once for one phase of task. Simply put,
why train your neural network using just one dataset?
*
Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China 2 Graviti Inc.,
Shanghai, China 3 Department of Software Engineering, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Gang Chen
<cg@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Instead, its versatility can be substantially enhanced by a
novel framework of dataset joining.
In real world applications, we often have the choice
of multiple datasets for the same task. Perhaps some
datasets can easily be combined, but some cannot. The
main bottleneck to join datasets together, we argue, is
the label discrepancy — that is, the discrepancy caused
by inconsistent label set, different semantic hierarchy or
granularity. Prior work attempting to solve this problem
has ubiquitously focused on mixing methodologies in
the vectorial hidden space, enabled by transfer learning
algorithms (He et al., 2019), adversarial training (Ganin
et al., 2016) and etc. These works, however, suffer from
a lack of interpretability and oftentimes an inadequate
exploitation of the semantic information of the labels. To the
best of our knowledge, how to combine different datasets
directly in the label space remains an untouched research
challenge.
In this article, we aim to propose a new framework to
join datasets and directly address the label space mixing
or joining. Unlike the conventional deep learning paradigm
where for each input the model is optimized towards
predicting the corresponding label, our paradigm extends
to predicting a trajectory on a label graph that traverses
through the targeted label node. The construction of the
label graph is the core element in our paradigm. Later in
this paper, we will describe how to construct it in detail;
briefly, the label graph can be perceived as an integration of
all the labels (as nodes) from considered datasets, in addition
to a set of augmented nodes which are used to bridge the
isolated label nodes.
In a nutshell, the label graph is knowledge-driven. The
construction of it simulates the human process of a decision.
We take cat breed classification as an example. Traditional
paradigm may only have delaminated cat breeds label such
as hbritish-shorthairi, hragdolli, and etc. By contrast, in
our paradigm, the constructed label graph would not only
consist of all the cat breed labels as nodes, but also compose
several additional augmented nodes. These augmented
nodes are functional to indicate certain features revealed
in its descendant nodes, such as the color feature htabbycolori being the ancestor node of cat breed label nodes like
hegyptian-maui, hbengali and hmaine cooni. Likewise, the

