On Energy-Based Models with Overparametrized Shallow Neural Networks

Carles Domingo-Enrich 1 Alberto Bietti 2 Eric Vanden-Eijnden 1 Joan Bruna 1 2

Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) are a simple yet
powerful framework for generative modeling.
They are based on a trainable energy function
which defines an associated Gibbs measure, and
they can be trained and sampled from via wellestablished statistical tools, such as MCMC. Neural networks may be used as energy function approximators, providing both a rich class of expressive models as well as a flexible device to incorporate data structure. In this work we focus on
shallow neural networks. Building from the incipient theory of overparametrized neural networks,
we show that models trained in the so-called ’active’ regime provide a statistical advantage over
their associated ’lazy’ or kernel regime, leading
to improved adaptivity to hidden low-dimensional
structure in the data distribution, as already observed in supervised learning. Our study covers
both maximum likelihood and Stein Discrepancy
estimators, and we validate our theoretical results
with numerical experiments on synthetic data.

1. Introduction
A central problem in machine learning is to learn generative models of a distribution through its samples. Such
models may be needed simply as a modeling tool in order
to discover properties of the data, or as a way to generate new samples that are similar to the training samples.
Generative models come in various flavors. In some cases
very few assumptions are made on the distribution and one
simply tries to learn generator models in a black-box fashion (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2013),
while other approaches make more precise assumptions
on the form of the data distribution. In this paper, we focus on the latter approach, by considering Gibbs measures
defined through an energy function f , with a density propor1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 2 Center for Data Science, New York University. Correspondence to: Carles Domingo-Enrich <cd2754@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tional to exp{−f (x)}. Such energy-based models (EBMs)
originate in statistical physics (Ruelle, 1969), and have become a fundamental modeling tool in statistics and machine
learning (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Ranzato et al., 2007;
LeCun et al., 2006; Xie et al., 2016; 2017; Du & Mordatch,
2019; Song & Kingma, 2021). If data is assumed to come
from such a model, the learning algorithms then attempt to
estimate the energy function f . The resulting learned model
can then be used to obtain new samples, typically through
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.
In this paper, we study the statistical problem of learning
such EBMs from data, in a non-parametric setting defined
by a function class F, and with possibly arbitrary target
energy functions. If we only assume a simple Lipschitz
property on the energy, learning such models will generally
suffer from the curse of dimensionality (von Luxburg &
Bousquet, 2004), in the sense that an exponential number
of samples in the dimension is needed to find a good model.
However, one may hope to achieve better guarantees when
additional structure is present in the energy function.
An important source of structure comes from energy functions which capture local rather than global interactions
between input features, such as those in Local Markov Random Fields or Ising models. Such energies can be expressed
as linear combinations of potential functions depending only
on low-dimensional projections, and are therefore amenable
to efficient approximation by considering classes F given by
shallow neural networks endowed with a sparsity-promoting
norm (Bach, 2017a). Analogously to the supervised regime
(Bach, 2017a; Chizat & Bach, 2020), learning in such
variation-norm spaces F = F1 admits a convex formulation
in the overparametrized limit, whose corresponding class of
Gibbs measures {ν(dx) ∝ exp{−f (dx)}, f ∈ F1 } is the
natural infinite-dimensional extension of exponential families (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). Our main contribution
is to show that such EBMs lead to a well-posed learning
setup with strong statistical guarantees, breaking the curse
of dimensionality.
These statistical guarantees can be combined with qualitative optimization guarantees in this overparamerised limit
under an appropriate ‘active’ or ‘mean-field’ scaling (Mei
et al., 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Chizat &
Bach, 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2019). As it is also

