Light RUMs
Flavio Chierichetti 1 Ravi Kumar 2 Andrew Tomkins 2

Abstract
A Random Utility Model (RUM) is a distribution
on permutations over a universe of items. For
each subset of the universe, a RUM induces a
natural distribution of the winner in the subset:
choose a permutation according to the RUM distribution and pick the maximum item in the subset
according to the chosen permutation. RUMs are
widely used in the theory of discrete choice.
In this paper we consider the question of the
(lossy) compressibility of RUMs on a universe
of size n, i.e., the minimum number of bits required to approximate the winning probabilities
of each slate. Our main result is that RUMs can
e 2 ) bits, an exponenbe approximated using O(n
tial improvement over the standard representation;
furthermore, we show that this bound is optimal.
En route, we sharpen the classical existential result of McFadden & Train (2000) by showing that
the minimum size of a mixture of multinomial
logits required to approximate a general RUM is
e
⇥(n).

1. Introduction

Random utility models, or RUMs, are the most influential
and well-studied class of user behavior models in the field
of discrete choice (see Train, 2003, for an overview). A
model in the RUM family is a predictor for the item a user
will choose when presented with a slate of options. The
prediction has a specific form: the user arrives with a utility
in mind for each item of the universe, drawn from a joint
distribution over utility vectors. For any slate of options, the
user behaves rationally by selecting the highest-utilty option
available. Much of the work in the area covers subclasses of
RUMs in which the utility distribution has a specific form,
*
Equal contribution 1 Dipartimento di Informatica, Sapienza
University of Rome, Italy 2 Google, Mountain View, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Flavio Chierichetti <flavio@di.uniroma1.it>,
Ravi Kumar <ravi.k53@gmail.com>, Andrew Tomkins <atomkins@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

but in this paper we consider the general class.
A seminal work of McFadden & Train (2000) showed that
any RUM may be approximated by a mixture of multinomial
logit (MNL) models. Models of this form, MNL mixtures,
have seen significant recent study, as in (Shazeer et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2018). However, the construction of McFadden
& Train (2000) relied on unboundedly many mixture components, leaving little understanding of the correct complexity.
Partial progress on this question was attained by Chierichetti
et al. (2018a), who showed that quadratically many mixture
components or quadratically many permutations suffice to
approximate any RUM. In this paper we continue to study
efficient representations for approximating any RUM.
We begin with some intuition about approximating RUMs.
Any RUM encodes exponentially many distributions over
a universe of n items, in the sense that each of the exponentially many slates (subsets of the universe) induces a
distribution over the item of the slate that a random user will
prefer. These distributions are not arbitrary, as the RUM
imposes some structure relating the distributions of nearby
slates. Nonetheless, exactly representing the RUM requires
exponentially many bits. The question therefore is whether
the combination of the restrictions given by the form of
RUMs plus the ability to introduce a small and controllable
error in the approximation will allow a more concise representation of the entire RUM.
An answer to this question will reveal how much practical information a RUM actually carries, as well as how concisely
it can be specified and communicated. As in sketching,
metric approximation, and related areas, the information
content captures some aspect of the representative power of
the model. While RUMs have seen significant investment
over many decades, leading to the 2000 Nobel prize being
awarded to Daniel McFadden “for his development of theory
and methods for analyzing discrete choice,” computational
and information-theoretic properties of the model have not
seen the same level of scrutiny until more recently. Hence,
fundamental questions such as the amount of information
required to approximate a RUM remain unresolved to now.
Our Results. This paper closes the question to within logarithmic factors, as follows. For a universe of n items, any
RUM may be approximated arbitrarily closely on all slates
as either a mixture of ⇥(n) permutations or as a mixture

