On Recovering from Modeling Errors Using Testing Bayesian Networks

Haiying Huang 1 Adnan Darwiche 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of supervised learning with Bayesian Networks when the used dependency structure is incomplete due to missing
edges or missing variable states. These modeling errors induce independence constraints on
the learned model that may not hold in the true,
data-generating distribution. We provide a unified
treatment of these modeling errors as instances
of state-space abstractions. We then identify a
class of Bayesian Networks and queries which
allow one to fully recover from such modeling
errors if one can choose Conditional Probability
Tables (CPTs) dynamically based on evidence.
We show theoretically that the recently proposed
Testing Bayesian Networks (TBNs), which can be
trained by compiling them into Testing Arithmetic
Circuits (TACs), provide a promising construct
for emulating this CPT selection mechanism. Finally, we present empirical results that illustrate
the promise of TBNs as a tool for recovering from
certain modeling errors in the context of supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has become very influential recently
and stands behind most real-world applications of AI today.
In supervised learning, one learns a function from labeled
data, a practice that is now dominated by neural networks;
see (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Hinton et al., 2006; Bengio
et al., 2006; Ranzato et al., 2006). This particular use of neural networks is an example of model-free supervised learning
to be contrasted with model-based supervised learning; see,
e.g., (Bishop, 2013; Gao et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020).
The latter type feeds more information and assumptions into
the learning process so should perform better in principle,
let alone being more interpretable and also well-positioned
1
Computer Science Department, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Haiying Huang <hhaiying@ucla.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to provide guarantees on the learned functions. Yet, modelbased supervised learning has been outperformed by the
model-free approach in many applications which has somewhat created a dilemma for AI (Darwiche, 2018).1
A major challenge for model-based supervised learning
is the availability of accurate models. Consider Bayesian
networks (Pearl, 1989), for example, which can be used
for supervised learning as follows. Given a Bayesian network structure, one can learn its parameters to optimize a
distribution for some query variable as a function of the
values for some evidence variables. The used structure defines the space of functions that can be learned so if the
structure is incorrect the space may fail to include the datagenerating function. Hence, while the use of correct models
can be very advantageous, the use of incorrect ones can be
quite problematic. Moreover, it may be very difficult in
some cases to build even approximate models as we may
have very little understanding of the underlying phenomena.
One can of course aim to learn the structure of a Bayesian
network in addition to its parameters. This direction has
received significant attention but poses substantial computational difficulties; see (Darwiche, 2009; Koller & Friedman,
2009; Murphy, 2012) for some comprehensive treatments on
learning Bayesian networks and (Elidan et al., 2001; Kim &
Leskovec, 2011; Elidan & Friedman, 2001) for some works
that try to infer modeling errors from data.
We address the challenge of model-based supervised learning in this paper under the assumption that we have an incorrect Bayesian network structure. That is, the goal is to learn
a function from labeled data using an incorrect structure
while trying to recover from modeling errors that may have
manifested. Our approach is based on two main insights, the
first of which is motivated by earlier work on state-space abstractions (Wellman & Liu, 1994; Chang & Fung, 1990). In
particular, we show that one can cast certain modeling errors
(missing states and edges) as instances of such abstractions,
which allows us to cast the recovery from modeling errors
as a process of recovering from state-space abstractions.
Our central contribution is a result which shows that, under
certain conditions, one can fully recover from state-space
abstractions if one is able to learn dynamic parameters for
1

Some use the term “model” more broadly, referring to a neural
network as a (non-parametric) model.

