Decoupling Representation Learning from Reinforcement Learning

Adam Stooke 1 Kimin Lee 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Michael Laskin 1

Abstract
In an effort to overcome limitations of rewarddriven feature learning in deep reinforcement
learning (RL) from images, we propose decoupling representation learning from policy learning. To this end, we introduce a new unsupervised
learning (UL) task, called Augmented Temporal
Contrast (ATC), which trains a convolutional encoder to associate pairs of observations separated
by a short time difference, under image augmentations and using a contrastive loss. In online RL
experiments, we show that training the encoder
exclusively using ATC matches or outperforms
end-to-end RL in most environments. Additionally, we benchmark several leading UL algorithms
by pre-training encoders on expert demonstrations and using them, with weights frozen, in RL
agents; we find that agents using ATC-trained encoders outperform all others. We also train multitask encoders on data from multiple environments
and show generalization to different downstream
RL tasks. Finally, we ablate components of ATC,
and introduce a new data augmentation to enable replay of (compressed) latent images from
pre-trained encoders when RL requires augmentation. Our experiments span visually diverse
RL benchmarks in DeepMind Control, DeepMind
Lab, and Atari, and our complete code is available at https://github.com/astooke/
rlpyt/tree/master/rlpyt/ul.

1. Introduction
Ever since the first fully-learned approach succeeded at
playing Atari games from screen images (Mnih et al., 2015),
standard practice in deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
been to learn visual features and a control policy jointly,
end-to-end. Several such deep RL algorithms have matured
(Hessel et al., 2018; Schulman et al., 2017; Mnih et al., 2016;
1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Adam Stooke <adam.stooke@berkeley.edu>, Michael Laskin
<mlaskin@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Haarnoja et al., 2018) and have been successfully applied
to domains ranging from real-world (Levine et al., 2016;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018) and simulated robotics (Lee et al.,
2019; Laskin et al., 2020a; Hafner et al., 2020) to sophisticated video games (Berner et al., 2019; Jaderberg et al.,
2019), and even high-fidelity driving simulators (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017). While the simplicity of end-to-end methods is appealing, relying on the reward function to learn
visual features can be severely limiting. For example, it
leaves features difficult to acquire under sparse rewards, and
it can narrow their utility to a single task. Although our
intent is broader than to focus on either sparse-reward or
multi-task settings, they arise naturally in our studies. We
investigate how to learn visual representations which are
agnostic to rewards, without degrading the control policy.
A number of recent works have significantly improved RL
performance by introducing auxiliary losses, which are unsupervised tasks that provide feature-learning signal to the
convolution neural network (CNN) encoder, additionally
to the RL loss (Jaderberg et al., 2017; van den Oord et al.,
2018; Laskin et al., 2020b; Guo et al., 2020; Schwarzer
et al., 2020). Meanwhile, in the field of computer vision,
recent efforts in unsupervised and self-supervised learning
(Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2019) have
demonstrated that powerful feature extractors can be learned
without labels, as evidenced by their usefulness for downstream tasks such as ImageNet classification. Together,
these advances suggest that visual features for RL could
possibly be learned entirely without rewards, which would
grant greater flexibility to improve overall learning performance. To our knowledge, however, no single unsupervised
learning (UL) task has been shown adequate for this purpose
in general vision-based environments.
In this paper, we demonstrate the first decoupling of representation learning from reinforcement learning that performs as well as or better than end-to-end RL. We update
the encoder weights using only UL and train a control policy
independently, on the (compressed) latent images. This capability stands in contrast to previous state-of-the-art methods, which have trained the UL and RL objectives jointly,
or (Laskin et al., 2020b), which observed diminished performance with decoupled encoders.
Our main enabling contribution is a new unsupervised task

