Commutative Lie Group VAE for Disentanglement Learning

Xinqi Zhu 1 Chang Xu 1 Dacheng Tao 2
where σ denotes the representation function, and g, g 0 represent the same transformation acting on the data space and
representation space respectively. An invariant representation is achieved if g 0 becomes the identity transformation.

Abstract
We view disentanglement learning as discovering
an underlying structure that equivariantly reflects
the factorized variations shown in data. Traditionally, such a structure is fixed to be a vector
space with data variations represented by translations along individual latent dimensions. We
argue this simple structure is suboptimal since it
requires the model to learn to discard the properties (e.g. different scales of changes, different
levels of abstractness) of data variations, which
is an extra work than equivariance learning. Instead, we propose to encode the data variations
with groups, a structure not only can equivariantly
represent variations, but can also be adaptively
optimized to preserve the properties of data variations. Considering it is hard to conduct training
on group structures, we focus on Lie groups and
adopt a parameterization using Lie algebra. Based
on the parameterization, some disentanglement
learning constraints are naturally derived. A simple model named Commutative Lie Group VAE is
introduced to realize the group-based disentanglement learning. Experiments show that our model
can effectively learn disentangled representations
without supervision, and can achieve state-of-theart performance without extra constraints.

Unsupervised disentangled representation learning is to discover the factorizable variations shown in data and encode
them with individual dimensions in representations (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018; Chen et al., 2018;
Burgess et al., 2018; Jeong & Song, 2019; Zhao et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2020). A commonly applied
but less emphasized assumption is that the disentangled representations are also equivariant, because the semantic (or
attribute) changes are reflected by the shifting of different
dimensions in the representations space. The difficulty of
this task is to learn the representation that preserves such an
equivariance without supervision.

1. Introduction
Equivariance has been widely considered as one of the most
important desiderata in representation learning (Hinton et al.,
2011; Cohen & Welling, 2014; 2016; Higgins et al., 2018).
A representation is equivariant if the transformations on
the input data can be reflected by transformations on the
representation:
σ(g(x)) = g 0 σ(x),

(1)

1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia 2 JD Explore Academy, JD.com, China.
Correspondence to: Xinqi Zhu <xzhu7491@uni.sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Existing unsupervised disentanglement methods usually
learn the equivariance mapping based on a fixed vector
space. We argue that this modeling is suboptimal, because
it requires a model to do two tasks at the same time: (1)
to discover equivariance; and (2) to ignore the properties
in data variations to obey a fixed vector-space embedding.
Here the properties in variations can include different levels
of abstractness (e.g. low-level vs semantic attributes), different scales of variations (e.g. significant vs subtle changes),
certain structures (e.g. cyclic), relation between variations
(e.g. conditional relation), etc. Our hypothesis is that the
equivariance is more likely to be learned with an adaptive
equivariant structure which is used to fit the data variations.
By this means, the model is relieved from doing a combined difficult learning task and can thus focus on learning
equivariance. In this paper, group structures are adopted for
this task, and a conceptual illustration is shown in Fig. 1.
There exist some previous works that also adopt group structures to learn disentangled representations (Higgins et al.,
2018; Caselles-Dupré et al., 2019; Quessard et al., 2020;
Painter et al., 2020). However, these methods use predefined
(known) group structures, which are neither adaptive nor
generalizable. Additionally, these models cannot be learned
without supervision. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to learn unsupervised disentangled representations based on adaptive group structures, which can be
successfully applied to complex datasets.

