Graph Neural Networks Inspired by Classical Iterative Algorithms

Yongyi Yang 1 † Tang Liu 1 † Yangkun Wang 2 † Jinjing Zhou 3 Quan Gan 3 Zhewei Wei 4 Zheng Zhang 3
Zengfeng Huang 1 David Wipf 3

Abstract

Despite the recent success of graph neural networks (GNN), common architectures often exhibit significant limitations, including sensitivity
to oversmoothing, long-range dependencies, and
spurious edges, e.g., as can occur as a result of
graph heterophily or adversarial attacks. To at
least partially address these issues within a simple
transparent framework, we consider a new family
of GNN layers designed to mimic and integrate
the update rules of two classical iterative algorithms, namely, proximal gradient descent and
iterative reweighted least squares (IRLS). The
former defines an extensible base GNN architecture that is immune to oversmoothing while
nonetheless capturing long-range dependencies
by allowing arbitrary propagation steps. In contrast, the latter produces a novel attention mechanism that is explicitly anchored to an underlying
end-to-end energy function, contributing stability with respect to edge uncertainty. When combined we obtain an extremely simple yet robust
model that we evaluate across disparate scenarios
including standardized benchmarks, adversariallyperturbated graphs, graphs with heterophily, and
graphs involving long-range dependencies. In
doing so, we compare against SOTA GNN approaches that have been explicitly designed for
the respective task, achieving competitive or superior node classification accuracy. Our code is
available at this link. And for an extended version
of this work, please see (Yang et al., 2021).

†
Work completed during an internship at the AWS Shanghai AI Lab. 1 Fudan University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Amazon 4 Renmin University of China. Correspondence to:
Zengfeng Huang <huangzf@fudan.edu.cn>, David Wipf <davidwipf@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Given data comprised of entities with explicit relationships
between them, graph neural networks (GNNs) represent
a powerful means of exploiting these relationships within
a predictive model (Zhou et al., 2018). Among the most
successful candidates in this vein, message-passing GNNs
are based on stacking a sequence of propagation layers,
whereby neighboring nodes share feature information via
an aggregation function (Kipf & Welling, 2017a; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Kearnes et al., 2016). This sharing is also at
times modulated by various forms of attention to effectively
compute propagation weights that reflect the similarity between nodes connected by an edge (Velickovic et al., 2018).
While such approaches display impressive performance on
graph benchmarks involving tasks such as semi-supervised
node classification conditioned on input features, non-trivial
shortcomings remain. For example, as we deviate from more
standardized regimes exhibiting graph homophily, meaning
nearby nodes share similar labels and features, into the less
familiar, contrasting domain of heterophily, many messagepassing GNNs (including those with attention) experience
a steep degradation in accuracy (Zhu et al., 2020b;a). Similarly, when edge uncertainty is introduced via adversarial
attacks or related, performance declines as well (Zügner
et al., 2019; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019).
Pushing further, for problems requiring that nodes share
information across non-local regions of the graph, messagepassing GNNs require a large number of propagation layers.
However, this can lead to a well-known oversmoothing
phenomena in which node features converge to similar, nondiscriminative embeddings (Oono & Suzuki, 2020; Li et al.,
2018). To this end, a wide variety of countermeasures have
been deployed to address this concern, most notably various types of skip connections designed to preserve local
information even while propagating to distant neighbors
(Chen et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018). Even so,
most deeper architectures generally display modest improvement, and may require additional tuning or regularization
strategies to be effective.
And finally, beyond the above issues there is at times a
lingering opaqueness in terms of why and how different
GNN architectural choices relate to performance on specific

