Accurate Post Training Quantization With Small Calibration Sets

Itay Hubara * 1 2 Yury Nahshan * 1 Yair Hanani 1 Ron Banner 1 Daniel Soudry 2

Abstract
Lately, post-training quantization methods have
gained considerable attention, as they are simple
to use, and require only a small unlabeled calibration set. This small dataset cannot be used
to fine-tune the model without significant overfitting. Instead, these methods only use the calibration set to set the activations’ dynamic ranges.
However, such methods always resulted in significant accuracy degradation, when used below
8-bits (except on small datasets). Here we aim
to break the 8-bit barrier. To this end, we minimize the quantization errors of each layer or block
separately by optimizing its parameters over the
calibration set. We empirically demonstrate that
this approach is: (1) much less susceptible to overfitting than the standard fine-tuning approaches,
and can be used even on a very small calibration
set; and (2) more powerful than previous methods,
which only set the activations’ dynamic ranges.
We suggest two flavors for our method, parallel
and sequential aim for a fixed and flexible bitwidth allocation. For the latter, we demonstrate
how to optimally allocate the bit-widths for each
layer, while constraining accuracy degradation or
model compression by proposing a novel integer
programming formulation. Finally, we suggest
model global statistics tuning, to correct biases
introduced during quantization. Together, these
methods yield state-of-the-art results for both vision and text models. For instance, on ResNet50,
we obtain less than 1% accuracy degradation —
with 4-bit weights and activations in all layers, but
first and last. The suggested methods are two orders of magnitude faster than the traditional Quantize Aware Training approach used for lower than
8-bit quantization. We open-sourced our code
https://github.com/papers-submission/CalibTIP.
*

Equal contribution 1 Habana Labs – An Intel company,
Caesarea, Israel 2 Department of Electrical Engineering - Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Itay Hubara <itayhubara@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The pursuit of advanced Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
causes researchers to construct deeper and wider networks,
making them expensive to use in terms of power and time.
This increases the need for efficient implementations of
these networks. Efficient networks reduce cloud-vendor
costs and make it possible to run them on low-power devices
such as smartphones and wearable devices. The most common off-the-shelf approach to improving network efficiency
is quantization, which reduces the numerical precision of
the network and its complexity and memory footprint.
DNN quantization techniques can be classified as either
post-training or quantization-aware training (QAT) techniques (Han et al., 2015; Courbariaux et al., 2015; Hubara
et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2016). Although QAT techniques,
in general, achieve better results, there are important realworld scenarios in which they are not applicable. These
are the cases where the training data is sensitive or simply
unavailable at the time of deployment. For instance, when
off-the-shelf or legacy models are being used, or when medical records are involved. Therefore, much attention has recently been dedicated to post-training quantization methods
(Nagel et al., 2019; Banner et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019),
which can be more easily applied in practice. These methods allow for network quantization to happen seamlessly
when deployed, without requiring additional information
from the user except a small unlabeled calibration set.
Unfortunately, post-training quantization below 8-bit usually incurs significant accuracy degradation, and in some
cases even higher numerical precision is required. In this
paper, our goal is to break this barrier by distilling all the
information the pre-trained model and calibration set encode. Our goal is to find an optimal scheme for the current
state of the art hardware which usually supports 16,8,4 bits
data types with per-channel quantization of the weights. To
that end, we suggest a three-stage pipeline that consists of
methods applied solely on a small calibration set to reduce
the local error introduced during the quantization process
(e.g., round-off errors) followed by integer programming
to determine the bit-width of different layers so that the
overall accuracy degradation is minimized. Even without
using mixed-precision, the suggested method is much less
prone to over-fitting than current methods and yields best in

