Additive Error Guarantees for Weighted Low Rank Approximation

Aditya Bhaskara * 1 Aravinda Kanchana Ruwanpathirana * 1 Maheshakya Wijewardena * 1

Abstract
Low-rank approximation is a classic tool in data
analysis, where the goal is to approximate a matrix A with a low-rank matrix L so as to minimize
2
the error kA − LkF . However in many applications, approximating some entries is more important than others, which leads to the weighted low
rank approximation problem. However, the addition of weights makes the low-rank approximation
problem intractable. Thus many works have obtained efficient algorithms under additional structural assumptions on the weight matrix (such as
low rank, and appropriate block structure). We
study a natural greedy algorithm for weighted low
rank approximation and develop a simple condition under which it yields bi-criteria approximation up to a small additive factor in the error. The
algorithm involves iteratively computing the top
singular vector of an appropriately varying matrix, and is thus easy to implement at scale. Our
methods also allow us to study the problem of low
rank approximation under `p norm error.

1. Introduction
Matrix low rank approximation is one of the most classic
dimension reduction methods in data analysis. The standard
least squared error version can also be solved efficiently
using the singular value decomposition, and we know how
to do this in time comparable to the input sparsity (Clarkson
& Woodruff, 2017). Despite its utility, natural variants of
low-rank approximation turn out to be intractable. Weighted
low-rank approximation is one well studied example: in
many applications, some of the entries of a matrix may be
less important to approximate than others (e.g., they might
be known to be noisy), and thus we may have a weight
associated with each entry. While standard least-squares
regression for vectors can incorporate weights directly, the
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. Correspondence to: Maheshakya
<pmaheshakya4@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

matrix version turns out to be challenging. Formally, the
weighted low-rank approximation problem is defined as
follows: given A ∈ Rd×n , a non-negative weight matrix
W ∈ Rd×n and a parameter k, the goal is to find a rank k
matrix L that minimizes Cost(L),
X
Cost(L) :=
Wij · (Aij − Lij )2 .
(1)
i,j

The problem and its difficulty were recognized as early
as Young (1941), and it has been well-studied in the ML
literature starting with the work of Srebro & Jaakkola
(2003). Unlike the unweighted version (which corresponds
to W = 1d×n ) low-rank approximation, the problem above
is NP-hard in general (Gillis & Glineur, 2011). Much of the
early work such as Srebro & Jaakkola (2003); Manton et al.
(2003); Eriksson & van den Hengel (2010) thus developed
heuristics for the problem. The first provably efficient algorithms were obtained in the work of Razenshteyn et al.
(2016) (see also references therein for work on matrix completion which is closely related). Razenshteyn et al. (2016)
as well as more recent works (Musco et al., 2020; Ban et al.,
2019b) assume that W has low rank, and develop algorithms
that achieve a (1 + ) (multiplicative) approximation to the
optimum cost, while having a running time exponential in
the rank of W .
Very recently, Musco et al. (2020) initiated a study of additive error bounds for weighted low rank approximation.
Here the goal is to obtain an L0 such that Cost(L0 ) ≤
2
O PT +  kAkF , where O PT is the optimal cost. Additive
error guarantees have been a classic notion in the literature on low rank approximation (starting with the seminal
work of Frieze et al. (2004) on sampling for low rank approximation with additive error). Additive guarantees are
realistic in applications where the optimal error is a small
yet constant fraction of the total mass (e.g., when a low rank
approximation may capture 90% of the Frobenius mass).
So far, our discussion has been restricted to error in the
squared norm. However, low rank approximation has also
been studied in entrywise `p norms for p 6= 2. While any
p > 0 ensures that the matrix L approximates A, the choice
of p determines how the non-uniformity in approximation
error is penalized. For example, an `1 penalty allows some
errors |Aij − Lij | to be much larger than others (as long

