Cyclically Equivariant Neural Decoders for Cyclic Codes

Xiangyu Chen 1 Min Ye 1

Abstract
Neural decoders were introduced as a generalization of the classic Belief Propagation (BP) decoding algorithms, where the Trellis graph in the BP
algorithm is viewed as a neural network, and the
weights in the Trellis graph are optimized by training the neural network. In this work, we propose
a novel neural decoder for cyclic codes by exploiting their cyclically invariant property. More
precisely, we impose a shift invariant structure
on the weights of our neural decoder so that any
cyclic shift of inputs results in the same cyclic
shift of outputs. Extensive simulations with BCH
codes and punctured Reed-Muller (RM) codes
show that our new decoder consistently outperforms previous neural decoders when decoding
cyclic codes. Finally, we propose a list decoding procedure that can significantly reduce the
decoding error probability for BCH codes and
punctured RM codes. For certain high-rate codes,
the gap between our list decoder and the Maximum Likelihood decoder is less than 0.1dB. Code
available at github.com/cyclicallyneuraldecoder

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning methods have been successfully applied to the area of decoding error-correcting
codes. The usage of neural networks (Nachmani et al., 2016;
Gruber et al., 2017; Cammerer et al., 2017; Nachmani et al.,
2018; Kim et al., 2018a;b; Vasić et al., 2018; Teng et al.,
2019; Buchberger et al., 2020), autoencoders (Jiang et al.,
2019), graph neural networks (Nachmani & Wolf, 2019)
and reinforcement learning (Carpi et al., 2019; Habib et al.,
2020) have demonstrated improvements over classical algorithms in decoding various families of error-correcting
codes with short to moderate block length, including BCH
1

Data Science and Information Technology Research Center,
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to:
Min Ye <yeemmi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

codes, polar codes, LDPC codes and Reed-Muller (RM)
codes.
In particular, one line of research pioneered by (Nachmani
et al., 2016; 2018) introduced neural decoders as a generalization of the classic Belief Propagation (BP) decoding
algorithm. More precisely, the Trellis graph in the BP algorithm is viewed as a fully connected neural network (Nachmani et al., 2016), and the weights in the Trellis graph are
optimized by training the neural network. Later, (Nachmani
et al., 2018) suggested to replace the fully connected neural
networks with recurrent neural networks (RNNs). More
recently, the tools of graph neural networks were also introduced to this setting (Nachmani & Wolf, 2019). While these
neural BP decoders improve upon the vanilla BP decoder
for a wide range of error-correcting codes, their designs
rarely utilize the algebraic properties of any particular code
family. On the other hand, certain algebraic properties of
some code families have proven to be the key to their good
performance in error correction, e.g., the recursive structure
of polar codes (Arikan, 2009) and the doubly transitive property of BCH codes and RM codes (Kudekar et al., 2017).
In this paper we design a novel neural decoder for an important class of codes called cyclic codes, including two
extensively studied and widely applied code families—BCH
codes and punctured RM codes. As suggested by their name,
cyclic codes are invariant to cyclic shifts, and this property
is fully exploited in the design of our new decoder. Inspired
by the fact that the Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoder of
any cyclic code is equivariant to cyclic shifts, we impose a
shift invariant structure on the weights of our neural decoder
so that it shares the equivariant property of the ML decoder,
i.e., any cyclic shift of inputs results in the same cyclic shift
of the decoding outputs.
We carry out extensive simulations to test the performance
of our new decoder on BCH codes and punctured RM codes
with short to moderate code length. Simulation results show
that our decoder consistently outperforms previous neural
decoders. In particular, we observe a consistent 0.7dB improvement over the neural decoder proposed in (Nachmani
et al., 2018) for various choices of code parameters. Our
decoder also demonstrates a 0.3dB improvement over the
hyper-graph-network decoder proposed in (Nachmani &
Wolf, 2019) with 300 times smaller training time. As a con-

