PipeTransformer: Automated Elastic Pipelining for
Distributed Training of Large-scale Models
Chaoyang He 1 Shen Li 2 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 1 Salman Avestimehr 1

Abstract
The size of Transformer models is growing at an
unprecedented rate. It has taken less than one
year to reach trillion-level parameters since the
release of GPT-3 (175B). Training such models
requires both substantial engineering efforts and
enormous computing resources, which are luxuries most research teams cannot afford. In this
paper, we propose PipeTransformer, which
leverages automated elastic pipelining for efficient distributed training of Transformer models.
In PipeTransformer, we design an adaptive
on the fly freeze algorithm that can identify and
freeze some layers gradually during training, and
an elastic pipelining system that can dynamically
allocate resources to train the remaining active
layers. More specifically, PipeTransformer
automatically excludes frozen layers from the
pipeline, packs active layers into fewer GPUs,
and forks more replicas to increase data-parallel
width. We evaluate PipeTransformer using Vision Transformer (ViT) on ImageNet and
BERT on SQuAD and GLUE datasets. Our results
show that compared to the state-of-the-art baseline, PipeTransformer attains up to 2.83fold speedup without losing accuracy. We also
provide various performance analyses for a more
comprehensive understanding of our algorithmic
and system-wise design. Finally, we have modularized our training system with flexible APIs
and made the source code publicly available at
https://DistML.ai.

1. Introduction
Large Transformer models (Brown et al., 2020; Lepikhin
et al., 2020) have powered accuracy breakthroughs in both
natural language processing and computer vision. GPT-3 hit
a new record high accuracy for nearly all NLP tasks. Vision
1

University of Southern California 2 Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Chaoyang He <chaoyang.he@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) also achieved
89% top-1 accuracy in ImageNet, outperforming state-ofthe-art convolutional networks ResNet-152 (He et al., 2016)
and EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019). To tackle the growth in
model sizes, researchers have proposed various distributed
training techniques, including parameter servers (Li et al.,
2014; Jiang et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2019), pipeline parallel (Huang et al., 2019; Park et al., 2020; Narayanan et al.,
2019), intra-layer parallel (Lepikhin et al., 2020; Shazeer
et al., 2018; Shoeybi et al., 2019), and zero redundancy data
parallel (Rajbhandari et al., 2019).
T0 (0% trained)

T1 (35% trained)

T2 (75% trained)

T3 (100% trained)

Layer (end of training)

Layer (end of training)

Layer (end of training)

Layer (end of training)

Similarity score

Figure 1. Interpretable Freeze Training: DNNs converge bottom
up (Results on CIFAR10 using ResNet). Each pane shows layerby-layer similarity using SVCCA (Raghu et al., 2017).

Existing distributed training solutions, however, only study
scenarios where all model weights are required to be optimized throughout the training (i.e., computation and communication overhead remains relatively static over different
iterations). Recent works on freeze training (Raghu et al.,
2017; Morcos et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2020) suggest that
parameters in neural networks usually converge from the
bottom-up (i.e., not all layers need to be trained all the
way through training). Figure 1 shows an example of how
weights gradually stabilize during training in this approach.
This observation motivates us to utilize freeze training for
distributed training of Transformer models to accelerate
training by dynamically allocating resources to focus on a
shrinking set of active layers. Such a layer freezing strategy
is especially pertinent to pipeline parallelism, as excluding consecutive bottom layers from the pipeline can reduce
computation, memory, and communication overhead.
In this paper, we propose PipeTransformer, an elastic
pipelining training acceleration framework that automatically reacts to frozen layers by dynamically transforming
the scope of the pipelined model and the number of pipeline
replicas. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper

