Learner-Private Convex Optimization

Jiaming Xu 1 Kuang Xu 2 Dana Yang 1

Abstract
Convex optimization with feedback is a framework where a learner relies on iterative queries
and feedback to arrive at the minimizer of a convex function. The paradigm has gained significant popularity recently thanks to its scalability
in large-scale optimization and machine learning.
The repeated interactions, however, expose the
learner to privacy risks from eavesdropping adversaries that observe the submitted queries. In
this paper, we study how to optimally obfuscate
the learner’s queries in convex optimization with
first-order feedback, so that their learned optimal value is provably difficult to estimate for the
eavesdropping adversary. We consider two formulations of learner privacy: a Bayesian formulation
in which the convex function is drawn randomly,
and a minimax formulation in which the function
is fixed and the adversary’s probability of error is
measured with respect to a minimax criterion.
We show that, if the learner wants to ensure the
probability of the adversary estimating accurately
be kept below 1/L, then the overhead in query
complexity is additive in L in the minimax formulation, but multiplicative in L in the Bayesian
formulation. Compared to existing learner-private
sequential learning models with binary feedback,
our results apply to the significantly richer family of general convex functions with full-gradient
feedback. Our proofs are largely enabled by tools
from the theory of Dirichlet processes, as well as
more sophisticated lines of analysis aimed at measuring the amount of information leakage under a
full-gradient oracle.

1
The Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham
NC, USA 2 Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jiaming Xu <jiaming.xu868@duke.edu>, Kuang Xu <kuangxu@stanford.edu>,
Dana Yang <xiaoqian.yang@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Convex optimization with feedback is a paradigm in which
an learner repeatedly queries an external data source in
order to identify the optimal solution of a convex function.
The interactive nature of the framework is a double-edged
sword. On the one hand, the iterative optimization methods
offers inherent scalability since the learner is not required
to possess the entire function from the start. As such, it
has found applications in large-scale distributed machine
learning systems, such as Federated Learning (McMahan
et al., 2017; McMahan & Ramage, 2017), where a learner
interacts with millions of individual users (data providers)
in order to perform training. On the other hand, the repeated
interactions with external entities exposes the learner to
potential adversaries who may steal the learned model by
eavesdropping on the queries exchanged during the training
process, a woe especially poignant when the system involves
a large number of data providers, many of which could be
an eavesdropper in disguise ((Juuti et al., 2019), (Kairouz
et al., 2019, Section 4.3)).
To address challenges in protecting the learner’s privacy, a
recent line of research proposed the framework of Private
Sequential Learning, aimed at quantifying the extra query
complexities the learner has to suffer in order to ensure the
submitted queries provably conceal the learned value (Tsitsiklis et al., 2018; Xu, 2018; Xu et al., 2019). The model
is centered around a binary search problem where a learner
tries to estimate an unknown value X ∗ ∈ [0, 1] by sequentially submitting queries and receiving binary responses,
indicating the position of X ∗ relative to the queries. Meanwhile, an adversary observes all of the learner’s queries but
not responses, and tries to use this information to estimate
X ∗ . The learner’s goal is to design a querying strategy with
a minimal number of queries so that she can accurately estimate X ∗ while ensuring that the eavesdropping adversary
cannot reliably estimate X ∗ . Progress has been made towards understanding the optimal querying strategies in this
problem, and upper and lower bounds on the query complexity have been developed that differ by additive constants in
the case where the learner’s queries are noiseless (Tsitsiklis
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019), and are order-wise optimal in
the case of noisy queries (Xu et al., 2019).
While the original binary search formulation provides valu-

