Compressed Maximum Likelihood

Yi Hao 1 Alon Orlitsky 1

Abstract
Maximum likelihood (ML) is one of the most
fundamental and general statistical estimation
techniques. Inspired by recent advances in estimating distribution functionals, we propose compressed maximum likelihood (CML) that applies
ML to compressed samples. We show that CML is
sample-efficient for several fundamental learning
tasks over both discrete and continuous domains,
including learning structural densities, estimating probability multisets, and inferring symmetric
distribution functionals.

An estimator for f is a function fˆ : Z → Q such that when
Z ∼ p, the loss d(fˆ(Z), f (p)) is small. The ML plug-in
estimator of f first finds the ML distribution estimate
pz := arg max p(z)
p∈P

and then estimates the functional’s value as f (pZ ).
For example, if P is a parametric family indexed by Θ, and
f maps each pθ ∈ P to its index θ ∈ Θ, the task becomes
the classical parameter estimation problem, and ML maps
sample Z to the parameter θ maximizing pθ (Z).
1.1. Statistical Guarantees of ML Methods

1. Introduction
Maximum likelihood (ML) is a strikingly simple yet fundamental statistical inference paradigm for estimating parameters in probabilistic data generalization models. Over
the past century, it has been applied to derive numerous
important results in mathematics, statistics, and machine
learning (Friedman et al., 2001).
At its core, the ML principle favors the model that maximizes the observed data’s probability. Consider for example
flipping a coin with unknown heads probability p ten times
and observing six heads and four tails. The observed sequence’s probability is p6 (1 − p)4 , and ML suggests that the
best guess of p is p̂ = 0.6 that maximizes this probability.
ML is so natural and intuitive that it may be stumbled upon
without realizing its depth and significance. Yet, it can be
shown to be near-optimal under relatively mild and general
regularity conditions (Van der Vaart, 2000). In particular, p̂
tends to the actual value of p as the number of observations
increases and enjoys both consistency and efficiency.
This paper concerns functional estimation, where P is a
distribution collection over a domain space Z, and f : P →
Q is a functional, mapping distributions in P into a space
Q equipped with a pseudo-metric d.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Hao
<yih179@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ML is particularly significant in modern scientific applications that often involve complex structures in high dimensions. Deriving a bespoke estimator for each application
may be an arduous task. Yet ML provides a simple universal
methodology that in principle can be applied to any problem.
Unfortunately, it is well-known that for finite samples, ML
estimators may be suboptimal, and other estimators often
concentrate faster around the true parameters. Hence, establishing finite-sample guarantees for ML-based methods is
of fundamental importance.
While the ML principle is quite natural, showing its finitesample efficiency is often not easy. Recent work Acharya
et al. (2017a) provided a simple argument for bypassing the
difficulty in analyzing ML methods. Their primary lemma,
stated next, relies only on the fact that pz (z) ≥ p(z) for any
z ∈ Z. For simplicity, we write df (p, q) for d(f (p), f (q)).
Lemma 1. For any Z, P, and accuracy ε > 0,


max Pr (df (p, pZ) > 2ε) ≤ |Z| max Pr d(f (p), fˆ(Z)) > ε .
p∈P Z∼p

p∈P Z∼p

Namely, the ML plug-in estimator is competitive with all
other estimators in that if any other estimator achieves loss at
most ε with probability 1 − δ then the ML plug-in estimator
will achieve a 2ε loss with probability at least 1 − |Z| · δ.
Leveraging this lemma, the paper showed that the ML-based
profile maximum likelihood (PML) probability-multiset estimator in Orlitsky et al. (2004) is sample-optimal for several
symmetric functionals, including entropy and support size.

