WGAN with an Infinitely Wide Generator Has No Spurious Stationary Points

Albert No 1 TaeHo Yoon 2 Sehyun Kwon 2 Ernest K. Ryu 2

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) are a
widely used class of deep generative models, but
their minimax training dynamics are not understood very well. In this work, we show that
GANs with a 2-layer infinite-width generator and
a 2-layer finite-width discriminator trained with
stochastic gradient ascent-descent have no spurious stationary points. We then show that when
the width of the generator is finite but wide, there
are no spurious stationary points within a ball
whose radius becomes arbitrarily large (to cover
the entire parameter space) as the width goes to
infinity.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), which learn a generative model mimicking the data
distribution, have found a broad range of applications in
machine learning. While supervised learning setups solve
minimization problems in training, GANs solve minimax
optimization problems. However, the minimax training dynamics of GANs are poorly understood. Empirically, training is tricky to tune, as reported in (Mescheder et al., 2018,
Section 1) and (Goodfellow, 2016, Section 5.1). Theoretically, prior analyses of minimax training have established
few guarantees.
In the supervised learning setup, the limit in which the deep
neural networks’ width is infinite has been utilized to analyze the training dynamics. Another line of work establishes
guarantees showing that no spurious local minima exist,
and such results suggest (but do not formally guarantee)
that training converges to the global minimum despite the
non-convexity.
In this work, we study a Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017) with an in1

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Hongik
University, Seoul, Korea 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Ernest K. Ryu <ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

finitely wide generator trained with stochastic gradient
ascent-descent. Specifically, we show that a WGAN with a
2-layer generator and a 2-layer discriminator both with random features and sigmoidal1 activation functions and with
the width of the generator (but not the discriminator) being
large or infinite has no spurious stationary points2 when
trained with stochastic gradient ascent-descent. The theoretical analysis utilizes ideas from universal approximation
theory and random feature learning.
1.1. Prior work
The classical universal approximation theorem establishes
that a 2-layer neural network with a sigmoidal activation
function can approximate any continuous function when
the hidden layer is sufficiently wide (Cybenko, 1989). This
universality result was extended to broader classes of activation functions (Hornik, 1991; Leshno et al., 1993), and
quantitative bounds on the width of such approximations
were established (Pisier, 1980-1981; Barron, 1993; Jones,
1992). Random feature learning (Rahimi & Recht, 2007;
2008a;b) combines these ingredients into the following implementable algorithm: generate the hidden layer weights
randomly and optimize the weights of the output layers
while keeping the hidden layer weights fixed.
In recent years, there has been intense interest in the analysis
of infinitely wide neural networks, primarily in the realm of
supervised learning. In the “lazy training regime”, infinitely
wide neural networks behave as Gaussian processes at initialization (Neal, 1996; Lee et al., 2018) and are essentially
linear in the parameters, but not the inputs, during training.
The limiting linear network can be characterized with the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019; Li & Liang, 2018).
In a different “mean-field regime”, the training dynamics
of infinitely wide 2-layer neural networks are characterized
with a Wasserstein gradient flow. This idea was concurrently
developed by several groups (Chizat & Bach, 2018; Mei
et al., 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Rotskoff
et al., 2019; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020a;b). Specif1

We say an activation function is sigmoidal if it satisfies assumptions (AG) and (AD), which we later state. The standard
sigmoid and tanh activations functions are sigmoidal.
2
A stationary point is spurious if it is not a global minimum.

