Consistent regression when oblivious outliers overwhelm

Tommaso d’Orsi * 1 Gleb Novikov * 1 David Steurer * 1

Abstract
We consider a robust linear regression model
y = X β∗ + η, where an adversary oblivious to
the design X ∈ Rn×d may choose η to corrupt all
but an α fraction of the observations y in an arbitrary way. Prior to our work, even for Gaussian
X, no estimator for β∗ was known to be consistent in this model except for quadratic sample
size n & (d/α)2 or for logarithmic inlier fraction
α ≥ 1/log n. We show that consistent estimation is possible with nearly linear sample size and
inverse-polynomial inlier fraction. Concretely, we
show that the Huber loss estimator is consistent
for every sample size n = ω(d/α2 ) and achieves
an error rate of O(d/α2 n)1/2 (both bounds are optimal up to constant factors). Our results extend to
designs far beyond the Gaussian case and only require the column span of X to not contain approximately sparse vectors (similar to the kind of assumption commonly made about the kernel space
for compressed sensing). We provide two technically similar proofs. One proof is phrased in terms
of strong convexity, extending work of (Tsakonas
et al., 2014), and particularly short. The other
proof highlights a connection between the Huber
loss estimator and high-dimensional median computations. In the special case of Gaussian designs,
this connection leads us to a strikingly simple
algorithm based on computing coordinate-wise
medians that achieves nearly optimal guarantees
in linear time, and that can exploit sparsity of β∗ .
The model studied here also captures heavy-tailed
noise distributions that may not even have a first
moment.

* Equal contribution
1 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Tommaso d’Orsi <tommaso.dorsi@inf.ethz.ch>,
Gleb
Novikov <gleb.novikov@inf.ethz.ch>,
David Steurer
<david.steurer@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Linear regression is a fundamental task in statistics: given
observations (x1, y1 ), . . . , (xn, yn ) ∈ Rd+1 following a linear
model yi = hxi, β∗ i + ηi , where β∗ ∈ Rd is the unknown
parameter of interest and η1, . . . , ηn is noise, the goal is to
recover β∗ as accurately as possible.
In the most basic setting, the noise values are drawn independently from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and
variance σ 2 . Here, the classical least-squares estimator β̂
achieves an optimal error bound n1 k X(β∗ − β̂)k 2 . σ 2 · d/n
with high probability, where the design X is has rows
x1, . . . , xn . Unfortuantely, this guarantee is fragile and the
estimator may experience arbitrarily large error in the presence of a small number of benign outlier noise values.
In many modern applications, including economics
(Rousseeuw & Leroy, 2005), image recognition (Wright
et al., 2008), and sensor networks (Haupt et al., 2008), there
is a desire to cope with such outliers stemming from extreme
events, gross errors, skewed and corrupted measurements. It
is therefore paramount to design estimators robust to noise
distributions that may have substantial probability mass on
outlier values.
In this paper, we aim to identify the weakest possible assumptions on the noise distribution such that for a wide
range of measurement matrices X, we can efficiently recover the parameter vector β∗ with vanishing error.
The design of learning algorithms capable of succeeding
on data sets contaminated by adversarial noise has been
a central topic in robust statistics (e.g. see (Diakonikolas
et al., 2019a; Charikar et al., 2017) and their follow-ups for
some recent developments). In the context of regression
with adaptive adversarial outliers (i.e. depending on the
instance) several results are known (Candes & Tao, 2005;
Candes et al., 2005; Klivans et al., 2018; Karmalkar et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; 2018; Karmalkar & Price, 2018;
Dalalyan & Thompson, 2019; Raghavendra & Yau, 2020).
However, it turns out that for adaptive adversaries, vanishing
error bounds are only possible if the fraction of outliers is
vanishing.
In order to make vanishing error possible in the presence
of large fractions of outliers, we consider weaker adversary
models that are oblivious to the design X. Different assump-

