UCB Momentum Q-learning:
Correcting the bias without forgetting

Pierre Ménard 1 Omar Darwiche Domingues 2 Xuedong Shang 2 3 Michal Valko 2 3 4

Abstract
We propose UCBMQ, Upper Confidence Bound
Momentum Q-learning, a new algorithm for reinforcement learning in tabular and possibly stagedependent, episodic Markov decision process.
UCBMQ is based on Q-learning where we add a
momentum term and rely on the principle of optimism in face of uncertainty to deal with exploration. Our new technical ingredient of UCBMQ
is the use of momentum to correct the bias that
Q-learning suffers while, at the same time, limiting the impact it has on the the second-order term
of the regret. For UCBMQ, we
√ are able to guarane H 3 SAT + H 4 SA)
tee a regret of at most O(
where H is the length of an episode, S the
number of states, A the number of actions, T
the number of episodes and ignoring terms in
poly log(SAHT ). Notably, UCBMQ is the first
algorithm that
√ simultaneously matches the lower
bound of Ω( H 3 SAT ) for large enough T and
has a second-order term (with respect to the horizon T ) that scales only linearly with the number
of states S.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with an
environment with the objective of maximizing the sum of
collected rewards (Sutton & Barto, 1998). We model the
environment as an unknown episodic tabular Markov Decision Process (MDP) with S states, A actions and episodes
of length H. After T episodes, we measure the performance of the agent by its cumulative regret which is the
difference between the total reward collected by an optimal
policy and the total reward collected by the agent during the
learning. In order to minimize the regret the agent needs to
1

Otto von Guericke University 2 Inria 3 Université de
Lille 4 DeepMind Paris.
Correspondence to: Pierre Ménard <pierre.menard@ovgu.de>, Omar Darwiche Domingues
<omar.darwiche-domingues@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

balance the exploration of the environment and exploitation
of the current knowledge to act optimally.
In particular, we study the non-stationary setting where rewards and transitions can change within an episode, and for
which Jin et al. (2018) and Domingues et al. (2021b) provide a problem-independent
lower bound on the regret of
√
order Ω( H 3 SAT ) (see also Azar et al. 2017 for stationary transitions).
Following the previous work on the infinite-horizon setting
(Jaksch et al., 2010; Fruit et al., 2018; Talebi & Maillard,
2018), a first line of research on episodic MDPs (Azar et al.,
2017; Dann et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019) investigate model-based algorithms. The idea is to perform an
optimistic value-iteration with an estimated model (i.e. estimated transitions here), and act greedily with respect to
the obtained upper bounds on the optimal Q-values.
In particular, Azar et al. √
(2017) provide an upper bound
e H 3 SAT + H 3 S 2 A). This
on the regret of order O(
bound matches the √
lower bound for T ≥ H 3 S 3 A, where
the first-order term, H 3 SAT , dominates. However, for
T ≤ H 3 S 3 A, which is an important regime, the bound is
affected by the second order term that scales in S 2 and can
be harmful. Indeed, when the number of states is very large
(e.g., for continuous states MDPs after discretization), the
second order term can dominate the regret bound, which in
such case leads to a bound with a potentially sub-optimal
rate (see Domingues et al. 2020; Sinclair et al. 2020). Furthermore, in order to obtain a non-trivial upper bound on
the regret (i.e., a bound smaller than HT ), at least H 3 S 2 A
samples are needed. That means we roughly need H 2 S
samples per state-action pair while we rather expect to have
a meaningful bound with only poly(H) samples per stateaction pair. In the current analyses, the S 2 factor in the
second-order term comes from the fact that, for modelbased algorithms, the estimated transitions and the upper
confidence bounds on the optimal value functions are correlated.1 A union bound over a covering of all possible
value functions with a cardinal that scales exponentially
1

It is the same reason why there is an extra factor S in the first
order term of the bound of UCRL algorithm by Jaksch et al. (2010).
This factor is "pushed" to the second-order term by the improved
analysis of Azar et al. (2017).

