Fair Selective Classification via Sufficiency

Yuheng Bu * 1 Joshua Ka-Wing Lee * 1 Subhro Das 2 Rameswar Panda 2 Deepta Rajan 2 Prasanna Sattigeri 2
Gregory Wornell 1

Abstract
Selective classification is a powerful tool for
decision-making in scenarios where mistakes are
costly but abstentions are allowed. In general, by
allowing a classifier to abstain, one can improve
the performance of a model at the cost of reducing
coverage and classifying fewer samples. However,
recent work has shown, in some cases, that selective classification can magnify disparities between
groups, and has illustrated this phenomenon on
multiple real-world datasets. We prove that the
sufficiency criterion can be used to mitigate these
disparities by ensuring that selective classification
increases performance on all groups, and introduce a method for mitigating the disparity in precision across the entire coverage scale based on this
criterion. We then provide an upper bound on the
conditional mutual information between the class
label and sensitive attribute, conditioned on the
learned features, which can be used as a regularizer to achieve fairer selective classification. The
effectiveness of the method is demonstrated on the
Adult, CelebA, Civil Comments, and CheXpert
datasets.

1. Introduction
As machine learning applications continue to grow in scope
and diversity, its use in industry raises increasingly many
ethical and legal concerns, especially those of fairness and
bias in predictions made by automated systems (Selbst et al.,
2019; Bellamy et al., 2018; Meade, 2019). As systems are
trusted to aid or make decisions regarding loan applications,
criminal sentencing, and even health care, it is more important than ever that these predictions be free of bias.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research,
Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Joshua Ka-Wing Lee <jklee83@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The field of fair machine learning is rich with both problems
and proposed solutions, aiming to provide unbiased decision
systems for various applications. A number of different
definitions and criteria for fairness have been proposed, as
well as a variety of settings where fairness might be applied.
One major topic of interest in fair machine learning is that
of fair classification, whereby we seek to make a classifier
“fair” for some definition of fairness that varies according
to the application. In general, fair classification problems
arise when we have protected groups that are defined by a
shared sensitive attribute (e.g., race, gender), and we wish
to ensure that we are not biased against any one group with
the same sensitive attribute.
In particular, one sub-setting of fair classification which
exhibits an interesting fairness-related phenomenon is that
of selective classification. Generally speaking, selective
classification is a variant of the classification problem where
a model is allowed to abstain from making a decision. This
has applications in settings where making a mistake can be
very costly, but abstentions are not (e.g., if the abstention
results in deferring classification to a human actor).
In general, selective classification systems work by assigning some measure of confidence about their predictions,
and then deciding whether or not to abstain based on this
confidence, usually via thresholding.
The desired outcome is obvious: the higher the confidence
threshold for making a decision (i.e., the more confident
one needs to be to not abstain), the lower the coverage
(proportion of samples for which a decision is made) will
be. But in return, one should see better performance on the
remaining samples, as the system is only making decisions
when it is very sure of the outcome. In practice, for most
datasets, with the correct choice of confidence measure and
the correct training algorithm, this outcome is observed.
However, recent work has revealed that selective classification can magnify disparities between groups as the coverage
decreases, even as overall performance increases. (Jones
et al., 2020). This, of course, has some very serious consequences for systems that require fairness, especially if it
appears at first that predictions are fair enough under full
coverage (i.e., when all samples are being classified).

