Out-of-Distribution Generalization via Risk Extrapolation

David Krueger 1 2 Ethan Caballero 1 2 Joern-Henrik Jacobsen 3 4 Amy Zhang 1 5 6 Jonathan Binas 1 2
Dinghuai Zhang 1 2 Remi Le Priol 1 2 Aaron Courville 1 2

Abstract
Distributional shift is one of the major obstacles
when transferring machine learning prediction
systems from the lab to the real world. To tackle
this problem, we assume that variation across
training domains is representative of the variation we might encounter at test time, but also
that shifts at test time may be more extreme in
magnitude. In particular, we show that reducing
differences in risk across training domains can
reduce a model’s sensitivity to a wide range of extreme distributional shifts, including the challenging setting where the input contains both causal
and anti-causal elements. We motivate this approach, Risk Extrapolation (REx), as a form of
robust optimization over a perturbation set of extrapolated domains (MM-REx), and propose a
penalty on the variance of training risks (V-REx)
as a simpler variant. We prove that variants of
REx can recover the causal mechanisms of the targets, while also providing robustness to changes
in the input distribution (“covariate shift”). By
trading-off robustness to causally induced distributional shifts and covariate shift, REx is able to
outperform alternative methods such as Invariant
Risk Minimization in situations where these types
of shift co-occur.

1. Introduction
While neural networks often exhibit super-human generalization on the training distribution, they can be extremely
sensitive to distributional shift, presenting a major roadblock
for their practical application (Su et al., 2019; Engstrom
et al., 2017; Recht et al., 2019; Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019). This sensitivity is often caused by relying on “spurious” features unrelated to the core concept we are trying to
learn (Geirhos et al., 2018). For instance, Beery et al. (2018)
give the example of an image recognition model failing to
1
Mila 2 University of Montreal 3 Vector 4 University of Toronto
McGill University 6 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to:
<david.scott.krueger@gmail.com>.
5

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

correctly classify cows on the beach, since it has learned to
make predictions based on the features of the background
(e.g. a grassy field) instead of just the animal.
In this work, we consider out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization,also known as domain generalization, where
a model must generalize appropriately to a new test domain
for which it has neither labeled nor unlabeled training data.
Following common practice (Ben-Tal et al., 2009), we formulate this as optimizing the worst-case performance over
a perturbation set of possible test domains, F:
ROOD
(θ) = max Re (θ)
(1)
F
e∈F

Since generalizing to arbitrary test domains is impossible, the choice of perturbation set encodes our assumptions
about which test domains might be encountered. Instead
of making such assumptions a priori, we assume access to
data from multiple training domains, which can inform our
choice of perturbation set. A classic approach for this setting is group distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
(Sagawa et al., 2019), where F contains all mixtures of the
training distributions. This is mathematically equivalent to
considering convex combinations of the training risks.
However, we aim for a more ambitious form of OOD generalization, over a larger perturbation set. Our method minimax Risk Extrapolation (MM-REx) is an extension of
DRO where F instead contains affine combinations of training risks, see Figure 1. Under specific circumstances, MMREx can be thought of as DRO over a set of extrapolated
domains.1 But MM-REx also unlocks fundamental new
generalization capabilities unavailable to DRO.
In particular, focusing on supervised learning, we show
that Risk Extrapolation can uncover invariant relationships
between inputs X and targets Y . Intuitively, an invariant
relationship is a statistical relationship which is maintained
across all domains in F. Returning to the cow-on-the-beach
example, the relationship between the animal and the label
is expected to be invariant, while the relationship between
the background and the label is not. A model which bases
its predictions on such an invariant relationship is said to
perform invariant prediction.2
1

We define “extrapolation” to mean “outside the convex hull”,
see Appendix B for more.
2
Note this is different from learning an invariant representation

