Trajectory Diversity for Zero-Shot Coordination

Andrei Lupu 1 Brandon Cui 2 Hengyuan Hu 2 Jakob Foerster 2

Abstract
We study the problem of zero-shot coordination
(ZSC), where agents must independently produce
strategies for a collaborative game that are compatible with novel partners not seen during training. Our first contribution is to consider the need
for diversity in generating such agents. Because
self-play (SP) agents control their own trajectory
distribution during training, each policy typically
only performs well on this exact distribution. As
a result, they achieve low scores in ZSC, since
playing with another agent is likely to put them
in situations they have not encountered during
training. To address this issue, we train a common best response (BR) to a population of agents,
which we regulate to be diverse. To this end, we
introduce Trajectory Diversity (TrajeDi) – a differentiable objective for generating diverse reinforcement learning policies. We derive TrajeDi as a
generalization of the Jensen-Shannon divergence
between policies and motivate it experimentally
in two simple settings. We then focus on the collaborative card game Hanabi, demonstrating the
scalability of our method and improving upon the
cross-play scores of both independently trained
SP agents and BRs to unregularized populations.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we use policy diversity as a tool to improve
cross-play (XP) scores in zero-shot coordination (ZSC).
Introduced by Hu et al., ZSC is the problem of independently training two or more agents in a cooperative game
such that their strategies are compatible and achieve high
return when they are paired together at test time. Since it is
impossible to exactly agree on an arbitrary strategy with all
humans ahead of time, solving ZSC is required for AI agents
that can cooperate with humans , such as rescue robots or
1
Mila, McGill University (Work done while at Facebook AI
Research) 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Andrei
Lupu <andrei.lupu@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: The corridor coordination task admits three optimal SP policies, only one of which is suitable for ZSC.
self-driving cars.
The challenge of the ZSC framework arises from the fact that
many collaborative settings admit multiple joint-strategies
that are optimal under self-play (SP) (Tesauro, 1994) yet
incompatible. Thus, if we naively train two independent
agents in SP, there is no guarantee that they will converge to
compatible policies.
For instance, consider the task of two robots coordinating
in a corridor presented in Figure 1. At each step, robot A
moves first, then robot B does the same after observing A’s
action. The robots can occupy the same cell and receive
a positive reward only if they both reach the same end of
the corridor. In pure SP, robots can form conventions, and
so an optimal solution is for both to agree to always go in
one direction (left or right). However, another pair of robots
can reach the opposite convention, in which case pairing the
two in XP would result in robots A and B going in separate
directions, failing to solve the task. Instead, to be optimal
under ZSC, robot B must learn to follow A, regardless of
the direction in which A moves.
Hu et al. address the problem of ZSC by proposing OtherPlay (OP), a method of preventing those conventions (e.g.
agreeing on a given direction in the corridor) that rely on
arbitrarily breaking the symmetries of the setting. However,
OP reduces to SP if the symmetries are not known a priori
or if they are absent from the game. In the corridor task, this
occurs if the transition probabilities in each direction are
slightly different or if the rewards at the end have different
variances – all while maintaining the same expected return.
Instead, we propose a complementary approach that relies
on the best response (BR) relationships of the optimal SP
policies. In particular, if we have access to the entire solution space (e.g. robot A either going left or right in the
corridor), we can train an agent to be the common BR to
the largest possible subset of that space. The resulting agent
would then be robust to the maximum number of potential

