Global Rhythm Style Transfer Without Text Transcriptions
Kaizhi Qian * 1 2 Yang Zhang * 1 2 Shiyu Chang 1 2 Jinjun Xiong 2 Chuang Gan 1 2 David Cox 1 2
Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 3

Abstract
Prosody plays an important role in characterizing
the style of a speaker or an emotion, but most
non-parallel voice or emotion style transfer algorithms do not convert any prosody information. Two major components of prosody are pitch
and rhythm. Disentangling the prosody information, particularly the rhythm component, from the
speech is challenging because it involves breaking the synchrony between the input speech and
the disentangled speech representation. As a result, most existing prosody style transfer algorithms would need to rely on some form of text
transcriptions to identify the content information,
which confines their application to high-resource
languages only. Recently, S PEECH S PLIT (Qian
et al., 2020b) has made sizeable progress towards
unsupervised prosody style transfer, but it is unable to extract high-level global prosody style in
an unsupervised manner. In this paper, we propose AUTO PST, which can disentangle global
prosody style from speech without relying on any
text transcriptions. AUTO PST is an Autoencoderbased Prosody Style Transfer framework with a
thorough rhythm removal module guided by selfexpressive representation learning. Experiments
on different style transfer tasks show that AU TO PST can effectively convert prosody that correctly reflects the styles of the target domains.

1. Introduction
Speech contains many layers of information. Besides the
speech content, which can roughly be transcribed to text
for many languages, prosody also conveys rich information
about the personal, conversational, and world context within
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, USA 3 University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence
to: Yang Zhang <yang.zhang2@ibm.com>, Kaizhi Qian
<kaizhiqian@gmail.com >.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

which the speaker expresses the content. There are two
major constituents of prosody. The first is rhythm, which
summarizes the sequence of phone durations, and expresses
phrasing, speech rate, pausing, and some aspects of prominence. The second is pitch, which reflects intonation.
Recently, non-parallel speech style transfer tasks have
achieved rapid progress thanks to the advancement of nonparallel deep style transfer algorithms. Speech style transfer
refers to the tasks of transferring the source speech into the
style of the target domain, while keeping the content unchanged. For example, in voice style transfer, the domains
correspond to the speaker identities. In emotion style transfer, the domains correspond to the emotion categories. In
both of these tasks, prosody is supposed to be an important
part of the domain style — different speakers or emotions
have distinctive prosody patterns. However, few of the stateof-the-art algorithms in these two applications can convert
the prosody aspect at all. Typically, the converted speech
would almost always maintain the same pace and pitch contour shape as the source speech, even if the target speaker
or emotion has a completely different prosody style.
The fundamental cause of not converting prosody is that disentangling the prosody information, particularly the rhythm
aspect, is very challenging. Since the rhythm information
corresponds to how long the speaker utters each phoneme,
deriving a speech representation with the rhythm information removed implies breaking the temporal synchrony between the speech utterance and the representation, which
has been shown difficult (Watanabe et al., 2017; Kim et al.,
2017) even for supervised tasks (e.g. automatic speech
recognition (ASR)), using state-of-the-art asynchronous
sequence-to-sequence architectures such as Transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017).
Due to this challenge, most existing prosody style transfer
algorithms are forced to use text transcriptions to identify
the content information in speech, and thereby separate out
the remaining information as style (Biadsy et al., 2019).
However, such methods are language-dependent and cannot
be applied to low-resource languages with few text transcriptions. Although there are some sporadic attempts to
disentangle prosody in an unsupervised manner (Polyak &
Wolf, 2019), their performance is limited. These algorithms

