Deep Adaptive Design: Amortizing Sequential Bayesian Experimental Design

Adam Foster * 1 Desi R. Ivanova * 1 Ilyas Malik 2 Tom Rainforth 1

Abstract
We introduce Deep Adaptive Design (DAD),
a method for amortizing the cost of adaptive
Bayesian experimental design that allows experiments to be run in real-time. Traditional sequential Bayesian optimal experimental design approaches require substantial computation at each
stage of the experiment. This makes them unsuitable for most real-world applications, where
decisions must typically be made quickly. DAD
addresses this restriction by learning an amortized design network upfront and then using this
to rapidly run (multiple) adaptive experiments
at deployment time. This network represents a
design policy which takes as input the data from
previous steps, and outputs the next design using a
single forward pass; these design decisions can be
made in milliseconds during the live experiment.
To train the network, we introduce contrastive information bounds that are suitable objectives for
the sequential setting, and propose a customized
network architecture that exploits key symmetries.
We demonstrate that DAD successfully amortizes
the process of experimental design, outperforming
alternative strategies on a number of problems.

1. Introduction
A key challenge across disciplines as diverse as psychology
(Myung et al., 2013), bioinformatics (Vanlier et al., 2012),
pharmacology (Lyu et al., 2019) and physics (Dushenko
et al., 2020) is to design experiments so that the outcomes
will be as informative as possible about the underlying process. Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED) is a
powerful mathematical framework for tackling this problem (Lindley, 1956; Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995).
In the BOED framework, outcomes y are modeled in a
Bayesian manner (Gelman et al., 2013; Kruschke, 2014)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Oxford, UK 2 Work undertaken whilst at the University of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Adam Foster <adam.foster@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

using a likelihood p(y|θ, ξ) and a prior p(θ), where ξ is
our controllable design and θ is the set of parameters we
wish to learn about. We then optimize ξ to maximize the expected information gained about θ (equivalently the mutual
information between y and θ):
I(ξ) := Ep(θ)p(y|θ,ξ) [log p(y|θ, ξ) − log p(y|ξ)] .

(1)

The true power of BOED is realized when it is used to design
a sequence of experiments ξ1 , ..., ξT , wherein it allows us
to construct adaptive strategies which utilize information
gathered from past data to tailor each successive design ξt
during the progress of the experiment. The conventional,
iterative, approach for selecting each ξt is to fit the posterior
p(θ|ξ1:t−1 , y1:t−1 ) representing the updated beliefs about θ
after t−1 iterations have been conducted, and then substitute
this for the prior in (1) (Ryan et al., 2016; Rainforth, 2017;
Kleinegesse et al., 2020). The design ξt is then chosen as
the one which maximizes the resulting objective.
Unfortunately, this approach necessitates significant computational time to be expended between each step of the
experiment in order to update the posterior and compute the
next optimal design. In particular, I(ξ) is doubly intractable
(Rainforth et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2018) and its optimization constitutes a significant computational bottleneck. This
can be prohibitive to the practical application of sequential
BOED as design decisions usually need to be made quickly
for the approach to be useful (Evans & Mathur, 2005).
To give a concrete example, consider running an adaptive
survey to understand political opinions (Pasek & Krosnick,
2010). A question ξt is put to a participant who gives their
answer yt and this data is used to update an underlying
model with latent variables θ. Here sequential BOED is of
immense value because previous answers can be used to
guide future questions, ensuring that they are pertinent to
the particular participant. However, it is not acceptable to
have lengthy delays between questions to compute the next
design, precluding existing approaches from being used.
To alleviate this problem, we propose amortizing the cost of
sequential experimental design, performing upfront training
before the start of the experiment to allow very fast design
decisions at deployment, when time is at a premium. This
amortization is particularly useful in the common scenario
where the same adaptive experimental framework will be

