Leveraging Sparse Linear Layers for
Debuggable Deep Networks

Eric Wong * 1 Shibani Santurkar * 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
We show how ﬁtting sparse linear models over
learned deep feature representations can lead to
more debuggable deep networks. These networks
remain highly accurate while also being more
amenable to human interpretation, as we demonstrate quantitatively via numerical and human experiments. We further illustrate how the resulting
sparse explanations can help to identify spurious
correlations, explain misclassiﬁcations, and diagnose model biases in vision and language tasks.1

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) models ﬁnd wide-spread application, there is a growing demand for interpretability: access
to tools that help people see why the model made its decision.
There are still many obstacles towards achieving this goal
though, particularly in the context of deep learning. These
obstacles stem from the scale of modern deep networks, as
well as the complexity of even deﬁning and assessing the
(often context-dependent) desiderata of interpretability.
Existing work on deep network interpretability has largely
approached this problem from two perspectives. The ﬁrst
seeks to uncover the concepts associated with speciﬁc neurons in the network, for example via visualization (Yosinski
et al., 2015) or semantic labeling (Bau et al., 2017). The second aims to explain model decisions on a per-example basis,
using techniques such as local surrogates (Ribeiro et al.,
2016a) and saliency maps (Simonyan et al., 2013). While
both families of approaches can improve model understanding at a local level—i.e., for a given example or neuron—
recent work has argued that such localized explanations can
lead to misleading conclusions about the model’s overall
decision process (Adebayo et al., 2018; 2020; Leavitt &
Morcos, 2020). As a result, it is often challenging to ﬂag a
*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Wong
<wongeric@mit.edu>, Shibani Santurkar <shibani@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

model’s failure modes or evaluate corrective interventions
without in-depth problem-speciﬁc studies.
To make progress on this front, we focus on a more actionable intermediate goal of interpretability: model debugging.
Speciﬁcally, instead of directly aiming for a complete characterization of the model’s decision process, our objective
is to develop tools that help model designers uncover unexpected model behaviors (semi-)automatically.
Our contributions. Our approach to model debugging is
based on a natural view of a deep network as the composition of a “deep feature extractor” and a linear “decision
layer”. Embracing this perspective allows us to focus our
attention on probing how deep features are (linearly) combined by the decision layer to make predictions. Even with
this simpliﬁcation, probing current deep networks can be
intractable given the large number of parameters in their
decision layers. To overcome this challenge, we replace the
standard (typically dense) decision layer of a deep network
with a sparse but comparably accurate counterpart. This
simple approach ends up being surprisingly effective for
building deep networks that are intrinsically more debuggable. Speciﬁcally, for a variety of modern ML settings:

• We demonstrate that it is possible to construct deep networks that have sparse decision layers (e.g., with only
20-30 deep features per class for ImageNet) without
sacriﬁcing much model performance. This involves
developing a custom solver for ﬁtting elastic net regularized linear models in order to perform effective
sparsiﬁcation at deep-learning scales.2
• We show that sparsifying a network’s decision layer
can indeed help humans understand the resulting models better. For example, untrained annotators can intuit
(simulate) the predictions of a model with a sparse
decision layer with high (∼63%) accuracy. This is in
contrast to their near chance performance (∼33%) for
1
The code for our toolkit can be found at https://github.
com/madrylab/debuggabledeepnetworks.
2
A standalone package of our solver is available at https:
//github.com/madrylab/glm_saga

