Regret Minimization in Stochastic Non-Convex Learning
via a Proximal-Gradient Approach

Nadav Hallak 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 Volkan Cevher 3

Abstract
This paper develops a methodology for regret
minimization with stochastic first-order oracle
feedback in online, constrained, non-smooth,
non-convex problems.
In this setting, the
minimization of external regret is beyond reach
for first-order methods, and there are no
gradient-based algorithmic frameworks capable
of providing a solution.
On that account,
we focus on a local regret measure defined
via a proximal-gradient mapping, that also
encompasses the original notion proposed by
Hazan et al. (2017). To achieve no local regret
in this setting, we develop a proximal-gradient
method based on stochastic first-order feedback,
and a simpler method for when access to a perfect
first-order oracle is possible. Both methods
are order-optimal (in the min-max sense), and
we also establish a bound on the number of
proximal-gradient queries these methods require.
As an important application of our results, we
also obtain a link between online and offline nonconvex stochastic optimization manifested as a
new proximal-gradient scheme with complexity
guarantees matching those obtained via variance
reduction techniques.

1. Introduction
First-order methods have proven to be extremely flexible
and efficient in online convex optimization: They enjoy
tight performance guarantees in a wide range of relevant
settings such as convex, strongly convex and/or composite
1

Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, The
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria,
LIG, Grenoble, France, & Criteo AI Lab 3 École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). Correspondence to: Nadav Hallak
<ndvhllk@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

problems, and they can adapt to different measures of
regret under different oracle feedback assumptions, e.g.,
perfect/stochastic gradients or bandit feedback.
For
example, see Abernethy et al. (2008), Hazan (2016), Hazan
et al. (2007) and Xiao (2010) for applications to different
convex settings, Besbes et al. (2015), Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2012), and Hazan & Seshadhri (2009) for variant regret
measures, and Abernethy et al. (2008), Agarwal et al.
(2010), and Bubeck & Eldan (2016, 2017) for a range of
feedback assumptions.
On the other hand, many contemporary problems,
especially in machine learning, involve highly multimodal non-convex functions. In this case, the results
obtained in the above framework do not – in fact, cannot
– apply, and new analytical tools and algorithms are
needed. Nevertheless, and somewhat surprisingly at
that, online non-convex optimization problems are not as
well explored, and significantly less is known about the
performance of first-order methods in this context.
The key difficulties encountered in the online non-convex
setting are twofold: First, the standard regret comparator
of a “best action in hindsight” (fixed or otherwise) is
too ambitious because, in general, even offline nonconvex optimization problems are intractable. Second,
compared to problems with a convex structure, nonconvex problems have no local-to-global guarantees, so the
adversary has a near-insurmountable advantage (in analogy
to non-convexified/non-randomized optimizers facing an
adversarial bandit). Our paper seeks to address these
challenges in a unified way in the setting of first-order
methods.
Related work. One approach to treat online non-convex
optimization is to regard the problem as an adversarial
multi-armed bandit (MAB) with a continuum of arms.
This approach was pioneered by Bubeck et al. (2011),
Kleinberg (2004) and Kleinberg et al. (2008), who
proposed a range of hierarchical search methods, with
and without a doubling trick, that guarantee no regret
in problems with a geometry that is amenable to local

