Offline Reinforcement Learning with Pseudometric Learning

Robert Dadashi 1 Shideh Rezaeifar 2 Nino Vieillard 1 3 Léonard Hussenot 1 4 Olivier Pietquin 1 Matthieu Geist 1

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning methods seek
to learn a policy from logged transitions of
an environment, without any interaction. In
the presence of function approximation, and
under the assumption of limited coverage
of the state-action space of the environment,
it is necessary to enforce the policy to visit
state-action pairs close to the support of logged
transitions. In this work, we propose an iterative
procedure to learn a pseudometric (closely related
to bisimulation metrics) from logged transitions,
and use it to define this notion of closeness.
We show its convergence and extend it to the
function approximation setting. We then use this
pseudometric to define a new lookup based bonus
in an actor-critic algorithm: PLO FF. This bonus
encourages the actor to stay close, in terms of the
defined pseudometric, to the support of logged
transitions. Finally, we evaluate the method on
hand manipulation and locomotion tasks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proven its ability to
solve complex problems in recent years (Silver et al., 2016;
Vinyals et al., 2019). Behind those breakthroughs, the
adoption of RL in real-world systems remains challenging
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). Learning a policy by trial-anderror, while operating on the system, can be detrimental to
the system where it is deployed (e.g., user satisfaction in
recommendation systems or material damage in robotics)
and is not guaranteed to lead to good performance (sparse
rewards problems).
Nevertheless, in the setting where experiences were previously collected in an environment (logged transitions), one
possible way of learning a policy is to mimic the policy
1

Google Research, Brain Team 2 University of Geneva
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, IECL, F-54000 Nancy,
France 4 Univ. de Lille, CNRS, Inria Scool, UMR 9189 CRIStAL.
Correspondence to: Robert Dadashi <dadashi@google.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

that generated these experiences (Pomerleau, 1991). However, if these experiences come from different sources, with
different degrees of desirability, naive imitation might lead
to poor results. On the other hand, offline RL (or batch
RL) (Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003; Ernst et al., 2005; Riedmiller, 2005; Levine et al., 2020), offers a setting where
the policy is learned from the collected experiences. As
it requires no interaction with the environment, offline RL
is a promising direction for learning policies that can be
deployed into systems.
Still, collected experiences typically only cover a subset
of the range of possibilities in an environment (not every
state is present; for a given state, not every action is taken).
With function approximation, this is particularly problematic since actions not executed in the system can be assigned
overly optimistic values (especially through bootstrapping),
which leads to poor policies. To limit this extrapolation
error, offline RL is typically incentivized to learn policies
that are plausible in light of the collected experiences. In
other words, offline RL methods need to learn policies that
maximize their return, while making sure to remain close to
the support of logged transitions.
This work introduces a new method for computing the
closeness to the support by learning a pseudometric
from collected experiences. This pseudometric, close
to bisimulation metrics (Ferns et al., 2004), computes
similarity between state-action pairs based on the expected
difference in rewards when following specific sequences
of actions. We show theoretical properties in the dynamic
programming setting for deterministic environments as well
as for the sampled setting. We further extend the learning of
this pseudometric to the function approximation setting, and
propose an architecture to learn it from collected experience.
We define a new offline RL actor-critic algorithm: PLO FF
(Pseudometric Learning Offline RL), which computes a
bonus through this learned pseudometric and uses it to filter
admissible actions in the greedy step and penalizes nonadmissible actions in the evaluation step. Finally, we lead an
empirical study on the hand manipulation and locomotion
tasks of the D4RL benchmark from Fu et al. (2020).
We make the following contributions: 1) we extend neural
bisimulation metrics (Castro, 2020) to state-action spaces
and to the offline RL setting and 2) we exploit this pseudo-

