From Local Structures to Size Generalization in Graph Neural Networks

Gilad Yehudai 1 Ethan Fetaya 2 Eli Meirom 1 Gal Chechik 1 2 Haggai Maron 1

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) can process
graphs of different sizes, but their ability to generalize across sizes, specifically from small to
large graphs, is still not well understood. In
this paper, we identify an important type of data
where generalization from small to large graphs
is challenging: graph distributions for which the
local structure depends on the graph size. This
effect occurs in multiple important graph learning domains, including social and biological networks. We first prove that when there is a difference between the local structures, GNNs are
not guaranteed to generalize across sizes: there
are ”bad” global minima that do well on small
graphs but fail on large graphs. We then study
the size-generalization problem empirically and
demonstrate that when there is a discrepancy in
local structure, GNNs tend to converge to nongeneralizing solutions. Finally, we suggest two
approaches for improving size generalization, motivated by our findings. Notably, we propose a
novel Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) task aimed
at learning meaningful representations of local
structures that appear in large graphs. Our SSL
task improves classification accuracy on several
popular datasets.

1. Introduction
Graphs are a flexible representation, widely used for representing diverse data and phenomena. In recent years, graph
neural networks (GNNs), deep models that operate over
graphs, have become the leading approach for learning on
graph-structured data (Bruna et al., 2013; Kipf & Welling,
2016a; Veličković et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017).
In many domains, graphs vary significantly in size. This is
the case in molecular biology, where molecules are represented as graphs and their sizes vary from few-atom com1

NVIDIA 2 Bar-Ilan University. Correspondence to: Gilad
Yehudai <gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We study the ability of GNNs to generalize from small
to large graphs, focusing on graphs in which the local structure
depends on the graph size. The figure shows two graph distributions that differ in size and degree distribution. We show that
when the local structures in the test set are different from the local
structures in the training set, it is difficult for GNNs to generalize.
Additionally, we suggest ways to improve generalization.

pounds to proteins with thousands of nodes. Graph sizes are
even more heterogeneous in social networks, ranging from
dozens of nodes to billions of nodes. Since a key feature
of GNNs is that they can operate on graphs regardless of
their size, a fundamental question arises: ”When do GNNs
generalize to graphs of sizes that were not seen during
training?”.
Aside from being an intriguing theoretical question, the
size-generalization problem has important practical implications. In many domains, it is hard to collect ground-truth
labels for large graphs. For instance, many combinatorial
optimization problems can be represented as graph classification problems, but labeling large graphs for training may
require solving large and hard optimization problems. In
other domains, it is often very hard for human annotators
to correctly label complex networks. It would therefore be
highly valuable to develop techniques that can train on small
graphs and generalize to larger graphs. This first requires
that we develop an understanding of size generalization.
In some cases, GNNs can naturally generalize to graphs
whose size is different from what they were trained on,
but it is largely unknown when such generalization occurs.
Empirically, several papers report good size-generalization
performance (Li et al., 2018; Luz et al., 2020; SanchezGonzalez et al., 2020). Other papers (Velickovic et al.,

