Quantitative Understanding of VAE as a Non-linearly Scaled Isometric
Embedding

Akira Nakagawa 1 Keizo Kato 1 Taiji Suzuki 2 3

Abstract
Variational autoencoder (VAE) estimates the posterior parameters (mean and variance) of latent
variables corresponding to each input data. While
it is used for many tasks, the transparency of
the model is still an underlying issue. This paper provides a quantitative understanding of VAE
property through the differential geometric and
information-theoretic interpretations of VAE. According to the Rate-distortion theory, the optimal transform coding is achieved by using an
orthonormal transform with PCA basis where the
transform space is isometric to the input. Considering the analogy of transform coding to VAE, we
clarify theoretically and experimentally that VAE
can be mapped to an implicit isometric embedding with a scale factor derived from the posterior
parameter. As a result, we can estimate the data
probabilities in the input space from the prior, loss
metrics, and corresponding posterior parameters,
and further, the quantitative importance of each latent variable can be evaluated like the eigenvalue
of PCA.

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
is one of the most successful generative models, estimating
posterior parameters of latent variables for each input data.
In VAE, the latent representation is obtained by maximizing an evidence lower bound (ELBO). A number of studies
have attempted to characterize the theoretical property of
VAE. Indeed, there still are unsolved questions, e.g., what
is the meaning of the latent variable VAE obtained, what β
represents in β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017), whether ELBO
1

Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, Japan 2 Graduate School
of Information Science and Technology, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 3 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Akira Nakagawa
<anaka@fujitsu.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

converges to an appropriate value, and so on. Alemi et al.
(2018) introduced the RD trade-off based on the informationtheoretic framework to analyse β-VAE. However, they did
not clarify what VAE captures after optimization. Dai et al.
(2018) showed VAE restricted as a linear transform can be
considered as a robust principal component analysis (PCA).
But, their model has a limitation for the analysis on each
latent variable basis because of the linearity assumption.
Rolı́nek et al. (2019) showed the Jacobian matrix of VAE is
orthogonal, which seems to make latent variables disentangled implicitly. However, they do not uncover the impact of
each latent variable on the input data quantitatively because
they simplify KL divergence as a constant. Locatello et al.
(2019) also showed the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations fundamentally requires inductive biases
on both the metric and data. Yet, they also do not uncover
the quantitative property of disentangled representations
which is obtained under the given inductive biases. Kumar
& Poole (2020) connected the VAE objective with the Riemannian metric and proposed new deterministic regularized
objectives. However, they still did not uncover the quantitative property of VAE after optimizing their objectives.
These problems are essentially due to the lack of a clear
formulation of the quantitative relationship between the input data and the latent variables. To overcome this point,
Kato et al. (2020) propose an isometric autoencoder as a
non-VAE model. In the isometric embedding (Han & Hong,
2006), the distance between arbitrary two input points is
retained in the embedding space. With isometric embedding,
the quantitative relationship between the input data and the
latent variables is tractable. Our intuition is that if we could
also map VAE to an isometric autoencoder, the behavior
of VAE latent variables will become clear. Thus, the challenge of this paper is to resolve these essential problems by
utilizing the view point of isometric embedding.
1. First of all, we show that VAE obtains an implicit isometric embedding of the support of the input distribution as its
latent space. That is, the input variable is embedded through
the encoder in a low dimensional latent space in which the
distance in the given metric between two points in the input space is preserved. Surprisingly, this characterization
resolves most unsolved problems of VAE such as what we

