MURAL: Meta-Learning Uncertainty-Aware Rewards for Outcome-Driven
Reinforcement Learning
Kevin Li * 1 Abhishek Gupta * 1 Vitchyr Pong 1 Ashwin Reddy 1 Aurick Zhou 1 Justin Yu 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Exploration in reinforcement learning is, in general, a challenging problem. A common technique
to make learning easier is providing demonstrations from a human supervisor, but such demonstrations can be expensive and time-consuming to
acquire. In this work, we study a more tractable
class of reinforcement learning problems defined
simply by examples of successful outcome states,
which can be much easier to provide while still
making the exploration problem more tractable.
In this problem setting, the reward function can
be obtained automatically by training a classifier
to categorize states as successful or not. However, as we will show, this requires the classifier
to make uncertainty-aware predictions that are
very difficult using standard techniques for training deep networks. To address this, we propose
a novel mechanism for obtaining calibrated uncertainty based on an amortized technique for
computing the normalized maximum likelihood
(NML) distribution, leveraging tools from metalearning to make this distribution tractable. We
show that the resulting algorithm has a number of
intriguing connections to both count-based exploration methods and prior algorithms for learning
reward functions, while also providing more effective guidance towards the goal. We demonstrate
that our algorithm solves a number of challenging
navigation and robotic manipulation tasks which
prove difficult or impossible for prior methods.

1. Introduction
While reinforcement learning (RL) has been shown to successfully solve problems with careful reward design (Ra*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin Li <kevintli@berkeley.edu>, Abhishek Gupta
<abhigupta@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. MURAL: Our method trains an uncertainty-aware classifier based on user-provided examples of successful outcomes. Appropriate uncertainty in the classifier, obtained via a meta-learning
based estimator for the normalized maximum likelihood (NML)
distribution, automatically incentivizes exploration and provides
reward shaping for RL.

jeswaran et al., 2018), RL in its most general form, with no
assumptions on the dynamics or reward function, requires
solving a challenging uninformed search problem in which
rewards are sparsely observed. Techniques that explicitly
provide “reward-shaping” (Ng et al., 1999), or modify the
reward function to guide learning, can help take some of
the burden off of exploration, but shaped rewards are often
difficult to provide without significant domain knowledge.
Moreover, in many domains of practical significance, actually specifying rewards in terms of high dimensional observations can be extremely difficult, making it infeasible to
directly apply RL to problems with challenging exploration.
Can the RL problem be made more tractable if the agent is
provided with examples of successful outcomes instead of
an uninformative reward function? Such examples are often
easier to provide than, for example, entire demonstrations
or a hand-designed reward function. However, they can
still provide considerable guidance on how to successfully
accomplish a task, potentially alleviating exploration challenges if the agent can successfully recognize similarities
between visited states and the provided examples. In this
paper, we study such a problem setting, where instead of
a hand-designed reward function, the RL algorithm is provided with a set of successful outcome examples: states in
which the desired task has been accomplished successfully.
Prior work (Fu et al., 2018b; Zhu et al., 2020) aims to solve
tasks in this setting by estimating the distribution over these
states and maximizing the probability of reaching states
that are likely under this distribution. While this can work

