Fast Sketching of Polynomial Kernels of Polynomial Degree
Zhao Song 1 David P. Woodruff 2 Zheng Yu 3 Lichen Zhang 4

Abstract
Kernel methods are fundamental in machine
learning, and faster algorithms for kernel approximation provide direct speedups for many core
tasks in machine learning. The polynomial kernel is especially important as other kernels can
often be approximated by the polynomial kernel via a Taylor series expansion. Recent techniques in oblivious sketching reduce the dependence in the running time on the degree q of the
polynomial kernel from exponential to polynomial, which is useful for the Gaussian kernel,
for which q can be chosen to be polylogarithmic.
However, for more slowly growing kernels, such
as the neural tangent and arc-cosine kernels, q
needs to be polynomial, and previous work incurs a polynomial factor slowdown in the running time. We give a new oblivious sketch which
greatly improves upon this running time, by removing the dependence on q in the leading order
term. Combined with a novel sampling scheme,
we give the fastest algorithms for approximating
a large family of slow-growing kernels.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are a powerful tool for solving nonparametric learning problems, such as kernel regression,
support vector machines (SVM), principal component analysis (PCA), and many others. A typical burden for kernel
methods is that they suffer from scalability, since computing a kernel matrix requires computing a quadratic (in the
number of input points) number of entries in the matrix.
A direction that has received less attention but still of particular interest is the regime where the dimension d of the
1
Princeton University and Institute for Advanced
2
Study
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Princeton Uni4
versity
Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to:
Zhao Song <magic.linuxkde@gmail.com>,
David
P.
Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Zheng Yu <zhengyu@princeton.edu>,
Lichen Zhang
<lichenz@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

data points is large. Typically, applying the kernel function to each pair of data points takes O(d) time. This is
especially undesirable in applications for natural language
processing (Drikvandi & Lawal, 2020) and computational
biology (Teodoro et al., 2002), where d can be as large as
poly(n), with n being the number of data points. To compute the kernel matrix, the algorithm does have to read the
d×n input matrix. Therefore, algorithms that have a nearly
linear dependence on nd are of particular interest.
To accelerate the computation of kernel matrices from the
naïve O(n2 d) time algorithm, a lot of work has focused on
finding a good approximation to a kernel matrix efficiently
(Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Musco
& Musco, 2017; Ahle et al., 2020; Woodruff & Zandieh,
2020). All of these methods make use of randomized algorithmic primitives such as sampling or sketching. Roughly
speaking, the idea is to randomly generate a “sketching matrix" with a small number of rows, multiply the sketching
matrix with the input matrix, and show that the resulting
matrix approximately preserves the length of vectors in the
row or column space of the original matrix.
The polynomial kernel is of interest, since any kernel can
be written as a sum of polynomial kernels through a Taylor expansion. If we can efficiently approximate the polynomial kernel, then we will be able to efficiently approximate many types of kernels. In (Avron et al., 2014), Avron,
Nguyen and Woodruff approximate the polynomial kernel
with a sketching matrix in time that depends exponentially
on the degree p of the polynomial kernel. Recent works
of (Ahle et al., 2020; Woodruff & Zandieh, 2020) have improved the dependence on p to polynomial. However, their
algorithms mainly focus on optimizing the dependence on
n and reducing the exponential dependence on p to polynomial. If X ∈ Rd×n is the input matrix and is dense, then
these algorithms have runtime e
O(pnd + −2 n3 p2 ).1 Notice
this is unsatisfactory when both d and p are large.
Thus, a natural question to ask is:

Does there exist a sketch for polynomial kernels of degree
p, such that the runtime is nearly linear in nd, and with an
improved dependence on p?
1

tors.

e
e
e
We use O(·),
Ω(·),
Θ(·)
to suppress poly(log(nd/δ)) fac-

