Best Arm Identification in Graphical Bilinear Bandits

Geovani Rizk 1 2 Albert Thomas 2 Igor Colin 2 Rida Laraki 1 3 Yann Chevaleyre 1

Abstract
We introduce a new graphical bilinear bandit problem where a learner (or a central entity) allocates
arms to the nodes of a graph and observes for
each edge a noisy bilinear reward representing the
interaction between the two end nodes. We study
the best arm identification problem in which the
learner wants to find the graph allocation maximizing the sum of the bilinear rewards. By efficiently exploiting the geometry of this bandit
problem, we propose a decentralized allocation
strategy based on random sampling with theoretical guarantees. In particular, we characterize
the influence of the graph structure (e.g. star,
complete or circle) on the convergence rate and
propose empirical experiments that confirm this
dependency.

1. Introduction
In many multi-agent systems the contribution of an agent to
a common team objective is impacted by the behavior of the
other agents. The agents must coordinate (or be coordinated)
to achieve the best team performance. Consider, for instance,
the problem of configuring antennas of a wireless cellular
network to obtain the best signal quality over the whole
network (Siomina et al., 2006). The signal quality of the
region covered by a given antenna might be degraded by the
behavior of its neighboring antennas due to an increase of
interferences or bad user handovers. Another example is
the adjustment of the turbine blades of a wind farm where
the best adjustment for one turbine may generate turbulence
for its neighboring turbines and thus be suboptimal for the
global wind farm objective (Bargiacchi et al., 2018).
These real-life problems can be viewed as instances of a
stochastic multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem (Robbins, 1952; Bargiacchi et al., 2018) where a learner (or a central entity) sequentially pulls a joint arm, one arm for each
1
PSL - Université Paris Dauphine, CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris,
France 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Liverpool University. Correspondence to: Geovani Rizk <geovani.rizk@dauphine.psl.eu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

agent (e.g., all the configuration parameters of the antennas),
and receives an associated global noisy reward (e.g., the
signal quality over the whole network). The goal of the
learner can either be to maximize the accumulated reward,
implying a trade-off between exploration and exploitation,
or to find the joint arm maximizing the reward, known as
pure exploration or best arm identification (Bubeck et al.,
2009; Audibert and Bubeck, 2010).
In this paper we focus on the best arm identification problem
in a multi-agent system for which we assume the knowledge
of a coordination graph G = (V, E) representing the agent
interactions (Guestrin et al., 2002).
At each round t, a learner
(i)

1. chooses for each node i ∈ V an arm xt in an finite
arm set X ⊂ Rd ,
2. observes for each edge (i, j) ∈ E a bilinear reward
(i,j)
(i)>
(j)
(i,j)
rt
= xt M? xt + ηt .
Here, we denote by M? ∈ Rd×d the unknown parame(i,j)
ter matrix, and ηt
a zero-mean σ-sub-Gaussian random
variable for all edges (i, j) ∈ E and round t.
The goal of the central entity is to find, within a minimum
(1)
(|V |)
number of rounds, the joint arm (x? , . . . , x? ) such that
P
(i)>
(j)
the expected global reward (i,j)∈E x? M? x? is maximized.
(i,j)

The reward rt
reflects the quality of the interaction between the neighboring nodes i and j when pulling respec(i)
(j)
tively the arm xt and xt at time t. For instance, when con(i,j)
figuring handover parameters of a wireless network, rt
can be any criterion assessing the handover quality between
antenna i and antenna j, the parameters selected by each
antenna both impacting this quantity. The bilinear setting
appears as a natural extension of the commonly studied
linear setting to model the interaction between two agents.
Furthermore, instead of a global reward being a sum of independent linear agent rewards, the global reward is now
the result of the interactions between neighboring agents.
As exposed in Jun et al. (2019), the bilinear reward can be

