Valid Causal Inference with (Some) Invalid Instruments
Jason Hartford 1 Victor Veitch 2 Dhanya Sridhar 3 Kevin Leyton-Brown 1

Abstract
Instrumental variable methods provide a power­
ful approach to estimating causal effects in the
presence of unobserved confounding. But a key
challenge when applying them is the reliance on
untestable “exclusion” assumptions that rule out
any relationship between the instrument variable
and the response that is not mediated by the treat­
ment. In this paper, we show how to perform con­
sistent instrumental variable estimation despite
violations of the exclusion assumption. In particu­
lar, we show that when one has multiple candidate
instruments, only a majority of these candidates—
or, more generally, the modal candidate–response
relationship—needs to be valid to estimate the
causal effect. Our approach uses an estimate
of the modal prediction from an ensemble of in­
strumental variable estimators. The technique is
simple to apply and is “black-box” in the sense
that it may be used with any instrumental vari­
able estimator as long as the treatment effect is
identiﬁed for each valid instrument independently.
As such, it is compatible with recent machinelearning based estimators that allow for the esti­
mation of conditional average treatment effects
(CATE) on complex, high dimensional data. Ex­
perimentally, we achieve accurate estimates of
conditional average treatment effects using an
ensemble of deep network-based estimators, in­
cluding on a challenging simulated Mendelian
randomization problem.

1. Introduction
Instrumental variable (IV) methods are a powerful approach
for estimating treatment effects: they are robust to unob­
served confounders and they are compatible with a variety
of ﬂexible nonlinear function approximators (see e.g. Newey
*

Equal contribution 1 University of British Columbia, Vancou­
ver, Canada 2 University of Chicago, Illinois, USA 3 Columbia
University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Jason Hartford
<jasonhar@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

& Powell, 2003; Darolles et al., 2011; Hartford et al., 2017;
Singh et al., 2019; Bennett et al., 2019; Muandet et al., 2020;
Dikkala et al., 2020), thereby allowing nonlinear estimation
of heterogeneous treatment effects.
In order to use an IV approach, one must make three assump­
tions. The ﬁrst, relevance, asserts that the treatment is not
independent of the instrument. This assumption is relatively
unproblematic, because it can be veriﬁed with data. The sec­
ond assumption, unconfounded instrument, asserts that the
instrument and outcome do not share any common causes.
This assumption cannot be veriﬁed directly, but in some
cases it can be justiﬁed via knowledge of the system; e.g.
the instrument may be explicitly randomized or may be the
result of some well understood random process. The ﬁnal
assumption, exclusion, asserts that the instrument’s effect
on the outcome is entirely mediated through the treatment.
This assumption is even more problematic; not only can it
not be veriﬁed directly, but it can be very difﬁcult to rule
out the possibility of direct effects between the instrument
and the outcome variable. Indeed, there are prominent cases
where purported instruments have been called into ques­
tion for this reason. For example, in economics, the widely
used “judge ﬁxed effects” research design (Kling, 2006)
uses random assignment of trial judges as instruments and
leverages differences between different judges’ propensities
to incarcerate to infer the effect of incarceration on some
economic outcome of interest (see Frandsen et al., 2019,
for many recent examples). Mueller-Smith (2015) points
out that exclusion is violated if judges also hand out other
forms of punishment (e.g. ﬁnes, a stern verbal warning
etc.) that are not observed. Similarly, in genetic epidemiol­
ogy, “Mendelian randomization” (Davey Smith & Ebrahim,
2003) uses genetic variation to study the effects of some
exposure on an outcome of interest. For example, given ge­
netic markers that are known to be associated with a higher
body mass index (BMI), we can estimate the effect of BMI
on cardiovascular disease. However, this only holds if we
are conﬁdent that the same genetic markers do not inﬂuence
the risk of cardiovascular disease in any other ways. The
possibility of such “direct effects”—referred to as “horizon­
tal pleiotropy” in the genetic epidemiology literature—is
regarded as a key challenge for Mendelian randomization
(Hemani et al., 2018).
It is sometimes possible to identify many candidate instru­

