Opening the Blackbox: Accelerating Neural Differential Equations by
Regularizing Internal Solver Heuristics

Avik Pal 1 2 Yingbo Ma 2 Viral Shah 2 Christopher Rackauckas 2 3 4 5

Abstract
Democratization of machine learning requires architectures that automatically adapt to new problems. Neural Differential Equations (NDEs) have
emerged as a popular modeling framework by removing the need for ML practitioners to choose
the number of layers in a recurrent model. While
we can control the computational cost by choosing the number of layers in standard architectures,
in NDEs the number of neural network evaluations for a forward pass can depend on the number of steps of the adaptive ODE solver. But, can
we force the NDE to learn the version with the
least steps while not increasing the training cost?
Current strategies to overcome slow prediction require high order automatic differentiation, leading
to significantly higher training time. We describe
a novel regularization method that uses the internal cost heuristics of adaptive differential equation
solvers combined with discrete adjoint sensitivities to guide the training process towards learning
NDEs that are easier to solve. This approach
opens up the blackbox numerical analysis behind
the differential equation solver’s algorithm and
directly uses its local error estimates and stiffness
heuristics as cheap and accurate cost estimates.
We incorporate our method without any change
in the underlying NDE framework and show that
our method extends beyond Ordinary Differential Equations to accommodate Neural Stochastic
Differential Equations. We demonstrate how our
approach can halve the prediction time and, unlike other methods which can increase the training
time by an order of magnitude, we demonstrate
similar reduction in training times. Together this
showcases how the knowledge embedded within
1
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 2 Julia Computing
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Pumas AI 5 University
of Maryland Baltimore.
Correspondence to: Avik Pal
<avikpal@cse.iitk.ac.in>, Christopher Rackauckas <crackauc@mit.edu>.
3

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Training and Prediction Performance of Regularized
NDEs We obtain an average training and prediction speedup of
1.45x and 1.84x respectively for our best model on supervised
classification and time series problems.

state-of-the-art equation solvers can be used to
enhance machine learning.

1. Introduction
How many hidden layers should you choose in your recurrent neural network? Chen et al. (2018) showed that the
answer could be found automatically by using a continuous
reformulation, the neural ordinary differential equation, and
allowing an adaptive ODE solver to effectively choose the
number of steps to take. Since then the idea was generalized
to other domains such as stochastic differential equations
(Liu et al., 2019; Rackauckas et al., 2020) but one fact remained: solving a neural differential equation is expensive,
and training a neural differential equation is even more so.
In this manuscript we show a generally applicable method
to force the neural differential equation training process to
choose the least expensive option. We open the blackbox
and show how using the numerical heuristics baked inside of
these sophisticated differential equation solver codes allows
for identifying the cheapest equations without requiring
extra computation.
Our main contributions include:
• We introduce a novel regularization scheme for neural differential equations based on the local error estimates and stiffness estimates. We observe that by

