Diversity Actor-Critic: Sample-Aware Entropy Regularization for
Sample-Efficient Exploration

Seungyul Han 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract
In this paper, sample-aware policy entropy regularization is proposed to enhance the conventional
policy entropy regularization for better exploration. Exploiting the sample distribution obtainable from the replay buffer, the proposed sampleaware entropy regularization maximizes the entropy of the weighted sum of the policy action distribution and the sample action distribution from
the replay buffer for sample-efficient exploration.
A practical algorithm named diversity actor-critic
(DAC) is developed by applying policy iteration to
the objective function with the proposed sampleaware entropy regularization. Numerical results
show that DAC significantly outperforms existing
recent algorithms for reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to maximize the expected
return under Markov decision process (MDP) (Sutton &
Barto, 1998). When the given task is complex, e.g., the environment has high action-dimensions or sparse rewards, it is
important to explore state-action pairs well for high performance (Agre & Rosenschein, 1996). For better exploration,
recent RL considers various methods: maximizing the policy entropy to take actions more uniformly (Ziebart et al.,
2008; Fox et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2017), maximizing
diversity gain that yields intrinsic reward to explore rare
states by counting the number of visiting states (Strehl &
Littman, 2008; Lopes et al., 2012), maximizing information
gain (Houthooft et al., 2016; Hong et al., 2018), maximizing model prediction error (Achiam & Sastry, 2017; Pathak
et al., 2017). In particular, based on policy iteration for soft
Q-learning, Haarnoja et al. (2018a) extended maximum entropy RL and proposed an off-policy actor-critic algorithm,
soft actor-critic (SAC), which has competitive performance
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for challenging continuous control tasks.
In this paper, we consider the problem of policy entropy
regularization in off-policy learning and propose a generalized approach to policy entropy regularization for sampleefficient exploration. In off-policy learning, we store samples in the replay buffer and reuse old samples to update the
current policy (Mnih et al., 2015). Thus, the sample buffer
has information about the old samples. However, the simple
policy entropy regularization tries to maximize the entropy
of the current policy irrespective of the distribution of the
previous samples in the replay buffer. In order to exploit
the sample information in the replay buffer and enhance performance, we propose sample-aware entropy regularization,
which tries to maximize the entropy of the weighted sum of
the current policy action distribution and the sample action
distribution from the replay buffer. We develop a practical
and efficient algorithm for return maximization based on the
proposed sample-aware entropy regularization without explicitly computing the replay-buffer sample distribution, and
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm yields significant
enhancement in exploration and final performance on various difficult environments such as tasks with sparse reward
or high action dimensions.

2. Related Works
Entropy regularization: Entropy regularized RL maximizes the sum of the expected return and the policy action
entropy. It encourages the agent to visit the action space uniformly for each given state, and can provide more accurate
model prediction (Ziebart, 2010). Entropy regularization is
considered in various domains: inverse reinforcement learning (Ziebart et al., 2008), stochastic optimal control problems (Todorov, 2008; Toussaint, 2009; Rawlik et al., 2013),
and off-policy reinforcement learning (Fox et al., 2015;
Haarnoja et al., 2017). Nachum et al. (2017a) showed that
there exists a connection between value-based and policybased RL under entropy regularization. O’Donoghue et al.
(2016) proposed an algorithm combining value-based and
policy-based RL, and Schulman et al. (2017a) proved that
they are equivalent. Hazan et al. (2019) maximized the entropy of state distribution induced by the current policy by
using state mixture distribution for better pure exploration.

