Principal Bit Analysis:
Autoencoding with Schur-Concave Loss

Sourbh Bhadane 1 Aaron B. Wagner 1 Jayadev Acharya 1

Abstract
We consider a linear autoencoder in which the
latent variables are quantized, or corrupted by
noise, and the constraint is Schur-concave in the
set of latent variances. Although finding the optimal encoder/decoder pair for this setup is a
nonconvex optimization problem, we show that
decomposing the source into its principal components is optimal. If the constraint is strictly
Schur-concave and the empirical covariance matrix has only simple eigenvalues, then any optimal encoder/decoder must decompose the source
in this way. As one application, we consider a
strictly Schur-concave constraint that estimates
the number of bits needed to represent the latent
variables under fixed-rate encoding, a setup that
we call Principal Bit Analysis (PBA). This yields
a practical, general-purpose, fixed-rate compressor that outperforms existing algorithms. As a
second application, we show that a prototypical autoencoder-based variable-rate compressor
is guaranteed to decompose the source into its
principal components.

1. Introduction
Autoencoders are an effective method for representation
learning and dimensionality reduction.
P Given a centered
dataset x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd (i.e., i xi = 0), an autoencoder (with latent dimension k ≤ d) consists of an encoder
f : Rd 7→ Rk and a decoder g : Rk 7→ Rd . The goal is
to select f and g from prespecified classes Cf and Cg such
that if a random point x is picked from the data set then
g(f (x)) is close to x in some sense, for example in mean
squared error. If Cf and Cg consist of linear mappings then
the autoencoder is called a linear autoencoder.
Autoencoders have achieved striking successes when f
1

Cornell University. Correspondence to: Sourbh Bhadane
<snb62@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and g are selected through training from the class of functions realized by multilayer perceptrons of a given architecture (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006). Yet, the canonical
autoencoder formulation described above has a notable failing, namely that for linear autoencoders, optimal choices
of f and g do not necessarily identify the principal components of the dataset; they merely identify the principal
subspace (Bourlard & Kamp, 1988; Baldi & Hornik, 1989).
That is, the components of f (x) are not necessarily proportional to projections of x against the eigenvectors of the
covariance matrix
n
X
def 1
K =
xi · x>
(1)
i ,
n i=1
which we assume without loss of generality is full rank.
Thus, linear autoencoders do not recover Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The reason for this is that both the
objective (the distortion) and the constraint (the dimensionality of the latents) are invariant to an invertible transformation applied after the encoder with its inverse applied
before the decoder. It is desirable for linear autoencoders
to recover PCA for two reasons. First, from a representation learning sandpont, it guarantees that the autoencoder
recovers uncorrelated features. Second, since a conventional
linear autoencoder has a large number of globally optimal
solutions corresponding to different bases of the principal
subspace, it is preferable to eliminate this indeterminism.
Autoencoders are sometimes described as “compressing”
the data (Bishop, 2006; Bourlard & Kamp, 1988; Liao et al.,
2021; do Espı́rito Santo, 2012), even though f can be invertible even when k < d. We show that by embracing
this compression-view, one can obtain autoencoders that
are able to recover PCA. Specifically, we consider linear
autoencoders with quantized (or, equivalently, noisy) latent
variables with a constraint on the estimated number of bits
required to transmit the quantized latents under fixed-rate
coding. We call this problem Principal Bit Analysis (PBA).
The constraint turns out to be a strictly Schur-concave function of the set of variances of the latent variables (see the
supplementary for a review of Schur-concavity). Although
finding the optimal f and g for this loss function is a nonconvex optimization problem, we show that for any strictly
Schur-concave loss function, an optimal f must send projec-

