Multi-Agent Training beyond Zero-Sum with Correlated Equilibrium
Meta-Solvers
Luke Marris 1 2 Paul Muller 1 3 Marc Lanctot 1 Karl Tuyls 1 Thore Graepel 1 2

Abstract
Two-player, constant-sum games are well studied in the literature, but there has been limited
progress outside of this setting. We propose Joint
Policy-Space Response Oracles (JPSRO), an algorithm for training agents in n-player, general-sum
extensive form games, which provably converges
to an equilibrium. We further suggest correlated
equilibria (CE) as promising meta-solvers, and
propose a novel solution concept Maximum Gini
Correlated Equilibrium (MGCE), a principled and
computationally efficient family of solutions for
solving the correlated equilibrium selection problem. We conduct several experiments using CE
meta-solvers for JPSRO and demonstrate convergence on n-player, general-sum games.

1. Introduction
Recent success in tackling two-player, constant-sum games
(Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019) has outpaced
progress in n-player, general-sum games despite a lot of
interest (Jaderberg et al., 2019; OpenAI et al., 2019; Brown
& Sandholm, 2019; Lockhart et al., 2020; Gray et al., 2020;
Anthony et al., 2020). One reason is because Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash, 1951) is tractable and interchangeable in the two-player, constant-sum setting but becomes
intractable (Daskalakis et al., 2009) and potentially noninterchangeable1 in n-player and general-sum settings. The
problem of selecting from multiple solutions is known as
the equilibrium selection problem (Goldberg et al., 2013;
1

DeepMind 2 University College London 3 Université Gustave
Eiffel. Correspondence to: Luke Marris <marris@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
That is, there are no longer any guarantees on the expected
utility when each player plays their part of some equilibrium;
guarantees only hold when all players play the same equilibrium.
Since players cannot guarantee what others choose, they cannot
optimize independently, so the Nash equilibrium loses its appeal
as a prescriptive solution concept.

Avis et al., 2010; Harsanyi & Selten, 1988).2
Outside of normal form (NF) games, this problem setting
arises in multi-agent training when dealing with empirical games (also called meta-games), where a game payoff tensor is populated with expected outcomes between
agents playing an extensive form (EF) game, for example
the StarCraft League (Vinyals et al., 2019) and Policy-Space
Response Oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017), a recent
variant of which reached state-of-the-art results in Stratego
Barrage (McAleer et al., 2020).
In this work we propose using correlated equilibrium (CE)
(Aumann, 1974) and coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) as
a suitable target equilibrium space for n-player, general-sum
games3 . The (C)CE solution concept has two main benefits over NE; firstly, it provides a mechanism for players to
correlate their actions to arrive at mutually higher payoffs
and secondly, it is computationally tractable to compute
solutions for n-player, general-sum games (Daskalakis et al.,
2009). We provide a tractable approach to select from the
space of (C)CEs (MG), and a novel training framework that
converges to this solution (JPSRO). The result is a set of
tools for theoretically solving any complete information4
multi-agent problem. These tools are amenable to scaling
approaches; including utilizing reinforcement learning, function approximation, and online solution solvers, however
we leave this to future work.
In Section 2 we provide background on a) correlated equilibrium (CE), an important generalization of NE, b) coarse
correlated equilibrium (CCE) (Moulin & Vial, 1978), a similar solution concept, and c) PSRO, a powerful multi-agent
training algorithm. In Section 3 we propose novel solution
concepts called Maximum Gini (Coarse) Correlated Equilibrium (MG(C)CE) and in Section 4 we thoroughly explore its
properties including tractability, scalability, invariance, and
2
The equilibrium selection problem is subtle and can have
various interpretations. We describe it fully in Section 4.1 based
on the classical understanding from (Harsanyi & Selten, 1988).
3
We mean games (also called environments) in a very general
sense: extensive form games, multi-agent MDPs and POMDPs
(stochastic games), imperfect information games, are all solvable
with this approach.
4
Payoffs for all players are required for the correlation device.

