Conditional Distributional Treatment Effect with Kernel Conditional Mean
Embeddings and U-Statistic Regression

Junhyung Park 1 Uri Shalit 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 Krikamol Muandet 1

Abstract
We propose to analyse the conditional distributional treatment effect (CoDiTE), which, in contrast to the more common conditional average
treatment effect (CATE), is designed to encode
a treatment’s distributional aspects beyond the
mean. We first introduce a formal definition of
the CoDiTE associated with a distance function
between probability measures. Then we discuss
the CoDiTE associated with the maximum mean
discrepancy via kernel conditional mean embeddings, which, coupled with a hypothesis test, tells
us whether there is any conditional distributional
effect of the treatment. Finally, we investigate
what kind of conditional distributional effect the
treatment has, both in an exploratory manner via
the conditional witness function, and in a quantitative manner via U-statistic regression, generalising the CATE to higher-order moments. Experiments on synthetic, semi-synthetic and real
datasets demonstrate the merits of our approach.

1. Introduction
Analysing the effect of a treatment (medical drug, economic
programme, etc.) has long been a problem of great importance, and has attracted researchers from diverse domains,
including econometrics (Imbens & Wooldridge, 2009), political sciences (Künzel et al., 2019), healthcare (Foster et al.,
2011) and social sciences (Imbens & Rubin, 2015). The
field has naturally received much attention of statisticians
over the years (Rosenbaum, 2002; Rubin, 2005; Imbens &
Rubin, 2015), and in the past few years, the machine learning community has started applying its own armoury to this
problem – see Section 1.2 for a succinct review.
Traditional methods for treatment effect evaluation focus
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Technion, Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Junhyung Park <junhyung.park@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

on the analysis of the average treatment effect (ATE), such
as an increase or decrease in average income, inequality
or poverty, aggregated over the population. However, the
ATE is not informative about the individual responses to
the intervention and how the treatment impact varies across
individuals (known as treatment effect heterogeneity). The
study of conditional average treatment effect (CATE)1 has
been proposed to analyse such heterogeneity in the mean
treatment effect. Although sufficient in many cases, the
CATE is still an average. As such, it fails to capture information about distributional aspects of the treatment beyond
the mean. A significant amount of interest exists for developing methods that can analyse distributional treatment
effects conditioned on the covariates (Chang et al., 2015;
Bitler et al., 2017; Shen, 2019; Chernozhukov et al., 2020;
Hohberg et al., 2020; Briseño Sanchez et al., 2020).
Our contributions are as follows. Firstly, we formally define the conditional distributional treatment effect (CoDiTE)
associated with a chosen distance function between distributions. Then we use kernel conditional mean embeddings
(Song et al., 2013; Park & Muandet, 2020a) to analyse the
CoDiTE associated with the maximum mean discrepancy
(Gretton et al., 2012). Coupled with a statistical hypothesis
test, this can determine whether there exists any effect of
the treatment, conditioned on a set of covariates. Finally, we
use conditional witness functions and U-statistic regression
to investigate what kind of effect the treatment has.
1.1. Problem Set-Up: Potential Outcomes Framework
Throughout this paper, we take (Ω, F, P ) as the underlying probability space, X as the input space and Y ⊆ R
as the output space. Let Z : Ω → {0, 1}, X : Ω → X
and Y0 , Y1 , Y : Ω → Y be random variables representing,
respectively, the treatment assignment, covariates, the potential outcomes under control and treatment, and the observed
outcome, i.e. Y = Y0 (1 − Z) + Y1 Z. For example, Z
may indicate whether a subject is administered a medical
treatment (Z = 1) or not (Z = 0). The potential outcomes
Y1 , Y0 respectively correspond to subject’s responses had
they received treatment or not. The covariates X corre1

See Section 1.1 for the definitions of the ATE and CATE.

