On Disentangled Representations Learned from Correlated Data

Frederik Träuble 1 Elliot Creager 2 Niki Kilbertus 3 Francesco Locatello 4 Andrea Dittadi 5 Anirudh Goyal 6
Bernhard Schölkopf 1 Stefan Bauer 1 7

Abstract
The focus of disentanglement approaches has
been on identifying independent factors of variation in data. However, the causal variables underlying real-world observations are often not statistically independent. In this work, we bridge the
gap to real-world scenarios by analyzing the behavior of the most prominent disentanglement approaches on correlated data in a large-scale empirical study (including 4260 models). We show and
quantify that systematically induced correlations
in the dataset are being learned and reflected in the
latent representations, which has implications for
downstream applications of disentanglement such
as fairness. We also demonstrate how to resolve
these latent correlations, either using weak supervision during training or by post-hoc correcting a
pre-trained model with a small number of labels.

1. Introduction
Disentangled representations promise generalization to unseen scenarios (Higgins et al., 2017b; Locatello et al.,
2020b), increased interpretability (Adel et al., 2018; Higgins et al., 2018), faster learning on downstream tasks (van
Steenkiste et al., 2019) or better sim2real transfer (Dittadi
et al., 2021) as well as a connection to robustness and causal
inference (Suter et al., 2019).
While the advantages of disentangled representations have
been well established, they generally assume the existence
of natural factors that vary independently within the given
dataset, which is rarely the case in real-world settings. As
an example, consider a dataset containing images of various
persons (see Fig. 1). Higher-level factors of this representa-

Figure 1. While in principle we would like to consider foot length
and body height to be independent features of our model, they
exhibit strong positive correlation in observed data.

tion, such as foot length and body height are in fact found
to be statistically correlated (Agnihotri et al., 2007; Grivas
et al., 2008). Humans can still conceive varying both factors independently across their entire range. However, only
given a correlated dataset, learning systems may be tempted
to encode both factors simultaneously in a single size factor.
It is thus argued that what we actually want to infer are
independent (causal) mechanisms (Peters et al., 2017; Suter
et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2021; Leeb et al., 2020; Schölkopf
et al., 2021).

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Toronto and Vector Institute 3 Helmholtz AI,
Munich 4 Amazon (work partly done when FL was at ETH Zurich
and MPI-IS) 5 Technical University of Denmark 6 Mila and Université de Montréal 7 CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar. Correspondence
to: Frederik Träuble <frederik.traeuble@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

A complex generative model can be thought of as the composition of independent mechanisms, which generate highdimensional observations (such as images or videos). In the
causality community, this is often considered a prerequisite
to achieve representations that are robust to interventions
upon variables determined by such models (Peters et al.,
2017). The notion of disentangled representation is one particular instantiation of this idea (Bengio et al., 2013). The
goal of disentanglement learning is to find a representation
of the data which captures all the ground-truth factors of
variation (FoV) independently.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Despite the recent growth of the field, state-of-the-art disentanglement learners have mostly been trained and evaluated

1

