SGA: A Robust Algorithm for Partial Recovery of Tree-Structured Graphical
Models with Noisy Samples

Anshoo Tandon 1 Aldric J. Y. Han 2 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 2

Abstract
We consider learning Ising tree models when the
observations from the nodes are corrupted by independent but non-identically distributed noise with
unknown statistics. Katiyar et al. (2020) showed
that although the exact tree structure cannot be
recovered, one can recover a partial tree structure;
that is, a structure belonging to the equivalence
class containing the true tree. This paper presents
a systematic improvement of Katiyar et al. (2020).
First, we present a novel impossibility result by
deriving a bound on the necessary number of samples for partial recovery. Second, we derive a
significantly improved sample complexity result
in which the dependence on the minimum correla−24
tion ρmin is ρ−8
min instead of ρmin . Finally, we propose Symmetrized Geometric Averaging (SGA),
a more statistically robust algorithm for partial
tree recovery. We provide error exponent analyses and extensive numerical results on a variety of
trees to show that the sample complexity of SGA
is significantly better than the algorithm of Katiyar et al. (2020). SGA can be readily extended
to Gaussian models and is shown via numerical
experiments to be similarly superior.

1. Introduction
Graphical models provide a succinct diagrammatic representation of the dependencies among a set of random variables. The vertices of the graph are in one-to-one correspondence with the random variables, while the edges encode
conditional independence relationships. Graphical models
have found applications in domains from biology (Friedman,
2004), to coding theory (Kschischang & Frey, 1998), social
1
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. 2 Department of Mathematics,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Anshoo Tandon <anshoo.tandon@gmail.com>, Vincent Y. F. Tan
<vtan@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

networks (Lauritzen, 1996) and computer vision (Besag,
1986). For a detailed description of graphical models, the
reader is referred to Wainwright & Jordan (2008).
This paper concerns the learning of the structure of a certain
class of graphical models from data (Johnson et al., 2007).
In particular, we consider undirected Ising graphical models
that are Markov on trees. While this is a classical problem that has been studied extensively (Chow & Liu, 1968;
Bresler & Karzand, 2020), here we focus on a relatively
unexplored problem in which the vector-valued samples
presented to the learner are corrupted by independent but
non-identically distributed noise. This scenario is motivated
by two different real-world scenarios. Firstly, suppose each
component is obtained at spatially distributed locations of a
large sensor network. The scalar-valued components need to
be transmitted to a fusion center for the reconstruction of the
graphical structure of the data. Due to the presence of disturbances (e.g., pollution, ambient noise), the components will
inevitably be corrupted and the corruption levels are different as the distances of the spatially distributed devices to the
fusion center are different. Secondly, imagine that a drug
company would like to understand the inter-dependencies
between different chemicals to design an effective vaccine
given training samples obtained from human subjects. To
thwart the company’s attempts, a competitor corrupts certain
measurements or features of the human subjects (Wang &
Gu, 2017), where these corruptions may be non-identically
distributed. In these scenarios, we would like to design
robust algorithms to recover, as best as possible, a certain
structure that is “close” to the true one.
Motivated by these examples, we consider a tree learning
problem in which each component of the vector-valued
samples may be corrupted in a non-identical but independent (across components) manner. Because the corruption
noises are non-identical, the ordering of the observed correlations are distorted, and hence the tree, in general, cannot
be identified using the maximum likelihood Chow-Liu algroithm (Chow & Liu, 1968). More precisely Katiyar et al.
(2020) showed that in such a case, even in the infinite sample
limit, the structure can only be identified up to its equivalent
class, a notion that will be defined precisely in the sequel.
Building on their previous work for the robust learning of

