Generative Adversarial Networks for Markovian Temporal Dynamics:
Stochastic Continuous Data Generation
Sung Woo Park 1 Dong Wook Shu 1 Junseok Kwon 1

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel generative adversarial network (GAN) that can describe Markovian temporal dynamics. To generate stochastic
sequential data, we introduce a novel stochastic
differential equation-based conditional generator
and spatial-temporal constrained discriminator
networks. To stabilize the learning dynamics of
the min-max type of the GAN objective function,
we propose well-posed constraint terms for both
networks. We also propose a novel conditional
Markov Wasserstein distance to induce a pathwise
Wasserstein distance. The experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms stateof-the-art methods using several different types
of data.

1. Introduction
Recently, research has been actively conducted to synthesize
realistic dynamical data, which are ubiquitous and natural in
real-world scenes. To develop generative methods for timesequential data, the following important question should
be posed: How can we accurately model fake probability
distributions to represent time-varying real distributions?
To describe the probabilistic sequences of time-sequential
data, conventional methods typically adopt model-based approaches that generate discrete-time temporal states. These
approaches have widely employed recurrent neural networks
to generate samples (X1 , · · · , Xn ), in which the conditional
distribution, p(Xn |Xk<n ), is dependent on black-box types
of dynamics induced by the recurrent networks. In this paper, we propose an alternative method that utilizes stochastic differential equations (SDEs) as probabilistic models to
generate continuous time-sequential data, Xt , according to
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Sung Woo Park <pswkiki@gmail.com>,
Dong Wook Shu <seowok@naver.com>, Junseok Kwon
<jskwon@cau.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

probability distribution Xt ∼ pt , which has the following
formulation:
dXtx = f (Xt , t, θ)dt + Σ(Xt , θ)dWt ,

x ∼ pt=0 , (1)

where the first term propagates particles Xt according to
drift function f (·, t, θ) with parameters θ, and the second
term imposes randomness on the evolution paths of Xt
using Wiener process Wt and diffusion function Σ. Then,
the combination of these two terms can explicitly render
probabilistic flows of data. Utilizing SDEs for generating
time-sequential data in our method has two advantages: it
ensures the generation of Markovian temporal dynamics
and stochastic/continuous sample paths.
(Model-based Temporal Dynamics → Markovian Temporal Dynamics) Key to generating stochastic sequential
data is estimating an accurate conditional density, p(Xt |Xs ),
which can describe complex dynamics over temporal transitions. For this, recurrent networks (i.e., model-based)(Yoon
et al., 2019; Yingzhen & Mandt, 2018) have been used to
define the conditional distribution, p(Xn |X<n ). 1 , for accurate time-sequential data generation. In contrast to modelbased approaches, our proposed method adopts stochastic
dynamics to define a conditional probability by introducing
a continuous Markov transition from Xs to Xt , in which
the solution to (1), Xt , is inherently a continuous Markov
process. In particular, let p(x, t|y, s) be a transition kernel2
that transitions spatial states y to x given a time interval
from s to t. Specifically, SDEs in (1) induce a unique form
of partial differential equations (PDEs) (i.e., Fokker-Planck
equations) in a distributional sense, which proposes an evolution rule for probability distribution pt at temporal state t:
∂t p(x, t|y, s)
 (2)
1 
= −∂x f (x, t, θ)pt (x) + Tr ∂x2 Σ(x, θ) · pt (x) ,
2
where the initial condition is x = X0x ∼ p0 . The mathematical characteristics of PDEs in (2) provide strong advantages
in the development of time-sequence generative models.
1
To distinguish between the notations, we use n, k ∈ N+ for
discrete processes, and t, s ∈ R+ for continuous processes.
2
The transition kernel exists because Xtx is Markovian given
an initial state x.

