Learning Bounds for Open-Set Learning

Zhen Fang * 1 Jie Lu 1 Anjin Liu * 1 Feng Liu 1 Guangquan Zhang 1

Abstract
Traditional supervised learning aims to train a
classifier in the closed-set world, where training
and test samples share the same label space. In
this paper, we target a more challenging and realistic setting: open-set learning (OSL), where
there exist test samples from the classes that are
unseen during training. Although researchers
have designed many methods from the algorithmic perspectives, there are few methods that provide generalization guarantees on their ability to
achieve consistent performance on different training samples drawn from the same distribution.
Motivated by the transfer learning and probably
approximate correct (PAC) theory, we make a
bold attempt to study OSL by proving its generalization error−given training samples with size
n, the √estimation error will get close to order
Op (1/ n). This is the first study to provide
a generalization bound for OSL, which we do
by theoretically investigating the risk of the target classifier on unknown classes. According to
our theory, a novel algorithm, called auxiliary
open-set risk (AOSR) is proposed to address the
OSL problem. Experiments verify the efficacy of
AOSR. The code is available at github.com/
Anjin-Liu/Openset_Learning_AOSR.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has achieved dramatic successes in
many applications such as object detection (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015), speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly,
2014) and natural language processing (Collobert & Weston,
2008). These successes are partly rooted in the closed-set
assumption that training and test samples share a same label space. Under this assumption, the standard supervised
learning is also regarded as closed-set learning (CSL) (Geng
*
Equal contribution 1 AAII, University of Technology Sydney.
Correspondence to: Zhen Fang <zhen.fang@student.uts.edu.au>,
Jie Lu <jie.lu@uts.edu.au>, Anjin Liu <anjin.liu@uts.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020).
However, the closed-set assumption is not realistic during
the testing phase (i.e., there are no labels in the samples)
since it is not known whether the classes of test samples
are from the label space of training samples. Test samples
may come from some classes (unknown classes) that are not
necessarily seen during training. These unknown classes
can emerge unexpectedly and drastically weaken the performance of existing closed-set algorithms (de O. Cardoso
et al., 2017; Dhamija et al., 2018; Perera et al., 2020).
To solve supervised learning without closed-set assumption,
Scheirer et al. (2013) proposed a new problem setting, openset learning (OSL), in which the test samples can come from
any classes, even unknown classes. An open-set classifier
should classify samples from known classes into correct
known classes while recognizing samples from unknown
classes into unknown classes.
Remarkable advances have been achieved in open-set learning. The key challenge of OSL algorithms is to recognize
the unknown classes accurately. To address this challenge,
different strategies have been proposed such as open-space
risk (Scheirer et al., 2013) and extreme value theory (Jain
et al., 2014; Rudd et al., 2018). Further, to adapt deep networks support to OSL, Bendale & Boult (2016), Ge et al.
(2017) proposed OpenMax and G-OpenMax, respectively.
While many OSL algorithms can be roughly interpreted as
minimizing the open-space risk or using the extreme value
theory, several disconnections still form non-negligible gaps
between the theories and algorithms (Boult et al., 2019;
Geng et al., 2018). Very little theoretical groundwork has
been undertaken to reveal the generalization ability of OSL
from the perspective of learning theory.
This work aims to bridge the gap between the theory and algorithm for OSL from the perspective of learning theory. In
particular, our theory answers an important question: under
some assumptions, given training samples with size n, then
there exists an OSL
√ algorithm such that the estimation error
is close to Op (1/ n). This result reveals OSL problem can
achieve an order of estimation error that is the same as CSL
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
Since the test samples contain unknown classes, the distribution of test samples is intrinsically different from that of

