Asymmetric Heavy Tails and Implicit Bias in Gaussian Noise Injections
Alexander Camuto * 1 Xiaoyu Wang * 2 Lingjiong Zhu 2 Mert Gürbüzbalaban 3 Chris Holmes 1
Umut Şimşekli 4

Abstract
Gaussian noise injections (GNIs) are a family of
simple and widely-used regularisation methods
for training neural networks where one injects
additive or multiplicative Gaussian noise to the
network activations at every iteration of the optimisation algorithm, which is typically chosen
as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). In this paper we focus on the so-called ‘implicit effect’ of
GNIs, which is the effect of the injected noise on
the dynamics of SGD. We show that this effect induces an asymmetric heavy-tailed noise on SGD
gradient updates. In order to model this modified dynamics, we first develop a Langevin-like
stochastic differential equation that is driven by a
general family of asymmetric heavy-tailed noise.
Using this model we then formally prove that
GNIs induce an ‘implicit bias’, which varies depending on the heaviness of the tails and the level
of asymmetry. Our empirical results confirm that
different types of neural networks trained with
GNIs are well-modelled by the proposed dynamics and that the implicit effect of these injections
induces a bias that degrades the performance of
networks.

1. Introduction
Noise injections are a family of methods that involve adding
or multiplying samples from a noise distribution to the
weights and activations of a neural network during training. The most commonly used distributions are Bernoulli
distributions and Gaussian distributions (Srivastava et al.,
2014; Poole et al., 2014) and the noise is most often inserted
at the level of network activations.
*
Equal contribution 1 Alan Turing Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Department of Mathematics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, USA 3 Department of Management Science
and Information Systems, Rutgers Business School, Piscataway,
USA 4 INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure - PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Alexander Camuto <acamuto@turing.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of the effect of GNIs added to a network’s
activations. Each colored dot represents a neuron’s activations. We
add GNIs, represented as circles, to each layer’s activations bar the
output layer. Perhaps counter-intuitively, though the forward pass
experiences Gaussian noise, gradient updates in the backward pass
experience heavy-tailed asymmetric noise.

Though the regularisation conferred by Gaussian noise injections (GNIs) can be observed empirically, and there have
been many studies on the benefits of noising data (Bishop,
1995; Cohen et al., 2019; Webb, 1994), the mechanisms by
which these injections operate are not fully understood. Recently, the explicit effect of GNIs, which is the added term
to the loss function obtained when marginalising out the
injected noise, has been characterised analytically (Camuto
et al., 2020): it corresponds to a penalisation in the Fourier
domain which improves model generalisation.
Here we extend this analysis and focus on the implicit effect
of GNIs. This is the effect of the remaining noise that has
been marginalised out when studying the explicit effect. In
particular we focus on the manner in which such noise alters
the dynamics of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Wei
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2017). We show that the implicit
effect is driven by an asymmetric heavy-tailed noise on the
SGD gradient updates, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To study the effect of this gradient noise, we model the
dynamics of SGD for a network experiencing GNIs by a
stochastic differential equation (SDE) driven by an asymmetric heavy-tailed ↵-stable noise. We demonstrate that
this model captures the dynamics of networks trained with
GNIs and we show that the stationary distribution of this
process becomes arbitrarily distant from the so-called Gibbs
measure, whose modes exactly match the local minima
of the loss function, as the gradient becomes increasingly
heavy-tailed and asymmetric. Heavy-tailed and asymmetric

