Neural Pharmacodynamic State Space Modeling

Zeshan Hussain * 1 Rahul G. Krishnan * 2 David Sontag 1

Abstract
Modeling the time-series of high-dimensional,
longitudinal data is important for predicting patient disease progression. However, existing neural network based approaches that learn representations of patient state, while very flexible, are
susceptible to overfitting. We propose a deep generative model that makes use of a novel attentionbased neural architecture inspired by the physics
of how treatments affect disease state. The result is a scalable and accurate model of highdimensional patient biomarkers as they vary over
time. Our proposed model yields significant improvements in generalization and, on real-world
clinical data, provides interpretable insights into
the dynamics of cancer progression.

1. Introduction
Clinical biomarkers capture snapshots of a patient’s evolving
disease state as well as their response to treatment. However,
these data can be high-dimensional, exhibit missingness,
and display complex nonlinear behaviour over time as a
function of time-varying interventions. Good unsupervised
models of such data are key to discovering new clinical
insights. This task is commonly referred to as disease progression modeling (Alaa & van der Schaar, 2019; Elibol
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2015; Schulam & Saria, 2016; Severson et al., 2020; Venuto et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2014).
Reliable unsupervised models of time-varying clinical data
find several uses in healthcare. One use case is enabling
practitioners to ask and answer counterfactuals using observational data (Bica et al., 2020a; Pearl et al., 2009; Rubin,
1974). Other use cases include guiding early treatment
decisions based on a patient’s biomarker trajectory, detecting drug effects in clinical trials (Mould et al., 2007), and
clustering patterns in biomarkers that correlate with disease
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachussetts Institute of Technology,
CSAIL and IMES, Cambridge, MA 2 Microsoft Research New
England, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Zeshan Hussain
<zeshanmh@mit.edu>, Rahul G. Krishnan <rahulgk@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sub-type (Zhang et al., 2019b). To do these tasks well, understanding how a patient’s biomarkers evolve over time given
a prescribed treatment regimen is vital, since a person’s
biomarker profile is often the only observed proxy to their
true disease state. Like prior work (Alaa & van der Schaar,
2019; Krishnan et al., 2017; Severson et al., 2020), we frame
this problem as a conditional density estimation task, where
our goal is to model the density of complex multivariate
time-series conditional on time-varying treatments.
Representation learning exposes a variety of techniques for
good conditional density estimation (Che et al., 2018; Choi
et al., 2016; Miotto et al., 2016; Suresh et al., 2017). For
sequential data, a popular approach has been to leverage
black-box, sequential models (e.g. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)), where a time-varying representation is used
to predict clinical biomarkers. Such models are prone to
overfitting, particularly on smaller clinical datasets. More
importantly, such models often make simplistic assumptions
on how time-varying treatments affect downstream clinical
biomarkers; for example, one choice is to concatenate treatments to the model’s hidden representations (Alaa & van der
Schaar, 2019; Krishnan et al., 2017). The assumption here
is that the neural network learns how treatments influence
the representation. We argue that this choice is a missed
opportunity and better choices exist. Concretely, we aim
to encourage neural models to learn representations that
encode a patient’s underlying disease burden by specifying
how these representations evolve due to treatment. We develop a new disease progression model that captures such
insights by using inductive biases rooted in the biological
mechanisms of treatment effect.
Inductive biases have been integral to the success of deep
learning in other domains such as vision, text and audio. For
example, convolutional neural networks explicitly learn representations invariant to translation or rotation of image data
(Jaderberg et al., 2015; LeCun, 2012; Veeling et al., 2018),
transformers leverage attention modules (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Vaswani et al., 2017) that mimic how human vision
pays attention to various aspects of an image, and modified
graph neural networks can explicitly incorporate laws of
physics to generalize better (Seo & Liu, 2019). For some
learning problems, the physics underlying the domain are
often known, e.g. the laws of motion, and may be leveraged
in the design of inductive biases (Anderson et al., 2019; Ling

