Image-Level or Object-Level?
A Tale of Two Resampling Strategies for Long-Tailed Detection

Nadine Chang 1 * Zhiding Yu 2 Yu-Xiong Wang 3 Anima Anandkumar 2 4 Sanja Fidler 2 5 6 Jose M. Alvarez 2
Memory Bank (RoI Feat + Box Loc)

Abstract
Training on datasets with long-tailed distributions
has been challenging for major recognition tasks
such as classification and detection. To deal with
this challenge, image resampling is typically introduced as a simple but effective approach. However, we observe that long-tailed detection differs
from classification since multiple classes may be
present in one image. As a result, image resampling alone is not enough to yield a sufficiently
balanced distribution at the object level. We address object-level resampling by introducing an
object-centric memory replay strategy based on
dynamic, episodic memory banks. Our proposed
strategy has two benefits: 1) convenient objectlevel resampling without significant extra computation, and 2) implicit feature-level augmentation
from model updates. We show that image-level
and object-level resamplings are both important,
and thus unify them with a joint resampling strategy (RIO). Our method outperforms state-of-theart long-tailed detection and segmentation methods on LVIS v0.5 across various backbones.

1. Introduction
Real-world visual data often follows a long-tailed distribution, where a few object classes are very common and many
of the classes are rare (Zhu et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2019;
Gupta et al., 2019). However, many existing datasets are
curated to be balanced (Krizhevsky et al., 2009; Everingham
et al.; Lin et al., 2014), leading to a discrepancy between
the performance of the methods developed and tested on
these datasets and their performance when deployed in the
real world. In many applications, localization/recognition
of rare classes is critical, e.g., in autonomous driving the
*

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. 1 Carnegie Mellon
Univ 2 NVIDIA 3 Univ of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 4 Caltech
5
Univ of Toronto 6 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Zhiding Yu
<zhidingy@nvidia.com>, Nadine Chang <nadinec@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Frequent

Classes

Rare

Resampled Objects

Figure 1. We illustrate the difference between image resampling
and our proposed resampling strategy based on object-centric memory replay. In image resampling, all the objects within a repeated
image are resampled, including the teddy bears, aprons, and gourds
in this example. Our method increases the sampling of the rare
gourds by retrieving additional ones from the memory bank.

ego-car is expected to be able to localize and react to objects
such as certain animals that the system has not often seen in
the training data. In this paper, we address the problem of
long-tailed object detection (and segmentation).
Long-tailed recognition has been recently popularized, facilitated by the release of large-scale visual recognition benchmarks (Liu et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2019). Popular approaches include reweighting the loss function according to
the class frequency (Tan et al., 2020), decoupling representation and classifier (Kang et al., 2019), as well as few-shot
learning techniques such as feature normalization (Chen
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020b), fine-tuning (Wang et al.,
2020b), and meta-learning (Wang et al., 2017). In addition
to these techniques, repeat factor sampling (RFS) (Mahajan
et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2019) has emerged as a simple but

