HAWQ-V3: Dyadic Neural Network Quantization
Zhewei Yao * 1 Zhen Dong * 1 Zhangcheng Zheng * 1 Amir Gholami * 1 Jiali Yu 2 3 Eric Tan 1 Leyuan Wang 2
Qijing Huang 1 Yida Wang 2 Michael W. Mahoney 1 Kurt Keutzer 1

Abstract
Current low-precision quantization algorithms often have the hidden cost of conversion back and
forth from floating point to quantized integer values. This hidden cost limits the latency improvement realized by quantizing Neural Networks.
To address this, we present HAWQ-V3, a novel
mixed-precision integer-only quantization framework. The contributions of HAWQ-V3 are the
following: (i) An integer-only inference where
the entire computational graph is performed only
with integer multiplication, addition, and bit shifting, without any floating point operations or even
integer division; (ii) A novel hardware-aware
mixed-precision quantization method where the
bit-precision is calculated by solving an integer
linear programming problem that balances the
trade-off between model perturbation and other
constraints, e.g., memory footprint and latency;
(iii) Direct hardware deployment and open source
contribution for 4-bit uniform/mixed-precision
quantization in TVM, achieving an average speed
up of 1.45⇥ for uniform 4-bit, as compared to
uniform 8-bit for ResNet50 on T4 GPUs; and (iv)
extensive evaluation of the proposed methods on
ResNet18/50 and InceptionV3, for various model
compression levels with/without mixed precision.
For ResNet50, our INT8 quantization achieves an
accuracy of 77.58%, which is 2.68% higher than
prior integer-only work, and our mixed-precision
INT4/8 quantization can reduce INT8 latency by
23% and still achieve 76.73% accuracy. Our
framework and the TVM implementation have
been open sourced (HAWQ, 2020).

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
Amazon 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence
to: Zhewei Yao <zheweiy@berkeley.edu>, Amir Gholami
<amirgh@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
An important step toward realizing pervasive deep learning is enabling real-time inference, both at the edge and in
the cloud, with low energy consumption and state-of-theart model accuracy. This will have a significant impact on
applications such as real-time intelligent healthcare monitoring, autonomous driving, audio analytics, and speech
recognition. Over the past decade, we have observed significant improvements in the accuracy of Neural Networks
(NNs) for various tasks. However, the state-of-the-art models are often prohibitively large and too compute-heavy to
be deployed for real-time use. A promising approach to
address this is through quantization (Gray & Neuhoff, 1998;
Han et al., 2016), where low-precision quantized integer
values are used to express the model parameters and feature maps. That can help reduce the model footprint, and
improve inference speed and energy consumption.
However, existing quantization algorithms often use simulated quantization, where the parameters are stored with
quantization, but are cast to floating point for inference. As
a result, all or part of the inference operations (e.g. convolution, matrix operations, batch norm layers, residual
connections) are performed using floating point precision.
This of course limits the speed up as we cannot utilize low
precision logic. To address this, we build upon existing
integer-only quantization methods (Jacob et al., 2018), and
propose systematic methods to extend them to low and
mixed-precision quantization. In particular, we make the
following contributions:
• We develop HAWQ-V3, a mixed-precision integeronly quantization framework with integer-only multiplication, addition, and bit shifting with static quantization. Importantly, no floating point and no integer
division calculation is performed in the entire inference.
This includes the batch norm layers and residual connections, which are typically kept at floating point precision in prior integer-only quantization work (Dong
et al., 2019). While keeping these operations in floating
point helps accuracy, this is not allowed for integeronly hardware. We show that ignoring this and attempting to deploy a model that uses floating point
residual on integer-only hardware can lead to more

