Private Alternating Least Squares:
Practical Private Matrix Completion with Tighter Rates

Steve Chien 1 Prateek Jain 1 Walid Krichene * 1 Steffen Rendle 1
Shuang Song 1 Abhradeep Thakurta * 1 Li Zhang 1

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private
(DP) matrix completion under user-level privacy.
We design a joint differentially private variant
of the popular Alternating-Least-Squares (ALS)
method that achieves: i) (nearly) optimal sample complexity for matrix completion (in terms of
number of items, users), and ii) the best known privacy/utility trade-off both theoretically, as well as
on benchmark data sets. In particular, we provide
the first global convergence analysis of ALS with
noise introduced to ensure DP, and show that, in
comparison to the best known alternative (the Private Frank-Wolfe algorithm by Jain et al. (2018)),
our error bounds scale significantly better with
respect to the number of items and users, which
is critical in practical problems. Extensive validation on standard benchmarks demonstrate that
the algorithm, in combination with carefully designed sampling procedures, is significantly more
accurate than existing techniques, thus promising
to be the first practical DP embedding model.

1. Introduction
Given M ij , (i, j) ∈ Ω where Ω ⊆ [n] × [m] is a set of observed user-item ratings, and assuming M ≈ U ∗ (V ∗ )> ∈
Rn×m to be a nearly low-rank matrix, the goal of low-rank
b ∈ Rn×r
matrix completion (LRMC) is to efficiently learn U
m×r
>
b
b
b
and V ∈ R
, such that M ≈ U V .
LRMC, a.k.a. matrix factorization, is a cornerstone technique for building recommendation systems (Koren & Bell,
2015; Hu et al., 2008), and though proposed over a decade
ago, it remains highly competitive (Rendle et al., 2019).
In the recommendation setting, M represents a mostly un1

Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Walid
Krichene <walidk@google.com>, Abhradeep Thakurta
<athakurta@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

b and Vb capture the
known user-item ratings matrix and U
b , Vb ), the
user and item embeddings. Using the learned (U
c
b
system computes rating predictions M ij = (U Vb > )ij to
recommend items for the users. To ensure good generalization, one would set the rank r  min(m, n).
Such models, while highly successful in practice, have the
risk of leaking users’ ratings through model parameters or
their recommendations. The privacy risk of similar models
has been well documented, and the protection against it has
been intensively studied (Dinur & Nissim, 2003; Dwork
et al., 2007; Korolova, 2010; Calandrino et al., 2011; Shokri
et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2019; 2020a;b; Thakkar et al.,
2020). In this paper, we focus on learning user and item
embeddings, and consequently user-item recommendations,
while ensuring privacy of users’ ratings.
We conform to the well-established formal notion of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006a;b) to protect
users’ ratings. We operate in the setting of user-level privacy (Dwork & Roth, 2014; Jain et al., 2018), where we intend to protect all the ratings by the user, a much harder task
than protecting a single rating from the user (a.k.a. entrylevel privacy) (Hardt & Roth, 2013; Meng et al., 2018).
Note that user-level privacy is critical in this problem, as
the ratings from a single user tend to be correlated and can
thus be used to fingerprint a user (Calandrino et al., 2011).
As is standard in the user-level privacy literature (Jain et al.,
2018), we estimate the shared item embeddings Vb while
preserving privacy with respect to the users. In contrast,
each user independently computes their embedding (a row
b ) as a function of their own ratings and the privacy
of U
preserving item embeddings Vb . Formally, this setup is
called joint differential privacy (Kearns et al., 2014), and it
is well-established (Hardt & Roth, 2012; 2013) that such a
relaxation is necessary to learn non-trivial recommendations
while ensuring user-level privacy.
While several works have studied LRMC under jointdifferential privacy (McSherry & Mironov, 2009; Liu et al.,
2015; Jain et al., 2018), most of the existing techniques do
not provide satisfactory empirical performance compared
to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) non-private LRMC methods.
Furthermore, these works either lack a rigorous performance

