Generative Causal Explanations for Graph Neural Networks

Wanyu Lin 1 2 Hao Lan 2 Baochun Li 2

Abstract
This paper presents Gem, a model-agnostic approach for providing interpretable explanations
for any GNNs on various graph learning tasks.
Specifically, we formulate the problem of providing explanations for the decisions of GNNs as
a causal learning task. Then we train a causal
explanation model equipped with a loss function
based on Granger causality. Different from existing explainers for GNNs, Gem explains GNNs on
graph-structured data from a causal perspective.
It has better generalization ability as it has no requirements on the internal structure of the GNNs
or prior knowledge on the graph learning tasks.
In addition, Gem, once trained, can be used to explain the target GNN very quickly. Our theoretical
analysis shows that several recent explainers fall
into a unified framework of additive feature attribution methods. Experimental results on synthetic
and real-world datasets show that Gem achieves
a relative increase of the explanation accuracy by
up to 30% and speeds up the explanation process
by up to 110× as compared to its state-of-the-art
alternatives.

1. Introduction
Many problems in scientific domains, ranging from social
networks (Lin et al., 2020) to biology (Zitnik et al., 2018)
and chemistry (Zitnik & Leskovec, 2017), can be naturally
modeled as problems of property learning on graphs. For example, in biology, identifying the functionality of proteins is
critical to find the proteins associated with a disease, where
proteins are represented by local protein-protein interaction
(PPI) graphs. Supervised learning of graphs, especially with
graph neural networks (GNNs), has had a significant impact on these domains, mainly owing to their efficiency and
capability of inductive learning (Hamilton et al., 2017).
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 2 Department of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Wanyu Lin <wanylin@comp.polyu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Despite their practical success, most GNNs are deployed as
black boxes, lacking explicit declarative knowledge representations. Therefore, they have difficulty in generating the
required underlying explanatory structure. The deficiency of
explanations for the decisions of GNNs significantly hinders
the applicability of these models in decision-critical settings,
where both predictive performance and interpretability are
of paramount importance. For example, medical decisions
are increasingly being assisted by complex predictions that
should lend themselves to be verified by human experts
easily. Model explanations allow us to argue for model decisions and exhibit the situation when algorithmic decisions
might be biased or discriminating. In addition, precise explanations may facilitate model debugging and error analysis,
which may help decide which model would better describe
the data’s underlying semantics.
While explaining graph neural networks on graphs is
still a nascent research topic, a few recent works have
emerged (Luo et al., 2020; Vu & Thai, 2020; Ying et al.,
2019; Yuan et al., 2020), each with its own perspective on
this topic. In particular, XGNN (Yuan et al., 2020) was
proposed to investigate graph patterns that lead to a specific
class, while GNNExplainer (Ying et al., 2019) provided the
local explanation for a single instance (a node/link/graph),
by determining a compact subgraph leading to its prediction.
PGM-Explainer (Vu & Thai, 2020) explored the dependencies of explained features in the form of conditional probability, which is naturally designed for explaining a single
instance.
However, verifying if a target GNN works as expected often
requires a considerable amount of explanations for providing a global view of explanations. For this end, PGExplainer (Luo et al., 2020) learns a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) to explain multiple instances collectively. However,
PGExplainer heavily relies on node embeddings from the
target GNN, which may not be obtained without knowing
its internal model structure and parameters. Besides, PGExplainer can not explain any graph tasks without explicit
motifs. Taking MUTAG as an example, PGExplainer assumes that NH2 and NO2 are the motifs for the mutagen
graphs and filters out the instances without these two motifs.
We verified that the assumption might not be reasonable by
looking at the dataset statistics (provided in Appendix B).
More specifically, PGExplainer fails to explain the instances

