Meta-StyleSpeech : Multi-Speaker Adaptive Text-to-Speech Generation

Dongchan Min 1 Dong Bok Lee 1 Eunho Yang 1 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract
With rapid progress in neural text-to-speech (TTS)
models, personalized speech generation is now in
high demand for many applications. For practical applicability, a TTS model should generate
high-quality speech with only a few audio samples from the given speaker, that are also short in
length. However, existing methods either require
to fine-tune the model or achieve low adaptation
quality without fine-tuning. In this work, we propose StyleSpeech, a new TTS model which not
only synthesizes high-quality speech but also effectively adapts to new speakers. Specifically,
we propose Style-Adaptive Layer Normalization
(SALN) which aligns gain and bias of the text
input according to the style extracted from a reference speech audio. With SALN, our model
effectively synthesizes speech in the style of the
target speaker even from a single speech audio.
Furthermore, to enhance StyleSpeech’s adaptation to speech from new speakers, we extend
it to Meta-StyleSpeech by introducing two discriminators trained with style prototypes, and performing episodic training. The experimental results show that our models generate high-quality
speech which accurately follows the speaker’s
voice with single short-duration (1-3 sec) speech
audio, significantly outperforming baselines.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, the fidelity and intelligibility of speech
produced by neural text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis models
have shown dramatic improvements. Furthermore, a number
of applications such as AI voice assistant services and audio
navigation systems have been actively developed and deployed to real-world, attracting increasing demand of TTS
1

Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Seoul, South Korea 2 AITRICS,
Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Dongchan Min <alsehdcks95@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

synthesis. The majority of the TTS models aim to synthesize high quality speech of a single speaker from the given
text (Oord et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018;
Ren et al., 2019; 2020) and have been extended to support
multi speakers (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2020).
Meanwhile, there is an increasing demand for personalized
speech generation, which requires TTS models to generate high-quality speech that well captures the voice of the
given speaker with only a few samples of the speech data.
However, natural human speech is highly expressive and
contains rich information, including various factors such as
the speaker identity and prosody. Thus, generating personalized speech from a few speech audios, potentially even from
a single audio, is an extremely challenging task. To achieve
this goal, the TTS model should be able to generate speech
of multiple speakers and adapt well to an unseen speaker’s
voice.
A popular approach to handle this challenge is to pre-train
the model on a large dataset consisting of the speech from
many speakers and fine-tune the model with a few audio
samples of a target speaker (Chen et al., 2019; Arik et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2021). However, this approach requires
audio samples and corresponding transcripts of the target
speaker to fine-tune, as well as hundreds of fine-tuning
steps, which limits its applicability to real-world scenarios.
Another approach is to use a piece of reference speech
audio to extract a latent vector that captures the voice of
the speaker such as speaker identity, prosody and speaking
style (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Jia et al.,
2018). Specifically, these models are trained to synthesize
speech conditioned on a latent style vector extracted from
the speech of the given speaker, in addition to text input.
This style-based approach has shown convincing results in
expressive speech generation, and is able to adapt to new
speakers without fine-tuning. However, they heavily rely on
the diversity of the speakers in the source dataset, and thus
often show low adaptation performance on new speakers.
Meta-learning (Thrun & Pratt, 1998), or learning to learn,
has attracted attention of many researchers recently, as it
allows the trained model to rapidly adapt to new tasks only
with a few examples. In this regard, some of the few-shot
generative models have utilized meta-learning for improved

