Risk Bounds and Rademacher Complexity in Batch Reinforcement Learning

Yaqi Duan 1 Chi Jin 2 Zhiyuan Li 3

Abstract
This paper considers batch Reinforcement Learning (RL) with general value function approximation. Our study investigates the minimal assumptions to reliably estimate/minimize Bellman error,
and characterizes the generalization performance
by (local) Rademacher complexities of general
function classes, which makes initial steps in
bridging the gap between statistical learning theory and batch RL. Concretely, we view the Bellman error as a surrogate loss for the optimality
gap, and prove the followings: (1) In double sampling regime, the excess risk of Empirical Risk
Minimizer (ERM) is bounded by the Rademacher
complexity of the function class. (2) In the single
sampling regime, sample-efficient risk minimization is not possible without further assumptions,
regardless of algorithms. However, with completeness assumptions, the excess risk of FQI and
a minimax style algorithm can be again bounded
by the Rademacher complexity of the corresponding function classes. (3) Fast statistical rates can
be achieved by using tools of local Rademacher
complexity. Our analysis covers a wide range of
function classes, including finite classes, linear
spaces, kernel spaces, sparse linear features, etc.

1. Introduction
Statistical learning theory, since its introduction in the late
1960’s, has become one of the most important frameworks
in machine learning, to study problems of inference or function estimation from a given collection of data (Hastie et al.,
2009; Vapnik, 2013; James et al., 2013). The development
of statistical learning has led to a series of new popular
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Princeton University 3 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Yaqi Duan
<yaqid@princeton.edu>, Chi Jin <chij@princeton.edu>,
Zhiyuan Li <zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

algorithms including support vector machines (Cortes &
Vapnik, 1995; Suykens & Vandewalle, 1999), boosting (Freund et al., 1996; Schapire, 1999), as well as many successful applications in fields such as computer vision (Szeliski,
2010; Forsyth & Ponce, 2012), speech recognition (Juang
& Rabiner, 1991; Jelinek, 1997), and bioinformatics (Baldi
et al., 2001).
Notably, in the area of supervised learning, a considerable
amount of effort has been spent on obtaining sharp risk
bounds. These are valuable, for instance, in the problem
of model selection—choosing a model of suitable complexity. Typically, these risk bounds characterize the excess
risk—the suboptimality of the learned function compared
to the best function within a given function class, via proper
complexity measures of that function class. After a long
line of extensive research (Vapnik, 2013; Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 2015; Bartlett et al., 2005; 2006), risk bounds are
proved under very weak assumptions which do not require
realizability—the prespecified function class contains the
ground-truth. The complexity measures for general function
classes have also been developed, including but not limited
to metric entropy (Dudley, 1974), VC dimension (Vapnik &
Chervonenkis, 2015) and Rademacher complexity (Bartlett
& Mendelson, 2002). (See e.g. (Wainwright, 2019) for a
textbook review.)
Concurrently, batch reinforcement learning (Lange et al.,
2012; Levine et al., 2020)—a branch of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) that learns from offline data, has been independently developed. This paper considers the value
function approximation setting, where the learning agent
aims to approximate the optimal value function from a restricted function class that encodes the prior knowledge.
Batch RL with value function approximation provides an
important foundation for the empirical success of modern
RL, and leads to the design of many popular algorithms
such as DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and Fitted Q-Iteration with
neural networks (Riedmiller, 2005; Fan et al., 2020).
Despite being a special case of supervised learning, batch
RL also brings several unique challenges due to the additional requirement of learning the rich temporal structures
within the data. Addressing these unique challenges has
been the main focus of the field so far (Levine et al., 2020).
Consequently, the field of statistical learning and batch RL

