Neural Transformation Learning for Deep Anomaly Detection Beyond Images

Chen Qiu 1 2 Timo Pfrommer 1 Marius Kloft 2 Stephan Mandt 3 Maja Rudolph 1

Abstract
Data transformations (e.g. rotations, reﬂections,
and cropping) play an important role in selfsupervised learning. Typically, images are transformed into different views, and neural networks
trained on tasks involving these views produce
useful feature representations for downstream
tasks, including anomaly detection. However, for
anomaly detection beyond image data, it is often unclear which transformations to use. Here
we present a simple end-to-end procedure for
anomaly detection with learnable transformations.
The key idea is to embed the transformed data into
a semantic space such that the transformed data
still resemble their untransformed form, while
different transformations are easily distinguishable. Extensive experiments on time series show
that our proposed method outperforms existing approaches in the one-vs.-rest setting and is competitive in the more challenging n-vs.-rest anomalydetection task. On medical and cyber-security
tabular data, our method learns domain-speciﬁc
transformations and detects anomalies more accurately than previous work.

1. Introduction
Many recent advances in anomaly detection rely on the
paradigm of data augmentation. In the self-supervised setting, especially for image data, predeﬁned transformations
such as rotations, reﬂections, and cropping are used to generate varying views of the data. This idea has led to strong
anomaly detectors based on either transformation prediction
(Golan & El-Yaniv, 2018; Wang et al., 2019b; Hendrycks
et al., 2019) or using representations learned using these
views (Chen et al., 2020) for downstream anomaly detection
tasks (Sohn et al., 2021; Tack et al., 2020).
Unfortunately, for data other than images, such as time series or tabular data, it is much less well known which trans1

Bosch Center for AI 2 TU Kaiserslautern 3 UC Irvine. Correspondence to: Maja Rudolph <majarita.rudolph@de.bosch.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

formations are useful, and it is hard to design these transformations manually. This paper studies self-supervised
anomaly detection for data types beyond images. We develop neural transformation learning for anomaly detection
(NeuTraL AD): a simple end-to-end procedure for anomaly
detection with learnable transformations. Instead of manually designing data transformations to construct auxiliary
prediction tasks that can be used for anomaly detection, we
derive a single objective function for jointly learning useful
data transformations and anomaly thresholding. As detailed
below, the idea is to learn a variety of transformations such
that the transformed samples share semantic information
with their untransformed form, while different views are
easily distinguishable.
NeuTraL AD has only two components: a ﬁxed set of learnable transformations and an encoder model. Both elements
are jointly trained on a noise-free, deterministic contrastive
loss (DCL) designed to learn faithful transformations. Our
DCL is different from other contrastive losses in representation learning (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; 2012; Mnih
& Kavukcuoglu, 2013; Oord et al., 2018; Bamler & Mandt,
2020; Chen et al., 2020) and image anomaly detection (Tack
et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2021), all of which use negative
samples from a noise distribution. In contrast, our approach
leads to a non-stochastic objective that neither needs any additional regularization or adversarial training (Tamkin et al.,
2021) and can be directly used as the anomaly score.
Our approach leads to a new state of the art in anomaly
detection beyond images. For time series and tabular data,
NeuTraL AD signiﬁcantly improves the anomaly detection
accuracy. For example, in an epilepsy time series dataset, we
raised the state-of-the-art from an AUC of 82.6% to 92.6%
(+10%). On an Arrhythmia tabular dataset, we raised the
F1 score by +2.9 percentage points to an accuracy of 60.3.
Our paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrst discuss related
work (Section 2) and present NeuTraL AD in Section 3. In
Section 3.2, we discuss its advantages for neural transformation learning in comparison to other self-supervised learning
objectives. Experimental results are presented in Section 4.
Section 5 concludes this paper.

