Neural Rough Differential Equations for Long Time Series

James Morrill 1 2 Cristopher Salvi 1 2 Patrick Kidger 1 2 James Foster 1 2

Abstract
Neural controlled differential equations (CDEs)
are the continuous-time analogue of recurrent neural networks, as Neural ODEs are to residual networks, and offer a memory-efficient continuoustime way to model functions of potentially irregular time series. Existing methods for computing
the forward pass of a Neural CDE involve embedding the incoming time series into path space, often via interpolation, and using evaluations of this
path to drive the hidden state. Here, we use rough
path theory to extend this formulation. Instead of
directly embedding into path space, we instead
represent the input signal over small time intervals through its log-signature, which are statistics
describing how the signal drives a CDE. This is
the approach for solving rough differential equations (RDEs), and correspondingly we describe
our main contribution as the introduction of Neural RDEs. This extension has a purpose: by generalising the Neural CDE approach to a broader
class of driving signals, we demonstrate particular
advantages for tackling long time series. In this
regime, we demonstrate efficacy on problems of
length up to 17k observations and observe significant training speed-ups, improvements in model
performance, and reduced memory requirements
compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Neural controlled differential equations (CDEs) (Kidger
et al., 2020) are the continuous-time analogue to recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) and provide a natural method for
modelling temporal dynamics with neural networks.
Neural CDEs are similar to neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs), as popularised by Chen et al. (2018). A Neural ODE is determined by its initial condition, without a

direct way to modify the trajectory given subsequent observations. In contrast, the vector field of a Neural CDE
depends upon the time-varying data, so that the trajectory
of the system is driven by a sequence of observations.
1.1. Controlled Differential Equations
Let a, b ∈ R with a < b, and let v, w ∈ N. Let ξ ∈ Rw . Let
X : [a, b] → Rv be a continuous function of bounded variation (which is for example implied by it being Lipschitz),
and let f : Rw → Rw×v be continuous.
Then we may define Z : [a, b] → Rw as the unique solution
to the controlled differential equation
Z t
Za = ξ, Zt = Za +
f (Zs ) dXs for t ∈ (a, b]. (1)
a

The notation “f (Zs )dXs ” denotes a matrix-vector product.
“dXs ” itself denotes a Riemann–Stieltjes integral: if X is
differentiable then
Z t
Z t
f (Zs )dXs =
f (Zs )Ẋs ds,
a

a

with Ẋs =

dXr
(s). (2)
dr

If in equation (1), dXs was replaced with ds, then the equation would just be an ODE. Using dXs causes the solution
to depend continuously on the evolution of X. We say that
the solution is “driven by the control X”.
Next, we recall the definition of a Neural CDE as introduced
in Kidger et al. (2020).
1.2. Neural Controlled Differential Equations
Consider a time series x as a collection of points xi ∈
Rv−1 with corresponding time-stamps ti ∈ R such that
x = ((t0 , x0 ), (t1 , x1 ), ..., (tn , xn )), and t0 < ... < tn .

*
Equal contribution 1 Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, UK. Correspondence to: James Morrill <morrill@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

Let X : [t0 , tn ] → Rv be some interpolation of the data
such that Xti = (ti , xi ). In Kidger et al. (2020) the authors
use natural cubic splines to ensure differentiability of the
control X, so as to treat the term “dXs ” in equation (1) as
“Ẋs ds”.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Let ξθ : Rv → Rw and fθ : Rw → Rw×v be two neural
networks and let `θ : Rw → Rq be a linear map, for some

