Re-understanding Finite-State Representations of Recurrent Policy Networks

Mohamad H. Danesh 1 Anurag Koul 1 Alan Fern 1 Saeed Khorram 1

Abstract
We introduce an approach for understanding control policies represented as recurrent neural networks. Recent work has approached this problem by transforming such recurrent policy networks into finite-state machines (FSM) and then
analyzing the equivalent minimized FSM. While
this led to interesting insights, the minimization
process can obscure a deeper understanding of
a machine’s operation by merging states that are
semantically distinct. To address this issue, we
introduce an analysis approach that starts with an
unminimized FSM and applies more-interpretable
reductions that preserve the key decision points
of the policy. We also contribute an attention tool
to attain a deeper understanding of the role of observations in the decisions. Our case studies on
7 Atari games and 3 control benchmarks demonstrate that the approach can reveal insights that
have not been previously noticed.

1. Introduction
What roles do observations and memory play in the decision
making of deep policy networks for complex control tasks?
While such networks have yielded state-of-the-art performance in reinforcement and imitation learning (e.g. (Mnih
et al., 2013; Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Wang et al., 2015;
Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Ho & Ermon, 2016)), there are limited tools and approaches for giving insight into this question. This is particularly the case for policies represented as
recurrent networks, e.g. LSTMs and GRUs (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Chung et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014),
which condition on high-dimensional memory vectors with
no preconceived semantics. Prior works have attempted to
gain insight via attention maps over the network input, e.g.
(Greydanus et al., 2018; Iyer et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020;
Atrey et al., 2020), however, this ultimately involves subjec1
Department of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. Correspondence to: Mohamad H. Danesh
<daneshm@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tive human interpretation of the underlying “strategic role"
of the attended-to elements. In this paper, we develop an
analysis approach that reveals such human interpretations
can sometimes be highly misleading.
Our work builds on a recent approach for understanding
recurrent policy networks by quantizing memory and observations within an RNN (Koul et al., 2019). A quantized
RNN is a type of FSM, known as a Moore Machine (MM),
which can be visualized and analyzed. In particular, the originally large MMs were algorithmically minimized, resulting
in small machines for a variety of domains, which yielded
high-level insights. For example, the minimal MM for Atari
Pong showed that memory was not actually needed (i.e. a
state-action mapping), while for Atari Bowling the MM was
an open-loop strategy that ignored observations.
While analyzing minimal MMs allows for determining
global properties, such as memory/observation use or not,
we have found it difficult to gain more in-depth insight from
minimal MMs. To see this, Figure 4 (a) and (b) show minimal MMs for Pong and Bowling and Figure 5 shows a set
of frames/observations for each MM that all map to a single
state in the corresponding MM. For a human, the frames are
semantically distinct, whereas the minimization process was
able to merge them all into a single state. This is due to the
minimization focusing on maintaining logically equivalence
to the unminimized MM policy, rather than maintaining any
semantic meaning of states. Thus, we have found it very
difficult to understand the strategic role of different states in
such MMs to gain deeper insight into their decision logic.
This experience has led us to the view that minimal MMs
are unlikely to be a good starting point for gaining a deeper
understanding of recurrent policies.
Our main contribution is to develop a new approach for RL
researchers and advanced practitioners to analyze MM policy representations. We demonstrate that this approach can
yield significantly more insight into the decision making of
recurrent policies. Rather than start with a minimal MM after quantization, we start with the unminimized MM, which
is often quite large, and apply “interpretable reductions" in
order to reduce the visual complexity. The reductions are intentionally simple in order to preserve the inherent decision
structure in the machine while effective at compressing the
visual representation. For example, one reduction operation

