Objective Bound Conditional Gaussian Process for Bayesian Optimization

Taewon Jeong 1 Heeyoung Kim 1

Abstract
A Gaussian process is a standard surrogate model
for an unknown objective function in Bayesian
optimization. In this paper, we propose a new
surrogate model, called the objective bound conditional Gaussian process (OBCGP), to condition
a Gaussian process on a bound on the optimal
function value. The bound is obtained and updated as the best observed value during the sequential optimization procedure. Unlike the standard Gaussian process, the OBCGP explicitly incorporates the existence of a point that improves
the best known bound. We treat the location of
such a point as a model parameter and estimate it
jointly with other parameters by maximizing the
likelihood using variational inference. Within the
standard Bayesian optimization framework, the
OBCGP can be combined with various acquisition functions to select the next query point. In
particular, we derive cumulative regret bounds for
the OBCGP combined with the upper confidence
bound acquisition algorithm. Furthermore, the
OBCGP can inherently incorporate a new type of
prior knowledge, i.e., the bounds on the optimum,
if it is available. The incorporation of this type
of prior knowledge into a surrogate model has
not been studied previously. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the OBCGP through its application to Bayesian optimization tasks, such as the
sequential design of experiments and hyperparameter optimization in neural networks.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012) is a widely
used technique for maximizing or minimizing black-box
objective functions. It is typically used to find the global
optimum of a nonconvex function, whose derivative infor1
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Heeyoung Kim
<heeyoungkim@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

mation is unavailable. BO is particularly useful when the
objective function is expensive to evaluate. In this case,
grid or random search (e.g., simulated annealing and tabu
search) (Bertsimas et al., 1993; Glover and Laguna, 2013)
can be highly inefficient. BO has been applied to various
problems, including experimental design and hyperparameter tuning. BO incorporates a prior distribution over the
objective function and updates the prior with sequentially
acquired data to form a posterior distribution that better approximates the objective function. The posterior distribution
is subsequently used to construct an acquisition function.
By maximizing the acquisition function, we can determine
the next query point and evaluate the objective function.
Then, the posterior distribution is updated again according
to the augmented data with the new point. BO iterates these
steps. It commonly uses a Gaussian process (GP) for the
prior over the objective function. GPs provide a flexible and
analytically tractable family of prior distributions, working
as a surrogate model that captures the behavior of the unknown objective function. The acquisition function used to
determine the next query point quantifies the utility of candidate points and balances the trade-off between exploitation
(local search) and exploration (global search). Various acquisition functions have been proposed to maximize the
probability of gaining information during the sequential
procedure, including the expected improvement (EI) (Jones
et al., 1998), probability of improvement (Brochu et al.,
2010), upper confidence bound (UCB) (Srinivas et al., 2009),
entropy search (Hennig and Schuler, 2012), predictive entropy search (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014), output-space
predictive entropy search (Hoffman and Ghahramani, 2015),
and max-value entropy search (Wang and Jegelka, 2017).
In this paper, we propose a new surrogate model, called the
objective bound conditional Gaussian process (OBCGP),
to explicitly condition a GP on a bound on the optimum.
The bound is initially obtained as the best observed function
value from the initial experiment using a space-filling design, and then it is updated as the current best function value
during the sequential optimization procedure. The OBCGP
is developed based on the idea that explicit incorporation
of the knowledge of the existence of a better point than the
current best point helps to infer the objective function more
accurately. The location of such a point, which improves
the best known bound, is included as a model parameter in

