Newton Method over Networks is Fast up to the Statistical Precision

Amir Daneshmand 1 Gesualdo Scutari 1 Pavel Dvurechensky 2 3 Alexander Gasnikov 4 3
where ` : Rd × Z → R is the loss function, assumed to be
(strongly) convex in x, for any given z ∈ Z. Agents aim to
minimize the total empirical risk over the N = mn samples,
resulting in the following ERM over networks:
m
1 X
x
b ∈ argmin F (x) ,
fi (x) ,
(P)
m i=1
x∈K
where K ⊆ Rd is convex and known to the agents.

Abstract
We propose a distributed cubic regularization of
the Newton method for solving (constrained) empirical risk minimization problems over a network
of agents, modeled as undirected graph. The algorithm employs an inexact, preconditioned Newton
step at each agent’s side: the gradient of the centralized loss is iteratively estimated via a gradienttracking consensus mechanism and the Hessian is
subsampled over the local data sets. No Hessian
matrices are thus exchanged over the network.
We derive global complexity bounds for convex
and strongly convex losses. Our analysis reveals
an interesting interplay between sample and iteration/communication complexity: statistically
accurate solutions are achievable roughly in the
same number of iterations of the centralized cubic
Newton, with a communication
 cost per iteration
e 1/√1 − ρ , where ρ characterof the order of O
izes the connectivity of the network. This represents a significant communication saving with
respect to that of existing, statistically oblivious,
distributed Newton-based methods over networks.

Since the functions fi can be accessed only locally and
routing local data to other agents is infeasible or highly
inefficient, solving (P) calls for the design of distributed
algorithms that alternate between a local computation procedure at each agent’s side, and a round of communication
among neighboring nodes. The cost of communications is
often considered the bottleneck for distributed computing, if
compared with local (possibly parallel) computations (e.g.,
(Bekkerman et al., 2011; Lian et al., 2017)). Therefore,
our goal is developing communication-efficient distributed
algorithms that solve (P) within the statistical precision.

1. Introduction
We study Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) problems
over a network of m agents, modeled as undirected graph.
Differently from master/slave systems, no centralized node
is assumed in the network (which will be referred to as
meshed network). Each agent i has access to n i.i.d. samples
(1)
(n)
zi , . . . , zi drawn from an unknown, common distribution on Z ⊆ Rp ; the associated empirical risk reads
n

1X
(j) 
fi (x) ,
` x; zi ,
n j=1

(1)

1

School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, WestLafayette, IN, USA 2 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and
Stochastics, Berlin, Germany 3 Higher School of Economics (HSE)
University, Moscow, Russia 4 Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia. Correspondence to: Gesualdo
Scutari <gscutari@purdue.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The provably faster convergence rates of second order methods over gradient-based algorithms make them potential
candidates for communication saving (at the cost of more
computations). Despite the success of Newton-like methods to solve ERM in a centralized setting (e.g., (Mokhtari
et al., 2016a; Bottou et al., 2018)), including master/slave
architectures (Zhang & Xiao, 2015; Shamir et al., 2014; Ma
& Takac, 2017; Jahani et al., 2020; Soori et al., 2020), their
distributed counterparts on meshed networks are not on par:
convergence rates provably faster than those of first order
methods are achieved at high communication costs (Uribe
& Jadbabaie, 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020), cf. Sec. 1.2.
We claim that stronger guarantees of second order methods
over meshed networks can be certified if a statisticallyinformed design/analysis is put forth, in contrast with statistically agnostic approaches that look at (P) as deterministic
optimization and target any arbitrarily small suboptimality.
To do so, we build on the following two key insights.
• Fact 1 (statistical accuracy): When it comes to learning
problems, the ERM (P) is a surrogate of the population
minimization
(2)
x? ∈ argmin FP (x) , EZ∼P ` (x; Z) .
x∈K

The ultimate goal is to estimate x? via the ERM (P). Denoting by xε ∈ K the estimate returned by the algorithm, we

