Cross-Gradient Aggregation for Decentralized Learning from Non-IID Data

Yasaman Esfandiari 1 Sin Yong Tan 1 Zhanhong Jiang 2 Aditya Balu 1 Ethan Herron 1 Chinmay Hegde 3
Soumik Sarkar 1

Abstract
Decentralized learning enables a group of collaborative agents to learn models using a distributed
dataset without the need for a central parameter server. Recently, decentralized learning algorithms have demonstrated state-of-the-art results
on benchmark data sets, comparable with centralized algorithms. However, the key assumption to
achieve competitive performance is that the data
is independently and identically distributed (IID)
among the agents which, in real-life applications,
is often not applicable. Inspired by ideas from
continual learning, we propose Cross-Gradient
Aggregation (CGA), a novel decentralized learning algorithm where (i) each agent aggregates
cross-gradient information, i.e., derivatives of its
model with respect to its neighbors’ datasets, and
(ii) updates its model using a projected gradient
based on quadratic programming (QP). We theoretically analyze the convergence characteristics
of CGA and demonstrate its efficiency on non-IID
data distributions sampled from the MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets. Our empirical comparisons
show superior learning performance of CGA over
existing state-of-the-art decentralized learning algorithms, as well as maintaining the improved
performance under information compression to reduce peer-to-peer communication overhead. The
code is available here on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Distributed machine learning refers to a class of algorithms
that are focused on learning from data distributed among
multiple agents. Approaches to design distributed deep
learning algorithms include: centralized learning (McMa1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University,
Ames, Iowa, USA 2 Johnson Controls, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
USA 3 Computer Science and Engineering Department, New York
University, New York City, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Soumik Sarkar <soumiks@iastate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Algorithm overview. In the proposed CGA algorithm
(1) each agent computes gradients of model parameters on its own
data set; (2) each agent sends its model parameters to its neighbors;
(3) each agent computes the gradients of its neighbors’ models on
its own data set and sends the cross gradients back to the respective
neighbors; (4) cross gradients and local gradients are projected into
an aggregated gradient (using Quadratic Programming); which is
then used to (5) update the model parameter.

han et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2019), decentralized learning (Lian et al., 2017; Nedić et al., 2018), gradient compression (Seide et al., 2014; Alistarh et al., 2018) and coordinate
updates (Richtárik and Takáč, 2016; Nesterov, 2012). In
centralized learning, a central parameter server collects,
processes, and sends processed information back to the
agents (Konečnỳ et al., 2016). As a popular approach for
centralized learning, Federated Learning (FL) leverages a
central parameter server and learns from dispersed datasets
that are private to the agents. Another approach is Federated Averaging (McMahan et al., 2017) where agents avoid
communicating with the server at each learning iteration
and significantly decrease the communication cost.
Decentralized learning: While having a central parameter
server is acceptable for data center applications, in certain
use cases (such as learning over a wide-area distributed sensor network), continuous communication with a central parameter server is often not feasible (Haghighat et al., 2020).
To address this concern, several decentralized learning algorithms have been proposed, where agents only interact with
their neighbors without a central parameter server.
Recent advances in decentralized learning involve gossip

