DeepReDuce: ReLU Reduction for Fast Private Inference

Abstract
The recent rise of privacy concerns has led researchers to devise methods for private neural
inference—where inferences are made directly on
encrypted data, never seeing inputs. The primary
challenge facing private inference is that computing on encrypted data levies an impractically-high
latency penalty, stemming mostly from non-linear
operators like ReLU. Enabling practical and private inference requires new optimization methods
that minimize network ReLU counts while preserving accuracy. This paper proposes DeepReDuce: a set of optimizations for the judicious
removal of ReLUs to reduce private inference
latency. The key insight is that not all ReLUs
contribute equally to accuracy. We leverage this
insight to drop, or remove, ReLUs from classic
networks to significantly reduce inference latency
and maintain high accuracy. Given a network architecture, DeepReDuce outputs a Pareto frontier
of networks that tradeoff the number of ReLUs
and accuracy. Compared to the state-of-the-art for
private inference DeepReDuce improves accuracy
and reduces ReLU count by up to 3.5% (iso-ReLU
count) and 3.5× (iso-accuracy), respectively.

1. Introduction
Concerns surrounding data privacy continue to rise and are
beginning to affect technology. Companies are changing the
way they use and store users’ data while lawmakers are passing legislation to improve users’ privacy rights (Act, 1996;
Regulation, 2016). Deep learning is the core driver of many
applications impacted by privacy concerns. It provides high
utility in classifying, recommending, and interpreting user
data to build user experiences and requires large amounts of
private user data to do so. Private inference is a solution that
simultaneously provides strong privacy guarantees while
preserving the utility of neural networks to power applica1

New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Nandan Kumar Jha <nj2049@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Test (top-1) accuracy (%)

Nandan Kumar Jha 1 Zahra Ghodsi 1 Siddharth Garg 1 Brandon Reagen 1

80 DeepReDuce
75
70

SAFENet
CryptoNAS
DELPHI
ResNet

65
60
8

16

32
64
#ReLUs (in K)

128

256

Figure 1. DeepReDuce Pareto frontier of ReLU counts versus accuracy for CIFAR-100. We show DeepReDuce outperforms the
state-of-the-art (SAFENet (Lou et al., 2021), CryptoNAS (Ghodsi
et al., 2020) and DELPHI (Mishra et al., 2020)).

tion experiences users enjoy. Today, in a typical inference
pipeline, a client encrypts data (ciphertexts) and sends it
to the cloud, the cloud decrypts the data and performs inferences on the data (plaintext), and returns the encrypted
results. With private inference, the same inference is executed without the cloud ever decrypting the client’s data;
that is, inferences are processed directly on ciphertexts.
Prior work has established two methods for private inference.
The primary difference between them is how linear layers
are computed, either with secret-sharing (SS), a type of secure multi-party computation (MPC) (Goldreich et al., 2019;
Shamir, 1979), or homomorphic encryption (HE), an encryption scheme that enables computation on ciphertexts (Gentry
et al., 2009; Brakerski & Vaikuntanathan, 2014). For example, Gazelle (Juvekar et al., 2018) and Cheetah (Reagen
et al., 2021) use HE for convolution and fully-connected layers whereas MiniONN (Liu et al., 2017), DELPHI (Mishra
et al., 2020), and CryptoNAS (Ghodsi et al., 2020) use SS.
While distinct, both offer limited functional support and
cannot readily process non-linear operations, e.g., ReLUs.
To overcome this limitation, private inference protocols use
Garbled circuits (GCs), another form of MPC (Yao, 1982;
1986), to process ReLU privately. However, GCs are several
orders of magnitude more expensive than the linear layer
protocols in terms of communication and computational,
rendering private inference impractical (Ghodsi et al., 2020).
For example, ReLUs account for 93% of ResNet32’s online
private inference time using the DELPHI protocol (Mishra
et al., 2020). Therefore, enabling low-latency private inference is a matter of minimizing a network’s ReLU count.

