Nonparametric Decomposition of Sparse Tensors

Conor Tillinghast 1 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is a powerful framework
for multiway data analysis. Despite the success of
existing approaches, they ignore the sparse nature
of the tensor data in many real-world applications, explicitly or implicitly assuming dense tensors. To address this model misspecification and
to exploit the sparse tensor structures, we propose
Nonparametric dEcomposition of Sparse Tensors
(NEST), which can capture both the sparse structure properties and complex relationships between
the tensor nodes to enhance the embedding estimation. Specifically, we first use completely
random measures to construct tensor-valued random processes. We prove that the entry growth is
much slower than that of the corresponding tensor
size, which implies sparsity. Given finite observations (i.e., projections), we then propose two
nonparametric decomposition models that couple Dirichlet processes and Gaussian processes
to jointly sample the sparse entry indices and the
entry values (the latter as a nonlinear mapping of
the embeddings), so as to encode both the structure properties and nonlinear relationships of the
tensor nodes into the embeddings. Finally, we
use the stick-breaking construction and random
Fourier features to develop a scalable, stochastic variational learning algorithm. We show the
advantage of our approach in sparse tensor generation, and entry index and value prediction in
several real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Multiway data, such as interactions between multiple nodes
(or entities), are ubiquitous in real-world applications. These
data are naturally represented by tensors. For example, we
can use a three-mode (customer, service-item, provider) tensor to summarize consumer behaviors. Accordingly, tensor
1

School of Computing, University of Utah. Correspondence to:
Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

decomposition is a fundamental framework for multiway
data analysis. In general, tensor decomposition aims to estimate an embedding representation of the nodes in each
mode, with which to recover the observed entry values.
These embeddings can reflect hidden structures within the
tensor nodes, e.g., communities and outliers, and be used in
various downstream tasks, such as click-through-rate prediction and commodity recommendation.
Although many excellent tensor decomposition methods
have been developed (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu
and Ghahramani, 2009; Kang et al., 2012; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014), they explicitly or implicitly assume that
the tensors have dense entries and overlook the sparse nature
of the data in numerous real-world applications. For example, many algorithms (Kolda and Bader, 2009; Kang et al.,
2012; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014; Xu et al., 2012) rely
on tensor algebras and require that all the possible entries
must have been generated — although most entry values can
be zero — so that they can operate on the entire tensor (folding, unfolding, multiplying with matrices, etc.). Although
quite a few methods can focus on a small set of entries and
only decompose the observed entry values (Rai et al., 2014;
Zhe et al., 2016b; Du et al., 2018), they essentially assume
that the tensor entries are generated by a random function
of the embeddings, which is equivalent to assuming the tensor is exchangeable. That is, the distribution of the tensor
is invariant to the permutation of the nodes in each mode.
According to the Aldous-Hoover theorem (Aldous, 1981;
Hoover, 1979), the tensor is either trivially empty or dense,
i.e., the numberQof present entries grows linearly with the
tensor size (Θ( k Mk ) where Mk is the number of nodes
in mode k).
However, real-world tensor data are usually very sparse. The
number
Q of present entries is way less than the tensor size
(o( k Mk )). Therefore, existing models are often misspecified, and unable to capture the valuable structure properties
within the observed sparse entries. To address these limitations, we propose NEST, Bayesian nonparametric decomposition models for sparse tensors. Our method not only is flexible enough to capture the complex relationships between
the tensor nodes in generating the entry values, but also can
account for the generation of sparse entry indices, assimilating both the hidden relationships and sparse structure
properties into the embedding representations. Specifically,

