An End-to-End Framework for Molecular Conformation Generation
via Bilevel Programming

Minkai Xu 1 2 Wujie Wang 3 Shitong Luo 4 Chence Shi 1 2
Yoshua Bengio 1 2 5 Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli 3 Jian Tang 1 5 6

Abstract
Predicting molecular conformations (or 3D structures) from molecular graphs is a fundamental
problem in many applications. Most existing approaches are usually divided into two steps by
first predicting the distances between atoms and
then generating a 3D structure through optimizing
a distance geometry problem. However, the distances predicted with such two-stage approaches
may not be able to consistently preserve the geometry of local atomic neighborhoods, making
the generated structures unsatisfying. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end solution for molecular conformation prediction called ConfVAE
based on the conditional variational autoencoder
framework. Specifically, the molecular graph is
first encoded in a latent space, and then the 3D
structures are generated by solving a principled
bilevel optimization program. Extensive experiments on several benchmark data sets prove the
effectiveness of our proposed approach over existing state-of-the-art approaches. Code is available at https://github.com/MinkaiXu/
ConfVAE-ICML21.

1. Introduction
Recently we have witnessed much success of deep learning
for molecule modeling in a variety of applications ranging
from molecule property prediction (Gilmer et al., 2017) and
molecule generation (You et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2020b) to
retrosynthesis planning (Shi et al., 2020a). In these applications, molecules are generally represented as graphs with
atoms as nodes and covalent chemical bonds as edges. Al*
Equal contribution 1 Mila - Québec AI Institute, Canada
Université de Montréal, Canada 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 4 Peking University, China 5 Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research (CIFAR), Canada 6 HEC Montréal, Canada.
Correspondence to: Minkai Xu <minkai.xu@umontreal.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

though this is empirically effective, in reality molecules are
better represented as 3D structures (also known as conformations), where each atom is characterized by 3D Cartesian
coordinates. Such 3D structures are also more intrinsic
and informative, determining many chemical and biological properties such as chemical sensing and therapeutic
interactions with proteins.
However, determining the 3D structures from experiments is
challenging and costly. Effectively predicting valid and lowenergy conformations has been a very important and active
topic in computational chemistry. Traditional computational
approaches are typically based on Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) or molecular dynamics (MD) (De Vivo et al.,
2016) to propose conformations combined with simulations
to assign energies through cheap empirical potentials or
expensive quantum chemical simulations (Ballard et al.,
2015). Recently, there is growing interest in developing
machine learning approaches (Mansimov et al., 2019; Simm
& Hernández-Lobato, 2020; Xu et al., 2021) to model the
conditional distribution p(R|G) of stable conformations R
given the molecular graph G by training on a collection of
molecules with available stable conformations. Specifically,
two recent works (Simm & Hernández-Lobato, 2020; Xu
et al., 2021) propose to first predict the distances between
atoms and then generate molecular conformations based
on the predicted distances by solving a distance geometry
problem (Liberti et al., 2014). Such approaches based on
distance geometry effectively take into account the rotation
and translation invariance of molecular conformations and
have hence achieved very promising performance.
However, there is still a significant limitation for these twostage approaches, which predict the distances and conformations separately: the predicted distances might not be
able to properly preserve the 3D geometry of local atomic
neighborhoods. Some invalid combinations of distances
could be assigned a high likelihood according to the distance
prediction model. The errors in these distances could be significantly exaggerated by the distance geometry program of
the second stage, yielding unrealistic outlier samples of 3D
structures. This is not surprising as the distance prediction
model is trained by maximizing the factorized likelihood

