Average-Reward Off-Policy Policy Evaluation with Function Approximation

Shangtong Zhang 1 * Yi Wan 2 * Richard S. Sutton 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
We consider off-policy policy evaluation with
function approximation (FA) in average-reward
MDPs, where the goal is to estimate both the
reward rate and the differential value function.
For this problem, bootstrapping is necessary and,
along with off-policy learning and FA, results in
the deadly triad (Sutton & Barto, 2018). To address the deadly triad, we propose two novel algorithms, reproducing the celebrated success of
Gradient TD algorithms in the average-reward
setting. In terms of estimating the differential
value function, the algorithms are the first convergent off-policy linear function approximation
algorithms. In terms of estimating the reward
rate, the algorithms are the first convergent offpolicy linear function approximation algorithms
that do not require estimating the density ratio.
We demonstrate empirically the advantage of the
proposed algorithms, as well as their nonlinear
variants, over a competitive density-ratio-based
approach, in a simple domain as well as challenging robot simulation tasks.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in average-reward Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs, see, e.g., Puterman (1994)) is policy
evaluation, that is, estimating, for a given policy, the reward
rate and the differential value function. The reward rate of
a policy is the average reward per step and thus measures
the policy’s long term performance. The differential value
function summarizes the expected cumulative future excess
rewards, which are the differences between received rewards
and the reward rate. The solution of the policy evaluation
problem is interesting in itself because it provides a useful
performance metric, the reward rate, for a given policy. In
addition, it is an essential part of many control algorithms,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Shangtong Zhang <
shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Yi Wan <wan6@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

which aim to generate a policy that maximizes the reward
rate by iteratively improving the policy using its estimated
differential value function (see, e.g., Howard (1960); Konda
(2002); Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2019)).
One typical approach in policy evaluation is to learn from
real experience directly, without knowing or learning a
model. If the policy followed to generate experience (behavior policy) is the same as the policy of interest (target
policy), then this approach yields an on-policy method; otherwise, it is off-policy. Off-policy methods are usually more
practical in settings in which following bad policies incurs
prohibitively high cost (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). For
policy evaluation, we can use either tabular methods, which
maintain a look-up table to store quantities of interest (e.g.,
the differential values for all states) separately, or use function approximation, which represents these quantities collectively, possibly in a more efficient way (e.g., using a neural
network). Function approximation methods are necessary
for MDPs with large state and/or action spaces because they
are scalable in the size of these spaces and also generalize
to states and actions that are not in the data (Mnih et al.,
2015; Silver et al., 2016). Finally, for the policy evaluation
problem in average reward MDPs, the agent’s stream of
experience never terminates and thus actual returns cannot
be obtained. Because of this, learning algorithms have to
bootstrap, that is, the estimated values must be updated towards targets that include existing estimated values instead
of actual returns.
In this paper, we consider methods for solving the averagereward policy evaluation problem with all the above three
elements (off-policy learning, function approximation and
bootstrapping), which comprise the deadly triad (see Chapter 11 of Sutton & Barto (2018) and Section 3). The main
contributions of this paper are two newly proposed methods to break this deadly triad in the average-reward setting,
both of which are inspired by the celebrated success of the
Gradient TD family of algorithms (Sutton et al., 2009b;a) in
breaking the deadly triad in the discounted setting.
Few methods exist for learning differential value functions.
These are either on-policy linear function approximation
methods (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1999; Konda, 2002; Yu &
Bertsekas, 2009; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019) or off-policy
tabular methods (Wan et al., 2020). The on-policy methods

