Follow-the-Regularized-Leader Routes to Chaos in Routing Games
Jakub Bielawski 1 Thiparat Chotibut 2 Fryderyk Falniowski 1 Grzegorz Kosiorowski 1 Michał Misiurewicz 3
Georgios Piliouras 4

Abstract
We study the emergence of chaotic behavior of
Follow-the-Regularized Leader (FoReL) dynamics in games. We focus on the effects of increasing the population size or the scale of costs in
congestion games, and generalize recent results
on unstable, chaotic behaviors in the Multiplicative Weights Update dynamics (Chotibut et al.,
2020; 2021; Palaiopanos et al., 2017) to a much
larger class of FoReL dynamics. We establish
that, even in simple linear non-atomic congestion games with two parallel links and any fixed
learning rate, unless the game is fully symmetric,
increasing the population size or the scale of costs
causes learning dynamics to becomes unstable
and eventually chaotic, in the sense of Li-Yorke
and positive topological entropy. Furthermore,
we prove the existence of novel non-standard phenomena such as the coexistence of stable Nash
equilibria and chaos in the same game. We also
observe the simultaneous creation of a chaotic attractor as another chaotic attractor gets destroyed.
Lastly, although FoReL dynamics can be strange
and non-equilibrating, we prove that the time average still converges to an exact equilibrium for
any choice of learning rate and any scale of costs.

1. Introduction
We study the dynamics of online learning in a non-atomic
repeated congestion game. Namely, every iteration of the
game presents a population (i.e., a continuum of players)
1

Department of Mathematics, Cracow University of Economics, Rakowicka 27, 31-510 Kraków, Poland. 2 Chula Intelligent and Complex Systems, and Department of Physics, Faculty
of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis, 402 N. Blackford Street, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA. 4 Engineering Systems and Design, Singapore
University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372.. Correspondence to: Georgios Piliouras <georgios@sutd.edu.sg>, Thiparat Chotibut <thiparat.c@chula.ac.th>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

with a choice between two strategies, and imposes on them
a cost which increases with the fraction of population adopting the same strategy. In each iteration, the players update
their strategy accommodating for the outcomes of previous
iterations. The structure of cost function here concerns that
of the congestion games, which are introduced by Rosenthal
(Rosenthal, 1973) and are amongst the most studied classes
of games. A seminal result of (Monderer & Shapley, 1996)
shows that congestion games are isomorphic to potential
games; as such, numerous learning dynamics are known
to converge to Nash equilibria (Berenbrink et al., 2014;
Even-Dar & Mansour, 2005; Fischer et al., 2006; Fotakis
et al., 2008; Kleinberg et al., 2009; 2011; Mertikopoulos &
Sandholm, 2018).
A prototypical class of online learning dynamics is Follow the Regularized Leader (FoReL) (Hazan, 2016; ShalevShwartz, 2012). FoReL algorithm includes as special
cases ubiquitous meta-algorithms, such as the Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) algorithm (Arora et al., 2012).
Under FoReL, the strategy in each iteration is chosen by
minimizing the weighted (by the learning rate) sum of the
total cost of all actions chosen by the players and the regularization term. FoReL dynamics are known to achieve
optimal regret guarantees (i.e., be competitive with the best
fixed action with hindsight), as long as they are executed
with a highly optimized learning rate; i.e., one that is decreasing with the steepness of the online costs (inverse to
the Lipschitz constant of the online cost
p functions) as well
as decreasing with time T at a rate 1/ T (Shalev-Shwartz,
2012).
Although precise parameter tuning is perfectly reasonable
from the perspective of algorithmic design, it seems implausible from the perspective of behavioral game theory
and modeling. For example, experimental and econometric studies based on a behavioral game theoretic learning
model known as Experienced Weighted Attraction (EWA),
which includes MWU as a special case, have shown that
agents can use much larger learning rates than those required for the standard regret bounds to be meaningfully
applicable (Camerer, 2011; Ho & Camerer, 1998; 1999; Ho
et al., 2007). In some sense, such a tension is to be expected
because small and optimized learning rates are designed
with system stability and asymptotic optimality in mind,

