Maximum Mean Discrepancy Test is Aware of Adversarial Attacks

Ruize Gao * 1 2 Feng Liu * 3 Jingfeng Zhang * 4 Bo Han 1 Tongliang Liu 5 Gang Niu 4 Masashi Sugiyama 4 6

Abstract

sup in Eq. (1), Gretton et al. (2012b) restricted F to be a
unit ball in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
and obtain the kernel-based MMD defined in the following.

The maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) test
could in principle detect any distributional discrepancy between two datasets. However, it has
been shown that the MMD test is unaware of adversarial attacks—the MMD test failed to detect
the discrepancy between natural and adversarial
data. Given this phenomenon, we raise a question:
are natural and adversarial data really from different distributions? The answer is affirmative—the
previous use of the MMD test on the purpose
missed three key factors, and accordingly, we propose three components. Firstly, Gaussian kernel
has limited representation power, and we replace
it with an effective deep kernel. Secondly, test
power of the MMD test was neglected, and we
maximize it following asymptotic statistics. Finally, adversarial data may be non-independent,
and we overcome this issue with the wild bootstrap. By taking care of the three factors, we
verify that the MMD test is aware of adversarial
attacks, which lights up a novel road for adversarial data detection based on two-sample tests.

MMD(P, Q; Hk ) :=

k

=kµP − µQ kHk ,

(2)

where k is a bounded kernel regarding a RKHS Hk (i.e.,
|k(·, ·)| < +∞), and X ∼ P, Y ∼ Q are two random
variables, and µP := E[k(·, X)] and µQ := E[k(·, Y )] are
kernel mean embeddings of P and Q, respectively (Gretton
et al., 2005; 2012b; Jitkrittum et al., 2016; 2017; Sutherland
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020b). According to Eq. (1), it is
clear that MMD equals zero if and only if P = Q (Gretton
et al., 2008). As for the MMD defined in Eq. (2), Gretton
et al. (2012b) also prove this property. Namely, we could in
principle use the MMD to show whether two distributions
are the same, which drives researchers to develop the MMDbased two-sample test (Gretton et al., 2012b).

1. Introduction
The maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) aims to measure
the closeness between two distributions P and Q:
MMD(P, Q; F) := sup |E[f (X)] − E[f (Y )]|,

|E[f (X)] − E[f (Y )]|

sup
f ∈H,kf kH ≤1

(1)

f ∈F

where F is a set containing all continuous functions (Gretton
et al., 2012a). To obtain an analytic solution regarding the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Hong Kong Baptist University 2 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong 3 DeSI Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
4
RIKEN-AIP 5 TML Lab, University of Sydney 6 Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo.
Correspondence to: Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>,
Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>, Gang Niu
<gang.niu@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the MMD test, we are given two samples observed from
P and Q and aim to check whether two samples come from
the same distribution. Specifically, we first estimate MMD
value from two samples, and then compute the p-value corresponding to the estimated MMD value (Sutherland et al.,
2017). If the p-value is above a given threshold α, then
two samples are from the same distribution. In the last
decade, MMD test has been used to detect the distributional
discrepancy within several real-world datasets, including
high-energy physics data (Chwialkowski et al., 2015), amplitude modulated signals (Gretton et al., 2012c), and challenging image datasets, e.g., the MNIST and the CIFAR-10
(Sutherland et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020b).
However, it has been empirically shown that the MMD test,
as one of the most powerful two-sample tests, is unaware of
adversarial attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a). Specifically,
Carlini & Wagner (2017a) input adversarial and natural
data into the MMD test, then the MMD test outputs a pvalue that is greater than the given threshold α with a high
probability. Namely, the MMD test agrees that adversarial
and natural data are from the same distribution. Given the
success of MMD test in many fields (Liu et al., 2020b), this
phenomenon seems a paradox regarding the homogeneity
between nature and adversarial data.

