Discretization Drift in Two-Player Games

Mihaela Rosca 1 2 Yan Wu 1 Benoit Dherin 3 David G.T. Barrett 1

Abstract
Gradient-based methods for two-player games
produce rich dynamics that can solve challenging
problems, yet can be difficult to stabilize and understand. Part of this complexity originates from
the discrete update steps given by simultaneous or
alternating gradient descent, which causes each
player to drift away from the continuous gradient
flow — a phenomenon we call discretization drift.
Using backward error analysis, we derive modified continuous dynamical systems that closely
follow the discrete dynamics. These modified dynamics provide an insight into the notorious challenges associated with zero-sum games, including
Generative Adversarial Networks. In particular,
we identify distinct components of the discretization drift that can alter performance and in some
cases destabilize the game. Finally, quantifying
discretization drift allows us to identify regularizers that explicitly cancel harmful forms of drift
or strengthen beneficial forms of drift, and thus
improve performance of GAN training.

1. Introduction
The fusion of deep learning with two-player games has produced a wealth of breakthroughs in recent years, from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) through to model-based reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2020). Gradient descent methods are widely used across these settings, partly
because these algorithms scale well to high-dimensional
models and large datasets. However, much of the recent
progress in our theoretical understanding of two-player differentiable games builds upon the analysis of continuous
differential equations that model the dynamics of training (Singh et al., 2000; Heusel et al., 2017; Nagarajan &
Kolter, 2017), leading to a gap between theory and practice. Our aim is to take a step forward in our understanding
1
DeepMind, London, UK 2 Center for Artificial Intelligence,
University College London 3 Google, Dublin, Ireland. Correspondence to: Mihaela Rosca <mihaelacr@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of two player games by finding continuous systems which
better match the gradient descent updates used in practice.
Our work builds upon Barrett & Dherin (2021), who use
backward error analysis to quantify the discretization drift
induced by using gradient descent in supervised learning.
We extend their work and use backward error analysis to
understand the impact of discretization in the training dynamics of two-player games. More specifically, we quantify
the Discretization Drift (DD), the difference between the
solutions of the original ODEs defining the game and the
discrete steps of the numerical scheme used to approximate
them. To do so, we construct modified continuous systems
that closely follow the discrete updates. While in supervised
learning DD has a beneficial regularization effect (Barrett &
Dherin, 2021), we find that the interaction between players
in DD can have a destabilizing effect in adversarial games.
Contributions: Our primary contribution, Theorems 3.1
and 3.2, provides the continuous modified systems which
quantify the discretization drift in simultaneous and alternating gradient descent for general two-player differentiable
games. Both theorems are novel in their scope and generality, as well as their application toward understanding
the effect of the discretization drift in two-player games
parametrized with neural networks. Theorems 3.1 and 3.2
allow us to use dynamical system analysis to describe GD
without ignoring discretization drift, which we then use to:
• Provide new stability analysis tools (Section 4).
• Motivate explicit regularization methods which drastically improve the performance of simultaneous gradient descent in GAN training (Section 7.3).
• Pinpoint optimal regularization coefficients and shed
new light on existing explicit regularizers (Table 1).
• Pinpoint the best performing learning rate ratios for
alternating updates (Sections 5 and 7.2).
• Explain previously observed but unexplained phenomena such as the difference in performance and stability
between alternating and simultaneous updates in GAN
training (Section 6).

