A Theory of High Dimensional Regression with Arbitrary Correlations
between Input Features and Target Functions: Sample Complexity, Multiple
Descent Curves and a Hierarchy of Phase Transitions

Gabriel C. Mel 1 Surya Ganguli 2

Abstract
The performance of neural networks depends on
precise relationships between four distinct ingredients: the architecture, the loss function, the statistical structure of inputs, and the ground truth
target function. Much theoretical work has focused on understanding the role of the first two
ingredients under highly simplified models of random uncorrelated data and target functions. In
contrast, performance likely relies on a conspiracy between the statistical structure of the input
distribution and the structure of the function to be
learned. To understand this better we revisit ridge
regression in high dimensions, which corresponds
to an exceedingly simple architecture and loss
function, but we analyze its performance under
arbitrary correlations between input features and
the target function. We find a rich mathematical
structure that includes: (1) a dramatic reduction
in sample complexity when the target function
aligns with data anisotropy; (2) the existence of
multiple descent curves; (3) a sequence of phase
transitions in the performance, loss landscape, and
optimal regularization as a function of the amount
of data that explains the first two effects.

1. Introduction and Motivation
The field of machine learning, especially in the form of deep
learning, has undergone major revolutions in the last several
years, leading to significant advances in multiple domains
(LeCun et al., 2015). Many works have attempted to gain a
theoretical understanding of the key reasons underlying the
empirical success of deep neural networks (see e.g. (Bahri
et al., 2020) for a review). A major open puzzle concerns
1
Neurosciences PhD Program, School of Medicine, Stanford
University, CA, US 2 Department of Applied Physics, Stanford,
CA, US. Correspondence to: G.C. Mel <meldefon@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

understanding the ability of not only deep networks, but also
many other machine learning (ML) methods, to successfully
generalize to test examples drawn from the same distribution
as the training data. Such theory would ideally guide the
choice of various ML hyperparameters to achieve minimal
test error.
However, any such theory that is powerful enough to guide
hyperparameter choices in real world settings necessarily
involves assumptions about the nature of the ground truth
mapping to be learned, the statistical structure of the inputs
one has access to, the amount of data available, and the machine learning method itself. Many theoretical works studying the generalization properties of ML methods have made
highly simplified assumptions about the statistical structure
of inputs and the ground truth mapping to be learned.
Much work in computer science for example seeks to find
worst case bounds on generalization error over the choice
of the worst data set and the worst ground truth function
(Vapnik, 1998). Such bounds are often quite pessimistic
as the types of data and ground truth functions that occur
in natural problems are far from worst case. These worst
case bounds are then often vacuous (Zhang et al., 2017) and
cannot guide choices made in practice, spurring the recent
search for nonvacuous data-dependent bounds (Dziugaite &
Roy, 2017).
Also, much work in statistical physics has focused instead
on computing exact formulas for the test error of various
ML algorithms (Engel & den Broeck, 2001; Advani et al.,
2013; Advani & Ganguli, 2016a;b) including compressed
sensing (Rangan et al., 2009; Donoho et al., 2009; Ganguli
& Sompolinsky, 2010b;a), single layer (Seung et al., 1992)
and multi-layer (Monasson & Zecchina, 1995; Lampinen
& Ganguli, 2018) neural networks, but under highly simplified random uncorrelated assumptions about the inputs.
Moreover, the ground truth target function was often chosen
randomly in a manner that was uncorrelated with the choice
of the random inputs. In most situations where the ground
truth function possessed no underlying simple structure,
these statistical physics works based on random uncorrelated functions and inputs generally concluded that the ratio

