Variance Reduced Training with Stratiﬁed Sampling
for Forecasting Models
Yucheng Lu 1 2 Youngsuk Park 2 Lifan Chen 2 Yuyang Wang 2 Christopher De Sa 1 Dean Foster 3 4

Abstract
In large-scale time series forecasting, one often encounters the situation where the temporal patterns
of time series, while drifting over time, differ from
one another in the same dataset. In this paper, we
provably show under such heterogeneity, training
a forecasting model with commonly used stochastic optimizers (e.g. SGD) potentially suffers large
variance on gradient estimation, and thus incurs
long-time training. We show that this issue can
be efﬁciently alleviated via stratiﬁcation, which
allows the optimizer to sample from pre-grouped
time series strata. For better trading-off gradient
variance and computation complexity, we further
propose SCott (Stochastic Stratiﬁed Control Variate Gradient Descent), a variance reduced SGDstyle optimizer that utilizes stratiﬁed sampling via
control variate. In theory, we provide the convergence guarantee of SCott on smooth non-convex
objectives. Empirically, we evaluate SCott and
other baseline optimizers on both synthetic and
real-world time series forecasting problems, and
demonstrate SCott converges faster with respect
to both iterations and wall clock time.

1. Introduction
Large-scale time series forecasting is prevalent in many
real-world applications, such as trafﬁc ﬂow prediction (Vlahogianni et al., 2014), stock price monitoring (Box et al.,
2011), weather forecasting (Xu et al., 2019), etc. Traditional forecasting models such as SSM (Durbin & Koopman,
2012), ARIMA (Zhang, 2003), ETS (De Livera et al., 2011)
and Gaussian Processes (Brahim-Belhouari & Bermak,
This work was done during Yucheng Lu’s internship at Amazon. Lifan Chen participated in this work while he was with
Amazon. 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 2 Amazon Web Services (AWS) AI Labs,
Palo Alto, CA, USA. 3 Amazon Research, New York, NY, USA.
4
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Yucheng Lu <yl2967@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2004) are the folklore methods for modeling the dynamics
of a single time series. Recently, deep forecasting models
(Faloutsos et al., 2019) that leverage deep learning techniques have been proven to be particularly well-suited at
modeling over an entire collection of time series (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Salinas et al., 2020). In
such setting, multiple time series are jointly learned, which
enables forecasting over a large scope.
In practice, a time series dataset can be heterogeneous with
respect to a single forecasting model (Lee et al., 2018).
The heterogeneity here speciﬁcally indicates the underlying
distribution of interests may vary across different time series instances due to local effects (Wang et al., 2019; Sen
et al., 2019); or is correlated to time in each time series
individually – a phenomenon we refer to as concept drift
(Gama et al., 2014). In light of this, a seemingly plausible solution is to maintain multiple forecasters. However,
in most applications training a single model is inevitable
since deploying multiple models incurs storage overhead
and sometimes generalizes worse (Montero-Manso & Hyndman, 2020; Oreshkin et al., 2019; Gasthaus et al., 2019).
As a ﬁrst investigation in this paper, we provably show
the time series heterogeneity can induce arbitrarily large
gradient estimation variance in many optimizers, including
SGD (Bottou, 2010), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), AdaGrad
(Ward et al., 2019), etc.
Extensive study has been conducted on reducing gradient
estimation variance in stochastic optimization such as using
mini-batching (Gower et al., 2019), control variate (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and importance sampling (Csiba &
Richtárik, 2018). These methods are mostly motivated by
optimization theory and do not consider time series heterogeneity at a ﬁner-grained level. In this paper, we take a
different perspective: observing that the distribution of interests in time series is usually recurring over time horizon
or is correlated over instances (Liao, 2005; Aghabozorgi
et al., 2015; Maharaj et al., 2019), we argue gradient variance induced by time series heterogeneity can be mitigated
via stratiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, the intuition is that if we can
somehow stratify the time series into multiple strata where
each stratum contains homogeneous series, then the variance on the gradient estimation can be provably reduced via

