Bias-Free Scalable Gaussian Processes via Randomized Truncations
Andres Potapczynski * 1 Luhuan Wu * 2 Dan Biderman * 1 Geoff Pleiss 1 John P. Cunningham 1 2

Abstract
Scalable Gaussian Process methods are computationally attractive, yet introduce modeling biases
that require rigorous study. This paper analyzes
two common techniques: early truncated conjugate gradients (CG) and random Fourier features
(RFF). We find that both methods introduce a
systematic bias on the learned hyperparameters:
CG tends to underfit while RFF tends to overfit. We address these issues using randomized
truncation estimators that eliminate bias in exchange for increased variance. In the case of
RFF, we show that the bias-to-variance conversion is indeed a trade-off: the additional variance proves detrimental to optimization. However,
in the case of CG, our unbiased learning procedure meaningfully outperforms its biased counterpart with minimal additional computation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
cunningham-lab/RTGPS.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GP) are popular and expressive nonparametric models, and considerable effort has gone into alleviating their cubic runtime complexity. Notable successes
include inducing point methods (e.g. Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013), finite-basis
expansions (e.g. Rahimi & Recht, 2008; Mutnỳ & Krause,
2018; Wilson et al., 2020; Loper et al., 2020), nearest neighbor truncations (e.g. Datta et al., 2016; Katzfuss et al., 2021),
and iterative numerical methods (e.g. Cunningham et al.,
2008; Cutajar et al., 2016; Gardner et al., 2018). Common to these techniques is the classic speed-bias tradeoff :
coarser GP approximations afford faster but more biased
solutions that in turn affect both the model’s predictions and
learned hyperparameters. While a few papers analyze the
*
Equal contribution (randomly ordered). 1 Zuckerman Institute, Columbia University 2 Statistics Department, Columbia
University.
Correspondence to:
Andres Potapczynski
<ap3635@columbia.edu>, Luhuan Wu <lw2827@columbia.edu>,
Dan Biderman <db3236@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

bias of inducing point methods (Bauer et al., 2016; Burt
et al., 2019), the biases of other approximation techniques,
and their subsequent impact on learned GP models, have
not been rigorously studied.
Here we scrutinize the biases of two popular techniques –
random Fourier features (RFF) (Rahimi & Recht, 2008) and
conjugate gradients (CG) (e.g. Cunningham et al., 2008;
Cutajar et al., 2016; Gardner et al., 2018). These methods
are notable due to their popularity and because they allow
dynamic control of the speed-bias tradeoff: at any model
evaluation, the user can adjust the number of CG iterations
or RFF features to a desired level of approximation accuracy. In practice, it is common to truncate these methods
to a fixed number of iterations/features that is deemed adequate. However, such truncation will stop short of an exact
(machine precision) solution and potentially lead to biased
optimization outcomes.
We provide a novel theoretical analysis of the biases resulting from RFF and CG on the GP log marginal likelihood
objective. Specifically, we prove that CG is biased towards
hyperparameters that underfit the data, while RFF is biased towards overfitting. In addition to yielding suboptimal
hyperparameters, these biases hurt posterior predictions, regardless of the inference method used at test-time. Perhaps
surprisingly, this effect is not subtle, as we will demonstrate. Our analysis suggests there is value in debiasing
GP learning with CG and RFF. To do so, we turn to recent
work that shows the merits of exchanging the speed-bias
tradeoff for a speed-variance tradeoff (Beatson & Adams,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020; Oktay et al., 2020).
These works all introduce a randomization procedure that
reweights elements of a fast truncated estimator, eliminating
its bias at the cost of increasing its variance.
We thus develop bias-free versions of GP learning with CG
and RFF using randomized truncation estimators. In short,
we randomly truncate the number of CG iterations and RFF
features, while reweighting intermediate solutions to maintain unbiasedness. Our variant of CG uses the Russian
Roulette estimator (Kahn, 1955), while our variant of RFF
uses the Single Sample estimator of Lyne et al. (2015). We
believe our RR-CG and SS-RFF methods to be the first to
produce unbiased estimators of the GP log marginal likelihood with < O(N 3 ) computation.

