PAC-Learning for Strategic Classification

Ravi Sundaram * 1 Anil Vullikanti * 2 3 Haifeng Xu * 2 Fan Yao * 2

Abstract
The study of strategic or adversarial manipulation of testing data to fool a classifier has attracted
much recent attention. Most previous works have
focused on two extreme situations where any testing data point either is completely adversarial or
always equally prefers the positive label. In this
paper, we generalize both of these through a unified framework for strategic classification, and
introduce the notion of strategic VC-dimension
(SVC) to capture the PAC-learnability in our general strategic setup. SVC provably generalizes
the recent concept of adversarial VC-dimension
(AVC) introduced by Cullina et al. (2018). We
instantiate our framework for the fundamental
strategic linear classification problem. We fully
characterize: (1) the statistical learnability of linear classifiers by pinning down its SVC; (2) its
computational tractability by pinning down the
complexity of the empirical risk minimization
problem. Interestingly, the SVC of linear classifiers is always upper bounded by its standard
VC-dimension. This characterization also strictly
generalizes the AVC bound for linear classifiers
in (Cullina et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
In today’s increasingly connected world, it is rare that an algorithm will act alone. When a machine learning algorithm
is used to make predictions or decisions about others who
have their own preferences over the learning outcomes, it is
well known (e.g., Goodhart’s law) that gaming behaviors
may arise—these have been observed in a variety of domains such as finance (Tearsheet), online retailing (Hannak
et al., 2014), education (Hardt et al., 2016) as well as during
*

Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Science,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
3
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22904. Correspondence to: Haifeng Xu
<hx4ad@virginia.edu>, Fan Yao <fy4bc@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (Bryan & Crossroads;
Williams & Haire). In the early months of the pandemic,
simple decision rules were designed for COVID-19 testing
(COVID) by the CDC. However, people had different preferences for getting tested. Those with work-from-home jobs
and leave benefits preferred to get tested in order to know
their true health status whereas some of the people with
lower income, and without leave benefits preferred not to
get tested (with fears of losing their income) (Williams &
Haire). Policy makers sometimes prefer to make classification rules confidential (Citron & Pasquale, 2014) to mitigate
such gaming. However, this is not fool-proof in general
since the methods may be reverse engineered in some cases,
and transparency of ML methods is sometimes mandated by
law, e.g., (Goodman & Flaxman, 2016). Such concerns have
led to a lot of interest in designing learning algorithms that
are robust to strategic gaming behaviors of the data sources
(Perote & Perote-Peña, 2004; Dekel et al., 2010; Hardt et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2018; Cullina et al.,
2018; Awasthi et al., 2019); the present work subscribes to
this literature.
This paper focuses on the ubiquitous binary classification
problem, and we look to design classification algorithms
that are robust to gaming behaviors during the test phase.
We study a strict generalization of the canonical classification setup that naturally incorporates data points’ preferences over classification outcomes (which leads to strategic
behaviors as we will describe later). In particular, each
data point is denoted as a tuple (x, y, r) where x ∈ X and
y ∈ {−1, +1} are the feature and label, respectively (as
in classic classification problems), and additionally, r ∈ R
is a real number that describes how much this data point
prefers label +1 over −1. Importantly, we allow r to be
negative, meaning that the data point may prefer label −1.
For instance, in the decision rules for COVID-19 testing,
individuals who prefer to get tested have r > 0, while those
who prefer not to be tested have r < 0. The magnitude
|r| captures how strong their preferences are. For example, in the school choice matching market, students have
heterogeneous preferences over universities (Pathak, 2017;
Roth, 2008) and may manipulate their application materials
during the admission process. Let set R ⊆ R denote the set
of all possible values that the preference value r may take.
Obviously, the trivial singleton set R = {0} corresponds to

