Regularized Online Allocation Problems: Fairness and Beyond
Santiago Balseiro * 1 2 Haihao Lu * 3 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract
Online allocation problems with resource constraints have a rich history in computer science
and operations research. In this paper, we introduce the regularized online allocation problem, a
variant that includes a non-linear regularizer acting on the total resource consumption. In this
problem, requests repeatedly arrive over time and,
for each request, a decision maker needs to take
an action that generates a reward and consumes resources. The objective is to simultaneously maximize total rewards and the value of the regularizer
subject to the resource constraints. Our primary
motivation is the online allocation of internet advertisements wherein firms seek to maximize additive objectives such as the revenue or efficiency
of the allocation. By introducing a regularizer,
firms can account for the fairness of the allocation or, alternatively, punish under-delivery of
advertisements—two common desiderata in internet advertising markets. We design an algorithm
when arrivals are drawn independently from a distribution that is unknown to the decision maker.
Our algorithm is simple, fast, and attains the optimal order of sub-linear regret compared to the
optimal allocation with the benefit of hindsight.
Numerical experiments confirm the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm and of the regularizers
in an internet advertising application.

1. Introduction
Online allocation problems with resource constraints have
abundant real-world applications and, as such, have been
extensively studied in computer science and operations research. Prominent applications can be found in internet
advertising and cloud computing, both of which are multibillion dollar markets. In display advertising, for example,
*

Equal contribution 1 Columbia University, New York, USA
Google Research, New York, USA 3 University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Santiago R. Balseiro <srb2155@columbia.edu>,
Haihao Lu <haihao.lu@chicagobooth.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a publisher typically signs contracts with many advertisers
agreeing to deliver a fixed number of impressions within a
limited time horizon. Impressions arrive sequentially over
time and the publisher needs to assign, in real time, each
impression to one advertiser so as to maximize metrics
such as the cumulative click-through rate or the number
of conversions while satisfying contractual agreements on
the number of impressions to be delivered (Feldman et al.,
2010). In cloud computing, jobs arriving online need to
be scheduled to one of many servers. Each job consumes
resources from the server, which need to be shared with
other jobs. The scheduler needs to assign jobs to servers
to maximize metrics such as the cumulative revenue or efficiency of the allocation. When jobs’ processing times are
long compared to their arrival rates, this scheduling problem
can be cast as an online allocation problem (Badanidiyuru
et al., 2018).
The literature on online allocation problems focuses mostly
on optimizing additively separable objectives such as the
total click-throughout rate, revenue, or efficiency of the allocation. In many settings, however, decision makers are also
concerned about ancillary objectives such as fairness across
advertisers, avoiding under-delivery of impressions, balancing the load across servers, or avoiding saturating resources.
These metrics are, unfortunately, non-separable and cannot
be readily accommodated by existing algorithms that are
tailored for additively separable objectives. Thus motivated,
in this paper, we introduce the regularized online allocation
problem, a variant that includes a non-linear regularized
acting on the total resource consumption. The introduction
of a regularizer allows the decision maker to simultaneously
maximize an additively separable objective together with
other metrics such as fairness and load balancing that are
non-linear in nature.
More formally, we consider a finite horizon model in which
requests arrive repeatedly over time. The decision maker
is endowed with a fixed amount of resources that cannot
be replenished. Each arriving requests is presented with a
concave reward function and a consumption matrix. After
observing the request, the decision makers needs to take an
action that generates a reward and consumes resources. The
objective of the decision maker is to maximize the sum of
the cumulative reward and a regularizer that acts on the total
resource consumption. (Our model can easily accommodate

