Improving Breadth-Wise Backpropagation in Graph Neural Networks Helps
Learning Long-Range Dependencies

Denis Lukovnikov 1 Asja Fischer 1

Abstract
In this work, we focus on the ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn long-range patterns
in graphs with edge features. Learning patterns
that involve longer paths in the graph, requires
using deeper GNNs. However, GNNs suffer from
a drop in performance with increasing network
depth. To improve the performance of deeper
GNNs, previous works have investigated normalization techniques and various types of skip connections. While they are designed to improve
depth-wise backpropagation between the representations of the same node in successive layers, they
do not improve breadth-wise backpropagation between representations of neighbouring nodes. To
analyse the consequences, we design synthetic
datasets serving as a testbed for the ability of
GNNs to learn long-range patterns. Our analysis shows that several commonly used GNN variants with only depth-wise skip connections indeed
have problems learning long-range patterns. They
are clearly outperformed by an attention-based
GNN architecture that we propose for improving
both depth- and breadth-wise backpropagation.
We also verify that the presented architecture is
competitive on real-world data.

1. Introduction
The ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to capture
long-range dependencies in graphs with edge features heavily depends on their depth: at least K GNN layers are
needed to capture information that is K hops away. However, GNNs suffer from decreasing performance when the
number of layers is increased. Recently, several works have
identified and investigated different possible causes of this
decrease in performance: (1) over-fitting (Vashishth et al.,
1

Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. Correspondence to: Denis Lukovnikov <denis.lukovnikov@rub.de>, Asja
Fischer <asja.fischer@rub.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020), (2) over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019;
Zhao & Akoglu, 2020; Rong et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020),
(3) over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2020), and (4) possible
vanishing gradient (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Pascanu et al., 2013; He et al., 2016) problems (Li et al., 2019;
2020; Rahimi et al., 2018).
Our contributions in this paper are threefold. First, we identify design choices of GNN architectures that may limit their
ability to learn long-range patterns (Section 3). A simple
but effective approach to avoid vanishing gradients and to
reduce over-smoothing is the use of skip connections, as for
example implemented in Residual GCNs (RGCNs) (Li et al.,
2019), Jumping Knowledge Networks (Xu et al., 2018), and
Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNN) (Li et al., 2015).
However, this approach focuses on improving backpropagation only depth-wise, that is between representations
of the same node in successive layers. However, as we
shall discuss, they do not improve breadth-wise backpropagation, that is between representations of one node to the
representations of its neighbours in the previous layer. In
addition, we point out that the commonly used uniformly
weighted sum and max/min pooling aggregators can lead to
exponentially decaying gradients, which is related to oversquashing. Finally, we argue that some commonly used
techniques to take into account edge types or other edge
features may also lead to poor backpropagation behavior,
along with over-parameterization.
Second, in Section 4, we develop a GNN architecture for predictions on graphs with edge features and multi-relational
graphs, with a focus on avoiding the identified problems.
The presented architecture relies on attention-based aggregation to reduce exponential gradient decay, and ensures
effective breadth-wise backpropagation by adopting breadthwise residual connections. The resulting architecture is similar to Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) but simpler while
allowing to seamlessly integrate edge features.
Third, we propose two synthetic datasets that challenge
the ability of GNNs in learning long-range patterns. The
first task is designed to measure the ability of GNNs to
learn simple rules over multiple hops on a simple chain
while the second tests the models on semi-supervised node
classification on trees. We use these datasets to perform

