ARMS: Antithetic-REINFORCE-Multi-Sample Gradient for Binary Variables

Alek Dimitriev 1 Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract
Estimating the gradients for binary variables is
a task that arises frequently in various domains,
such as training discrete latent variable models.
What has been commonly used is a REINFORCE
based Monte Carlo estimation method that uses
either independent samples or pairs of negatively
correlated samples. To better utilize more than
two samples, we propose ARMS, an Antithetic
REINFORCE-based Multi-Sample gradient estimator. ARMS uses a copula to generate any number of mutually antithetic samples. It is unbiased,
has low variance, and generalizes both DisARM,
which we show to be ARMS with two samples,
and the leave-one-out REINFORCE (LOORF)
estimator, which is ARMS with uncorrelated samples. We evaluate ARMS on several datasets for
training generative models, and our experimental
results show that it outperforms competing methods. We also develop a version of ARMS for
optimizing the multi-sample variational bound,
and show that it outperforms both VIMCO and
DisARM. The code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
At the heart of many optimization problems is optimizing
an expectation of a function with respect to the parameters of the distribution, such as E(φ) = Eb [f (b)], where
b ∼ pφ (b). There are several approaches to estimate the
gradient ∇φ Eb [f (b)]. Most commonly used is the reparameterization gradient (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014). If f is differentiable, and b can be expressed
as a differentiable deterministic transformation b = Tφ ()
of a variable  ∼ p() not dependent on φ, then:
h
h
i
i
∇φ E(φ) = ∇φ E f Tφ () = E ∇φ f Tφ () .
1
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. Correspondence to:
Alek Dimitriev <alekdimi@utexas.edu>, Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/alekdimi/arms

If b is discrete, however, Tφ is not differentiable, and f is not
always differentiable, e.g., if it corresponds to the reward
function in reinforcement learning. This has inspired work
into replacing Tφ (and f ) with a continuous relaxation for
the discrete case, using the Gumbel-Softmax trick (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al., 2017). Some are biased (Bengio
et al., 2013; Lorberbom et al., 2019), and others, such as
REBAR (Tucker et al., 2017) and RELAX (Grathwohl et al.,
2018), contain a debiasing term. However, a relaxation
could require much more computation, e.g., in best subset
selection (Yin et al., 2020) where f (b) is the loss function,
and b is a (sparse) binary vector that selects a subset of
features on which to train the model. Evaluating a relaxed
version of f for any input would train the model with all
features at considerable computational cost if the number of
features is large.
A second, less well-known approach, is the measure valued
gradient (Rosca et al., 2019; Mohamed et al., 2020). If
possible, it expresses the dth element of the gradient as
a difference of two measures: ∇φd pφ (b) = cd (pd+ (b) −
pd− (b)) This allows us to estimate ∇φd E(φ) using as few
as two f evaluations per dimension:





∇φd E(φ) = cd Eb∼pd+ f (b) − Eb0 ∼pd− f (b) ,
but this needs to be done for each dimension separately,
which is not scalable for a large number of dimensions,
requiring twice as many function evaluations as dimensions.
The most widely applicable approach is the score function
estimator (Glynn, 1990; Fu, 2006), also known as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992). Using the log derivative trick
∇φ p(b) = p(b)∇φ ln p(b), it expresses the gradient as an
expectation with respect to the original distribution:




∇φ E(φ) = ∇φ Eb f (b) = Eb f (b)∇φ ln p(b) ,
which results in a simple form, only requiring the ability to
sample from the original distribution. Unlike the reparameterization trick, it is directly applicable to discrete variables,
but usually suffers from high variance in the form presented
above. Recent work has focused on various mechanisms
for variance reduction, applied either to general variational
inference tasks (Paisley et al., 2012; Ranganath et al., 2014;
Ruiz et al., 2016; Kucukelbir et al., 2017) or focusing on discrete (Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Gu et al., 2016) cases. Leveraging the specific structure of the distribution pφ (b), while

