World Model as a Graph:
Learning Latent Landmarks for Planning

Lunjun Zhang 1 2 Ge Yang 3 Bradly Stadie 4

Abstract

Planning, the ability to analyze the structure of a
problem in the large and decompose it into interrelated subproblems, is a hallmark of human intelligence. While deep reinforcement learning (RL)
has shown great promise for solving relatively
straightforward control tasks, it remains an open
problem how to best incorporate planning into existing deep RL paradigms to handle increasingly
complex environments. One prominent framework, Model-Based RL, learns a world model
and plans using step-by-step virtual rollouts. This
type of world model quickly diverges from reality
when the planning horizon increases, thus struggling at long-horizon planning. How can we learn
world models that endow agents with the ability to
do temporally extended reasoning? In this work,
we propose to learn graph-structured world models composed of sparse, multi-step transitions. We
devise a novel algorithm to learn latent landmarks
that are scattered (in terms of reachability) across
the goal space as the nodes on the graph. In this
same graph, the edges are the reachability estimates distilled from Q-functions. On a variety of
high-dimensional continuous control tasks ranging from robotic manipulation to navigation, we
demonstrate that our method, named L3 P , significantly outperforms prior work, and is oftentimes
the only method capable of leveraging both the
robustness of model-free RL and generalization
of graph-search algorithms. We believe our work
is an important step towards scalable planning in
reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
An intelligent agent should be able to solve difficult problems by breaking them down into sequences of simpler
problems. Classically, planning algorithms have been the
tool of choice for endowing AI agents with the ability to reason over complex long-horizon problems (Doran & Michie,
1966; Hart et al., 1968). Recent years have seen an uptick
in monographs examining the intersection of classical planning techniques – which excel at temporal abstraction – with
deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms – which excel
at state abstraction. Perhaps the ripest fruit born of this
relationship is the AlphaGo algorithm, wherein a model free
policy is combined with a MCTS (Coulom, 2006) planning
algorithm to achieve superhuman performance on the game
of Go (Silver et al., 2016a).

1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 MIT 4 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Correspondence to: Lunjun Zhang
<lunjun@cs.toronto.edu>.

In the field of robotics, progress on combining planning
and reinforcement learning has been somewhat less rapid,
although still resolute. Indeed, the laws of physics in the
real world are vastly more complex than the simple rules
of Go. Unlike board games such as chess and Go, which
have deterministic and known dynamics and discrete action
space, robots have to deal with a probabilistic and unpredictable world. Moreover, the action space for robotics is
often continuous. As a result of these difficulties, planning
in robotics presents a much harder problem. One general
class of methods (Sutton, 1991) seeks to combine modelbased planning and deep RL. These methods can be thought
of as an extension of model-predictive control (MPC) algorithms, with the key difference being that the agent is trained
over hypothetical experience in addition to the actually collected experience. The primary shortcoming of this class of
methods is that, like MCTS in AlphaGo, they resort to planning with action sequences – forcing the robot to plan for
each action at every hundred milliseconds. Planning on the
level of action sequences is fundamentally bottlenecked by
the accuracy of the learned dynamics model and the horizon
of a task, as the learned world model quickly diverges over
a long horizon. This limitation shows that world models in
the traditional Model-based RL (MBRL) setting often fail
to deliver the promise of planning.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Another general class of methods, Hierarchical RL (HRL),
introduces a higher-level learner to address the problem of

