MOTS: Minimax Optimal Thompson Sampling

Tianyuan Jin 1 Pan Xu 2 Jieming Shi 3 Xiaokui Xiao 1 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract
Thompson sampling is one of the most widely
used algorithms for many online decision problems, due to its simplicity in implementation and
superior empirical performance over other stateof-the-art methods. Despite its popularity and empirical success, it has remained an open problem
whether Thompson sampling
can match the min√
imax lower bound Ω( KT ) for K-armed bandit problems, where T is the total time horizon.
In this paper, we solve this long open problem
by proposing a variant of Thompson sampling
called MOTS that adaptively clips the sampling
instance of the chosen arm at each time step. We
prove that this simple variant of Thompson sampling
√ achieves the minimax optimal regret bound
O( KT ) for finite time horizon T , as well as the
asymptotic optimal regret bound for Gaussian rewards when T approaches infinity. To our knowledge, MOTS is the first Thompson sampling type
algorithm that achieves the minimax optimality
for multi-armed bandit problems.

1. Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a sequential
decision process which is typically described as a game
between the agent and the environment with K arms. The
game proceeds in T time steps. In each time step t =
1, . . . , T , the agent plays an arm At ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K} based
on the observation of the previous t − 1 time steps, and then
observes a reward rt that is independently generated from
a 1-subGaussian distribution with mean value µAt , where
µ1 , µ2 , · · · , µK ∈ R are unknown. The goal of the agent
is to maximize the cumulative reward over T time steps.
The performance of a strategy for MAB is measured by the
expected cumulative difference over T time steps between
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA 3 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Xiaokui
Xiao <xkxiao@nus.edu.sg>, Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

playing the best arm and playing the arm according to the
strategy, which is also called the regret of a bandit strategy.
Formally, the regret Rµ (T ) is defined as follows
Rµ (T ) = T ·

max
i∈{1,2,··· ,K}

" T
#
X
µi − Eµ
rt .

(1)

t=1

For a fixed time horizon T , the problem-independent lower
bound (Auer et al., 2002b) states
√ that any strategy has at
least a regret in the order of Ω( KT ), which is called the
minimax optimal regret. On the other hand, for a fixed model
(i.e., µ1 , . . . , µK are fixed), Lai & Robbins (1985) proved
that any strategy must have at least C(µ) log(T )(1 − o(1))
regret when the horizon T approaches infinity, where C(µ)
is a constant depending on the model. Therefore, a strategy
with a regret upper-bounded by C(µ) log(T )(1 − o(1)) is
asymptotically optimal.
This paper studies the earliest bandit strategy, Thompson
sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933). It has been observed in
practice that TS often achieves a smaller regret than many
upper confidence bound (UCB)-based algorithms (Chapelle
& Li, 2011; Wang & Chen, 2018). In addition, TS is simple
and easy to implement. Despite these advantages, the theoretical analysis of TS algorithms has not been established
until the past decade. In particular, in the seminal work
by Agrawal & Goyal (2012), they provided the first finitetime analysis of TS. Kaufmann et al. (2012) and Agrawal &
Goyal (2013) showed that the regret bound of TS is asymptotically optimal when using Beta priors. Subsequently,
Agrawal & Goyal
√ (2017) showed that TS with Beta priors
achieves an O( KT log T ) problem-independent regret
bound while maintaining the asymptotic optimality. In addition, they proved that TS with Gaussian
priors can achieve
√
an improved regret bound O( KT log K). Agrawal &
Goyal (2017) also established the following regret lower
bound for TS: the TS
√ strategy with Gaussian priors has a
worst-case regret Ω( KT log K).
Main Contributions. It remains an open problem (Li &
Chapelle, 2012) whether TS type algorithms
can achieve
√
the minimax optimal regret bound O( KT ) for MAB
problems. In this paper, we solve this open problem by
proposing a variant of Thompson sampling, referred to as
Minimax Optimal Thompson Sampling (MOTS), which
clips the sampling instances for each arm based on the his-

