A Collective Learning Framework to Boost GNN Expressiveness
for Node Classification
Mengyue Hang 1 Jennifer Neville 1 Bruno Ribero 1

Abstract
Collective Inference (CI) is a procedure designed
to boost weak relational classifiers, specially for
node classification tasks. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) are strong classifiers that have been used
with great success. Unfortunately, most existing
practical GNNs are not most-expressive (universal). Thus, it is an open question whether one can
improve strong relational node classifiers, such
as GNNs, with CI. In this work, we investigate
this question and propose collective learning for
GNNs —a general collective classification approach for node representation learning that increases their representation power. We show that
previous attempts to incorporate CI into GNNs
fail to boost their expressiveness because they do
not adapt CI’s Monte Carlo sampling to representation learning. We evaluate our proposed framework with a variety of state-of-the-art GNNs. Our
experiments show a consistent, significant boost
in node classification accuracy —regardless of the
choice of underlying GNN— for inductive node
classification in partially-labeled graphs, across
five real-world network datasets.

1. Introduction
A large body of work in relational learning focuses on collective classification frameworks for strengthening poorlyexpressive (i.e., local) relational node classifiers (e.g., relational logistic regression, naive Bayes, decision trees
(Neville et al., 2003a)), by incorporating dependencies
among node labels and propagating inferences during classification to improve performance, particularly in semisupervised settings (Koller et al., 2007; Pfeiffer III et al.,
2015; Xiang & Neville, 2008). However, a long-standing
open question is when/if collective inference is needed, par1
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to: Mengyue Hang
<hangm@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ticularly as more expressive relational graph models become
available, e.g., Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
Despite the recent success of GNNs at node and graph
classification tasks (Hamilton et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling,
2016; Luan et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018), these GNNs are
no more powerful than the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph
isomorphism test, and thus, inherit its shortcomings. In other
words, existing GNNs are not universal (most-expressive)
graph representations (Chen et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019;
Murphy et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2018). This implies that these
GNNs (which we refer to as WL-GNNs and also includes
GCNs (Kipf & Welling, 2016)) are not expressive enough
for some node classification tasks, since their representation
can provably fail to distinguish non-isomorphic nodes with
different labels.
While recently there has been increasing interest in developing more expressive WL-GNNs for graph classification tasks
that can differentiate non-isomorphic graphs by considering
higher-order GNNs (e.g. (Maron et al., 2019a; Bouritsas
et al., 2020; Vignac et al., 2020; Azizian & Lelarge, 2021;
Beaini et al., 2020), these methods primarily consider graphlevel representations and, even when they can be adapted
for node-level classification tasks, they would be computationally expensive to apply. Is there a easy-to-implement
add-on procedure to existing WL-GNNs that can boost their
node classification expressiveness?
To address this question, in this work, we theoretically and
empirically investigate the potential for collective inference
to improve the expressiveness of GNNs. We devise an addon training and inference procedure, which we denote collective learning, that incorporates label dependencies among
neighboring nodes via predicted label sampling—akin to
how collective classification improves not-so-expressive
classifiers—and show that it can improve the expressiveness of any WL-GNN.
Contributions:
• We propose CL+GNN, an add-on collective learning
framework to GNNs that provably boosts their expressiveness for node classification tasks, beyond that of
an optimal WL-GNN∗ . CL+GNN uses self-supervised
∗

We use the term optimal WL-GNN to refer to the most ex-

