Coach-Player Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
for Dynamic Team Composition

Bo Liu 1 * Qiang Liu 1 Peter Stone 1 Animesh Garg 2 3 Yuke Zhu 1 3 Animashree Anandkumar 3 4

Abstract

coach omniscient

coach omniscient
view

view

In real-world multi-agent systems, agents with
different capabilities may join or leave without altering the team’s overarching goals. Coordinating
teams with such dynamic composition is challenging: the optimal team strategy varies with the
composition. We propose COPA, a coach-player
framework to tackle this problem. We assume
the coach has a global view of the environment
and coordinates the players, who only have partial views, by distributing individual strategies.
Specifically, we 1) adopt the attention mechanism
for both the coach and the players; 2) propose a
variational objective to regularize learning; and 3)
design an adaptive communication method to let
the coach decide when to communicate with the
players. We validate our methods on a resource
collection task, a rescue game, and the StarCraft
micromanagement tasks. We demonstrate zeroshot generalization to new team compositions.
Our method achieves comparable or better performance than the setting where all players have
a full view of the environment. Moreover, we see
that the performance remains high even when the
coach communicates as little as 13% of the time
using the adaptive communication strategy.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is
the problem of coordinating a team of agents to perform a
shared task. It has broad applications in autonomous vehicle
teams (Cao et al., 2012), sensor networks (Choi et al., 2009),
finance (Lee et al., 2007), and social science (Leibo et al.,
2017). Recent works in multi-agent reinforcement learn*
Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. 1 Department of
Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
USA 2 University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 3 Nvidia 4 California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA. Correspondence to: Bo
Liu <bliu@cs.utexas.edu>.

a fixed set
of teams

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

gradient

sample

action

action
players

(a) Training

world

new players

world

(b) Zero-shot generalization

Figure 1. In training, we sample teams from a set of compositions.
The coach observes the entire world and coordinates players by
broadcasting strategies periodically. In execution, the learned
strategy generalizes to new teams.

ing (MARL) powered by deep neural networks have shed
light on solving challenging problems such as playing StarCraft (Rashid et al., 2018) and soccer (Kurach et al., 2020).
Among these methods, centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) has gained extensive attention since
learning in a centralized way enables better cooperation
while executing independently makes the system efficient
and scalable (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018; Son
et al., 2019; Mahajan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020a). However, most deep CTDE approaches for cooperative MARL
are limited to a fixed number of homogeneous agents.
Real-world multi-agent tasks, on the other hand, often involve dynamic teams. For example, in a soccer game, a team
receiving a red card has one fewer player. In this case, the
team may switch to a more defensive strategy. As another
example, consider an autonomous vehicle team for delivery.
The control over the team depends on how many vehicles
we have, how much load each vehicle permits, as well as the
delivery destinations. In both examples, the optimal team
strategy varies according to the team composition,1 i.e., the
size of the team and each agent’s capability. In these settings, it is computationally prohibitive to re-train the agents
for each new team composition. Thus, it is desirable that the
model can generalize zero-shot to new team compositions
that are unseen during training.
1

th

strategy

strategy

Team composition is part of an environmental scenario (de Witt et al., 2019), which also includes other environment
entities. The formal definition is in Section 2.1.

