Leveraging Good Representations in Linear Contextual Bandits

Matteo Papini * † 1 Andrea Tirinzoni * 1 Marcello Restelli 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Matteo Pirotta 2

Abstract
The linear contextual bandit literature is mostly
focused on the design of efficient learning algorithms for a given representation. However, a
contextual bandit problem may admit multiple linear representations, each one with different characteristics that directly impact the regret of the
learning algorithm. In particular, recent works
showed that there exist “good” representations
for which constant problem-dependent regret can
be achieved. In this paper, we first provide a
systematic analysis of the different definitions of
“good” representations proposed in the literature.
We then propose a novel selection algorithm able
to adapt to the best representation in a set of M
candidates. We show that the regret is indeed
never worse than the regret obtained by running
L IN UCB on the best representation (up to a ln M
factor). As a result, our algorithm achieves constant regret whenever a “good” representation is
available in the set. Furthermore, we show that
the algorithm may still achieve constant regret by
implicitly constructing a “good” representation,
even when none of the initial representations is
“good”. Finally, we empirically validate our theoretical findings in a number of standard contextual
bandit problems.

1. Introduction
The stochastic contextual bandit is a general framework to
formalize sequential decision-making problems in which
at each step the learner observes a context drawn from a
fixed distribution, it plays an action, and it receives a noisy
reward. The goal of the learner is to maximize the reward
accumulated over n rounds, and the performance is typically
measured by the regret w.r.t. playing the optimal action in
each context. This paradigm has found application in a large
Equal contribution † Work done while at Facebook AI Research 1 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Matteo Papini <matteo.papini@polimi.it>.
*

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

range of domains, including recommendation systems, online advertising, and clinical trials (e.g., Bouneffouf & Rish,
2019). Linear contextual bandit (Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020) is one of the most studied instances of contextual bandit due to its efficiency and strong theoretical guarantees. In
this setting, the reward for each context x and action a is assumed to be representable as the linear combination between
d-dimensional features φ(x, a) ∈ Rd and an unknown parameter θ? ∈ Rd . In this case, we refer to φ as a realizable
representation. Algorithms based on the optimism-in-theface-of-uncertainty principle such as L IN UCB (Chu et al.,
2011) and OFUL (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011),
√ have been
proved to achieve minimax regret bound O Sd n ln(nL)

2 2
and problem-dependent regret O S ∆d ln2 (nL) , where ∆
is the minimum gap between the reward of the best and
second-best action across contexts, and L and S are upper
bounds to the `2 -norm of the features φ and θ? , respectively.
Unfortunately, the dimension d, and the norm upper bounds
L and S, are not the only characteristics of a representation
to have an effect on the regret and existing bounds may fail
at capturing the impact of the context-action features on the
performance of the algorithm. In fact, as illustrated in Fig. 1,
running L IN UCB with different realizable representations
with same parameters d and S may lead to significantly
different performance. Notably, there are “good” representations for which L IN UCB achieves constant regret, i.e., not
scaling with the horizon n. Recent works identified different conditions on the representation that can be exploited to
achieve constant regret for L IN UCB (Hao et al., 2020; Wu
et al., 2020). Similar conditions have also been leveraged
to prove other interesting learning properties, such as sublinear regret for greedy algorithms (Bastani et al., 2020), or
regret guarantees for model selection between linear and
multi-arm representations (Chatterji et al., 2020; Ghosh
et al., 2020). While all these conditions, often referred to
as diversity conditions, depend on how certain context-arm
features span the full Rd space, there is no systematic analysis of their connections and of which ones can be leveraged
to achieve constant regret in linear contextual bandits.
In this paper, we further investigate the concept of “good”
representations in linear bandit and we provide the following contributions: 1) We review the diversity conditions
available in the literature, clarify their relationships, and
discuss how they are used. We then focus on our primary

