Post-Selection Inference with HSIC-Lasso
Tobias Freidling 1 Benjamin Poignard 2 3 Héctor Climente-González 3 Makoto Yamada 3 4

Abstract
Detecting influential features in non-linear and/or
high-dimensional data is a challenging and increasingly important task in machine learning.
Variable selection methods have thus been gaining
much attention as well as post-selection inference.
Indeed, the selected features can be significantly
flawed when the selection procedure is not accounted for. We propose a selective inference
procedure using the so-called model-free ”HSICLasso” based on the framework of truncated Gaussians combined with the polyhedral lemma. We
then develop an algorithm, which allows for low
computational costs and provides a selection of
the regularisation parameter. The performance
of our method is illustrated by both artificial and
real-world data based experiments, which emphasise a tight control of the type-I error, even for
small sample sizes.

1. Introduction
The choice of a relevant statistical model in light of the
observations prior to any statistical inference is ubiquitous
in statistics. This reduces computational costs and fosters
parsimonious models. For example, in linear regression
analysis, allowing for a subset of features to enter the
model, i.e. the sparsity assumption, is particularly suited
to high-dimensional data, which potentially provides more
robust predictions. Yet, should one follow the standard
procedure, which assumes a model specified a priori, the
data-driven nature of the selection procedure would be
tacitly overlooked. Therefore, applying classical inference
methods may entail seriously flawed results, as it was
highlighted by Leeb & Pötscher (2005; 2006), among others.
1

Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Graduate
School of Economics, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan 3 Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), RIKEN, Kyoto, Japan
4
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
Correspondence to: Tobias Freidling <taf40@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The most straightforward remedy is sample splitting,
which uses one part of the data for model selection and the
other part for inference, cf. (Cox, 1975). However, this
approach leaves space for improvement as the selection-data
is outright disregarded at the inference step. In particular,
two major paradigms regarding the treatment of model
selection have evolved. Berk et al. (2013) developed a
post-selection inference (PSI) method, which enables to
circumvent distorting effects inherent to any selection
procedure. Yet, in practice this method often leads to
overly conservative confidence intervals and entails high
computational costs.
In contrast to this work, Lee et al. (2016) and Tibshirani
et al. (2016) only accounted for the actual selection outcome
by conditioning on the latter at the inference step. This
requires control over or at least insight into the selection
procedure in order to characterise the selection event. Under
the Gaussian assumption, it is possible to express this event
as a restriction on the distribution of the inference target,
using the so-called polyhedral lemma, and derive a pivotal
quantity. Due to its comparatively low computational cost
and general set-up, this method was applied with great
success to a variety of model selection approaches, e.g.
(Hyun et al., 2018) and (Taylor & Tibshirani, 2018).
Variable selection procedure methods typically include
step-wise procedures - see (Hocking, 1976) -, information
criteria, with the AIC and its extensions - see (Akaike, 1974)
-, and regularisation methods, pioneered by Tibshirani’s
work on the Lasso (1996). Their limitations, especially regarding assumptions such as linearity or certain probability
distributions, fostered a flourishing research on model-free
feature selection. The kernel-based Hilbert-Schmidt
independence criterion (HSIC) (2005), proposed by Gretton
et al., emerged as a key ingredient as it enables to quantify
the dependence between two random variables. This
allows for simple feature selection: For instance, one can
select a fixed number of covariates that exhibit the highest
HSIC-estimates with the response, which is referred to
as HSIC-ordering in the rest of the paper. HSIC-Lasso
(2014), proposed by Yamada et al., additionally accounts
for the dependence structure among the covariates and
selects features with an L1 -penalty. Yamada et al. (2018)
developed a selective inference approach for the former
selection procedure; the analogous results for HSIC-Lasso,
however, are still an important blind spot in PSI.

