DFAC Framework: Factorizing the Value Function via
Quantile Mixture for Multi-Agent Distributional Q-Learning

Wei-Fang Sun 1 2 3 Cheng-Kuang Lee 2 Chun-Yi Lee 1

Abstract
In fully cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) settings, the environments are
highly stochastic due to the partial observability of each agent and the continuously changing policies of the other agents. To address the
above issues, we integrate distributional RL and
value function factorization methods by proposing a Distributional Value Function Factorization
(DFAC) framework to generalize expected value
function factorization methods to their DFAC variants. DFAC extends the individual utility functions from deterministic variables to random variables, and models the quantile function of the total
return as a quantile mixture. To validate DFAC,
we demonstrate DFAC’s ability to factorize a simple two-step matrix game with stochastic rewards
and perform experiments on all Super Hard tasks
of StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge, showing that
DFAC is able to outperform expected value function factorization baselines.

1. Introduction
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), one of the
popular research directions is to enhance the training procedure of fully cooperative and decentralized agents. Examples of such agents include a fleet of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), a group of autonomous cars, etc. This
research direction aims to develop a decentralized and cooperative behavior policy for each agent, and is especially
difficult for MARL settings without an explicit communication channel. The most straightforward approach is independent Q-learning (IQL) (Tan, 1993), where each agent is
trained independently, with their behavior policies aimed to
1
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan 2 NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
Corporation 3 Wei-Fang Sun contributed to the work during
his NVIDIA internship. Correspondence to: Chun-Yi Lee
<cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

optimize the overall rewards in each episode. Nevertheless,
each agent’s policy may not converge owing to two main
difficulties: (1) non-stationary environments caused by the
changing behaviors of the agents, and (2) spurious reward
signals originated from the actions of the other agents. The
agent’s partial observability of the environment further exacerbates the above issues. Therefore, in the past few years,
a number of MARL researchers turned their attention to
centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
approaches, with an objective to stabilize the training procedure while maintaining the agents’ abilities for decentralized
execution (Oliehoek et al., 2016). Among these CTDE approaches, value function factorization methods (Sunehag
et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019) are especially promising in terms of their superior performances and
data efficiency (Samvelyan et al., 2019).
Value function factorization methods introduce the assumption of individual-global-max (IGM) (Son et al., 2019),
which assumes that each agent’s optimal actions result in
the optimal joint actions of the entire group. Based on IGM,
the total return of a group of agents can be factorized into
separate utility functions (Guestrin et al., 2001) (or simply
‘utility’ hereafter) for each agent. The utilities allow the
agents to independently derive their own optimal actions
during execution, and deliver promising performance in StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) (Samvelyan et al.,
2019). Unfortunately, current value function factorization
methods only concentrate on estimating the expectations
of the utilities, overlooking the additional information contained in the full return distributions. Such information,
nevertheless, has been demonstrated beneficial for policy
learning in the recent literature (Lyle et al., 2019).
In the past few years, distributional RL has been empirically shown to enhance value function estimation in various
single-agent RL (SARL) domains (Bellemare et al., 2017;
Dabney et al., 2018b;a; Rowland et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019). Instead of estimating a single scalar Q-value, it
approximates the probability distribution of the return by
either a categorical distribution (Bellemare et al., 2017) or a
quantile function (Dabney et al., 2018b;a). Even though the
above methods may be beneficial to the MARL domain due
to the ability to capture uncertainty, it is inherently incompat-

