FL-NTK: A Neural Tangent Kernel-based Framework
for Federated Learning Analysis
Baihe Huang 1 Xiaoxiao Li 2 Zhao Song 3 Xin Yang 4

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging learning
scheme that allows different distributed clients to
train deep neural networks together without data
sharing. Neural networks have become popular
due to their unprecedented success. To the best of
our knowledge, the theoretical guarantees of FL
concerning neural networks with explicit forms
and multi-step updates are unexplored. Nevertheless, training analysis of neural networks in FL
is non-trivial for two reasons: first, the objective
loss function we are optimizing is non-smooth and
non-convex, and second, we are even not updating
in the gradient direction. Existing convergence
results for gradient descent-based methods heavily rely on the fact that the gradient direction is
used for updating. This paper presents a new class
of convergence analysis for FL, Federated Learning Neural Tangent Kernel (FL-NTK), which corresponds to overparamterized ReLU neural networks trained by gradient descent in FL and is
inspired by the analysis in Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). Theoretically, FL-NTK converges to a
global-optimal solution at a linear rate with properly tuned learning parameters. Furthermore, with
proper distributional assumptions, FL-NTK can
also achieve good generalization.

1. Introduction
In traditional centralized training, deep learning models
learn from the data, and data are collected in a database on
the centralized server. In many fields, such as healthcare and
natural language processing, models are typically learned
1
Peking University, Beijing, China 2 The University of
British Colombia, Vancouver, BC, Canada 3 Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, United States 4 The University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. Correspondence to:
Baihe Huang <baihehuang@pku.edu.cn>, Xiaoxiao Li <xiaoxiao.li@aya.yale.edu>, Zhao Song <magic.linuxkde@gmail.com>,
Xin Yang <yx1992@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

from personal data. These personal data are subject to regulations such as California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
(Legislature, 2018), Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) (Act, 1996), and General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) of European Union. Due
to the data regulations, standard centralized learning techniques are not appropriate, and users are much less likely
to share data. Thus, the data are only available on the local
data owners (i.e. edge devices). Federated learning (FL) is
a new type of learning scheme that avoids centralizing data
in model training. FL allows local data owners (also known
as clients) to locally train the private model and then send
the model weights or gradients to the central server. Then
central server aggregates the shared model parameters to
update new global model, and broadcasts the the parameters
of global model to each local client.
Quite different from the centralized training, FL has the
following unique properties. First, the training data are
distributed on an astonishing number of devices, and the
connection between the central server and the device is
slow. Thus, the computational cost is a key factor in FL.
In communication-efficient FL, local clients are required to
update model parameters for a few steps locally then send
their parameters to the server (McMahan et al., 2017). Second, due to the fact that the data are collected from different
clients, the local data points can be sampled from different local distributions. When this happens during training,
convergence may not be guaranteed.
The above two unique properties not only bring challenges
to algorithm design but also make theoretical analysis much
harder. There have been many efforts developing convergence guarantees for FL algorithms based on the assumptions of convexity and smoothness for the objective functions (Yu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020c; Khaled et al., 2020).
Although a recent study (Li et al., 2021) shows theoretical
studies of FL on neural networks, its framework fails to generate multiple-local updates analysis, which is a key feature
in FL. One of the most conspicuous questions to ask is:
Can we build a unified and generalizable convergence
analysis framework for ReLU neural networks in FL?
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer to this question.

