Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention

Hugo Touvron 1 2 Matthieu Cord 1 2 Matthijs Douze 1
Francisco Massa 1 Alexandre Sablayrolles 1 Hervé Jégou 1

Abstract

⚗↑

Recently, neural networks purely based on attention were shown to address image understanding
tasks such as image classification. These highperforming vision transformers are pre-trained
with hundreds of millions of images using a large
infrastructure, thereby limiting their adoption.
In this work, we produce competitive convolutionfree transformers trained on ImageNet only using a single computer in less than 3 days. Our
reference vision transformer (86M parameters)
achieves top-1 accuracy of 83.1% (single-crop)
on ImageNet with no external data.
We also introduce a teacher-student strategy specific to transformers. It relies on a distillation
token ensuring that the student learns from the
teacher through attention, typically from a convnet teacher. The learned transformers are competitive (85.2% top-1 acc.) with the state of the art
on ImageNet, and similarly when transferred to
other tasks. We will share our code and models.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have been the main design
paradigm for image understanding tasks, as initially demonstrated on image classification tasks. One of the ingredient
to their success was the availability of a large training set,
namely Imagenet. Motivated by the success of attentionbased models in Natural Language Processing, there has
been an increasing interest in architectures leveraging attention mechanisms within convnets. More recently several
researchers have proposed hybrid architecture transplanting
transformer ingredients to convnets to solve vision tasks.
The vision transformer (ViT) introduced by Dosovitskiy
et al. (2020) is an architecture directly inherited from Natural Language Processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), but applied
1

Facebook AI 2 Sorbonne University. Correspondence to: Hugo
Touvron <htouvron@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

⚗
⚗

⚗

Figure 1. Throughput and accuracy on Imagenet of our method
(no external training data). The throughput is measured as the
number of images processed per second on a V100 GPU. DeiT-B
is identical to ViT-B, but with training adapted to a data-starving
regime. It is learned in a few days on one machine. The symbol ⚗
refers to models trained with our transformer-specific distillation.
See Table 5 for details and more models.

to image classification with raw image patches as input.
Their paper presented excellent results with transformers
trained with a large private labelled image dataset containing 300 millions images. The paper concluded that vision
transformers “do not generalize well when trained on insufficient amounts of data”. The training of these models
involved extensive computing resources.
In our paper, we train a vision transformer on a single 8GPU node in two to three days (53 hours of pre-training,
and optionally 20 hours of fine-tuning) that is competitive
with convnets having a similar number of parameters and
efficiency. It uses Imagenet as the sole training set. We
build upon the visual transformer architecture from Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) and improvements included in the timm
library (Wightman, 2019). With our Data-efficient image
Transformers (DeiT), we report large improvements over
previous results, see Figure 1. Our ablation study details
the hyper-parameters and key ingredients for a successful
training, such as repeated augmentation.

