Navigation Turing Test (NTT): Learning to Evaluate Human-Like Navigation

Sam Devlin * 1 Raluca Georgescu * 1 Ida Momennejad * 2 Jaroslaw Rzepecki * 1 Evelyn Zuniga * 1
Gavin Costello 3 Guy Leroy 1 Ali Shaw 3 Katja Hofmann 1

Abstract
A key challenge on the path to developing agents
that learn complex human-like behavior is the
need to quickly and accurately quantify humanlikeness. While human assessments of such behavior can be highly accurate, speed and scalability are limited. We address these limitations
through a novel automated Navigation Turing Test
(ANTT) that learns to predict human judgments
of human-likeness. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our automated NTT on a navigation task
in a complex 3D environment. We investigate six
classifcation models to shed light on the types of
architectures best suited to this task, and validate
them against data collected through a human NTT.
Our best models achieve high accuracy when distinguishing true human and agent behavior. At the
same time, we show that predicting fner-grained
human assessment of agents’ progress towards
human-like behavior remains unsolved. Our work
takes an important step towards agents that more
effectively learn complex human-like behavior.

1. Introduction
Developing agents capable of learning complex human-like
behaviors is a key goal of artifcial intelligence research
(Winston, 1984). Progress in this area would lead to new
applications, from engaging video games (Soni & Hingston,
2008), to intuitive virtual assistants (Cowan et al., 2017) and
robots (Scheutz et al., 2007). Yet, despite striking successes
in training highly skilled agents (Vinyals et al., 2019), quantifying and making progress towards learning human-like
behavior remains an open challenge.

mated NTT or ANTT), a novel approach to learn to quantify
the degree to which behavior is perceived as human-like
by humans. While human judges can be highly accurate
when judging human-like behavior, their scalability and
speed are limited. As a result, it is prohibitive to use human
assessments in, e.g., iterations of training machine learningbased agents. We aim to remove this bottleneck, providing
a scalable and accurate proxy of human assessments.
We demonstrate our NTT approach on the complex task of
goal-directed navigation in 3D space. This task is highly
relevant and practical because: (1) it has been studied from a
wide range of perspectives in both biological (Banino et al.,
2018; de Cothi, 2020) and artifcial (Alonso et al., 2020;
Chaplot et al., 2020) agents, so is relatively well understood;
and (2) artifcial approaches achieve a high level of task
success (Alonso et al., 2020), so profcient agents can be
obtained enabling us to focus on human-likeness. While the
majority of research on learning 3D navigation has focused
on task success, we show that a high success is not suffcient
for human-like behavior.
Our key contributions compared to prior work (Sec. 2) are:
(1) we introduce an automated NTT for assessing humanlike behavior and investigate six representative architectures
that capture principal design choices of this task (Sec. 3); (2)
we devise methodology for validating our automated NTT
against a human Navigation Turing Test (HNTT) and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness (Sec. 4); (3) our results
show high agreement of ANTT with human judges when
comparing human behavior to state-of-the-art reinforcement
learning agents (Sec. 5). At the same time, we demonstrate
that capturing fner gradations of human-likeness in artifcial agents remains an open challenge. In addition to the
potential to drive learning of more human-like behavior, our
work opens the door to a deeper understanding of human
decision making when assessing human-like behavior.

We propose an automated Navigation Turing Test (auto*
1
Equal contribution
Microsoft Research, Cambridge,
UK 2 Microsoft Research, New York, NY, USA 3 Ninja
Theory, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Sam Devlin
<sam.devlin@microsoft.com>,
Katja
Hofmann
<katja.hofmann@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2. Related Work
The question of how to systematically assess whether an
automated agent behaves in a human-like manner was compellingly addressed by Alan Turing (Turing, 1950). Initially
called the “imitation game”, and now adapted and widely
known as “Turing Test”, it asks a human judge to identify
which of two respondents is human, and which is machine.

