Convex Regularization in Monte-Carlo Tree Search

Tuan Dam 1 Carlo D’Eramo 1 Jan Peters 1 Joni Pajarinen 1 2

Abstract
Monte-Carlo planning and Reinforcement Learning (RL) are essential to sequential decision making. The recent AlphaGo and AlphaZero algorithms have shown how to successfully combine
these two paradigms to solve large-scale sequential decision problems. These methodologies exploit a variant of the well-known UCT algorithm
to trade off the exploitation of good actions and
the exploration of unvisited states, but their empirical success comes at the cost of poor sampleefficiency and high computation time. In this
paper, we overcome these limitations by introducing the use of convex regularization in MonteCarlo Tree Search (MCTS) to drive exploration efficiently and to improve policy updates. First, we
introduce a unifying theory on the use of generic
convex regularizers in MCTS, deriving the first
regret analysis of regularized MCTS and showing
that it guarantees an exponential convergence rate.
Second, we exploit our theoretical framework to
introduce novel regularized backup operators for
MCTS, based on the relative entropy of the policy
update and, more importantly, on the Tsallis entropy of the policy, for which we prove superior
theoretical guarantees. We empirically verify the
consequence of our theoretical results on a toy
problem. Finally, we show how our framework
can easily be incorporated in AlphaGo and we
empirically show the superiority of convex regularization, w.r.t. representative baselines, on wellknown RL problems across several Atari games.

1. Introduction
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a well-known algorithm to solve decision-making problems through the combination of Monte-Carlo planning and an incremental tree
1

Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität
Darmstadt, Germany 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Automation, Aalto University, Finland. Correspondence to: Tuan
Dam <tuan.dam@tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

structure (Coulom, 2006). MCTS provides a principled approach for trading off between exploration and exploitation
in sequential decision making. Moreover, recent advances
have shown how to enable MCTS in continuous and large
problems (Silver et al., 2016; Yee et al., 2016). Most remarkably, AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) and AlphaZero (Silver
et al., 2017a;b) couple MCTS with neural networks trained
using Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998)
methods, e.g., Deep Q-Learning (Mnih et al., 2015), to
speed up learning of large scale problems. In particular, a
neural network is used to compute value function estimates
of states as a replacement of time-consuming Monte-Carlo
rollouts, and another neural network is used to estimate
policies as a probability prior for the therein introduced
PUCT action selection strategy, a variant of well-known
UCT sampling strategy commonly used in MCTS for exploration (Kocsis et al., 2006). Despite AlphaGo and AlphaZero achieving state-of-the-art performance in games
with high branching factor like Go (Silver et al., 2016) and
Chess (Silver et al., 2017a), both methods suffer from poor
sample-efficiency, mostly due to the polynomial convergence rate of PUCT (Xiao et al., 2019). This problem,
combined with the high computation time to evaluate the
deep neural networks, significantly hinder the applicability
of both methodologies.
In this paper, we provide a theory of the use of convex
regularization in MCTS, which proved to be an efficient
solution for driving exploration and stabilizing learning in
RL (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017a; Haarnoja et al., 2018;
Buesing et al., 2020). In particular, we show how a regularized objective function in MCTS can be seen as an
instance of the Legendre-Fenchel transform, similar to previous findings on the use of duality in RL (Mensch & Blondel, 2018; Geist et al., 2019; Nachum & Dai, 2020a) and
game theory (Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2006; Pavel, 2007).
Establishing our theoretical framework, we can derive the
first regret analysis of regularized MCTS, and prove that a
generic convex regularizer guarantees an exponential convergence rate to the solution of the regularized objective
function, which improves on the polynomial rate of PUCT.
These results provide a theoretical ground for the use of
arbitrary entropy-based regularizers in MCTS until now
limited to maximum entropy (Xiao et al., 2019), among
which we specifically study the relative entropy of policy

