On the Generalization Power of
Overfitted Two-Layer Neural Tangent Kernel Models

Peizhong Ju 1 Xiaojun Lin 1 Ness B. Shroff 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the generalization performance of min `2 -norm overfitting solutions for
the neural tangent kernel (NTK) model of a twolayer neural network with ReLU activation that
has no bias term. We show that, depending on
the ground-truth function, the test error of overfitted NTK models exhibits characteristics that are
different from the “double-descent” of other overparameterized linear models with simple Fourier
or Gaussian features. Specifically, for a class
of learnable functions, we provide a new upper
bound of the generalization error that approaches
a small limiting value, even when the number
of neurons p approaches infinity. This limiting
value further decreases with the number of training samples n. For functions outside of this class,
we provide a lower bound on the generalization
error that does not diminish to zero even when n
and p are both large.

1. Introduction
Recently, there is significant interest in understanding why
overparameterized deep neural networks (DNNs) can still
generalize well (Zhang et al., 2017; Advani et al., 2020),
which seems to defy the classical understanding of biasvariance tradeoff in statistical learning (Bishop, 2006;
Hastie et al., 2009; Stein, 1956; James & Stein, 1992; LeCun et al., 1991; Tikhonov, 1943). Towards this direction, a
recent line of study has focused on overparameterized linear
models (Belkin et al., 2018b; 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020;
Hastie et al., 2019; Muthukumar et al., 2019; Ju et al., 2020;
Mei & Montanari, 2019). For linear models with simple features (e.g., Gaussian features and Fourier features) (Belkin
et al., 2018b; 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2019;
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA. 2 Department of ECE and
CSE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaojun Lin <linx@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Muthukumar et al., 2019; Ju et al., 2020), an interesting
“double-descent” phenomenon has been observed. Thus,
there is a region where the number of model parameters (or
linear features) is larger than the number of samples (and
thus overfitting occurs), but the generalization error actually decreases with the number of features. However, linear
models with these simple features are still quite different
from nonlinear neural networks. Thus, although such results
provide some hint why overparameterization and overfitting
may be harmless, it is still unclear whether similar conclusions apply to neural networks.
In this paper, we are interested in linear models based on the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018), which can
be viewed as a useful intermediate step towards modeling
nonlinear neural networks. Essentially, NTK can be seen as
a linear approximation of neural networks when the weights
of the neurons do not change much. Indeed, (Li & Liang,
2018; Du et al., 2018) have shown that, for a wide and
fully-connected two-layer neural network, both the neuron
weights and their activation patterns do not change much
after gradient descent (GD) training with a sufficiently small
step size. As a result, such a shallow and wide neural network is approximately linear in the weights when there are
a sufficient number of neurons, which suggests the utility of
the NTK model.
Despite its linearity, however, characterizing the double descent of such a NTK model remains elusive. The work in
(Mei & Montanari, 2019) also studies the double-descent
of a linear version of two-layer neural network. It uses
the so-called “random-feature” model, where the bottomlayer weights are random and fixed, and only the top-layer
weights are trained. (In comparison, the NTK model for
such a two-layer neural network corresponds to training
only the bottom-layer weights.) However, the setting there
requires the number of neurons, the number of samples,
and the data dimension to all grow proportionally to infinity. In contrast, we are interested in the setting where the
number of samples is given, and the number of neurons is
allowed to be much larger than the number of samples. As
a consequence of the different setting, in (Mei & Montanari,
2019) eventually only linear ground-truth functions can be
learned. (Similar settings are also studied in (d’Ascoli et al.,

