Label-Only Membership Inference Attacks
Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 1 Florian Tramèr 2 Nicholas Carlini 3 Nicolas Papernot 1

Abstract
Membership inference is one of the simplest privacy threats faced by machine learning models
that are trained on private sensitive data. In this
attack, an adversary infers whether a particular
point was used to train the model, or not, by observing the model’s predictions. Whereas current
attack methods all require access to the model’s
predicted confidence score, we introduce a labelonly attack that instead evaluates the robustness
of the model’s predicted (hard) labels under perturbations of the input, to infer membership. Our
label-only attack is not only as-effective as attacks requiring access to confidence scores, it
also demonstrates that a class of defenses against
membership inference, which we call “confidence
masking” because they obfuscate the confidence
scores to thwart attacks, are insufficient to prevent
the leakage of private information. Our experiments show that training with differential privacy
or strong `2 regularization are the only current
defenses that meaningfully decrease leakage of
private information, even for points that are outliers of the training distribution.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are often trained on sensitive
or private user information, e.g., medical records (Stanfill
et al., 2010), conversations (Devlin et al., 2018), or financial
information (Ngai et al., 2011). Trained models can inadvertently leak information about their training data (Shokri
et al., 2016; Carlini et al., 2019)—violating users’ privacy.
In perhaps the simplest form of information leakage, membership inference (MI) (Shokri et al., 2016) attacks enable
an adversary to determine whether or not a data point was
used in the training data. Revealing just this information can
1

University of Toronto and Vector Institute 2 Stanford University
3
Google. Correspondence to: Christopher A. Choquette-Choo
<choquette.christopher@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cause harm—it leaks information about specific individuals
instead of the entire population. Consider a model trained
to learn the link between a cancer patient’s morphological
data and their reaction to some drug. An adversary with a
victim’s morphological data and query access to the trained
model cannot directly infer if the victim has cancer. However, inferring that the victim’s data was part of the model’s
training set reveals that the victim indeed has cancer.
Existing MI attacks exploit the higher confidence that models exhibit on their training data (Pyrgelis et al., 2017; Truex
et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2019; Salem et al., 2018). An
adversary queries the model on a candidate data point to
obtain the model’s confidence and infers the candidate’s
membership in the training set based on a decision rule. The
difference in prediction confidence is largely attributed to
overfitting (Shokri et al., 2016; Yeom et al., 2018).
A large body of work has been devoted to understanding
and mitigating MI leakage in ML models. Existing defense
strategies fall into two broad categories and either
(1) reduce overfitting (Truex et al., 2018; Shokri et al.,
2016; Salem et al., 2018); or,
(2) perturb a model’s predictions so as to minimize the success of known membership attacks (Nasr et al., 2018a;
Jia et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020).
Defenses in (1) use regularization techniques or increase the
amount of training data to reduce overfitting. In contrast, the
adversary-aware defenses of (2) explicitly aim to minimize
the MI advantage of a particular attack. They do so either
by modifying the training procedure (e.g., an additional loss
penalty) or the inference procedure after training. These defenses implicitly or explicitly rely on a strategy that we call
confidence-masking1 , where the MI signal in the model’s
confidence scores is masked to thwart existing attacks.
We introduce label-only MI attacks. Our attacks are more
general: an adversary need only obtain (hard) labels—
without prediction confidences—of the trained model. This
threat model is more realistic, as ML models deployed in
user-facing products need not expose raw confidence scores.
Thus, our attacks can be mounted on any ML classifier.
1

Similar to gradient masking from the adversarial examples literature (Papernot et al., 2017).

