Catastrophic Fisher Explosion: Early Phase Fisher Matrix Impacts
Generalization
Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski 1 2 Devansh Arpit 3 Oliver Åstrand 2 Giancarlo Kerg 4 Huan Wang 3 Caiming Xiong 3
Richard Socher 3 Kyunghyun Cho * 2 5 Krzysztof J. Geras * 1 2

Abstract
The early phase of training a deep neural network
has a dramatic effect on the local curvature of
the loss function. For instance, using a small
learning rate does not guarantee stable optimization because the optimization trajectory has a tendency to steer towards regions of the loss surface
with increasing local curvature. We ask whether
this tendency is connected to the widely observed
phenomenon that the choice of the learning rate
strongly influences generalization. We first show
that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) implicitly
penalizes the trace of the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM), a measure of the local curvature, from
the start of training. We argue it is an implicit
regularizer in SGD by showing that explicitly penalizing the trace of the FIM can significantly
improve generalization. We highlight that poor
final generalization coincides with the trace of the
FIM attaining a large value early in training, to
which we refer as catastrophic Fisher explosion.
Finally, to gain insight into the regularization effect of penalizing the trace of the FIM, we show
that it limits memorization by reducing the learning speed of examples with noisy labels more than
that of the examples with clean labels.

1. Introduction
The exact mechanism behind implicit regularization effects
in training of deep neural networks (DNNs) remains an extensively debated topic despite being considered a critical
component in their empirical success (Neyshabur, 2017;
Zhang et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2020b). For instance, it is
*
Equal contribution 1 NYU Langone Medical Center, New York
University, USA 2 Center of Data Science, New York University,
USA 3 Salesforce Research, USA 4 Université de Montréal, Canada
5
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar. Correspondence to: Stanisław
Jastrz˛ebski <staszek.jastrzebski@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

commonly observed that using a moderately large learning
rate in the early phase of training results in better generalization (LeCun et al., 2012; Salakhutdinov, 2014; Jiang et al.,
2020b; Bjorck et al., 2018).
Recent work suggests that the early phase of training of
DNNs might hold the key to understanding some of these
implicit regularization effects. In particular, the learning
rate in the early phase of training has a dramatic effect on
the local curvature of the loss function (Jastrzebski et al.,
2020; Cohen et al., 2021). Recent work has found that
when using a small learning rate, the local curvature of the
loss surface increases along the optimization trajectory until
optimization is close to instability.1
These observations lead to a natural question: does the instability, and the corresponding dramatic change in the local
curvature, in the early phase of training influence generalization? We investigate this question through the lens of
the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM), a matrix that can be
seen as approximating the local curvature of the loss surface (Martens, 2020; Thomas et al., 2020). Achille et al.
(2019); Jastrzebski et al. (2019); Golatkar et al. (2019);
Lewkowycz et al. (2020) independently suggest that effects
of the early phase of training on the local curvature critically
influence the final generalization, but did not directly test
this proposition.
Our main contribution is to show that implicit regularization
effects due to using a large learning rate can be explained by
its impact on the trace of the FIM (Tr(F)), a quantity that
reflects the local curvature, from the beginning of training.
Our results suggest that the instability in the early phase
is a critical phenomenon for understanding optimization in
DNNs. This is in contrast to many prior theoretical works,
which generally do not connect implicit regularization effects in SGD to the large instability in the early phase of
training (Chaudhari & Soatto, 2018; Smith et al., 2021).
1
That is, a small further increase in the local curvature is not
possible without divergence. Interestingly, when training using
gradient descent with a learning rate η, the largest eigenvalue of the
Hessian of the training loss was observed to reach the critical value
of η2 (Cohen et al., 2021), at which training oscillates along the
eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian.

