A Sampling-Based Method for Tensor Ring Decomposition

Osman Asif Malik 1 Stephen Becker 1

Abstract
We propose a sampling-based method for computing the tensor ring (TR) decomposition of a
data tensor. The method uses leverage score sampled alternating least squares to fit the TR cores
in an iterative fashion. By taking advantage of
the special structure of TR tensors, we can efficiently estimate the leverage scores and attain
a method which has complexity sublinear in the
number of input tensor entries. We provide highprobability relative-error guarantees for the sampled least squares problems. We compare our proposal to existing methods in experiments on both
synthetic and real data. Our method achieves substantial speedup—sometimes two or three orders
of magnitude—over competing methods, while
maintaining good accuracy. We also provide an
example of how our method can be used for rapid
feature extraction.

1. Introduction
Tensor decomposition has recently found many applications
in machine learning and related areas. Examples include
parameter reduction in neural networks (Novikov et al.,
2015; Garipov et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017; Yu et al.,
2017; Ye et al., 2018), understanding the expressivity of
deep neural networks (Cohen et al., 2016; Khrulkov et al.,
2018), supervised learning (Stoudenmire & Schwab, 2017;
Novikov et al., 2017), filter learning (Hazan et al., 2005;
Rigamonti et al., 2013), image factor analysis and recognition (Vasilescu & Terzopoulos, 2002; Liu et al., 2019),
scaling up Gaussian processes (Izmailov et al., 2018), multimodal feature fusion (Hou et al., 2019), natural language
processing (Lei et al., 2014), data mining (Papalexakis et al.,
2016), feature extraction (Bengua et al., 2015), and tensor
completion (Wang et al., 2017). The CP and Tucker decompositions are the two most popular tensor decompositions

that each have strengths and weaknesses (Kolda & Bader,
2009). The number of parameters in the CP decomposition
scales linearly with the tensor dimension, but finding a good
decomposition numerically can be challenging. The Tucker
decomposition is usually easier to work with numerically,
but the number of parameters grows exponentially with tensor dimension. To address these challenges, decompositions
based on tensor networks have recently gained in popularity.
The tensor train (TT) is one such decomposition (Oseledets,
2011). The number of parameters in a TT scales linearly
with the tensor dimension. The tensor ring (TR) decomposition is a generalization of the TT decomposition. It is more
expressive than the TT decomposition (see Remark 1), but
maintains the linear scaling of the number of parameters
with increased tensor dimension. Although the TR decomposition is known to have certain numerical stability issues
it usually works well in practice, achieving a better compression ratio and lower storage cost than the TT decomposition
(Mickelin & Karaman, 2020).
It is crucial to have efficient algorithms for computing the
decomposition of a tensor. This task is especially challenging for large and high-dimensional tensors. In this paper,
we present a sampling-based method for TR decomposition which has complexity sublinear in the number of input
tensor entries. The method fits the TR core tensors by iteratively updating them in an alternating fashion. Each update
requires solving a least squares problem. We use leverage
score sampling to speed up the solution of these problems
and avoid having to consider all elements in the input tensor
for each update. The system matrices in the least squares
problems have a particular structure that we take advantage
of to efficiently estimate the leverage scores. To summarize,
we make the following contributions:
• Propose a sampling-based method for TR decomposition which has complexity sublinear in the number of
input tensor entries.
• Provide relative-error guarantees for the sampled least
squares problems we use in our algorithm.

1
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Colorado
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. Correspondence to: Osman Asif
Malik <osman.malik@colorado.edu>.

• Compare our proposed algorithm to four other methods
in experiments on both synthetic and real data.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• Provide an example of how our method can be used
for rapid feature extraction.

