A Unified Lottery Ticket Hypothesis for Graph Neural Networks

Tianlong Chen * 1 Yongduo Sui * 2 Xuxi Chen 1 Aston Zhang 3 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
With graphs rapidly growing in size and deeper
graph neural networks (GNNs) emerging, the
training and inference of GNNs become increasingly expensive. Existing network weight pruning algorithms cannot address the main space and
computational bottleneck in GNNs, caused by
the size and connectivity of the graph. To this
end, this paper first presents a unified GNN sparsification (UGS) framework that simultaneously
prunes the graph adjacency matrix and the model
weights, for effectively accelerating GNN inference on large-scale graphs. Leveraging this new
tool, we further generalize the recently popular
lottery ticket hypothesis to GNNs for the first time,
by defining a graph lottery ticket (GLT) as a pair
of core sub-dataset and sparse sub-network, which
can be jointly identified from the original GNN
and the full dense graph by iteratively applying
UGS. Like its counterpart in convolutional neural networks, GLT can be trained in isolation to
match the performance of training with the full
model and graph, and can be drawn from both randomly initialized and self-supervised pre-trained
GNNs. Our proposal has been experimentally
verified across various GNN architectures and diverse tasks, on both small-scale graph datasets
(Cora, Citeseer and PubMed), and large-scale
datasets from the challenging Open Graph Benchmark (OGB). Specifically, for node classification,
our found GLTs achieve the same accuracies with
20% ∼ 98% MACs saving on small graphs and
25% ∼ 85% MACs saving on large ones. For link
prediction, GLTs lead to 48% ∼ 97% and 70%
MACs saving on small and large graph datasets,
respectively, without compromising predictive
performance. Codes are at https://github.
com/VITA-Group/Unified-LTH-GNN.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Science
and Technology of China 3 AWS Deep Learning. Correspondence
to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

0.00

59.04
GNN Sparsity (%)

86.58

0.00

83.22
GNN Sparsity (%)

94.50 97.75

Figure 1. Summary of our achieved performance (y-axis) at different graph and GNN sparsity levels (x-axis) on Cora and Citeceer
node classification. The size of markers represent the inference
MACs (= 21 FLOPs) of each sparse GCN on the corresponding
sparsified graphs. Black circles (•) indicate the baseline, i.e., unpruned dense GNNs on the full graph. Blue circles (•) are random
pruning results. Orange circles (•) represent the performance of
a previous graph sparsification approach, i.e., ADMM (Li et al.,
2020b). Red stars (H) are established by our method (UGS).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Zhou et al., 2018; Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Chen et al., 2019; Veličković et al., 2017)
have established state-of-the-art results on various graphbased learning tasks, such as node or link classification (Kipf
& Welling, 2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Qu et al., 2019;
Verma et al., 2019; Karimi et al., 2019; You et al., 2020d;c),
link prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018), and graph classification (Ying et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; You et al., 2020b).
GNNs’ superior performance results from the structureaware exploitation of graphs. To update the feature of
each node, GNNs first aggregate features from neighbor
connected nodes, and then transform the aggregated embeddings via (hierarchical) feed-forward propagation.
However, the training and inference of GNNs suffer from
the notorious inefficiency, and pose hurdle to GNNs from
being scaled up to real-world large-scale graph applications.
This hurdle arises from both algorithm and hardware levels. On the algorithm level, GNN models can be thought
of a composition of traditional graphs equipped with deep
neural network (DNN) algorithms on vertex features. The
execution of GNN inference falls into three distinct cat-

