Deep kernel processes

Laurence Aitchison 1 Adam X. Yang 1 Sebastian W. Ober 2

Abstract
We define deep kernel processes in which positive
definite Gram matrices are progressively transformed by nonlinear kernel functions and by sampling from (inverse) Wishart distributions. Remarkably, we find that deep Gaussian processes
(DGPs), Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), infinite BNNs, and infinite BNNs with bottlenecks
can all be written as deep kernel processes. For
DGPs the equivalence arises because the Gram
matrix formed by the inner product of features
is Wishart distributed, and as we show, standard
isotropic kernels can be written entirely in terms
of this Gram matrix — we do not need knowledge
of the underlying features. We define a tractable
deep kernel process, the deep inverse Wishart process, and give a doubly-stochastic inducing-point
variational inference scheme that operates on the
Gram matrices, not on the features, as in DGPs.
We show that the deep inverse Wishart process
gives superior performance to DGPs and infinite
BNNs on fully-connected baselines.1

1. Introduction

already exist. In these methods, which are closely related to infinite Bayesian neural networks (Lee et al., 2017;
Matthews et al., 2018; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2018; Novak
et al., 2018), we take an initial kernel (usually the dot product of the input features) and perform a series of deterministic, parameter-free transformations to obtain an output kernel that we use in e.g. a support vector machine or Gaussian
process. However, the deterministic, parameter-free nature
of the transformation from input to output kernel means that
they lack the capability to learn a top-layer representation,
which is believed to be crucial for the effectiveness of deep
methods (Aitchison, 2019).

2. Contributions
1. We propose deep kernel processes (DKPs), which combine nonlinear transformations of the kernel, as in Cho
& Saul (2009) with a flexible learned representation by
exploiting a Wishart or inverse Wishart process (Dawid,
1981; Shah et al., 2014).
2. We show that models ranging from DGPs (Damianou
& Lawrence, 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017) to
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs; Blundell et al., 2015,
App. C.1), infinite BNNs (App. C.2) and infinite BNNs
with bottlenecks (App. C.3) can be written as DKPs.

The deep learning revolution has shown us that effective
performance on difficult tasks such as image classification
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) requires deep models with flexible
lower-layers that learn task-dependent representations. Here,
we consider whether these insights from the neural network
literature can be applied to purely kernel-based methods.
(Note that we do not consider deep Gaussian processes or
DGPs to be “fully kernel-based” as they use a feature-based
representation in intermediate layers).

3. We define a specific DKP, the deep inverse Wishart
process (DIWP) which offers convenient variational
approximate posteriors.

Importantly, deep kernel methods (e.g. Cho & Saul, 2009)

5. We demonstrate improved performance of DIWPs on
fully-connected benchmark datasets.

1

Department of Computer Science, Bristol, BS8
1UB, UK 2 Department of Engineering, Cambridge, CB2
1PZ, UK. Correspondence to: Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Reference implementation at: github.com/LaurenceA/
bayesfunc

4. We develop a novel doubly-stochastic variational
inducing-point inference scheme purely in the kernel
domain (as opposed to Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017,
who described DSVI for standard feature-based DGPs)
for DIWPs.

DKPs and specifically DIWPs offer two key advantages
over feature-based methods such as DGPs and BNNs. First,
DGPs and BNNs have complex approximate posteriors (Li
et al., 2018), due in part to permuation/rotation symmetries
in the posterior over weights/features (App. D.1 and D.2;
MacKay, 1992; Moore, 2016; Pourzanjani et al., 2017).

