Robust Density Estimation from Batches:
The Best Things in Life are (Nearly) Free

Ayush Jain 1 Alon Orlitsky 1

Abstract
In many applications data are collected in batches,
some potentially biased, corrupt, or even adversarial. Learning algorithms for this setting have
therefore garnered considerable recent attention.
In particular, a sequence of works has shown
that all approximately piecewise polynomial
distributions—and in particular all Gaussian,
Gaussian-mixture, log-concave, low-modal, and
monotone-hazard distributions—can be learned
robustly in polynomial time. However, these
results left open the question, stated explicitly
in (Chen et al., 2020), about the best possible sample complexity of such algorithms. We answer
this question, showing that, perhaps surprisingly,
up to logarithmic factors, the optimal sample complexity is the same as for genuine, non-adversarial,
data! To establish the result, we reduce robust
learning of approximately piecewise polynomial
distributions to robust learning of the probability
of all subsets of size at most k of a larger discrete
domain, and learn these probabilities in optimal
sample complexity linear in k regardless of
the domain size. In simulations, the algorithm
runs very quickly and estimates distributions
to essentially the accuracy achieved when all
adversarial batches are removed. The results also
imply the first polynomial-time sample-optimal
algorithm for robust interval-based classification
based on batched data.

1. Overview
1.1. Robust learning
In many learning applications, some samples are inadvertently or maliciously corrupted. A natural and intuitive
1
University of California, San Diego.
Correspondence to: Ayush Jain <ayjain@eng.ucsd.edu>, Alon Orlitsky
<alon@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

example shows that regardless of the number of samples
available, such corruption severely curtails the learning accuracy even for the simplest of tasks, a binary hypothesis test.
Consider independent binary samples distributed either all
Ber(1/2+β/2) or all Ber(1/2−β/2). With genuine samples,
the underlying distribution can be identified with error that
plummets to 0 exponentially fast in the number of samples.
However, if an adversary can observe a fraction 1 − β of
the samples and select the rest, our best error is destined to
remain a half, regardless of the number of samples available.
The poltergeist could simply use the observed samples to
determine the underlying distribution, and set the rest so
the whole sequence appears to be generated by a Ber(1/2)
distribution, leaving us with no better than a random guess.
This elemental example propagates to essentially all learning tasks, hard-limiting the performance of all learning algorithms. For example, the total variation (TV) distance
between the two indistinguishable distributions above is β.
Hence the triangle inequality implies that for any number of
samples, if a β fraction are adversarial, then even binary, let
alone general discrete and continuous, distributions cannot
be learned to TV distance less than β/2. Similar hard limits
follow for classification and other learning tasks.
The foregoing seems to suggest the discouraging conclusion
that with a β fraction of adversarial data, an Ω(β) loss is
inevitable, which as real-life β may be quite large, could be
rather foreboding. Fortunately, that is not necessarily so.
In the following and many other applications, data are collected from multiple sources, most typically genuine, but
some possibly corrupted or adversarial. Data may be gathered by sensors, each providing a large amount of data, and
some sensors may be faulty. The word frequency of an
author may be estimated from several large texts, some of
which are mis-attributed. User preferences may be learned
by querying several individuals, some intentionally biasing
their feedback. Multiple agents may contribute to a crowdsourcing platform, but some may be unreliable or malicious.
The collection of data generated by each source, or during
a time period, is called a batch. Interestingly, for data generated in batches, a fraction β of which are corrupted or

