KD3A: Unsupervised Multi-Source Decentralized Domain Adaptation via
Knowledge Distillation

Hao-zhe Feng 1 Zhaoyang You 2 Minghao Chen 1 Tianye Zhang 1 Minfeng Zhu 1
Fei Wu 2 Chao Wu 3 Wei Chen 1

Abstract
Conventional unsupervised multi-source domain
adaptation (UMDA) methods assume all source
domains can be accessed directly. However, this
assumption neglects the privacy-preserving policy, where all the data and computations must be
kept decentralized. There exist three challenges in
this scenario: (1) Minimizing the domain distance
requires the pairwise calculation of the data from
source and target domains, while the data on the
source domain is not available. (2) The communication cost and privacy security limit the application of existing UMDA methods, such as the
domain adversarial training. (3) Since users cannot govern the data quality, the irrelevant or malicious source domains are more likely to appear,
which causes negative transfer. To address the
above problems, we propose a privacy-preserving
UMDA paradigm named Knowledge Distillation
based Decentralized Domain Adaptation (KD3A),
which performs domain adaptation through the
knowledge distillation on models from different
source domains. The extensive experiments show
that KD3A significantly outperforms state-of-theart UMDA approaches. Moreover, the KD3A is
robust to the negative transfer and brings a 100×
reduction of communication cost compared with
other decentralized UMDA methods.

1. Introduction
Most deep learning models are trained with large-scale
datasets via supervised learning. Since it is often costly
to get sufficient data, we usually use other similar datasets
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China 3 School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Wei Chen
<chenvis@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to train the model. However, due to the domain shift,
naively combining different datasets often results in unsatisfying performance. Unsupervised Multi-source Domain
Adaptation (UMDA) (Zhang et al., 2015) addresses such
problems by establishing transferable features from multiple
source domains to an unlabeled target domain.
Recent advanced UMDA methods (Chang et al., 2019; Zhao
et al., 2020) perform the knowledge transfer within two
steps: (1) Combining data from source and target domains to
construct Source-Target pairs. (2) Establishing transferable
features by minimizing the H-divergence. This prevailing
paradigm works well when all source domains are available. However, in terms of the privacy-preserving policy,
we cannot access the sensitive data such as the patient data
from different hospitals and the client profiles from different
companies. In these cases, all the data and computations on
source domains must be kept decentralized.
Most conventional UMDA methods are not applicable under
this privacy-preserving policy due to three problems: (1)
Minimizing the H-divergence in UMDA requires the pairwise calculation of the data from source and target domains,
while the data on source domain is not available. (2) The
communication cost and privacy security limit the application of advanced UMDA methods. For example, the domain
adversarial training is able to optimize the H-divergence
without accessing data (Peng et al., 2020). However, it
requires each source domain to synchronize model with
target domain after every single batch, which results in huge
communication cost and causes the privacy leakage (Zhu
et al., 2019). (3) The negative transfer problem (Pan & Yang,
2010). Since it is difficult to govern the data quality, there
can exist some irrelevant source domains that are very different from the target domain or even some malicious source
domains which perform the poisoning attack (Bagdasaryan
et al., 2020). With these bad domains, the negative transfer
occurs.
In this study, we propose a solution to the above problems, Knowledge Distillation based Decentralized Domain
Adaptation (KD3A), which aims to perform decentralized
domain adaptation through the knowledge distillation on
models from different source domains. Our KD3A approach

