Causal Curiosity: RL Agents Discovering Self-supervised Experiments for
Causal Representation Learning

Sumedh A Sontakke 1 Arash Mehrjou 2 Laurent Itti 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2

Abstract
Animals exhibit an innate ability to learn regularities of the world through interaction. By performing experiments in their environment, they
are able to discern the causal factors of variation
and infer how they affect the world’s dynamics.
Inspired by this, we attempt to equip reinforcement learning agents with the ability to perform
experiments that facilitate a categorization of the
rolled-out trajectories, and to subsequently infer
the causal factors of the environment in a hierarchical manner. We introduce causal curiosity,
a novel intrinsic reward, and show that it allows
our agents to learn optimal sequences of actions
and discover causal factors in the dynamics of
the environment. The learned behavior allows
the agents to infer a binary quantized representation for the ground-truth causal factors in every
environment. Additionally, we find that these experimental behaviors are semantically meaningful
(e.g., our agents learn to lift blocks to categorize them by weight), and are learnt in a selfsupervised manner with approximately 2.5 times
less data than conventional supervised planners.
We show that these behaviors can be re-purposed
and fine-tuned (e.g., from lifting to pushing or
other downstream tasks). Finally, we show that
the knowledge of causal factor representations
aids zero-shot learning for more complex tasks.
Visit here for website.

1. Introduction
Discovering causation in environments an agent might encounter remains an open and challenging problem for reinforcement learning (Bengio et al., 2013; Schölkopf, 2015).
In physical systems, causal factors such as gravity or friction affect the outcome of behaviors an agent might per1
University of Southern California 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems. Correspondence to: Sumedh A Sontakke
<ssontakk@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

form. Thus, there has been recent interest in attempting to
train agents to be robust or invariant against varying values of such causal factors, allowing them to learn modular
behaviors that are useful across tasks. Most model-based
approaches take the form of Bayes Adaptive Markov Decision Processes (BAMDPs) (Zintgraf et al., 2019) or Hidden Parameter MDPs (Hi-Param MDPs) (Doshi-Velez &
Konidaris, 2016; Yao et al., 2018; Killian et al., 2017; Perez
et al., 2020) which condition the transition and/or reward
function of each environment on hidden parameters.
Formally, let s ∈ S, a ∈ A, r ∈ R, h ∈ H where S, A, R,
and H are the set of states, actions, rewards and admissible
causal factors, respectively. In the physical world, examples
of the parameter hj ∈ H might include gravity, coefficients
of friction, masses and sizes of objects. Hi-Param MDP or
BAMDP approaches treat each hj ∈ H as a latent variable
for which an embedding is learnt during training (often
using variational methods (Kingma et al., 2014; Ilse et al.,
2019)). Let a0:T be a sequence of actions taken by an agent
to maximize an external reward resulting in a state trajectory
s0:T . The above approaches define a probability distribution
over the entire observable sequence (i.e., rewards, states,
actions) as p(r0:T , s0:T , a0:T −1 ) which factorizes as
TY
−1

p(rt+1 |st , at , st+1 , z)p(st+1 |st , at , z)p(at |st , z)

t=1

conditioned on the latent variable z, a representation for
the unobserved causal factors. At test time, in a new environment, the agent infers z by observing the trajectories
produced by its initial actions issued by the latent conditioned policy obtained during training.
In practice, discovering causal factors in a physical environment is prone to various challenges that are due to the
disjointed nature of the influence of these factors on the produced trajectories. More specifically, at each time step, the
transition function is affected by a subset of global causal
factors. This subset is implicitly defined on the basis of the
current state and the action taken. For example, if a body
in an environment loses contact with the ground, the coefficient of friction between the body and the ground no longer
affects the outcome of any action that is taken. Likewise,
the outcome of an upward force applied by the agent to a

