Explaining Time Series Predictions with Dynamic Masks

Jonathan Crabbé 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
How can we explain the predictions of a machine
learning model? When the data is structured as
a multivariate time series, this question induces
additional difficulties such as the necessity for the
explanation to embody the time dependency and
the large number of inputs. To address these challenges, we propose dynamic masks (Dynamask).
This method produces instance-wise importance
scores for each feature at each time step by fitting a perturbation mask to the input sequence. In
order to incorporate the time dependency of the
data, Dynamask studies the effects of dynamic
perturbation operators. In order to tackle the large
number of inputs, we propose a scheme to make
the feature selection parsimonious (to select no
more feature than necessary) and legible (a notion
that we detail by making a parallel with information theory). With synthetic and real-world data,
we demonstrate that the dynamic underpinning of
Dynamask, together with its parsimony, offer a
neat improvement in the identification of feature
importance over time. The modularity of Dynamask makes it ideal as a plug-in to increase the
transparency of a wide range of machine learning models in areas such as medicine and finance,
where time series are abundant.

1. Introduction and context
What do we need to trust a machine learning model? If
accuracy is necessary, it might not always be sufficient.
With the application of machine learning to critical areas
such as medicine, finance and the criminal justice system,
the black-box nature of modern machine learning models
has appeared as a major hindrance to their large scale deployment (Caruana et al., 2015; Lipton, 2016; Ching et al.,
2018). With the necessity to address this problem, the field
1

DAMTP, University of Cambridge, UK 2 University of California Los Angeles, USA 3 The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to: Jonathan Crabbé <jc2133@cam.ac.uk>, Mihaela van
der Schaar <mv472@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) thrived (Barredo
Arrieta et al., 2020; Das & Rad, 2020; Tjoa & Guan, 2020).
Saliency Methods Among the many possibilities to increase the transparency of a machine learning model, we
focus here on saliency methods. The purpose of these methods is to highlight the features in an input that are relevant
for a model to issue a prediction. We can distinguish them
according to the way they interact with a model to produce
importance scores.
Gradient-based: These methods use the gradient of the
model’s prediction with respect to the features to produce
importance scores. The premise is the following: if a feature
is salient, we expect it to have a big impact on the model’s
prediction when varied locally. This translates into a big
gradient of the model’s output with respect to this feature.
Popular gradient methods include Integrated Gradient (Sundararajan et al., 2017), DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017)
and GradSHAP (Lundberg et al., 2018).
Perturbation-based: These methods use the effect of a perturbation in the input on the model’s prediction to produce
importance scores. The premise is similar to the one used in
gradient based method. The key difference lies in the way in
which the features are varied. If gradient based methods use
local variation of the features (according to the gradient),
perturbation-based method use the data itself to produce
a variation. A first example is Feature Occlusion (Suresh
et al., 2017) that replaces a group of features with a baseline. Another example is Feature Permutation that performs
individual permutation of features within a batch.
Attention-based: For some models, the architecture allows
to perform simple explainability tasks, such as determining
feature saliency. A popular example, building on the success
attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017), is the usage of
attention layers to produce importance scores (Choi et al.,
2016; Song et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Kwon et al., 2018).
Other: There are some methods that don’t clearly fall in one
of the above categories. A first example is SHAP (Lundberg
& Lee, 2017), which attributes importance scores based on
Shapley values. Another popular example is LIME in which
the importance scores correspond to weights in a local linear
model (Ribeiro et al., 2016a). Finally, some methods such as
INVASE (Yoon et al., 2019a) or ASAC (Yoon et al., 2019b)

