Online Learning in Unknown Markov Games

Yi Tian 1 * Yuanhao Wang 2 * Tiancheng Yu 1 * Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract
We study online learning in unknown Markov
games, a problem that arises in episodic multiagent reinforcement learning where the actions
of the opponents are unobservable. We show that
in this challenging setting, achieving sublinear
regret against the best response in hindsight is statistically hard. We then consider a weaker notion
of regret by competing with the minimax value of
the game, and present an algorithm that achieves
a sublinear Õ(K 2/3 ) regret after K episodes. This
is the first sublinear regret bound (to our knowledge) for online learning in unknown Markov
games. Importantly, our regret bound is independent of the size of the opponents’ action spaces.
As a result, even when the opponents’ actions are
fully observable, our regret bound improves upon
existing analysis (e.g., (Xie et al., 2020)) by an
exponential factor in the number of opponents.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) helps us model
strategic decision making problems in an interactive environment with multiple players. It has witnessed notable
recent success (with two or more agents), e.g., in Go (Silver
et al., 2016; 2017), video games (Vinyals et al., 2019), Poker
(Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019), and autonomous driving
(Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016).
When studying MARL, often Markov games (MGs) (Shapley, 1953) are used as the computational model. Compared
with Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014),
Markov games allow the players to influence the state transition and returns, and are thus capable of modeling competitive and collaborative behaviors that arise in MARL.
A fundamental problem in MGs is sample efficiency. Unlike
MDPs, there are at least two key ways to measure performance in MGs: (1) the offline (self-play) setting, where we
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of EECS, MIT 2 Department
of Computer Science, Princeton University. Correspondence to:
Suvrit Sra <suvrit@mit.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

control both/all players and aim to minimize the number of
episodes required to find a good policy; and (2) the online
setting, where we can only control one player (which we
refer to as our player), treat other players as opponents, and
judge how our player performs in the whole process using
regret. The offline setting is more useful when training players in a controllable environment (e.g., a simulator) and the
online setting is more favorable for life-long learning.
When ensuring sample efficiency for MARL, key challenges
arise from the observation model. We distinguish between
two online settings. When learning in informed MGs, our
player can observe the actions taken by the opponents. For
learning in unknown MGs (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006),
such observations are unavailable; information flows to our
player only through the revealed returns and state transitions. We emphasize that both informed games and unknown
games are describing the observation process instead of our
prior knowledge of the parameters: We always assume zero
knowledge of the transition function of the MG.
Learning in unknown MGs is harder, more general, and
potentially of greater practical relevance than informed MGs.
It is thus important to discover algorithms that can guarantee
low regret. However, theoretical understanding for unknown
MGs is rather limited. Even the following fundamental
question for analyzing online learning in unknown MGs
is open:
Q1. Is sublinear regret achievable?
To see why learning in unknown MGs is challenging, notice
that without observing an opponents’ actions, we cannot
learn the transition function of the MG, even with infinitely
many episodes to collect data. Therefore, explore-thencommit type of algorithms cannot achieve sublinear regret.
Another concern arises when the number of players involved
increases, as then the effective size of the opponents’ action
space grows exponentially in it. Therefore, the following
question is also crucial, even in (easier) informed MGs:
Q2. Can the regret be independent of the size of the
opponents’ action space?
Contributions. We answer both questions Q1 and Q2 affirmatively in this paper. At the heart of our answers lies an
Optimistic Nash V-learning algorithm for online learning

