Catformer: Designing Stable Transformers via Sensitivity Analysis

Jared Quincy Davis * 1 2 Albert Gu * 1 Krzysztof Choromanski 3 4 Tri Dao 1 Christopher Re 1 Chelsea Finn 1 3
Percy Liang 1

Abstract
Transformer architectures are widely used, but
training them is non-trivial, requiring custom
learning rate schedules, scaling terms, residual
connections, careful placement of submodules
such as normalization, and so on. In this paper,
we improve upon recent analysis of Transformers
and formalize a notion of sensitivity to capture
the difficulty of training. Sensitivity characterizes how the variance of activation and gradient
norms change in expectation when parameters
are randomly perturbed. We analyze the sensitivity of previous Transformer architectures and
design a new architecture, the Catformer, which
replaces residual connections or RNN-based gating mechanisms with concatenation. We prove
that Catformers are less sensitive than other Transformer variants and demonstrate that this leads
to more stable training. On DMLab30, a suite of
high-dimension reinforcement tasks, Catformer
outperforms other transformers, including Gated
Transformer-XL—the state-of-the-art architecture
designed to address stability—by 13%.

1. Introduction
Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Choromanski et al., 2020b) are widely used in natural language processing (Luo et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2018b), vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and bioinformatics (Rives et al., 2019;
Madani et al., 2020; Li, 2019). This success is due to their
ability to effectively model long-range dependencies as well
as scale effectively with data and compute (Kaplan et al.,
2020).
However, Transformers are hard to train, limiting their effectiveness in challenging and noisy domains such as reinforcement learning (RL). Even in the supervised learning setting,
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 DeepMind 3 Google
Brain Robotics 4 Columbia University. Correspondence to: Jared
Davis <jaredquincydavis@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to ameliorate these challenges, they require a combination
of techniques such as complex optimizers and learning rate
schedules (Dai et al., 2019), special weight initialization
(Radford et al., 2019), and careful ordering of components
such as normalization blocks (Parisotto et al., 2020). Architecturally, recent Transformer variants designed for stability have emerged, introducing new components (Liu et al.,
2020) or replacing the residual connection with RNN-style
gates (Xu et al., 2020; Parisotto et al., 2020). Only with
these recent changes have transformers made progress in
reinforcement learning.
These modifications are not specific to Transformers per
se, but rather refine the general architecture wiring—such
as residual connections and normalization layers—which
can be shown to improve training stability in deep models at large. More broadly, these improvements are guided
by general principles in deep learning that aim to control
standard measures of stability: conventionally, the activation and gradient variance (i.e., preventing the oft-studied
vanishing/exploding gradient problem (Hochreiter, 1991)).
However, these measures can be too coarse to capture the
true source of instability. For example, controlling activation variance at initialization does not preclude instability as
the model’s weights change during training (Choromanski
et al., 2020a; Likhosherstov et al., 2020),. Standard tools of
capturing how the output might change–such as measuring
gradient norms and Lipschitzness–are too pessimistic and
can be difficult to analyze.
This paper makes two main contributions. The first is introducing the concept of sensitivity, a measure of average-case
instability that captures a notion of how sensitive a function
is to random perturbations of its inputs. Our second main
contribution is a new Transformer architecture inspired by
the sensitivity analysis which empirically reduces instability.
First, we formalize and generalize ideas in Liu et al. (2020)
to introduce an improved measure of stability called sensitivity, a function of architecture that measures the effect
of random parameter perturbations on the output variance.
Sensitivity can be applied to analyze a broad class of architectures composed of repeated building blocks of normalization layers, generalized residual connections, and
black-box computation modules such as the self-attention

