Testing Group Fairness via Optimal Transport Projections

Nian Si1 Karthyek Murthy 2 Jose Blanchet1 Viet Anh Nguyen1 3

Abstract
We present a statistical testing framework to detect if a given machine learning classifier fails to
satisfy a wide range of group fairness notions.
The proposed test is a flexible, interpretable, and
statistically rigorous tool for auditing whether
exhibited biases are intrinsic to the algorithm or
due to the randomness in the data. The statistical challenges, which may arise from multiple impact criteria that define group fairness and
which are discontinuous on model parameters,
are conveniently tackled by projecting the empirical measure onto the set of group-fair probability models using optimal transport. This statistic is efficiently computed using linear programming and its asymptotic distribution is explicitly
obtained. The proposed framework can also be
used to test for testing composite fairness hypotheses and fairness with multiple sensitive attributes. The optimal transport testing formulation improves interpretability by characterizing
the minimal covariate perturbations that eliminate the bias observed in the audit.

1. Introduction
Algorithmic decisions are commonly conceived to have
the potential of being more objective than a human’s decisions, since they are generated by logical instructions
and the rules of algebra. However, recent studies indicate
that this may not be the case. For example, an algorithm
which helps the US criminal justice system to predict recidivism rates has been shown to falsely give a higher risk
for African-Americans than white Americans (Chouldechova, 2017; MultiMedia LLC, 2016). Similar biases are
exhibited against female candidates in a hiring-help system developed by Amazon AI (Dastin, 2018) and an adtargeting algorithm used by Google (Datta et al., 2015).
1

Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford
University 2 Engineering Systems and Design pillar, Singapore
University of Technology and Design 3 VinAI Research, Vietnam.
Correspondence to: Nian Si <niansi@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

A natural first explanation for the reported algorithmic biases is that the data used to train the algorithms may already be corrupted by human biases (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Manrai et al., 2016). Deeper inquests have revealed insights on how common learning procedures intrinsically perpetuate the biases and potentially introduce fresh
ones. The usual practice of training by minimizing empirical risk, while geared towards yielding predictions that
are best when averaged over the entire population, often
under-represents minority subgroups in the datasets. Moreover, even though certain sensitive attributes are forbidden
by law to be used in the algorithm, the strong correlations
between the sensitive attributes and other features potentially lead to biases in predictions. As reported in the studies in (Grgic-Hlaca et al., 2016; Garg et al., 2019; Barocas
& Selbst, 2016; Black et al., 2020; Kleinberg et al., 2018;
Lipton et al., 2018), merely masking the sensitive attributes
does not address the problem.
The aforementioned biases and their impacts have sparked
substantial interests in the pursuit of algorithmic fairness (Berk et al., 2018; Chouldechova & Roth, 2020;
Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Mehrabi et al., 2019). Testing
whether a given machine learning algorithm is fair emerges
as a question of first-order importance. In turn, designing
this test for a wide range of group fairness notions (discussed in the sequel) is the main task of this paper.
Our proposed statistical hypothesis testing framework (testing framework for short) allows the auditors to systematically determine whether the biases exhibited in the audit
procedure, if any, are intrinsic to the algorithm or due to the
randomness in data. Moreover, our framework can be implemented as a black-box, without knowing the exact structure of the classification algorithm used.
For settings where sensitive attributes are not explicitly
used as input to classification, fairness is measured on impact either at a group level or at an individual level (Barocas & Selbst, 2016). Group fairness notions seek to measure the differences in impacts across different groups and
constitute the prominent means of assessing discrimination associated with group memberships. Individual fairness, on the other hand, seeks to assess if similar users
are treated similarly (Dwork et al., 2012; John et al., 2020;
Xue et al., 2020). Common examples of group fairness

