Sparse and Imperceptible Adversarial Attack via a Homotopy Algorithm

Mingkang Zhu 1 Tianlong Chen 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

Sparse adversarial attacks can fool deep neural
networks (DNNs) by only perturbing a few pixels
(regularized by `0 norm). Recent efforts combine
it with another `∞ imperceptible on the perturbation magnitudes. The resultant sparse and imperceptible attacks are practically relevant, and
indicate an even higher vulnerability of DNNs
that we usually imagined. However, such attacks
are more challenging to generate due to the optimization difficulty by coupling the `0 regularizer
and box constraints with a non-convex objective.
In this paper, we address this challenge by proposing a homotopy algorithm, to jointly tackle the
sparsity and the perturbation bound in one unified framework. Each iteration, the main step
of our algorithm is to optimize an `0 -regularized
adversarial loss, by leveraging the nonmonotone
Accelerated Proximal Gradient Method (nmAPG)
for nonconvex programming; it is followed by an
`0 change control step, and an optional post-attack
step designed to escape bad local minima. We also
extend the algorithm to handling the structural
sparsity regularizer. We extensively examine the
effectiveness of our proposed homotopy attack
for both targeted and non-targeted attack scenarios, on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our homotopy
attack leads to significantly fewer perturbations,
e.g., reducing 42.91% on CIFAR-10 and 75.03%
on ImageNet (average case, targeted attack), at
similar maximal perturbation magnitudes, when
still achieving 100% attack success rates. Our
codes are available at: https://github.com/
VITA-Group/SparseADV_Homotopy.

1

The University of Texas at Austin, USA. Correspondence to:
Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) otterhound

(b) stingray

(c) `0 = 1803 (d) `0 = 12264

(e) American coot

(f) stingray

(g) `0 = 1400 (h) `0 = 13467

(i) Boston bull

(j) stingray

(k) `0 = 2986 (l) `0 = 16974

Figure 1. Visualization of pixel-wise sparsity of targeted attack
when enforcing a `∞ constraint of 0.05. The images in each row,
from the left to right are benign image, our adversarial example,
our perturbation position, GreedyFool (a recent state-of-the-art
approach in Dong et al. (2020))’s perturbation position. In the figures of perturbation positions, black pixels denote no perturbation;
white pixels denote perturbing all three RGB channels; pure red,
green, blue pixels represent perturbing single channel; and pixels
with other color denote perturbing two channels.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have widely demonstrated
fragility to adversarial attacks, e.g., maliciously crafted
small perturbations to their inputs that can fool them to
make incorrect and implausible predictions (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Xiao et al., 2018; Athalye et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020b; Zhou et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020a; Du et al., 2021). Adversarial attacks raise
serious concern against DNNs’ applicability in high-stake,
risk-sensitive applications. Meanwhile, probing and leveraging adversarial attacks could help us troubleshoot the
weakness of a DNN, and further leading to strengthening it,
e.g., by adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018).
A non-trivial adversarial attack is meant to be small and “imperceptible” in certain sense (Nguyen et al., 2015): in this
way, it impacts little on the benign input’s semantic meaning, hence uncovering the inherent instability of the DNN.

