Uncertainty Weighted Actor-Critic for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yue Wu 1 2 Shuangfei Zhai 1 Nitish Srivastava 1 Joshua Susskind 1 Jian Zhang 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 2
Hanlin Goh 1

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning promises to learn
effective policies from previously-collected, static
datasets without the need for exploration. However, existing Q-learning and actor-critic based
off-policy RL algorithms fail when bootstrapping
from out-of-distribution (OOD) actions or states.
We hypothesize that a key missing ingredient from
the existing methods is a proper treatment of uncertainty in the offline setting. We propose Uncertainty Weighted Actor-Critic (UWAC), an algorithm that detects OOD state-action pairs and
down-weights their contribution in the training
objectives accordingly. Implementation-wise, we
adopt a practical and effective dropout-based uncertainty estimation method that introduces very
little overhead over existing RL algorithms. Empirically, we observe that UWAC substantially
improves model stability during training. In addition, UWAC out-performs existing offline RL
methods on a variety of competitive tasks, and
achieves significant performance gains over the
state-of-the-art baseline on datasets with sparse
demonstrations collected from human experts.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has seen a surge of interest over the recent years. It has achieved remarkable success
in simulated tasks (Silver et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2018), where the cost of data collection is
low. However, one of the drawbacks of RL is its difficulty of
learning from prior experiences. Therefore, the application
of RL to unstructured real-world tasks is still in its primal
stages, due to the high cost of active data collection. It is
thus crucial to make full use of previously collected datasets
whenever large scale online RL is infeasible.
Offline batch RL algorithms offer a promising direction to
1

Apple Inc. 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to:
Yue Wu <ywu5@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

leveraging prior experience (Lange et al., 2012). However,
most prior off-policy RL algorithms (Haarnoja et al., 2018;
Munos et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Espeholt et al.,
2018; Peng et al., 2019) fail on offline datasets, even on expert demonstrations (Fu et al., 2020). The sensitivity to the
training data distribution is a well known issue in practical
offline RL algorithms (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al.,
2019; 2020; Peng et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). A large
portion of this problem is attributed to actions or states not
being covered within the training set distribution. Since the
value estimate on out-of-distribution (OOD) actions or states
can be arbitrary, OOD value or reward estimates can incur
destructive estimation errors that propagates through the
Bellman loss and destabilizes training. Prior attempts try to
avoid OOD actions or states by imposing strong constraints
or penalties that force the actor distribution to stay within
the training data (Kumar et al., 2019; 2020; Fujimoto et al.,
2019; Laroche et al., 2019). While such approaches achieve
some degree of experimental success, they suffer from the
loss of generalization ability of the Q function. For example,
a state-action pair that does not appear in the training set
can still lie within the training set distribution, but policies
trained with strong penalties will avoid the unseen states regardless of whether the Q function can produce an accurate
estimate of the state-action value. Therefore, strong penalty
based solutions often promote a pessimistic and sub-optimal
policy. In the extreme case, e.g., in certain benchmarking
environments with human demonstrations, the best performing offline algorithms only achieve the same performance
as a random agent (Fu et al., 2020), which demonstrates the
need of robust offline RL algorithms.
In this paper, we hypothesize that a key aspect of a robust
offline RL algorithm is a proper estimation and usage of
uncertainty. On the one hand, one should be able to reliably
assign an uncertainty score to any state-action pair; on the
other hand, there should be a mechanism that utilizes the
estimated uncertainty to prevent the model from learning
from data points that induce high uncertainty scores.
The first problem relates closely to OOD sample detection,
which has been extensively studied in the Bayesian deep
learning community. (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016a; Gal, 2016;
Osawa et al., 2019), often measured by the uncertainty of
the model. We adopt the dropout based approach (Gal &

