Leveraging Public Data for Practical Private Query Release

Terrance Liu 1 Giuseppe Vietri 2 Thomas Steinke 3 Jonathan Ullman 4 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
In many statistical problems, incorporating priors
can significantly improve performance. However,
the use of prior knowledge in differentially private query release has remained underexplored,
despite such priors commonly being available in
the form of public datasets, such as previous US
Census releases. With the goal of releasing statistics about a private dataset, we present PMWPub ,
which—unlike existing baselines—leverages public data drawn from a related distribution as prior
information. We provide a theoretical analysis
and an empirical evaluation on the American
Community Survey (ACS) and ADULT datasets,
which shows that our method outperforms stateof-the-art methods. Furthermore, PMWPub scales
well to high-dimensional data domains, where
running many existing methods would be computationally infeasible.

1. Introduction
As the collection and distribution of private information becomes more prevalent, controlling privacy risks is becoming
a priority for organizations that depend on this data. Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b) is a rigorous criterion
that provides meaningful guarantees of individual privacy
while allowing for trade-offs between privacy and accuracy.
It is now deployed by organizations such as Google, Apple, and the US Census Bureau. In this work, we study
the problem of differentially private query release, specifically generating a private synthetic dataset: a new dataset
in which records are “fake” but the statistical properties of
the original data are preserved. In particular, the release of
summary data from the 2020 US Decennial Census—one of
the most notable applications of differential privacy (Abowd,
2018)—can be framed as a private query release problem.
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA 3 Google, Mountain View,
CA, USA 4 Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Steven Wu <zstevenwu@cmu.edu>.

In practice, generating accurate differentially private synthetic datasets is challenging without an excessively large
private dataset, and a promising avenue for improving these
algorithms is to find methods for incorporating prior information that lessen the burden on the private data. In this
paper we explore using public data as one promising source
of prior information that can be used without regard for its
privacy.1 For example, one can derive auxiliary data for
the 2020 US Census release from already-public releases
like the 2010 US Census. Similarly, the Census Bureau’s
American Community Survey has years of annual releases
that can be treated as public data for future releases. Alternatively, once national-level statistics are computed and
released, they can serve as public data for computing private
statistics over geographic subdivisions, such as states and
counties. Indeed, such a hierarchy of releases is part of
the TopDown algorithm being developed for the 2020 US
Census (Abowd et al., 2019).
Existing algorithms for private query release do not incorporate public data. While there is theoretical work on publicdata-assisted private query release (Bassily et al., 2020a), it
crucially assumes that the public and private data come from
the same distribution and does not give efficient algorithms.
Our Contributions Therefore, in light of these observations, we make the following contributions:
1. We initiate the study of using public data to improve
private query release in the more realistic setting where
the public data is from a distribution that is related but
not identical to the distribution of the private data.
2. We present (Private) Multiplicative Weights with Public Data (PMWPub ), an extension of MWEM (Hardt
et al., 2012) that incorporates public data.
3. We show that as a side benefit of leveraging public data,
PMWPub is computationally efficient and therefore is
practical for much larger problem sizes than MWEM.

1

4. We analyze the theoretical privacy and accuracy guarantees of PMWPub .
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The public data may have been derived from private data, but
we refer to it as “public” for our purposes as long as the privacy
concerns have already been addressed.

