Marginal Contribution Feature Importance - an Axiomatic Approach for
Explaining Data

Amnon Catav 1 Boyang Fu 2 Yazeed Zoabi 3 Ahuva Weiss-Meilik 4 Noam Shomron 3 Jason Ernst 2 5 6
Sriram Sankararaman 2 5 7 Ran Gilad-Bachrach 8

Abstract

In recent years, methods were proposed for assigning feature importance scores to measure the
contribution of individual features. While in some
cases the goal is to understand a specific model,
in many cases the goal is to understand the contribution of certain properties (features) to a realworld phenomenon. Thus, a distinction has been
made between feature importance scores that explain a model and scores that explain the data.
When explaining the data, machine learning models are used as proxies in settings where conducting many real-world experiments is expensive or
prohibited. While existing feature importance
scores show great success in explaining models,
we demonstrate their limitations when explaining
the data, especially in the presence of correlations
between features. Therefore, we develop a set of
axioms to capture properties expected from a feature importance score when explaining data and
prove that there exists only one score that satisfies
all of them, the Marginal Contribution Feature
Importance (MCI). We analyze the theoretical
properties of this score function and demonstrate
its merits empirically.

1

School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel 2 Computer Science Department, University of California, Los
Angeles, USA 3 Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv,
Israel 4 I-Medata AI Center, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, TelAviv, Israel 5 Department of Computational Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, USA 6 Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, USA 7 Department of
Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
8
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Amnon Catav <amnoncatav@mail.tau.ac.il>, Ran Gilad-Bachrach <rgb@tauex.tau.ac.il
>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The increase usage of machine learning has profound influence on many aspects of our lives. Therefore, it is of
paramount importance to lessen the black box nature of
many machine learning methods (Lipton, 2018). This awareness has led to extensive work on interpretability (Molnar,
2018), explainability (Holzinger et al., 2019), and more
specifically regarding feature importance scores (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017;
Sundararajan et al., 2017; Plumb et al., 2018). Many of the
previous studies on feature importance focused on assigning
importance scores for predictions of a specific trained model.
Methods for assigning feature importance scores are often
divided into local and global, where the goal of local scores
is to explain how much each feature impacts a specific prediction, while the goal of global scores is to explain how
much each feature is impacting the model predictions across
the entire data distribution. However, in many scenarios
models are used as tools for studying relations in the real
world such as the impact of gender on salary or to identify
cancer related genes (Jagsi et al., 2012; Danaee et al., 2017;
Kothari et al., 2020). In these cases, we care more about the
true underlying relations between each feature and the label,
rather than the mechanism of a specific trained model. Thus,
one can differentiate between feature importance scores
that explain the model from feature importance scores that
explain the data (Chen et al., 2020).
To understand the differences between explaining a trained
model and explaining the data, consider the case of predicting the existence of a certain health condition using a linear
regression model trained over gene expression data. A scientist may be interested in gene importance as a tool for prioritizing the experiments to be done in the lab. Since correlations are common in gene expression data, a phenomenon
frequently referred as collinearity is likely to emerge (Mason & Perreault Jr, 1991; Zuber & Strimmer, 2009). In
the collinearity setting the coefficients of the model are not
uniquely determined and therefore they cannot serve as measures for the significance of features (Dormann et al., 2013).
Thus, a scientist trying to understand which genes are most
associated with the investigated health condition might get

