Representational aspects of depth and conditioning in normalizing flows

Frederic Koehler 1 Viraj Mehta 2 Andrej Risteski 3

Abstract
Normalizing flows are among the most popular
paradigms in generative modeling, especially for
images, primarily because we can efficiently evaluate the likelihood of a data point. This is desirable both for evaluating the fit of a model, and
for ease of training, as maximizing the likelihood
can be done by gradient descent. However, training normalizing flows comes with difficulties as
well: models which produce good samples typically need to be extremely deep – which comes
with accompanying vanishing/exploding gradient problems. A very related problem is that
they are often poorly conditioned: since they are
parametrized as invertible maps from Rd → Rd ,
and typical training data like images intuitively is
lower-dimensional, the learned maps often have
Jacobians that are close to being singular.
In our paper, we tackle representational aspects
around depth and conditioning of normalizing
flows: both for general invertible architectures,
and for a particular common architecture, affine
couplings. We prove that Θ(1) affine coupling
layers suffice to exactly represent a permutation or
1×1 convolution, as used in GLOW, showing that
representationally the choice of partition is not a
bottleneck for depth. We also show that shallow
affine coupling networks are universal approximators in Wasserstein distance if ill-conditioning is
allowed, and experimentally investigate related
phenomena involving padding. Finally, we show
a depth lower bound for general flow architectures
with few neurons per layer and bounded Lipschitz
constant.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models are one of the lynchpins of unsupervised learning, underlying tasks spanning distribution
learning, feature extraction and transfer learning. Parametric families of neural-network based models have been improved to the point of being able to model complex distributions like images of human faces. One paradigm that
has received a lot attention is normalizing flows, which
model distributions as pushforwards of a standard Gaussian
(or other simple distribution) through an invertible neural
network G. Thus, the likelihood has an explicit form via
the change of variables formula using the Jacobian of G.
Training normalizing flows is challenging due to a couple
of main issues. Empirically, these models seem to require a
much larger size than other generative models (e.g. GANs)
and most notably, a much larger depth. This makes training
challenging due to vanishing/exploding gradients. A very
related problem is conditioning, more precisely the smallest
singular value of the forward map G. It’s intuitively clear
that natural images will have a low-dimensional structure,
thus a close-to-singular G might be needed. On the other
hand, the change-of-variables formula involves the determinant of the Jacobian of G−1 , which grows larger the more
singular G is.
While recently, the universal approximation power of various types of invertible architectures has been studied if the
input is padded with a sufficiently large number of all-0
coordinates (Dupont et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020) or
arbitrary partitions and permutations are allowed (Teshima
et al., 2020), precise quantification of the cost of invertibility
in terms of the depth required and the conditioning of the
model has not been fleshed out.
In this paper, we study both mathematically and empirically
representational aspects of depth and conditioning in normalizing flows and answer several fundamental questions.

2. Related Work
1

Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Viraj Mehta <virajm@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

On the empirical side, flow models were first popularized by
(Dinh et al., 2014), who introduce the NICE model and the
idea of parametrizing a distribution as a sequence of transformations with triangular Jacobians, so that maximum likelihood training is tractable. Quickly thereafter, (Dinh et al.,
2016) improved the affine coupling block architecture they

