Automatic Variational Inference with Cascading Flows

Luca Ambrogioni 1 Gianluigi Silvestri 1 2 Marcel van Gerven 1

Abstract
The automation of probabilistic reasoning is one
of the primary aims of machine learning. Recently, the confluence of variational inference and
deep learning has led to powerful and flexible automatic inference methods that can be trained by
stochastic gradient descent. In particular, normalizing flows are highly parameterized deep models
that can fit arbitrarily complex posterior densities.
However, normalizing flows struggle in highly
structured probabilistic programs as they need
to relearn the forward-pass of the program. Automatic structured variational inference (ASVI)
remedies this problem by constructing variational
programs that embed the forward-pass. Here, we
combine the flexibility of normalizing flows and
the prior-embedding property of ASVI in a new
family of variational programs, which we named
cascading flows. A cascading flows program interposes a newly designed highway flow architecture in between the conditional distributions
of the prior program such as to steer it toward
the observed data. These programs can be constructed automatically from an input probabilistic program and can also be amortized automatically. We evaluate the performance of the new
variational programs in a series of structured inference problems. We find that cascading flows
have much higher performance than both normalizing flows and ASVI in a large set of structured
inference problems.

1. Introduction
The aim of probabilistic programming is to provide a fully
automated software system for statistical inference on arbitrary user-specified probabilistic models (also referred to
as probabilistic programs) (Milch et al., 2007; Sato, 1997;
1

Donders Centre for Cognition, Radboud University, Netherlands 2 OnePlanet Research Center, imec-the Netherlands, Wageningen, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Luca Ambrogioni
<l.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Kersting and De Raedt, 2007; Pfeffer, 2001; Park et al.,
2005; Goodman et al., 2012; Wingate et al., 2011; Patil
et al., 2010; Dillon et al., 2017; Bingham et al., 2019; Tran
et al., 2017; 2016). When the probabilistic programs are
built from differentiable components, stochastic variational
inference (VI) by automatic differentiation offers an effective and computationally efficient solution (Bishop et al.,
2002; Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2017). However,
the performance of stochastic VI depends strongly on the
choice of a variational program (also known as variational
family or variational guide) (Bishop and Winn, 2003).
Until recently, automatic variational program construction
was limited to simple mean field and multivariate normal
coupling approaches (Kucukelbir et al., 2017). These programs are highly constrained and exploit only minimally
the structure of the original probabilistic program. For example, the multivariate normal approach only depends on
the number of variables and their support. More recently,
normalizing flows revolutionized the field of variational
inference by offering a highly flexible parametric model
for complex multivariate distributions. Normalizing flows
can be easily used to construct automatic variational programs by mapping all the variables to a spherical normal
latent space through a learnable diffeomorphism (Rezende
and Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2019). While
highly flexible, the normalizing flow approach still uses
only minimal information concerning the input probabilistic
program. This leads to poor performance in highly structured probabilistic programs with complex computational
flows (Ambrogioni et al., 2021). For example, consider an
inference problem defined by a highly parameterized natural
language model (Brown et al., 2020). A typical problem
of this kind is controlled language generation, where the
goal is to steer the model to general text conditioned on its
past output and future targets (e.g. the presence of some
specific words). The controlled network can be formulated
in probabilistic programming terms as a posterior distribution that is parameterized by the variational program. In a
problem like this, most of the complexity of the posterior is
encoded in the structure of the prior probabilistic program
(the language model). The model just needs to be steered in
the right direction. However, normalizing flow completely
disregards this structure and has to relearn all the structure
embedded in the prior.

