EfficientTTS: An Efficient and High-Quality Text-to-Speech Architecture

Chenfeng Miao 1 Shuang Liang 1 Zhengchen Liu 1 Minchuan Chen 1 Jun Ma 1 Shaojun Wang 1 Jing Xiao 1

Abstract
In this work, we address the Text-to-Speech
(TTS) task by proposing a non-autoregressive architecture called EfficientTTS. Unlike the dominant non-autoregressive TTS models, which are
trained with the need of external aligners, EfficientTTS optimizes all its parameters with a stable, end-to-end training procedure, allowing for
synthesizing high quality speech in a fast and efficient manner. EfficientTTS is motivated by a new
monotonic alignment modeling approach, which
specifies monotonic constraints to the sequence
alignment with almost no increase of computation. By combining EfficientTTS with different
feed-forward network structures, we develop a
family of TTS models, including both text-tomelspectrogram and text-to-waveform networks.
We experimentally show that the proposed models
significantly outperform counterpart models such
as Tacotron 2 (Shen et al.) and Glow-TTS (Kim
et al., 2020) in terms of speech quality, training efficiency and synthesis speed, while still producing
the speeches of strong robustness and great diversity. In addition, we demonstrate that proposed
approach can be easily extended to autoregressive
models such as Tacotron 2.

1. Introduction
Text-to-Speech (TTS) is an important task in speech processing. With rapid progress in deep learning, TTS technology
has received widespread attention in recent years. The most
popular neural TTS models are autoregressive models based
on an encoder-decoder framework (Wang et al., 2017; Shen
et al.; Ping et al., 2018; 2019; Li et al., 2019; Valle et al.,
2021). In this framework, the encoder takes the text sequence as input and learns its hidden representation, while
the decoder generates the outputs frame by frame, i.e., in an
autoregressive manner. As the performance of autoregres1

Ping An Technology. Correspondence to: Chenfeng Miao
<miao chenfeng@126.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sive models has been substantially promoted, the synthesis
efficiency is becoming a new research hotspot.
Recently, significant efforts have been dedicated to the development of non-autoregressive TTS models (Ren et al.,
2019; 2021; Miao et al.; Peng et al., 2020). However, most
non-autoregressive TTS models suffer from complex training procedures, high computational cost or training time
cost, making them not suited for real-world applications. In
this work, we propose EfficientTTS, an efficient and highquality text-to-speech architecture. Our contributions are
summarized as follows,
• We propose a novel approach to produce soft or hard
monotonic alignments for sequence-to-sequence models. By constraining the sequence alignment to be
monotonic, the proposed approach extends the vanilla
attention mechanism with almost no increase in computation. Most importantly, the proposed approach can
be incorporated into any attention mechanisms without
constraints on network structures.
• We propose EfficientTTS, a non-autoregressive architecture to perform high-quality speech generation from
text sequence without additional aligners. EfficientTTS
is fully parallel, trained end-to-end, thus being quite
efficient for both training and inference.
• We develop a family of TTS models based on EfficientTTS, including: (1) EFTS-CNN, a convolutional
model learns melspectrogram generation with high
training efficiency; (2) EFTS-Flow, a flow-based model
enables parallel melspectrogram generation with controllable speech variation; (3) EFTS-Wav, a fully endto-end model directly learns waveform generation from
text sequence. We experimentally show that the proposed models achieve significant improvements in
speech quality, synthesis speed and training efficiency,
in comparison with counterpart models Tacotron 2 and
Glow-TTS.
• We show that the proposed approach can be easily
extended to autoregressive models such as Tacotron 2.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses related works in non-autoregressive TTS models and

