GNNAutoScale: Scalable and Expressive Graph Neural Networks
via Historical Embeddings

Matthias Fey 1 Jan Eric Lenssen 1 Frank Weichert 1 Jure Leskovec 2

Abstract
We present GNNAutoScale (GAS), a framework
for scaling arbitrary message-passing GNNs to
large graphs. GAS prunes entire sub-trees of the
computation graph by utilizing historical embeddings from prior training iterations, leading to
constant GPU memory consumption in respect to
input node size without dropping any data. While
existing solutions weaken the expressive power
of message passing due to sub-sampling of edges
or non-trainable propagations, our approach is
provably able to maintain the expressive power of
the original GNN. We achieve this by providing
approximation error bounds of historical embeddings and show how to tighten them in practice.
Empirically, we show that the practical realization
of our framework, PyGAS, an easy-to-use extension for P Y T ORCH G EOMETRIC, is both fast and
memory-efficient, learns expressive node representations, closely resembles the performance of
their non-scaling counterparts, and reaches stateof-the-art performance on large-scale graphs.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) capture local graph structure and feature information in a trainable fashion to derive
powerful node representations suitable for a given task at
hand (Hamilton, 2020; Ma & Tang, 2020). As such, numerous GNNs have been proposed in the past that integrate ideas
such as maximal expressiveness (Xu et al., 2019), anisotropy
and attention (Veličković et al., 2018), non-linearities (Wang
et al., 2019), or multiple aggregations (Corso et al., 2020)
into their message passing formulation. However, one of the
challenges that have so far precluded their wide adoption
in industrial and social applications is the difficulty to scale
them to large graphs (Frasca et al., 2020).
1
Department of Computer Science, TU Dortmund University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Matthias Fey <matthias.fey@udo.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While the full-gradient in a GNN is straightforward to compute, assuming one has access to all hidden node embeddings in all layers, this is not feasible in large-scale graphs
due to GPU memory limitations (Ma & Tang, 2020). Therefore, it is desirable to approximate its full-batch gradient
stochastically by considering only a mini-batch B ⊆ V of
nodes for loss computation. However, this stochastic gradient is still expensive to obtain due to the exponentially
increasing dependency of nodes over layers; a phenomenon
framed as neighbor explosion (Hamilton et al., 2017). Due
to neighbor explosion and since the whole computation
graph needs to be stored on the GPU, deeper architectures
can not be applied to large graphs. Therefore, a scalable
solution needs to make the memory consumption constant
or sub-linear in respect to the number of input nodes.
Recent works aim to alleviate this problem by proposing
various sampling techniques based on the concept of dropping edges (Ma & Tang, 2020; Rong et al., 2020): Nodewise sampling (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018b;
Markowitz et al., 2021) recursively samples a fixed number
of 1-hop neighbors; Layer-wise sampling techniques independently sample nodes for each layer, leading to a constant
sample size in each layer (Chen et al., 2018a; Zou et al.,
2019; Huang et al., 2018); In subgraph sampling (Chiang
et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020b;a), a full GNN is run on an
entire subgraph G[B] induced by a sampled batch of nodes
B ⊆ V. These techniques get rid of the neighbor explosion
problem by sampling the graph but may fail to preserve the
edges that present a meaningful topological structure. Further, existing approaches are either still restricted to shallow
networks, non-exchangeable GNN operators or operators
with reduced expressiveness. In particular, they consider
only specific GNN operators and it is an open question
whether these techniques can be successfully applied to
the wide range of GNN architectures available (Veličković
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Corso et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020b). Another line of work is based on the idea of decoupling propagations from predictions, either as a pre- (Wu
et al., 2019; Klicpera et al., 2019a; Frasca et al., 2020; Yu
et al., 2020) or post-processing step (Huang et al., 2021).
While this scheme enjoys fast training and inference time,
it cannot be applied to any GNN, in particular because the
propagation is non-trainable, and therefore reduces model

