Learning Queueing Policies for Organ Transplantation Allocation using
Interpretable Counterfactual Survival Analysis
Jeroen Berrevoets 1 Ahmed M. Alaa 2 Zhaozhi Qian 1
James Jordon 3 Alexander Gimson 4 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 5

Abstract
Organ transplantation is often the last resort for
treating end-stage illnesses, but managing transplant wait-lists is challenging because of organ
scarcity and the complexity of assessing donorrecipient compatibility. In this paper, we develop
a data-driven model for (real-time) organ allocation using observational data for transplant outcomes. Our model integrates a queuing-theoretic
framework with unsupervised learning to cluster the organs into “organ types”, and then construct priority queues (associated with each organ
type) wherein incoming patients are assigned. To
reason about organ allocations, the model uses
synthetic controls to infer a patient’s survival outcomes under counterfactual allocations to the different organ types—the model is trained end-toend to optimize the trade-o↵ between patient waiting time and expected survival time. The usage of
synthetic controls enable patient-level interpretations of allocation decisions that can be presented
and understood by clinicians. We test our model
on multiple data sets, and show that it outperforms other organ-allocation policies in terms of
added life-years, and death count. Furthermore,
we introduce a novel organ-allocation simulator
to accurately test new policies.

1. Introduction
Over the years, organ transplantation surgeries have become
increasingly prevalent in the developed world—currently, a
new patient is added to the transplant wait-list every nine
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA),
Los Angeles CA, USA 3 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 4 Cambridge University Hospitals,
Cambridge, UK 5 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: JB <jeroen.berrevoets@maths.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Matching
(1)

(2)

arriving patients wait-list

(3)

arriving organs

For each patient, a match is made using following learned properties:

Survival without organ

Survival with organ

Patient's waiting time
for suitable organ

Figure 1. Overview of transplant system and OrganSync. Various patients arrive at seemingly irregular intervals (1); and various
organs arrive at equally irregular intervals (3). Organ-allocation
algorithms match patients on the wait-list (right of the dashed line),
with arriving organs (2). OrganSync not only models (2), but also
(1) and (3). For this, OrganSync estimates each patient’s survival
without an organ, predicts which organ-type would be most beneficial, and compares the patient’s survival time with the waiting
time for their suitable organ-type. Indicated by the red arrow; a
patient is kept on the wait-list (despite arriving second), as our
model anticipates a suitable organ arriving in the future.

minutes in the US (Organ Procurement and Transplantation
Network (OPTN), 2021b). A major reason for this is the
recent improvement in case selection, anaesthesia, surgical techniques, immunosupression strategies, and expanded
donor supply. Allocation strategies used to suggest donor
organs to patients, however, have not improved as much.
For example, liver allocation in the US and Europe rely on
the MELD score which is calculated using only three lab
parameters1 (Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN), 2021a; Eurotransplant Reference Laboratory
(ETRL), 2020); in the UK, allocation relies on simple linear
models that vastly underestimate the complexity of organto-patient interaction (Neuberger et al., 2008; NHSBT Liver
Advisory Group (LAG), 2019). In addition, these allocation
protocols only score patient-organ compatibility, but do not
provide a systematic approach to managing the influx of
patients and organs arriving into the system over time.
Organ allocation is a hard problem. In this paper, we pro1
International Normalised Ratio, Creatinine, and Bilirubin;
USA also includes Sodium.

