State Entropy Maximization with Random Encoders
for Efficient Exploration

Younggyo Seo * 1 Lili Chen * 2 Jinwoo Shin 1 Honglak Lee 3 4 Pieter Abbeel 2 Kimin Lee 2

Abstract
Recent exploration methods have proven to be a
recipe for improving sample-efficiency in deep reinforcement learning (RL). However, efficient exploration in high-dimensional observation spaces
still remains a challenge. This paper presents Random Encoders for Efficient Exploration (RE3), an
exploration method that utilizes state entropy as
an intrinsic reward. In order to estimate state entropy in environments with high-dimensional observations, we utilize a k-nearest neighbor entropy
estimator in the low-dimensional representation
space of a convolutional encoder. In particular,
we find that the state entropy can be estimated in
a stable and compute-efficient manner by utilizing a randomly initialized encoder, which is fixed
throughout training. Our experiments show that
RE3 significantly improves the sample-efficiency
of both model-free and model-based RL methods
on locomotion and navigation tasks from DeepMind Control Suite and MiniGrid benchmarks.
We also show that RE3 allows learning diverse behaviors without extrinsic rewards, effectively improving sample-efficiency in downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Exploration remains one of the main challenges of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) in complex environments with
high-dimensional observations. Many prior approaches to
incentivizing exploration introduce intrinsic rewards based
on a measure of state novelty. These include count-based
visitation bonuses (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017;
Ostrovski et al., 2017) and prediction errors (Stadie et al.,
2015; Houthooft et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda
et al., 2019; Pathak et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020). By
introducing such novelty-based intrinsic rewards, these ap*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST 2 UC Berkeley 3 University of
Michigan 4 LG AI Research. Correspondence to: Kimin Lee
<kiminlee@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

proaches encourage agents to visit diverse states, but leave
unanswered the fundamental question of how to quantify
effective exploration in a principled way.
To address this limitation, Lee et al. (2019) and Hazan
et al. (2019) proposed that exploration methods should encourage uniform (i.e., maximum entropy) coverage of the
state space. For practical state entropy estimation without learning density models, Mutti et al. (2021) estimate
state entropy by measuring distances between states and
their k-nearest neighbors. To extend this approach to highdimensional environments, recent works (Tao et al., 2020;
Badia et al., 2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021) have proposed to
utilize the k-nearest neighbor state entropy estimator in a
low-dimensional latent representation space. The latent representations are learned by auxiliary tasks such as dynamics
learning (Tao et al., 2020), inverse dynamics prediction (Badia et al., 2020), and contrastive learning (Liu & Abbeel,
2021). However, these methods still involve optimizing multiple objectives throughout RL training. Given the added
complexity (e.g., hyperparameter tuning), instability, and
computational overhead of optimizing auxiliary losses, it is
important to ask whether effective state entropy estimation is
possible without introducing additional learning procedures.
In this paper, we present RE3: Random Encoders for
Efficient Exploration, a simple, compute-efficient method
for exploration without introducing additional models or
representation learning. The key idea of RE3 is to utilize a
k-nearest neighbor state entropy estimator in the representation space of a randomly initialized encoder, which is fixed
throughout training. Our main hypothesis is that a randomly
initialized encoder can provide a meaningful representation
space for state entropy estimation by exploiting the strong
prior of convolutional architectures. Ulyanov et al. (2018)
and Caron et al. (2018) found that the structure alone of
deep convolutional networks is a powerful inductive bias
that allows relevant features to be extracted for tasks such as
image generation and classification. In our case, we find that
the representation space of a randomly initialized encoder
effectively captures information about similarity between
states, as shown in Figure 1. Based upon this observation,
we propose to maximize a state entropy estimate in the fixed
representation space of a randomly initialized encoder.

