Evolving Attention with Residual Convolutions

Yujing Wang 1 * Yaming Yang 2 * Jiangang Bai 1 2 Mingliang Zhang 1 2
Jing Bai 2 Jing Yu 3 Ce Zhang 4 Gao Huang 5 Yunhai Tong 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) is the state-of-the-art
architecture for sequential modeling which achieves superior performances in various applications, such as natural
language understanding (Devlin et al., 2019), image generation (Parmar et al., 2018) and time-series forecasting (Li
et al., 2019). The performance of a transformer model
mainly depends on its capability of inducing reasonable
attentions between input tokens. However, as illustrated by
some previous works (Tang et al., 2018; Jain & Wallace,
*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 Microsoft Research
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 ETH Zurich 5 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to:
Yujing Wang <yujwang@pku.edu.cn>, Yaming Yang <yayaming@microsoft.com>, Yunhai Tong <yhtong@pku.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

80

79.63

79.29

79

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Transformer is a ubiquitous model for natural language processing and has attracted wide attentions
in computer vision. The attention maps are indispensable for a transformer model to encode the
dependencies among input tokens. However, they
are learned without explicit interactions in each
layer and sometimes fail to capture reasonable
patterns. In this paper, we propose a novel and
generic mechanism based on evolving attention
to improve the performance of transformers. On
one hand, the attention maps in different layers
share common knowledge, thus the ones in preceding layers can instruct the learning of attention
in succeeding layers through residual connections.
On the other hand, low-level and high-level attentions vary in the levels of abstraction, so we adopt
additional convolutional layers to capture the evolutionary process of attention maps. The proposed
evolving attention mechanism achieves significant
performance improvement over various state-ofthe-art models for multiple tasks, including image
classification, natural language understanding and
machine translation.

78.22

77

78.4

77.87

77.7

78

79.1

78.5

76.44

76
75.23
75
74
73

ResNet
AA-ResNet
EA-AA-ResNet (Ours)

74.33
73.79

20M

30M

40M

50M

60M

Parameter Size (Millions)

Figure 1. Comparison of different model architectures for ImageNet classification

2019), the attention maps captured by vanilla attention layers are not always effective and explainable. To cope with
this problem, recent efforts concatenated self-attentions with
convolutional layers to obtain better image or text representations (Bello et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020), whereas the
attention map itself was not ameliorated. In this paper, we
consider another question, can we improve the learning of
attention maps via a dedicated model architecture design?
As we will illustrate, it is possible to improve the quality of
attention maps by an evolving mechanism based on a chain
of convolutional modules.
In a vanilla transformer, the attention maps in each layer
are learned without explicit interactions, which does not
bring good generalization ability. Intuitively, one can simply share attention maps among layers, but it is not effective
as different layers may require attention structures from
different abstraction levels. For instance, in image classification tasks, a lower layer usually focuses on the relations
between similar colors and textures, while a higher layer
needs to reason about dependencies among different components. Our motivation is to design a dedicated module to
improve the quality of attention maps in an evolutionary process. Therefore, we directly bridge the attention maps from
different layers through residual connections. Moreover, we
adopt convolutional layers to capture the evolution of atten-

