Online Selection Problems against Constrained Adversary

Zhihao Jiang 1 Pinyan Lu 2 Zhihao Gavin Tang 2 Yuhao Zhang 3

Abstract
Inspired by a recent line of work in online algorithms with predictions, we study the constrained
adversary model that utilizes predictions from a
different perspective. Prior works mostly focused
on designing simultaneously robust and consistent algorithms, without making assumptions on
the quality of the predictions. In contrary, our
model assumes the adversarial instance is consistent with the predictions and aim to design algorithms that have best worst-case performance
against all such instances. We revisit classical
online selection problems under the constrained
adversary model. For the single item selection
problem, we design an optimal algorithm in the
adversarial arrival model and an improved algorithm in the random arrival model (a.k.a., the secretary problem). For the online edge-weighted
bipartite matching problem, we extend the classical Water-filling and Ranking algorithms and
achieve improved competitive ratios.

1. Introduction
In the classical online algorithm literature, the performance
of an algorithm is evaluated by its competitive ratio in the
worst case. This principle has guided the design of online
algorithms for decades and achieved great successes in many
areas, including caching, scheduling, online matching, etc..
However, the worst case analysis is often too pessimistic
when applied in practice.
A recent trend has been interested in incorporating machine*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Management Science
and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA 2 School of Information Management and Engineering,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 3 John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to:
Zhihao Jiang <faebdc@stanford.edu>,
Pinyan Lu <lu.pinyan@mail.shufe.edu.cn>, Zhihao Gavin
Tang <tang.zhihao@mail.shufe.edu.cn>,
Yuhao Zhang
<zhang yuhao@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learned advice to online algorithm designs. In particular,
the algorithm is given some extra information about the
instance (a.k.a. prediction) that are typically calculated by
machine learning algorithms. The goal is then to design
a simultaneously consistent and robust algorithm without
knowing the quality of the prediction, meaning that the algorithm has good performance when the prediction is accurate
and the worst-case performance of the algorithm is also
preserved. This framework is first proposed by Purohit et
al. (Purohit et al., 2018) for the ski-rental problem and the
non-clairvoyant scheduling problem. Later, it is extended
to online caching (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2018; Rohatgi,
2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Antoniadis et al., 2020a), online
covering problems (Bamas et al., 2020b), energy minimization (Bamas et al., 2020a), and secretary and online bipartite
matching problems (Antoniadis et al., 2020b;a).
In this paper, we study the constrained adversary model,
to utilize the predictions from a different perspective. In
contrary to the robustness-consistency framework, we make
assumptions on the quality of the prediction. Instead of a
point prediction without any accuracy guarantee, we consider a prediction interval [pl , pu ] that covers the value of
the real instance. I.e., the input instance must be consistent
with the prediction interval. Our goal is to design an algorithm that has the best worst-case competitive ratio against
this constrained adversary.
Our model is motivated by the confidence intervals from
statistics. In statistics, each confidence interval is associated
with a coverage probability, meaning the probability that the
true value is covered by the interval. It is straightforward
to combine statistics methods with our framework with predictions. As an illustration, we can start with a confidence
interval of arbitrary coverage probability 1 − δ and use it as
the prediction interval of our algorithm. Straightforwardly,
our competitive analysis stands with the probability at least
1 − δ.
1.1. Our Models and Contributions
Under the constrained adversary model, we revisit several
online selection problems, including the secretary problem
and the online matching problem, studied by Antoniadis
et al. (Antoniadis et al., 2020b), and adapt the prediction
model therein.

