An Integer Linear Programming Framework for Mining Constraints from Data

Tao Meng 1 Kai-Wei Chang 1

Abstract
Structured output prediction problems (e.g., sequential tagging, hierarchical multi-class classification) often involve constraints over the output label space. These constraints interact with
the learned models to filter infeasible solutions
and facilitate in building an accountable system.
However, although constraints are useful, they are
often based on hand-crafted rules. This raises a
question – can we mine constraints and rules from
data based on a learning algorithm?
In this paper, we present a general framework for
mining constraints from data. In particular, we
consider the inference in structured output prediction as an integer linear programming (ILP)
problem. Then, given the coefficients of the objective function and the corresponding solution, we
mine the underlying constraints by estimating the
outer and inner polytopes of the feasible set. We
verify the proposed constraint mining algorithm
in various synthetic and real-world applications
and demonstrate that the proposed approach successfully identifies the feasible set at scale. In
particular, we show that our approach can learn to
solve 9x9 Sudoku puzzles and minimal spanning
tree problems from examples without providing
the underlying rules. Our algorithm can also integrate with a neural network model to learn the
hierarchical label structure of a multi-label classification task. Besides, we provide a theoretical
analysis about the tightness of the polytopes and
the reliability of the mined constraints.

1. Introduction
A variety of machine learning problems involve making
coherent decisions over a set of output variables, where
the dependencies between them can be described by con1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Tao Meng
<tmeng@cs.ucla.edu>, Kai-Wei Chang <kwchang@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

straints (Punyakanok et al., 2005; Samdani & Roth, 2012;
Nowozin & Lampert, 2011). For example, in part-of-speech
tagging, a constraint specifying that every sentence should
contain at least one verb and one noun can greatly improve
the performance (Ganchev et al., 2010). Similarly, in hierarchical multi-label classification, a figure labeled ‘flower’
should also be labeled ‘plant’ as well (Dimitrovski et al.,
2011). To incorporate constraints with learned models, one
popular method is to formulate the inference problem into
an integer linear programming (ILP) (Roth & Yih, 2004).
This framework is general and can cope with constraints
formed as propositional logics (Hooker, 1988; Richardson
& Domingos, 2006). This approach has been widely used in
natural language processing, computer vision, and many application areas. It has demonstrated great performance gains
in various applications (e.g., Martins et al. (2010); Nowozin
& Lampert (2011); Roth & Yih (2004); Goldwasser et al.
(2012); Chang et al. (2008); Meng et al. (2019)).1
In the literature, existing works most focus on how to utilize constraints to facilitate learning. They mostly assume
constraints are given as a priori. However, for some applications, manually identifying constraints is tedious. Besides,
some constraints are obscure and cannot be easily identified by human experts.2 Inspired by representation learning
methods automate feature extraction, we envision that an
artificial intelligence system that could automatically recognize underlying constraints among output labels from data
and incorporate them in the prediction time.
To illustrate the goal, consider the following learning problem. We are given a set of input-output pairs as training
data, where each input is an adjacency matrix of a graph
representing the distances between nodes and the output is
corresponding minimal spanning tree (MST). Our goal is
to train a model to generate MST of a given graph (adjacency matrix) without telling the model that the output is a
1

Solving ILP is in general NP-hard. However, in practice,
inference problems often can be solved efficiently using a commercial ILP solver or an approximation inference technique (e.g.,
LP-relaxation (Fromer & Globerson, 2009), loopy belief proprogation (Murphy et al., 2013)). See discussion in (Finley & Joachims,
2008).
2
For example, if we shuffle columns of all sudoku puzzles
with the same order, the puzzles still follow a set of constraints.
However, it is hard for humans to recognize these underlying rules.

