Robust Learning-Augmented Caching: An Experimental Study

Jakub Chł˛edowski * 1 Adam Polak * 2 Bartosz Szabucki * 1 Konrad Żołna * 1 3

Abstract
Effective caching is crucial for the performance
of modern-day computing systems. A key optimization problem arising in caching – which
item to evict to make room for a new item – cannot be optimally solved without knowing the future. There are many classical approximation
algorithms for this problem, but more recently
researchers started to successfully apply machine
learning to decide what to evict by discovering
implicit input patterns and predicting the future.
While machine learning typically does not provide any worst-case guarantees, the new field
of learning-augmented algorithms proposes solutions that leverage classical online caching algorithms to make the machine-learned predictors robust. We are the first to comprehensively
evaluate these learning-augmented algorithms
on real-world caching datasets and state-of-theart machine-learned predictors. We show that
a straightforward method – blindly following either a predictor or a classical robust algorithm,
and switching whenever one becomes worse than
the other – has only a low overhead over a wellperforming predictor, while competing with classical methods when the coupled predictor fails,
thus providing a cheap worst-case insurance.

1. Introduction
Caching is an important part of almost any modern-day
computing system because it can vastly speed up memory
access. A major optimization problem arising with regard
to caching is: Which item to evict from the cache in order
to make room for a new item when the cache is full? The

optimization goal is to maximize the number of cache hits,
i.e., situations when the requested item is still present in the
cache. If we choose a wrong item to evict and it is requested
again soon after, a cache miss occurs, and the item has to
be reloaded to the cache from the main memory1 , which is
usually orders of magnitude slower than reading it directly
from the cache.
Classical caching algorithms. In the offline scenario,
i.e., when we know in advance the sequence of requested
items, the problem is easy to solve optimally. Indeed, Belady
(1966) proved that the number of cache misses is minimized
by a greedy eviction policy – always evict the item which
will reappear the furthest in the future (or which will never
reappear, if there is such item).
In the more realistic online scenario, we do not know the
future requests. For the cache size of k items, the classical MARKER algorithm (Fiat et al., 1991) is O(log k)competitive, i.e. it incurs at most O(log k · OPT) cache
misses on inputs which the optimal offline algorithm
serves with OPT misses. There is also a matching lower
bound (Fiat et al., 1991), showing that no algorithm can do
better, up to a constant factor. On the other hand, real-world
applications employ simple heuristics, such as the gold standard Least Recently Used (LRU), which happens to perform
better in practice.
Recent machine learning approaches try to discover implicit
access patterns specific to individual applications, which
are likely to occur in future request sequences and use that
knowledge to make better eviction decisions (Jain & Lin,
2016; Shi et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Yan & Li, 2020).

*
1
Equal contribution
Jagiellonian University, Kraków,
Poland 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 3 DeepMind, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to:
Jakub
Chł˛edowski
<jakub.chledowski@gmail.com>,
Adam
Polak <adam.polak@epfl.ch>, Bartosz Szabucki <bartosz.szabucki@gmail.com>,
Konrad
Żołna
<konrad.zolna@gmail.com>.

Learning-augmented caching algorithms. In general,
algorithms based on machine learning models tend to work
well on typical inputs but can perform arbitrarily badly
when, e.g. training data is scarce, or input patterns change
unexpectedly over time. Lykouris & Vassilvitskii (2018)
proposed a workaround to that issue. Their online caching
algorithm, PredictiveMarker, takes as an additional input
for each requested item a prediction (e.g. generated by an
ML model) when this item will be requested again. The

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
Even if a requested item is unlikely to be ever reused, it has to
be put into the cache.

