Towards Open-World Recommendation:
An Inductive Model-based Collaborative Filtering Approach
Qitian Wu 1 2 Hengrui Zhang 1 Xiaofeng Gao 1 2 Junchi Yan 1 2 Hongyuan Zha 3

Abstract
Recommendation models can effectively estimate
underlying user interests and predict one’s future
behaviors by factorizing an observed user-item
rating matrix into products of two sets of latent
factors. However, the user-specific embedding
factors can only be learned in a transductive way,
making it difficult to handle new users on-the-fly.
In this paper, we propose an inductive collaborative filtering framework that contains two representation models. The first model follows conventional matrix factorization which factorizes a
group of key users’ rating matrix to obtain meta latents. The second model resorts to attention-based
structure learning that estimates hidden relations
from query to key users and learns to leverage
meta latents to inductively compute embeddings
for query users via neural message passing. Our
model enables inductive representation learning
for users and meanwhile guarantees equivalent
representation capacity as matrix factorization.
Experiments demonstrate that our model achieves
promising results for recommendation on fewshot users with limited training ratings and new
unseen users which are commonly encountered in
open-world recommender systems.

1. Introduction
As information explosion has become one major factor affecting human life, recommender systems, which can filter
useful information and contents of user’s potential interests,
play an increasingly indispensable role. Recommendation
problems can be generally formalized as matrix completion
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University. 2 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 3 School of Data
Science, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
for Society, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.
Correspondence to: Xiaofeng Gao <gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(MC) where one has a user-item rating matrix whose entries,
which stand for interactions of users with items (ratings or
click behaviors), are partially observed. The goal of MC is
to predict missing entries (unobserved or future potential
interactions) in the matrix based on the observed ones.
Modern recommender systems need to meet two important
requirements for practical utility. First of all, recommendation models should have enough expressiveness to capture
diverse user interests and preferences so that the systems can
accomplish personalized recommendation. Existing methods based on collaborative filtering (CF)1 or, interchangeably, matrix factorization (MF) have shown great power in
this problem by factorizing the rating matrix into two classes
of latent factors (i.e., embeddings) for users and items respectively, and further leverage dot-product of two factors to
predict potential ratings (Hu et al., 2008; Koren et al., 2009;
Rendle et al., 2009; Srebro et al., 2004; Zheng et al., 2016).
Equivalently, for each user, the methods consider a one-hot
user encoding as input, and assume a user-specific embedding function mapping user index to a latent factor. Such
learnable latent factors can represent user’s preferences in a
low-dimensional space. Recent works extend MF with complex architectures, like multi-layer perceptrons (Dziugaite
& Roy, 2015), recurrent units (Monti et al., 2017), autoregressive models (Zheng et al., 2016), graph neural networks
(van den Berg et al., 2017), etc., achieving state-of-the-art
results on both benchmark datasets and commercial systems
(Covington et al., 2016; Ying et al., 2018; Kang et al., 2020).
The second requirement stems from a key observation from
real-world scenarios: recommender systems often interact
with a dynamic open world where new users, who are not
exposed to models during training, may appear in test stage.
This requires that models trained on a set of users manage
to adapt to unseen users. However, the above-mentioned
CF models would fail in this situation since the embedding
factors are parameterized for specific users and need to be
learned collaboratively with all other users in transductive
setting (see Fig. 1 for illustration). Brute-force ways include:
1
In recent literature, collaborative filtering (CF) approaches
often refer to model-based CF, i.e. matrix factorization, while
its memory-based counterpart, as an heuristic approach, adopts
similarity methods like KNN for recommendation.

