CRPO: A New Approach for Safe Reinforcement Learning with Convergence
Guarantee
Tengyu Xu 1 Yingbin Lang 1 Guanghui Lan 2

Abstract
In safe reinforcement learning (SRL) problems,
an agent explores the environment to maximize
an expected total reward and meanwhile avoids
violation of certain constraints on a number of
expected total costs. In general, such SRL problems have nonconvex objective functions subject
to multiple nonconvex constraints, and hence are
very challenging to solve, particularly to provide
a globally optimal policy. Many popular SRL algorithms adopt a primal-dual structure which utilizes the updating of dual variables for satisfying
the constraints. In contrast, we propose a primal
approach, called constraint-rectified policy optimization (CRPO), which updates the policy alternatingly between objective improvement and constraint satisfaction. CRPO provides a primal-type
algorithmic framework to solve SRL problems,
where each policy update can take any variant
of policy optimization step. To demonstrate the
theoretical performance of CRPO, we adopt natural policy gradient (NPG) for each policy update
√
step and show that CRPO achieves an O(1/ T )
convergence rate to the global optimal policy
in
√
the constrained policy set and an O(1/ T ) error bound on constraint satisfaction. This is the
first finite-time analysis of primal SRL algorithms
with global optimality guarantee. Our empirical
results demonstrate that CRPO can outperform
the existing primal-dual baseline algorithms significantly.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in
solving complex sequential decision-making and control
problems such as Go (Silver et al., 2017), StarCraft (Deep1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University, OH, United States 2 Industrial and Systems
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, United States.
Correspondence to: Tengyu Xu <xu.3260@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Mind, 2019) and recommendation system (Zheng et al.,
2018), etc. In these settings, the agent is allowed to explore
the entire state and action space to maximize the expected
total reward. However, in safe RL (SRL), in addition to
maximizing the reward, an agent needs to satisfy certain
constraints. Examples include self-driving cars (Fisac et al.,
2018), cellular network (Julian et al., 2002), and robot control (Levine et al., 2016). The global optimal policy in SRL
is the one that maximizes the reward and at the same time
satisfies the cost constraints.
The current safe RL algorithms can be generally categorized into the primal and primal-dual approaches. The
primal-dual approaches (Tessler et al., 2018; Ding et al.,
2020a; Stooke et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019; Achiam et al.,
2017; Yang et al., 2019a; Altman, 1999; Borkar, 2005; Bhatnagar & Lakshmanan, 2012; Liang et al., 2018; Paternain
et al., 2019a) are most commonly used, which convert the
constrained problem into an unconstrained one by augmenting the objective with a sum of constraints weighted by
their corresponding Lagrange multipliers (i.e., dual variables). Generally, primal-dual algorithms apply a certain
policy optimization update such as policy gradient alternatively with a gradient descent type update for the dual
variables. Theoretically, (Tessler et al., 2018) has provided
an asymptotic convergence analysis for primal-dual method
and established a local convergence guarantee. (Paternain
et al., 2019b) showed that the primal-dual method achieves
zero duality gap. Recently, (Ding et al., 2020a) proposed a
primal-dual type proximal policy optimization (PPO) and
established the regret bound for linear constrained MDP.
The convergence rate of primal-dual method based on a natural policy gradient algorithm was characterized in (Ding
et al., 2020b).
The primal type of approaches (Liu et al., 2019b; Chow
et al., 2018; 2019; Dalal et al., 2018a) enforce constraints
via various designs of the objective function or the update
process without an introduction of dual variables. The primal algorithms are much less studied than the primal-dual
approach. Notably, (Liu et al., 2019b) developed an interior
point method, which applies logarithmic barrier functions
for SRL. (Chow et al., 2018; 2019) leveraged Lyapunov
functions to handle constraints. (Dalal et al., 2018a) introduced a safety layer to the policy network to enforce

