CRFL: Certifiably Robust Federated Learning against Backdoor Attacks

Chulin Xie 1 Minghao Chen 2 Pin-Yu Chen 3 Bo Li 1

Federated Learning (FL) as a distributed learning paradigm that aggregates information from
diverse clients to train a shared global model,
has demonstrated great success. However, malicious clients can perform poisoning attacks and
model replacement to introduce backdoors into
the trained global model. Although there have
been intensive studies designing robust aggregation methods and empirical robust federated
training protocols against backdoors, existing approaches lack robustness certification. This paper
provides the first general framework, Certifiably
Robust Federated Learning (CRFL), to train certifiably robust FL models against backdoors. Our
method exploits clipping and smoothing on model
parameters to control the global model smoothness, which yields a sample-wise robustness certification on backdoors with limited magnitude.
Our certification also specifies the relation to federated learning parameters, such as poisoning ratio on instance level, number of attackers, and
training iterations. Practically, we conduct comprehensive experiments across a range of federated datasets, and provide the first benchmark for
certified robustness against backdoor attacks in
federated learning. Our code is publicaly available at https://github.com/AI-secure/CRFL.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has been widely applied to different
applications given its high efficiency and privacy-preserving
properties (Smith et al., 2017; McMahan et al., 2017a; Zhao
et al., 2018). However, recent studies show that it is easy
for the local client to add adversarial perturbation such as
“backdoors” during training to compromise the final aggregated model (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Bagdasaryan et al., 2020;
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Zhejiang
University 3 IBM Research.
Correspondence to: Chulin
Xie
<chulinx2@illinois.edu>,
Pin-Yu
Chen
<pinyu.chen@ibm.com>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

CRFL Testing

CRFL Training

Abstract

Parameter
Smoothing

Model Updates
Aggregated Model

Sever
Clients

Clean
Global Model

Clean
Prediction

Clipping and
Perturbing
Clean/
Poisoned
Test
Example

Clean local training datasets

Poisoned
Global Model

Attacker

Clipping and
Perturbing

Robustness
Guarantee

Poisoned
Prediction

Parameter
Smoothing

Poisoned local training datasets

CRFL Training

CRFL Testing

Figure 1. Overview of certifiably robust federated learning (CRFL)

Wang et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019). Such attacks raise great
security concerns and have become the roadblocks towards
the real-world deployment of federated learning.
Although there have been intensive studies on robust FL by
designing robust aggregation methods (Fung et al., 2020;
Pillutla et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Blanchard et al., 2017;
El Mhamdi et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018),
developing empirically robust federated training protocols
(e.g., gradient clipping (Sun et al., 2019), leveraging noisy
perturbation (Sun et al., 2019) and additional evaluation
during training (Andreina et al., 2020)), current defense
approaches lack robustness guarantees against the backdoor
attacks under certain conditions. To the best of our knowledge, certified robustness analysis and algorithms for FL
against backdoor attacks remain elusive.
To bridge this gap, in this work we propose a certifiably
robust federated learning (CRFL) framework as illustrated
in Figure 1. In particular, during training, we allow the local
agent to update their model parameters to the center server,
and the server will: 1) aggregate the collected model updates, 2) clip the norm of the aggregated model parameters,
3) add a random noise to the clipped model, and finally 4)
send the new model parameters back to each agent. Note
that all of the operations are conducted on the server side
to reduce the load for local clients and to prevent malicious
clients. During testing, the server will smooth the final
global model with randomized parameter smoothing and
make the final prediction based on the parameter-smoothed
model.

