Quantifying Availability and Discovery in Recommender Systems via
Stochastic Reachability

Mihaela Curmei * 1 Sarah Dean * 1 Benjamin Recht 1

Abstract
In this work, we consider how preference models
in interactive recommendation systems determine
the availability of content and users’ opportunities
for discovery. We propose an evaluation procedure based on stochastic reachability to quantify
the maximum probability of recommending a target piece of content to an user for a set of allowable strategic modifications. This framework
allows us to compute an upper bound on the likelihood of recommendation with minimal assumptions about user behavior. Stochastic reachability
can be used to detect biases in the availability of
content and diagnose limitations in the opportunities for discovery granted to users. We show that
this metric can be computed efficiently as a convex program for a variety of practical settings, and
further argue that reachability is not inherently at
odds with accuracy. We demonstrate evaluations
of recommendation algorithms trained on large
datasets of explicit and implicit ratings. Our results illustrate how preference models, selection
rules, and user interventions impact reachability
and how these effects can be distributed unevenly.

1. Introduction
Through recommendation systems, personalized preference
models mediate access to many types of information on
the internet. Aiming to surface content that will be consumed, enjoyed, and highly rated, these models are primarily designed to accurately predict individuals’ preferences.
However, it is important to look beyond measures of accuracy towards notions of access. The focus on improving
recommender model accuracy favors systems in which human behavior becomes as predictable as possible—effects
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
Correspondence to: Mihaela Curmei <mcurmei@berkeley.edu>,
Sarah Dean <sarahdean@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

which have been implicated in unintended consequences
like polarization or radicalization.
We focus on questions of access and agency by adopting an
interventional lens, which considers arbitrary and strategic
user actions. We expand upon the notion of reachability
first proposed by Dean et al. (2020), which measures the
ability of an individual to influence a recommender model
to select a certain piece of content. We define a notion
of stochastic reachability which quantifies the maximum
achievable likelihood of a given recommendation in the
presence of strategic interventions. This metric provides an
upper bound on the ability of individuals to discover specific
content, thus isolating unavoidable biases within preference
models from those due to user behavior.
Our primary contribution is the definition of metrics based
on stochastic reachability which capture the possible outcomes of a round of system interactions, including the availability of content and discovery possibilities for individuals.
In Section 3, we show that they can be computed by solving a convex optimization problem for a class of relevant
recommenders. In Section 4, we draw connections between
the stochastic and deterministic settings. This perspective
allows us to describe the relationship between agency and
stochasticity and further to argue that there is not an inherent
trade-off between reachability and model accuracy. Finally,
we present an audit of recommendation systems using a
variety of datasets and preference models. We explore how
design decisions influence reachability and the extent to
which biases in the training datasets are propagated.
1.1. Related Work
The recommender systems literature has long proposed a
variety of other metrics for evaluation, including notions
of novelty, serendipity, diversity, and coverage (Herlocker
et al., 2004; Castells et al., 2011). There is a long history
of measuring and mitigating bias in recommendation systems (Chen et al., 2020). Empirical investigations have
found evidence of popularity and demographic bias in domains including movies, music, books, and hotels (Abdollahpouri et al., 2019; Ekstrand et al., 2018a;b; Jannach et al.,
2015). Alternative metrics are useful both for diagnosing
biases and as objectives for post-hoc mitigating techniques

