Theory of Spectral Method
for Union of Subspaces-Based Random Geometry Graph

Gen Li 1 Yuantao Gu 1

Abstract
Spectral method is a commonly used scheme to
cluster data points lying close to Union of Subspaces, a task known as Subspace Clustering. The
typical usage is to construct a Random Geometry Graph first and then apply spectral method to
the graph to obtain clustering result. The latter
step has been coined the name Spectral Clustering. As far as we know, in spite of the significance
of both steps in spectral-method-based Subspace
Clustering, all existing theoretical results focus on
the first step of constructing the graph, but ignore
the final step to correct false connections through
spectral clustering. This paper establishes a theory to show the power of this method for the first
time, in which we demonstrate the mechanism of
spectral clustering by analyzing a simplified algorithm under the widely used semi-random model.
Based on this theory, we prove the efficiency of
Subspace Clustering in fairly broad conditions.
The insights and analysis techniques developed in
this paper might also have implications for other
random graph problems.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Union of Subspaces (UoS) model serves as an important
model in statistical machine learning. Briefly speaking, UoS
models those high-dimensional data, encountered in many
real-world problems, which lie close to low-dimensional
subspaces corresponding to several classes to which the
data belong, such as hand-written digits (Hastie & Simard,
1998), face images (Basri & Jacobs, 2003), DNA microarray data (Parvaresh et al., 2008), and hyper-spectral images (Chen et al., 2011), to name just a few. A fundamental
1

The authors are with the Beijing National Research Center for
Information Science and Technology (BNRist) and the Department
of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China. Correspondence to: Yuantao Gu <gyt@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

task in processing data points in UoS is to cluster these data
points, which is known as Subspace Clustering (SC). Applications of SC has spanned all over science and engineering,
including motion segmentation (Costeira & Kanade, 1998;
Kanatani, 2001), face recognition (Wright et al., 2008), and
classification of diseases (McWilliams & Montana, 2014)
and so on. We refer the reader to the tutorial paper (Vidal,
2011) for a review of the development of SC.
Considering the wide applications of SC, numerous algorithms have been developed for subspace clustering (Tipping & Bishop, 1999; Tseng, 2000; Vidal et al., 2005;
Yan & Pollefeys, 2006; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Peng
et al., 2018; Meng et al., 2018), together with computationefficient scheme (Li & Gu, 2017; Li et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2020). Arguably, spectral method is the most popular and
efficient method for solving SC, which obtains the clustering result by applying the spectral clustering (Ng et al.,
2002; Von Luxburg, 2007) on the constructed random graph
(or the adjacent matrix equivalently), named as Union of
Subspaces-based Random Geometry Graph (UoS-RGG), depending on the relative position among data points, referring
to Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) and its variants (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Liu et al., 2012; Dyer et al., 2013;
Heckel & Bölcskei, 2015; Chen et al., 2017).
In spite of the spectral method that practically works well for
many applications, theoretical analysis is lacked for the performance of clustering results. The fundamental difficulty
in the analysis of spectral method for SC may be the change
of view required in treating UoS-RGG (or general Random
Geometry Graph, RGG), which has non-independent edges,
in contrast with the traditional approach to analyzing clustering algorithms via Stochastic Block Model (SBM) which
assumes independent edges. Section 1.2 offers a detailed
discussion of this difficulty, as well as a survey of the existing attempts in theoretical aspects. We therefore propose
the critical question that this paper aims to explore:
• Why does spectral method work for RGG or UoSRGG?
This paper focuses on the analysis on the spectral method
for UoS-RGG. We consider a naive and prototypical SC
algorithm (Algorithm 1) here, and prove this algorithm,

