Breaking the Deadly Triad with a Target Network

Shangtong Zhang 1 Hengshuai Yao 2 3 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
The deadly triad refers to the instability of a reinforcement learning algorithm when it employs
off-policy learning, function approximation, and
bootstrapping simultaneously. In this paper, we
investigate the target network as a tool for breaking the deadly triad, providing theoretical support
for the conventional wisdom that a target network
stabilizes training. We first propose and analyze
a novel target network update rule which augments the commonly used Polyak-averaging style
update with two projections. We then apply the
target network and ridge regularization in several
divergent algorithms and show their convergence
to regularized TD fixed points. Those algorithms
are off-policy with linear function approximation
and bootstrapping, spanning both policy evaluation and control, as well as both discounted and
average-reward settings. In particular, we provide
the first convergent linear Q-learning algorithms
under nonrestrictive and changing behavior policies without bi-level optimization.

1. Introduction
The deadly triad (see, e.g., Chapter 11.3 of Sutton & Barto
(2018)) refers to the instability of a value-based reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (2018)) algorithm when
it employs off-policy learning, function approximation, and
bootstrapping simultaneously. Different from on-policy
methods, where the policy of interest is executed for data
collection, off-policy methods execute a different policy
for data collection, which is usually safer (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019) and more data efficient (Lin, 1992; Sutton et al.,
2011). Function approximation methods use parameterized
functions, instead of a look-up table, to represent quantities of interest, which usually cope better with large-scale
problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). Bootstrap1

University of Oxford 2 Huawei Technologies 3 University of
Alberta. Correspondence to: Shangtong Zhang <
shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ping methods construct update targets for an estimate by
using the estimate itself recursively, which usually has lower
variance than Monte Carlo methods (Sutton, 1988). However, when an algorithm employs all those three preferred
ingredients (off-policy learning, function approximation,
and bootstrapping) simultaneously, there is usually no guarantee that the resulting algorithm is well behaved and the
value estimates can easily diverge (see, e.g., Baird (1995);
Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1997); Zhang et al. (2021)), yielding
the notorious deadly triad.
An example of the deadly triad is Q-learning (Watkins &
Dayan, 1992) with linear function approximation, whose
divergence is well documented in Baird (1995). However,
Deep-Q-Networks (DQN, Mnih et al. (2015)), a combination of Q-learning and deep neural network function approximation, has enjoyed great empirical success. One
major improvement of DQN over linear Q-learning is the
use of a target network, a copy of the neural network function approximator (the main network) that is periodically
synchronized with the main network. Importantly, the bootstrapping target in DQN is computed via the target network
instead of the main network. As the target network changes
slowly, it provides a stable bootstrapping target which in
turn stabilizes the training of DQN. Instead of the periodical synchronization, Lillicrap et al. (2015) propose a
Polyak-averaging style target network update, which has
also enjoyed great empirical success (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Haarnoja et al., 2018).
Inspired by the empirical success of the target network in
RL with deep networks, in this paper, we theoretically investigate the target network as a tool for breaking the deadly
triad. We consider a two-timescale framework, where the
main network is updated faster than the target network. By
using a target network to construct the bootstrapping target,
the main network update becomes least squares regression.
After adding ridge regularization (Tikhonov et al., 2013) to
this least squares problem, we show convergence for both
the target and main networks.
Our main contributions are twofold. First, we propose a
novel target network update rule augmenting the Polyakaveraging style update with two projections. The balls for
the projections are usually large so most times they are just
identity mapping. However, those two projections offer sig-

