Learning Task Informed Abstractions

Xiang Fu * 1 Ge Yang * 1 2 Pulkit Agrawal 1 2 Tommi Jaakkola 1
No Background

Current model-based reinforcement learning
methods struggle when operating from complex
visual scenes due to their inability to prioritize
task-relevant features. To mitigate this problem, we propose learning Task Informed Abstractions (TIA) that explicitly separates rewardcorrelated visual features from distractors. For
learning TIA, we introduce the formalism of Task
Informed MDP (TiMDP) that is realized by training two models that learn visual features via cooperative reconstruction, but one model is adversarially dissociated from the reward signal. Empirical
evaluation shows that TIA leads to significant performance gains over state-of-the-art methods on
many visual control tasks where natural and unconstrained visual distractions pose a formidable
challenge. Project page: https://xiangfu.co/tia

1. Introduction
Consider results of a simple experiment reported in Figure 1. We train a state-of-the-art model-based reinforcement
learning algorithm (Hafner et al., 2020) to solve two versions of the Cheetah Run task (Tassa et al., 2018): one
with a simple and the other with a visually complex background (Zhang et al., 2021). For each version we train
three model variants that contain 0.5× (small), 1× (medium)
and 2× (large) parameters in their respective world models. The performance with the simple background is only
marginally affected by model capacity indicating that even
the smallest model has sufficient capacity to learn taskrelevant features. With complex background, performance
is much worse but increases monotonically with the model
size. Because the amount of task-relevant information is
unchanged between simple and complex background variants, these results demonstrate that excess model capacity
is devoted to representing background information when
learning from complex visual inputs. The background con*

Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL 2 IAIFI. Correspondence to:
Xiang Fu <xiangfu@csail.mit.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Episode Return

Abstract

Video Distraction

Model Size

Figure 1: Comparison of the performance of a state-ofthe-art model-based RL algorithm, Dreamer, on two versions of the Cheetah Run with vs. without visual distraction. Performance is reported for three models of increasing sizes (0.5×, 1×, 2× of the original Dreamer). Results
show that even the smallest model has sufficient capacity to capture task-relevant features when observations are
distractor-free (gray), but when the scene is complex (red),
task-irrelevant features consume most of the model capacity.
Error bars indicate one standard deviation.

veys no information about the task. It, therefore, interferes
with the learning of task-relevant information by consuming
model capacity. Here “relevant” refers to features needed to
predict the optimal actions, whereas “irrelevant” refers to
everything else that makes up the observation.
There are two main components of a model-based learner:
(i) a forward dynamics model that predicts future events
resulting from executing a sequence of actions from the current state and (ii) a reward predictor for evaluating possible
future states. The policy performance depends critically
on the prediction accuracy of the forward model, which
is intimately tied to the feature space in which the future
is predicted. Similar to the complex background version
of Cheetah Run, visual observations obtained in the real
world are full of irrelevant information. Therefore, if there
is no bias for learning “task-relevant features”, the model
will try to predict all the information. In such a scenario
spurious features would unnecessarily increase the sample
complexity and necessitate the use of much larger models
than necessary. Sometimes it can also result in training
failure.
Ways to learn good representations has been a major focus in
model-based deep reinforcement learning. A popular choice
is to reconstruct the input observations (Kingma & Welling,

