Quantifying the Benefit of Using
Differentiable Learning over Tangent Kernels

Eran Malach 1 Pritish Kamath 2 Emmanuel Abbe 3 Nathan Srebro 2

Abstract
We study the relative power of learning with gradient descent on differentiable models, such as
neural networks, versus using the corresponding tangent kernels. We show that under certain conditions, gradient descent achieves small
error only if a related tangent kernel method
achieves a non-trivial advantage over random
guessing (a.k.a. weak learning), though this advantage might be very small even when gradient descent can achieve arbitrarily high accuracy.
Complementing this, we show that without these
conditions, gradient descent can in fact learn with
small error even when no kernel method, in particular using the tangent kernel, can achieve a
non-trivial advantage over random guessing.1

1. Introduction
A recent line of research seeks to understand Neural Networks through their kernel approximation, as given by the
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK, Jacot et al., 2018). The
premise of the approach is that in certain regimes, the dynamics of training neural networks are essentially the same
as those of its first order Taylor expansion at initialization,
which in turn is captured by the Tangent Kernel at initialization. It is then possible to obtain convergence, global
optimality and even generalization guarantees by studying
the behaviour of training using the Tangent Kernel (e.g. Li
& Liang, 2018; Du et al., 2019b; Chizat et al., 2019; Zou
et al., 2020; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019b;
Du et al., 2019a, and many others). Some have also suggested using Tangent Kernel directly for training (e.g. Arora
et al., 2019a), even suggesting it can sometimes outperform
training by GD on the actual network (Geiger et al., 2020).

Can all the success of deep learning be explained using the
NTK? This would imply that we can replace training by
gradient descent on a non-convex model with a (potentially
simpler to train, and certainly better understood) kernel
method. Is anything learnable using gradient descent on a
neural network or other differentiable model also learnable
using a kernel method (i.e. using a kernelized linear model)?
This question was directly addressed by multiple authors,
who showed examples where neural networks trained with
gradient descent (or some variant thereof) provably outperform the best that can possibly be done using the tangent
kernel or any linear or kernel method, under different settings and assumptions (Yehudai & Shamir, 2019; Allen-Zhu
& Li, 2019; 2020; Li et al., 2020; Daniely & Malach, 2020;
Ghorbani et al., 2019b; 2020). However in these examples,
while training the model with gradient descent performs better than using the NTK, the error of the NTK is still much
better then baseline, with a significant “edge” over random
guessing or using a constant, or null, predictor. That is, the
NTK at least allows for “weak learning”. In fact, in some of
the constructions, the process of leveraging the “edge” of
a linear or kernel learner and amplifying it is fairly explicit
(e.g. Allen-Zhu & Li, 2019; 2020). The question we ask in
this paper is:
Can gradient descent training on the actual deep (nonconvex) model only amplify (or “boost”) the edge of
the NTK, with the NTK required to have an edge in
order to allow for learning in the first place? Or can
differentiable learning succeed even when the NTK —or
any other kernel— does not have a non-trivial edge?
Can gradient descent succeed at “strong learning” only when
the NTK achieves ”weak learning”? Or is it possible for
gradient descent to succeed even when the NTK is not able
to achieve any significant edge?

*
Equal contribution 1 Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Israel 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, USA
3
EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Eran Malach
<eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il>,
Pritish Kamath <pritish@ttic.edu>.

Our Contributions. The answer turns out to be subtle,
and as we shall see, relies crucially on two important considerations: the unbiasedness of the initialization, and whether
the initialization can depend on the input distribution.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
The full (better formatted and potentially more up-to-date)
version of this paper is available at arxiv.org/abs/2103.01210.

We start, in Section 3, by providing our own example of
a learning problem where Gradient Descent outperforms
the NTK, and indeed any kernel method. But unlike the
previous recent separating examples, where the NTK enjoys

