Moreau-Yosida f -divergences

Dávid Terjék 1

Abstract
Variational representations of f -divergences are
central to many machine learning algorithms, with
Lipschitz constrained variants recently gaining attention. Inspired by this, we define the MoreauYosida approximation of f -divergences with respect to the Wasserstein-1 metric. The corresponding variational formulas provide a generalization of a number of recent results, novel special cases of interest and a relaxation of the hard
Lipschitz constraint. Additionally, we prove that
the so-called tight variational representation of f divergences can be to be taken over the quotient
space of Lipschitz functions, and give a characterization of functions achieving the supremum in the
variational representation. On the practical side,
we propose an algorithm to calculate the tight
convex conjugate of f -divergences compatible
with automatic differentiation frameworks. As an
application of our results, we propose the MoreauYosida f -GAN, providing an implementation of
the variational formulas for the Kullback-Leibler,
reverse Kullback-Leibler, χ2 , reverse χ2 , squared
Hellinger, Jensen-Shannon, Jeffreys, triangular
discrimination and total variation divergences as
GANs trained on CIFAR-10, leading to competitive results and a simple solution to the problem
of uniqueness of the optimal critic.

1. Introduction
Variational representations of divergences between probability measures are central to many machine learning algorithms, such as generative adversarial networks (Nowozin
et al., 2016), mutual information estimation (Belghazi et al.,
2018) and maximization (Hjelm et al., 2019), and energybased models (Arbel et al., 2021). One class of such measures is the family of f -divergences (Csiszár, 1963; Ali &
Silvey, 1966; Csiszár, 1967), generalizing the well-known
1

Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary.
Correspondence to: Dávid Terjék <dterjek@renyi.hu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Kullback-Leibler divergence from information theory. Another is the family of optimal transport distances (Villani,
2008), including the Wasserstein-1 metric. In general, variational representations are supremums of integral formulas
taken over sets of functions, such as the Donsker-Varadhan
formula (Donsker & Varadhan, 1976) for the KullbackLeibler divergence or the Kantorovich-Rubinstein formula
(Villani, 2008) for the Wasserstein-1 metric. Informally
speaking, one can implement (Nowozin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017) such a formula by constructing a realvalued neural network called the critic (or discriminator)
taking samples from the two probability measures as inputs,
which is then trained to maximize the integral formula in
order to approximate the supremum, resulting in a learned
proxy to the actual divergence of said probability measures.
Implementing the Kantorovich-Rubinstein formula in such a
way involves restricting the Lipschitz constant of the neural
network (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Petzka et al., 2018; Miyato
et al., 2018; Adler & Lunz, 2018; Terjék, 2020), which effectively stabilizes the approximation procedure. Recently,
Lipschitz regularization has been incorporated (Farnia &
Tse, 2018; Zhou et al., 2019; Ozair et al., 2019; Song &
Ermon, 2020; Arbel et al., 2021; Birrell et al., 2020) into
learning algorithms based on variational formulas of divergences other than the Wasserstein-1 metric, leading to the
same empirical effect and a number of theoretical benefits.
Inspired by this, we study Lipschitz-constrained variational
representations of f -divergences. We show that existing
instances of such variants are special cases of the MoreauYosida approximation of f -divergences with respect to the
Wasserstein-1 metric. To any divergence and pair of probability measures corresponds a set of optimal critics, which
are exactly those functions which achieve the supremum
in the variational representation. An optimal critic corresponding to f -divergences is not Lipschitz in general (not
even continuous). Since any function represented by a neural network is Lipschitz, when a neural network is trained
to approximate such a divergence, its ”target”, an optimal
critic, will never be reached. We show that when the divergence is replaced by its Moreau-Yosida approximation, the
corresponding optimal critics are all Lipschitz continuous
with uniformly bounded Lipschitz constants, leading to a
divergence which is easier to approximate in practice via
neural networks. The approximation is parametrized by a

