On Explainability of Graph Neural Networks via Subgraph Explorations

Hao Yuan 1 Haiyang Yu 1 Jie Wang 2 Kang Li 3 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of explaining the predictions of graph neural networks (GNNs), which
otherwise are considered as black boxes. Existing methods invariably focus on explaining the
importance of graph nodes or edges but ignore
the substructures of graphs, which are more intuitive and human-intelligible. In this work, we
propose a novel method, known as SubgraphX,
to explain GNNs by identifying important subgraphs. Given a trained GNN model and an input
graph, our SubgraphX explains its predictions
by efficiently exploring different subgraphs with
Monte Carlo tree search. To make the tree search
more effective, we propose to use Shapley values
as a measure of subgraph importance, which can
also capture the interactions among different subgraphs. To expedite computations, we propose
efficient approximation schemes to compute Shapley values for graph data. Our work represents
the first attempt to explain GNNs via identifying
subgraphs explicitly and directly. Experimental
results show that our SubgraphX achieves significantly improved explanations, while keeping
computations at a reasonable level.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks have drawn significant attention recently due to their promising performance on various graph
tasks, including graph classification, node classification,
link prediction, and graph generation. Different techniques
have been proposed to improve the performance of deep
graph models, such as graph convolution (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2020; Yuan & Ji, 2021), graph attention (Veličković et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, TX, USA 2 Department of Electronic Engineering and
Information Science, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China 3 West China Biomedical Big Data Center,
West China Hospital, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018; Wang et al., 2019), and graph pooling (Yuan & Ji,
2020; Gao & Ji, 2019; Zhang et al., 2018). However, these
models are still treated as black boxes, and their predictions
lack explanations. Without understanding and reasoning the
relationships behind the predictions, these models cannot be
understood and fully trusted, which prevents their applications in critical areas. This raises the need of investigating
the explainability of deep graph models.
Recently, extensive efforts have been made to study explanation techniques for deep models on images and text (Simonyan et al., 2013; Yuan et al., 2019; Smilkov et al., 2017;
Yuan et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2019; Du et al., 2018). These
methods can explain both general network behaviors and
input-specific predictions via different strategies. However,
the explainability of GNNs is still less explored. Unlike
images and texts, graphs are not grid-like data and contain
important structural information. Thus, methods for images
and texts cannot be applied directly. While several recent
studies have developed GNN explanation methods, such
as GNNExplainer (Ying et al., 2019), PGExplainer (Luo
et al., 2020), and PGM-Explainer (Vu & Thai, 2020), they
invariably focus on explainability at node, edge, or node
feature levels, and only consider subgraphs indirectly via
regularization terms. We argue that subgraph-level explanations are more intuitive and useful, since subgraphs can
be simple building blocks of complex graphs and are highly
related to the functionalities of graphs (Alon, 2007; Milo
et al., 2002).
In this work, we propose the SubgraphX, a novel GNN
explanation method that can identify important subgraphs
to explain GNN predictions. Specifically, we propose to
employ the Monte Carlo tree search algorithm (Silver et al.,
2017) to efficiently explore different subgraphs for a given
input graph. Since the information aggregation procedures
in GNNs can be interpreted as interactions among different graph structures, we propose to employ Shapley values (Kuhn & Tucker, 1953) to measure the importance of
subgraphs by capturing such interactions. Furthermore, we
propose efficient approximation schemes to Shapley values
by considering interactions only within the information aggregation range. Altogether, our work represents the first attempt to explain GNNs via identifying subgraphs explicitly.
We conduct both qualitative and quantitative experiments to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of our SubgraphX.

