To be Robust or to be Fair: Towards Fairness in Adversarial Training

Han Xu * 1 Xiaorui Liu * 1 Yaxin Li 1 Anil K. Jain 1 Jiliang Tang 1

Abstract
Adversarial training algorithms have been proved
to be reliable to improve machine learning models’
robustness against adversarial examples. However, we find that adversarial training algorithms
tend to introduce severe disparity of accuracy and
robustness between different groups of data. For
instance, a PGD adversarially trained ResNet18
model on CIFAR-10 has 93% clean accuracy and
67% PGD l∞ -8 robust accuracy on the class ”automobile” but only 65% and 17% on the class
”cat”. This phenomenon happens in balanced
datasets and does not exist in naturally trained
models when only using clean samples. In this
work, we empirically and theoretically show that
this phenomenon can happen under general adversarial training algorithms which minimize DNN
models’ robust errors. Motivated by these findings, we propose a Fair-Robust-Learning (FRL)
framework to mitigate this unfairness problem
when doing adversarial defenses. Experimental
results validate the effectiveness of FRL.

1. Introduction
The existence of adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Szegedy et al., 2013) causes great concerns when
applying deep neural networks to safety-critical tasks,
such as autonomous driving vehicles and face identification (Morgulis et al., 2019; Sharif et al., 2016). As countermeasures against adversarial examples, adversarial training
algorithms aim to train a classifier that can classify the
input samples correctly even when they are adversarially
perturbed. Namely, they optimize the model to have the
minimum adversarial risk of a sample that can be perturbed
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Michigan State University, Michigan, U.S.. Correspondence to: Han Xu <xuhan1@msu.edu>, Xiaorui Liu <xiaorui@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to be wrongly classified:


min E max L(f (x + δ), y) .‘
f

x

||δ||≤

(1)

These adversarial training methods (Kurakin et al., 2016;
Madry et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019b) have been shown
to be one of the most effective and reliable approaches to
improve the model robustness against adversarial attacks.
Although promising to improve the model’s robustness, we
reveal an intriguing property about adversarial training algorithms: they usually result in a large disparity of accuracy and robustness among different classes. As a preliminary study in Section 2, we apply natural training and
PGD adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017) on the CIFAR10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) using a PreActResNet18 (He et al., 2016) architecture. For a naturally
trained model, the model performance in each class is similar. However, in the adversarially trained model, there is a
severe class-wise performance discrepancy (both accuracy
and robustness). For example, the model has both low standard and robust errors on the samples from the class “car”,
but it has a much larger error rate on those “cat” images.
Meanwhile, this fairness issue does not appear in natural
models which are trained on clean data. Note that this phenomenon happens in a balanced CIFAR10 dataset and exists
in other datasets, model structures and adversarial training
algorithms. More details can be found in Section 2. If
this phenomenon happens in real-world applications, it can
raise huge concerns about safety. Imagine that a traffic sign
recognizer has an overall high performance, but it is very
inaccurate and vulnerable to perturbations only for some
specific signs. The safety of this autonomous driving car
is still not guaranteed. Meanwhile, this phenomenon can
also lead to issues from the social ethics perspective. For
example, a robustly trained face identification system might
provide different levels of safety for the services provided
to different ethnic communities. Thus, there is a pressing
need to study this phenomenon.
In this work, we define this phenomenon as the “robust
fairness” problem of adversarial training and we aim to understand and mitigate this fairness problem. We first explore
the question: “why does adversarial training have this accuracy/robustness disparity between classes while natural
training does not present a similar issue?” To answer this

