Optimal regret algorithm for Pseudo-1d Bandit Convex Optimization

Aadirupa Saha 1 Nagarajan Natarajan 2 Praneeth Netrapalli 2 3 Prateek Jain 2 3

Abstract
We study online learning with bandit feedback
(i.e. learner has access to only zeroth-order oracle)
where cost/reward functions ft admit a "pseudo1d" structure, i.e. ft (w) = `t (gt (w)) where the
output of gt is one-dimensional. At each round,
the learner observes context xt , plays prediction gt (wt ; xt ) (e.g. gt (·) = hxt , ·i) for some
wt ∈ Rd and observes loss `t (gt (wt )) where `t
is a convex Lipschitz-continuous function. The
goal is to minimize the standard regret metric.
This pseudo-1d bandit convex optimization problem (PBCO) arises frequently in domains such
as online decision-making or parameter-tuning in
large systems. For this
√ problem, we first show a
lower bound of min( dT , T 3/4 ) for the regret of
any algorithm, where T is the number of rounds.
We propose a new algorithm O PT PBCO that combines randomized online gradient descent with a
kernelized exponential weights method to exploit
the pseudo-1d structure effectively, guaranteeing
the optimal regret bound mentioned above, up
to additional logarithmic factors. In contrast, applying state-of-the-artonline
optimization
 convex
√ √ 3/4 
9.5
methods leads to Õ min d
T , dT
regret, that is significantly suboptimal in d.

1. Introduction
Online learning with bandit feedback is a cornerstone problem in the online learning literature and can be used to
model a variety of practical systems where at each step
t, the system takes an action wt ∈ Rd for which it incurs a loss of ft (wt ). Now, often times in practice, the
action space has significantly more structure. For example, in large-scale parameter tuning the reward/loss is computed on a scalar parameter predicted by an underlying ML
model applied to the current context of system. That is,
1
Microsoft Research, New York City 2 Microsoft Research,
India 3 The authors are currently at Google Research, India. Correspondence to: Aadirupa Saha <aadirupa.saha@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the problem has a "pseudo-1d" structure in the loss functions ft (w) = `t (gt (w; xt )) where gt : Rd → R is a onedimensional function.
We formulate the Pseudo-1d Bandit Convex Optimization
(in Section 2) as follows: given a data point, or context,
xt ∈ X at round t, the prediction of the learner is given
by gt (wt ; xt ) for some wt ∈ W ⊆ Rd and known gt ,
e.g. gt (wt ; xt ) = hwt , xt i. The learner then receives
`t (gt (wt ; xt )) from the adversary for some unknown convex, Lipschitz-continuous loss `t . The goal is to minimize
regret, i.e. the excess cumulative loss suffered by the learner
over the best, fixed, parameter w∗ ∈ W in hindsight. As
mentioned above, the pseudo-1d structure arises naturally
in online parameter tuning/decision making where the goal
is to learn the optimal parameters w that govern the system,
which can be very high-dimensional, but the dynamic reward `t depends only on a one-dimensional action gt taken
by the system based on parameters w and the observed
context xt .
A concrete application that motivates our work is in the domain of large scale distributed services where programmers
are required to set configuration parameters of services using
hand-written heuristics for some control or decision logic;
this is indeed an important research question at the intersection of Programming Languages and ML, see Natarajan
et al. (2020). For example, a programmer wants to decide
the minimum amount of RAM required for a service, which
in turn depends on other configuration parameters such as
the number of threads running on the VM (x1 ) and the number of users served (x2 ), say, via gt (w; x) = w1 x1 + w2 x2 .
The ultimate validation of the choices of w1 and w2 is by
observing overall failures and system throughput, which is
the reward `t obtained in the bandit sense. This is an instance of the pseudo-1d problem, and arises as part of tuning
configuration settings of large-scale services in Microsoft.
The problem is a special case of the standard bandit convex
optimization for√which the state-of-the-art methods
√ have
regret of O(d9.5 T ) (Bubeck et al., 2017) or O( dT 3/4 )
(Flaxman et al., 2005). So, the key question we answer in
this paper is if and when the pseudo-1d structure can help
obtain learning algorithms with better sample complexity
or regret guarantees. For example,
can we design an algo√
rithm that has the optimal T regret in terms of T , but its

