Top-k eXtreme Contextual Bandits with Arm Hierarchy

Rajat Sen 1 Alexander Rakhlin 2 3 Lexing Ying 4 3 Rahul Kidambi 3 Dean Foster 3 Daniel Hill 3
Inderjit S. Dhillon 5 3

Abstract
Motivated by modern applications, such as online advertisement and recommender systems,
we study the top-k eXtreme contextual bandits problem, where the total number of arms
can be enormous, and the learner is allowed
to select k arms and observe all or some of
the rewards for the chosen arms. We first propose an algorithm for the non-eXtreme realizable setting, utilizing the Inverse Gap Weighting strategy for selecting multiple arms. We
show that
p our algorithm has a regret guarantee
of O(k (A − k + 1)T log(|F|T )), where A is
the total number of arms and F is the class containing the regression function, while only requiring Õ(A) computation per time step. In the
eXtreme setting, where the total number of arms
can be in the millions, we propose a practicallymotivated arm hierarchy model that induces a
certain structure in mean rewards to ensure statistical and computational efficiency. The hierarchical structure allows for an exponential
reduction in the number of relevant arms for
each context,
thus resulting in a regret guarantee
p
of O(k (log A − k + 1)T log(|F|T )). Finally,
we implement our algorithm using a hierarchical
linear function class and show superior performance with respect to well-known benchmarks
on simulated bandit feedback experiments using
eXtreme multi-label classification datasets. On
a dataset with three million arms, our reduction
scheme has an average inference time of only 7.9
milliseconds, which is a 100x improvement.

1
Google Research, Mountain View (work done while at Amazon) 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston 3 Amazon
4
Stanford University, Palo Alto 5 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas, Austin. Correspondence to: Rajat Sen
<rajat.sen@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The contextual bandit is a sequential decision-making
problem, in which, at every time step, the learner observes a context, chooses one of the A possible actions
(arms), and receives a reward for the chosen action.
Over the past two decades, this problem has found a
wide range of applications, from e-commerce and recommender systems (Yue & Guestrin, 2011; Li et al.,
2016) to medical trials (Durand et al., 2018; Villar
et al., 2015). The aim of the decision-maker is to
minimize the difference in total expected reward collected when compared to an optimal policy, a quantity
termed regret. As an example, consider an advertisement engine in an online shopping store, where the context can be the user’s query, the arms can be the set of
millions of sponsored products and the reward can be
a click or a purchase. In such a scenario, one must balance between exploitation (choosing the best ad (arm)
for a query (context) based on current knowledge) and
exploration (choosing a currently unexplored ad for the
context to enable future learning).
The contextual bandits literature can be broadly divided into two categories. The agnostic setting (Agarwal et al., 2014; Langford & Zhang, 2007; Beygelzimer
et al., 2011; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2016) is a modelfree setting where one competes against the best policy (in terms of expected reward) in a class of policies. On the other hand, in the realizable setting it is
assumed that a known class F contains the function
mapping contexts to expected rewards. Most of the
algorithms in the realizable setting are based on Upper Confidence Bound or Thompson sampling (Filippi
et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011; Krause & Ong, 2011;
Agrawal & Goyal, 2013) and require specific parametric assumptions on the function class. Recently there
has been exciting progress on contextual bandits in
the realizable case with general function classes. Foster & Rakhlin (2020) analyzed a simple algorithm for
general function classes that reduced the adversarial
contextual bandit problem to online regression, with
a minimax optimal regret scaling. The algorithm was
then analyzed for i.i.d. contexts using offline regression in (Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2020). The proposed algo-

