Meta Learning for Support Recovery in High-dimensional Precision Matrix
Estimation
Qian Zhang 1 Yilin Zheng 2 Jean Honorio 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study meta learning for support (i.e., the set of non-zero entries) recovery
in high-dimensional precision matrix estimation
where we reduce the sufficient sample complexity in a novel task with the information learned
from other auxiliary tasks. In our setup, each
task has a different random true precision matrix,
each with a possibly different support. We assume that the union of the supports of all the true
precision matrices (i.e., the true support union) is
small in size. We propose to pool all the samples from different tasks, and improperly estimate a single precision matrix by minimizing
the `1 -regularized log-determinant Bregman divergence. We show that with high probability, the
support of the improperly estimated single precision matrix is equal to the true support union,
provided a sufficient number of samples per task
n ∈ O((log N )/K), for N -dimensional vectors
and K tasks. That is, one requires less samples
per task when more tasks are available. We prove
a matching information-theoretic lower bound
for the necessary number of samples, which is
n ∈ Ω((log N )/K), and thus, our algorithm is
minimax optimal. Then for the novel task, we
prove that the minimization of the `1 -regularized
log-determinant Bregman divergence with the additional constraint that the support is a subset of
the estimated support union could reduce the sufficient sample complexity of successful support
recovery to O(log(|Soff |)) where |Soff | is the number of off-diagonal elements in the support union
and is much less than N for sparse matrices. We
also prove a matching information-theoretic lower
bound of Ω(log(|Soff |)) for the necessary number
of samples.
1

Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence to: Qian Zhang
<zhan3761@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Precision (or inverse covariance) matrix estimation is an
important problem in high-dimensional statistical learning
(Wang et al., 2016) with great application in time series
(Chen et al., 2013), principal component analysis (Fan et al.,
2016), probabilistic graphical models (Meinshausen et al.,
2006), etc. For example, in Gaussian graphical models
where we model the variables in a graph as a zero-mean
multivariate Gaussian random vector, the set of off-diagonal
non-zero entries of the precision matrix corresponds exactly
to the set of edges of the graph (Ravikumar et al., 2011).
For this reason, estimating the precision matrix to recover
its support set, which is the set of non-zero entries, is the
common strategy of structure learning in Gaussian graphical
models. An estimate of the precision matrix is called signconsistent if it has the same support and sign of entries with
respect to the true matrix.
However, the learner faces several challenges in precision matrix estimation. The first challenge is the highdimensionality of the data. The dimension of the data, N ,
could be much higher than the sample size n, and thus
the empirical sample covariance and its inverse will behave badly (Johnstone, 2001). Secondly, unlike in Gaussian
graphical models, the data may not follow multivariate Gaussian distribution. The third challenge is the heterogeneity of
the data. There could be limited samples from the distribution of interest but a large amount of samples from multiple
multivariate distributions with different precision matrices.
For the first two challenges, we assume the precision matrices are sparse and consider a general class of distributions,
i.e., multivariate sub-Gaussian distributions later described
in Definition 1. The class of sub-Gaussian variates (Buldygin & Kozachenko, 1980) includes for instance Gaussian
variables, any bounded random variable (e.g. Bernoulli,
multinomial, uniform), any random variable with strictly
log-concave density, and any finite mixture of sub-Gaussian
variables. Then we address the high-dimension challenge by
using `1 -regularized log-determinant Bregman divergence
minimization (Ravikumar et al., 2011), which is also the `1 regularized maximum likelihood estimator for multivariate
Gaussian distributions (Yuan & Lin, 2007).

