Scaling Properties of Deep Residual Networks

Alain–Sam Cohen 1 Rama Cont 2 Alain Rossier 2 1 Renyuan Xu 2

Abstract
Residual networks (ResNets) have displayed impressive results in pattern recognition and, recently, have garnered considerable theoretical interest due to a perceived link with neural ordinary
differential equations (neural ODEs). This link
relies on the convergence of network weights to a
smooth function as the number of layers increases.
We investigate the properties of weights trained
by stochastic gradient descent and their scaling
with network depth through detailed numerical
experiments. We observe the existence of scaling
regimes markedly different from those assumed
in neural ODE literature. Depending on certain
features of the network architecture, such as the
smoothness of the activation function, one may
obtain an alternative ODE limit, a stochastic differential equation or neither of these. These findings cast doubts on the validity of the neural ODE
model as an adequate asymptotic description of
deep ResNets and point to an alternative class of
differential equations as a better description of the
deep network limit.

1. Introduction
Residual networks, or ResNets, are multilayer neural network architectures in which a skip connection is introduced
at every layer (He et al., 2016). This allows deep networks
to be trained by circumventing vanishing and exploding gradients (Bengio et al., 1994). The increased depth in ResNets
has lead to commensurate performance gains in applications
ranging from speech recognition (Heymann et al., 2016;
Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) to computer vision (He
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016).
A residual network with L layers may be represented as


(L)
(L)
(L)
(L) (L)
(L)
hk+1 = hk + δk σd Ak hk + bk
,
(1)
1

InstaDeep 2 Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Alain Rossier <rossier@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(L)

(L)

where hk is the hidden state at layer k = 0, . . . , L, h0 =
(L)
x ∈ Rd the input, hL ∈ Rd the output, σ : R → R is a nonlinear activation function, σd (x) = (σ(x1 ), . . . , σ(xd ))> its
(L) (L)
component-wise extension to x ∈ Rd , and Ak , bk , and
(L)
δk are trainable network weights for k = 0, . . . , L − 1.
1.1. Connection to previous work
ResNets have been the focus of several theoretical studies
due to a perceived link with a class of differential equations. The idea, put forth in (Haber & Ruthotto, 2018; Chen
et al., 2018), is to view (1) as a discretization of a system of
ordinary differential equations

dHt
= σd A t Ht + bt ,
dt

(2)

where A : [0, 1] → Rd×d and b : [0, 1] → Rd are appropriate smooth functions and H(0) = x. This may be justified (Thorpe & van Gennip, 2018) by assuming that
δ (L) ∼ 1/L,

(L)

Ak

→ At,

(L)

bk

→ bt

(3)

as L increases and k/L → t. Such models, named neural ordinary differential equations or neural ODEs (Chen
et al., 2018; Dupont et al., 2019), have motivated the use of
optimal control methods to train ResNets (E et al., 2019a).
However, the precise link between deep ResNets and the
neural ODE model (2) is unclear: in practice, the weights
A(L) and b(L) result from training, and the validity of the
scaling assumptions (3) for trained weights is far from obvious and has not been verified. As a matter of fact, there
is empirical evidence showing that using a scaling factor
δ (L) ∼ 1/L can deteriorate the network accuracy (Bachlechner et al., 2020). Also, there is no guarantee that weights
obtained through training have a non-zero limit which depends smoothly on the layer, as (3) would require. In fact,
we present numerical experiments which point to the contrary for many ResNet architectures used in practice. These
observations motivate an in-depth examination of the actual
scaling behavior of weights with network depth in ResNets
and of its impact on the asymptotic behavior of those networks.

