Spectral Normalisation for Deep Reinforcement Learning:
An Optimisation Perspective

Florin Gogianu * 1 2 Tudor Berariu * 3 Mihaela Rosca 4 5 Claudia Clopath 3 4 Lucian Busoniu 2
Razvan Pascanu 4

Abstract
Most of the recent deep reinforcement learning
advances take an RL-centric perspective and focus on refinements of the training objective. We
diverge from this view and show we can recover
the performance of these developments not by
changing the objective, but by regularising the
value-function estimator. Constraining the Lipschitz constant of a single layer using spectral
normalisation is sufficient to elevate the performance of a Categorical-DQN agent to that of a
more elaborated R AINBOW agent on the challenging Atari domain. We conduct ablation studies
to disentangle the various effects normalisation
has on the learning dynamics and show that is
sufficient to modulate the parameter updates to
recover most of the performance of spectral normalisation. These findings hint towards the need
to also focus on the neural component and its
learning dynamics to tackle the peculiarities of
Deep Reinforcement Learning.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning has made considerable
strides in recent years, scaling up to complex games as Go
and Starcraft. However, besides relying on neural network
function approximation, by and large the community has
taken an RL-centric stance, with a plethora of approaches
from prioritised replay (Schaul et al., 2016) to improving exploration (Fortunato et al., 2018; Osband et al., 2016). Many
of these advances have been collated in the R AINBOW agent
(Hessel et al., 2018), a strong single-threaded Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithm on the Atari Arcade
*

Equal contribution 1 Bitdefender, Bucharest, Romania
Department of Automation, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca,
Romania 3 Imperial College London, Department of Bioengineering, London, UK 4 DeepMind, London, UK 5 Centre for Artificial
Intelligence, University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Tudor Berariu <tudor.berariu@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Optimisation rivals algorithmic improvements.
Left: Average Human Normalised Score (HNS) per time-step for
C51 with Spectral Normalisation (SN). Right: Comparison of
Maximum HNS reported in the literature (same as in Table 1).
Average over 54 Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) games.

Learning Environment (ALE) benchmark (Bellemare et al.,
2013). We take an orthogonal approach by focusing instead
on the neural network learning dynamics. Most of modern
deep learning assumes the optimisation of an objective on
a finite and fixed data-set where i.i.d. sampling is possible.
These assumptions are rarely satisfied in DRL, where data
is non-stationary, the observed samples tend to be highly
correlated, and sometimes the updates do not form a gradient vector field (Czarnecki et al., 2019; Bengio et al., 2020).
These shortcomings are often reflected in practice, as attested by multiple reports of narrow good hyper-parameter
ranges for optimisation (Henderson et al., 2018b;a), undergeneralisation in Temporal-difference learning (TD) (Bengio et al., 2020), and, as opposed to the supervised setting,
ineffective regularisation where Batch Normalisation (BN),
dropout or L2 hurt performance (Bhatt et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019; Cobbe et al., 2019). We emphasise the importance of
studying the learning dynamics of neural networks in DRL
by showing the gains such studies can provide.
In our paper we explore Spectral Normalisation (SN), one
such technique originating in the Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) literature (Miyato et al., 2018), another
field having to deal with non-stationarity and challenging
optimisation dynamics. SN was primarily used for its regu-

