Best Model Identification: A Rested Bandit Formulation
Leonardo Cella 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2 Claudio Gentile 3

Abstract
We introduce and analyze a best arm identification problem in the rested bandit setting, wherein
arms are themselves learning algorithms whose
expected losses decrease with the number of times
the arm has been played. The shape of the expected loss functions is similar across arms, and
is assumed to be available up to unknown parameters that have to be learned on the fly. We define
a novel notion of regret for this problem, where
we compare to the policy that always plays the
arm having the smallest expected loss at the end
of the game. We analyze an arm elimination algorithm whose regret vanishes as the time horizon
increases. The actual rate of convergence depends
in a detailed way on the postulated functional
form of the expected losses. We complement our
analysis with lower bounds, indicating strengths
and limitations of the proposed solution.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits are a mathematical framework of sequential decision problems that have played a fundamental
role in machine learning and statistics (see e.g. Bubeck
et al., 2012; Cesa-Bianchi, 2016; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020; Siegmund, 2003, and references therein). This framework consists of a sequence of T interactions (or rounds)
between a learning agent and an unknown environment.
During each round the learner picks an action from a set of
options K, usually referred to as arms, and the environment
consequently generates a feedback (e.g., in the form of a
loss value) associated with the chosen action/pulled arm.
Multi-armed bandits have applications to a wide variety of
domains including clinical trials, online advertising, and
marketing.
In the standard i.i.d. stochastic bandit setting (Auer et al.,
1

Italian Institute of Technology, Genoa, Italy 2 University
College London, United Kingdom 3 Google Research, New
York, USA. Correspondence to: Leonardo Cella <leonardocella@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2002), the feedback generated when pulling an arm is modeled as a random variable sampled from a prescribed distribution associated with the selected arm. In contrast, in
this paper we are interested in a non-stationary stochastic
bandit setting called rested bandits (Allesiardo et al., 2017;
Besbes et al., 2014; Cella & Cesa-Bianchi, 2020; Kleinberg
& Immorlica, 2018; Levine et al., 2017; Seznec et al., 2018),
whereby the feedback/losses received upon pulling arms
are not i.i.d. anymore. That is, the distribution of losses
changes as a function of the number of times each arm has
been pulled so far. As a relevant example, assume the expected loss of action i ∈ K at a given round is decreasing
with time and takes the parametric form
α
√ i + βi ,
(1)
τ
where τ is the number of times arm i has been pull up to
that round, and αi and βi are unknown parameters.
Considering decreasing expected losses is reasonable whenever the properties of the chosen arm improve as we allocate
resources to them. For example, this is the case in scenarios
where the goal is to find the best talent in a pool of candidates, say, the most valuable worker to train in an online
labor platform having limited training time.
Overall, we interpret this problem as an algorithm selection or selective training problem. In this scenario, an arm
represents a learning device that satisfies Equation (1) (like
a specific neural network architecture) and the goal is to
keep training the learner that will be the best at the end of
the game. The parameters αi and βi in (1) may therefore
quantify relevant properties of such models. For instance,
in a standard statistical learning setting, parameter αi can
quantify the complexity (which may or may not be known)
of the i-th model class, βi might encode the representational
power of that class in the form of the statistical risk of the
best-in-class hypothesis√(which is typically unknown), while
the dependence on 1/ τ is meant to suggest a plausible
behavior of the generalization error of the i-th algorithm as
a function of the training set size τ . Within this setting, an
arm i ∈ K with small αi and large βi may represent an empirical risk minimizer (ERM) operating on a simple model
class where the ERM has an estimation error getting small
with few samples, but which only underfits the data without
effectively minimizing the approximation error. Conversely,
an arm i ∈ K with large αi and small βi may correspond

