Boosting for Online Convex Optimization

Elad Hazan 1 2 Karan Singh 3

Abstract
We consider the decision-making framework of
online convex optimization with a very large number of experts. This setting is ubiquitous in contextual and reinforcement learning problems, where
the size of the policy class renders enumeration
and search within the policy class infeasible. Instead, we consider generalizing the methodology
of online boosting. We define a weak learning
algorithm as a mechanism that guarantees multiplicatively approximate regret against a base class
of experts. In this access model, we give an efficient boosting algorithm that guarantees nearoptimal regret against the convex hull of the base
class. We consider both full and partial (a.k.a.
bandit) information feedback models. We also
give an analogous efficient boosting algorithm for
the i.i.d. statistical setting. Our results simultaneously generalize online boosting and gradient
boosting guarantees to contextual learning model,
online convex optimization and bandit linear optimization settings.

1. Introduction
In the classical problem of prediction from expert advice
(Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1997), a learner iteratively makes decisions and receives loss according to an arbitrarily chosen
loss function. Learning in terms of guaranteeing an absolute
bound on the loss incurred would be a hopeless task, but
the learner is assisted by a pool of experts (or hypotheses).
The goal of the learner is thus to minimize regret, or the
difference of total loss to that of the best expert in hindsight.
For this canonical problem, numerous methods have been
devised and refined, some notably based on the multiplicative weights algorithm (Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994; Arora
*
Equal contribution 1 Google AI Princeton, Princeton, NJ,
USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Microsoft
Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Elad
Hazan <ehazan@cs.princeton.edu>, Karan Singh <karansingh@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2012). Itp
is well established that the regret can be
bounded by O( T log |H|), where |H| is the number of
experts, and that this is tight. However, in many problems
of interest, the class of experts is too large to efficiently
manipulate. This is particularly evident in contextual learning, where the experts are policies – functions mapping
contexts
p to action. In such instances, even if a regret bound
of O( T log |H|) is meaningful, the algorithms achieving
this bound are computationally inefficient; their running
time is linear in |H|.
One approach to deal with this computational difficulty is to
grant the leaner a best-in-hindsight (or ERM) oracle. This
has been explored in both the stochastic bandit (Langford &
Zhang, 2008; Agarwal et al., 2014; Dudik et al., 2011) and
(transductive) online settings (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2016;
Syrgkanis et al., 2016b;a; Hazan & Koren, 2016).
In this paper, we consider a different approach towards
addressing computational intractability, motivated by the
observation that it is often possible to design simple rulesof-thumb (Viola & Jones, 2001) that perform slightly better
than random guesses. We propose that the learner has access
to a “weak learner” - an computationally cheap mechanism
capable of guaranteeing multiplicatively approximate regret
against a base hypotheses class. Such considerations arise in
the theory of boosting (Schapire & Freund, 2012b), which
was originally devised in the context of binary classification
in the statistical/i.i.d. setting. A weak learner, defined as
one which is capable of better-than-random classification, is
used by a boosting algorithm to create an accurate classifier.
By analogy, the regret-based notion of weak learner we
define here is a natural extension of the concept of weak
learning to online convex optimization.
We design efficient algorithms that when provided weak
learners compete with the convex hull of the base hypotheses
class with near-optimal regret. We further consider different
information feedback models: both full gradient feedback,
as well as linear bandit (function value) feedback, and derive
efficient sublinear regret algorithms for these settings.
1.1. Setting and contributions
The setting of online convex optimization (OCO) generalizes the problem of prediction from expert advice to a
general convex decision set K ⊆ Rd , and adversarially

