Pure Exploration and Regret Minimization in Matching Bandits

Flore Sentenac * 1 Jialin Yi * 2 Clément Calauzènes 3 Vianney Perchet 4 Milan Vojnović 2

Abstract
Finding an optimal matching in a weighted graph
is a standard combinatorial problem. We consider
its semi-bandit version where either a pair or a full
matching is sampled sequentially. We prove that it
is possible to leverage a rank-1 assumption on the
adjacency matrix to reduce the sample complexity
and the regret of off-the-shelf algorithms up to
reaching a linear dependency in the number of
vertices (up to poly log terms).

1. Introduction
Finding matchings in graphs, i.e., subsets of edges without
common vertices, is a long standing problem (Lovász &
Plummer, 2009) with many different applications in economics (Roth et al., 2004), operations research (Wheaton,
1990), and machine learning (Mehta, 2012). We consider
here its sequential variant where at each time step t, an
agent chooses a matching mt of some graph, defined by its
unknown weighted adjacency matrix W (with bounded elements in (0, 1)), and observes noisy evaluations of the chosen entries {Xi,j,t : (i, j) ∈ mt }, with E[Xi,j,t ] = Wi,j .
This problem obviously falls in the realm of combinatorial bandits (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012), but we aim at
leveraging a specific structural property: in many relevant
examples, W is a rank 1 matrix.
Two different types of graphs are relevant for matchings,
bipartite and monopartite, and we are going to consider
both of them (even though the latter is more intriguing, the
former, maybe more intuitive, will serve as a warm-up and
to convey insights). In the bipartite case, the set of vertices is
separated in two distinct subsets U and V (of respective sizes
N and M ) and edges only exist across subsets, not within.
The rank-1 adjacency matrix W is then a N × M matrix,
that can be written as W = uv > for some u ∈ (0, 1)N and
v ∈ (0, 1)M . The canonical application of this setting is
*
Equal contribution 1 CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France
London School of Economics, London, UK 3 Criteo AI Lab,
Paris, France 4 CREST, ENSAE Paris, Palaiseau, France & Criteo
AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Flore Sentenac
<flore.sentenac@gmail.com>, Jialin Yi <J.Yi8@lse.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

online advertising, where the probability that a user clicks
on an ad depends on both the position at which the ad
is displayed and its relevance to the user (Katariya et al.,
2017b). Other motivations come from two-sided markets,
where matching occurs between offers and demands, e.g.
in online labor markets, ui may represent the utility for a
user seeking a solution to a project and vj may represent the
expertise of a project solver.
On the other hand, monopartite graphs have 2N vertices
and their rank-1 adjacency matrix W can be written as
W = uu> for some u ∈ (0, 1)2N . This setting models collaborative activities that arise in teamwork, online gaming,
and online labor platforms (Johari et al., 2018). For instance,
some online gaming apps match players together (e.g. Go,
competitive quizzes, and drawings) but players will participate only if they both want to. In a simple model, player
i decides to participate with probability ui , and matched
players i and j participate in a game with probability ui uj .
The expected number
Pof played games from a proposed
matching m is then (i,j)∈m ui uj . The revenue of such
apps typically comes from ads displayed during games, so
the more games played the better. In these examples, the
app will match (say, everyday) as many pairs of players as
possible and not just one (as in the bipartite example).
We will consider the aforementioned two variants of these
sequential choices of matchings: either the matching has
to be “minimal”, i.e., it has to be a single pair of vertices,
or it has to be “maximal”, i.e., a choice of N distinct pairs.
We will refer the former to as pair selection and the latter
as matching selection problem. As standard in multi-armed
bandits, we shall investigate both the regret minimization
over an arbitrary given time horizon and the pure exploration
in a PAC learning setting.
1.1. Related work
The matching problems defined above are special classes of
combinatorial bandit problems with semi-bandit feedback
(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012) with many recent improvements for regret minimization (Combes et al., 2015; Cuvelier et al., 2021; Degenne & Perchet, 2016; Perrault et al.,
2020; Wang & Chen, 2021) as well as pure exploration
(Garivier & Kaufmann, 2016; Chen et al., 2014). The combinatorial structure is quite clear, as the cardinality of the set
√
N
of matchings is equal to (2N )!/(2N N !) ∼ 2 2N/e .

