Non-Autoregressive Electron Redistribution Modeling for Reaction Prediction

Hangrui Bi * 1 Hengyi Wang * 1 Chence Shi 2 3 Connor Coley 4 Jian Tang 2 5 6 Hongyu Guo 7

Abstract
Reliably predicting the products of chemical reactions presents a fundamental challenge in synthetic chemistry. Existing machine learning approaches typically produce a reaction product by
sequentially forming its subparts or intermediate
molecules. Such autoregressive methods, however, not only require a pre-defined order for the
incremental construction but preclude the use of
parallel decoding for efficient computation. To address these issues, we devise a non-autoregressive
learning paradigm that predicts reaction in one
shot. Leveraging the fact that chemical reactions
can be described as a redistribution of electrons in
molecules, we formulate a reaction as an arbitrary
electron flow and predict it with a novel multipointer decoding network. Experiments on the
USPTO-MIT dataset show that, our approach has
established a new state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy
and achieves at least 27 times inference speedup
over the state-of-the-art methods. Also, our predictions are easier for chemists to interpret owing
to predicting the electron flows.

1. Introduction
Reaction prediction (Corey & Wipke, 1969), which aims
to predict the resulting chemical outcomes from given reactants and reagents, is a fundamental problem in computational chemistry. Reliably predicting such outcomes enables
chemists to analyze the feasibility of chemical reactions
and design optimal synthesis routes for target molecules,
which is of crucial importance for synthesis planning, drug
discovery, and material invention. Nevertheless, reaction
prediction has remained a foundational challenge owing
to the fact that a typical reaction may involve nearly 100
atoms (Jin et al., 2017), which makes fully exploring all
*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 Mila - Quebec AI
Institute 3 University of Montréal 4 MIT 5 CIFAR AI Research
Chair 6 HEC Montréal 7 National Research Council Canada. Correspondence to: Jian Tang < jian.tang@hec.ca>, Hongyu Guo
<hongyu.guo@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

possible transformations intractable.

O

C
R

O
HO

OH

R’

C
R

O

R’

H 2O

Figure 1. Illustration2 of the electron movements in a reaction,
where lines represent single covalent bonds (each comprising 2
shared electrons) and a pair of dots representing a lone pair. Each
pair of curly arrows show the movement of one electron pair, which
results in the bond broken (red curly arrow) and bond formed (blue
curly arrow) in the reaction. Such electron redistribution yields the
formation and breaking of chemical bonds that change the reactant
(left) into product (right). Our approach here aims to model all the
movements of electron pairs (i.e., curly arrays) in one shot.

Recently, profound successes have been achieved by applying machine learning to cope with the aforementioned
challenge in reaction prediction (Jin et al., 2017; Struble
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020). For example, (Schwaller et al.,
2018; 2019) formulate reaction prediction as a problem of
sequence translation by representing molecules as SMILES
strings, and Transformer based architecture is used for the
translation. More advanced methods (Coley et al., 2019;
Do et al., 2019; Sacha et al., 2020) represent molecules as
graphs and formulate reaction prediction as iterative graph
transformation process. Generally, these methods generate
subparts or intermediate molecules of a reaction product in a
sequential fashion, through leveraging successive decoding
steps.
Despite their dramatic successes, these state-of-the-art endto-end methods have a major shortcoming, thus hindering
their wider applications. That is, these strategies embrace
an autoregressive decoding procedure, which produces reaction subparts or intermediate molecule graphs sequentially,
each conditioning on previously generated ones. Although
autoregressive models can model the dependency between
the sequential subparts, there is no unambiguous principle
2

This formalism is inspired by, but does not accurately represent, a true arrow pushing mechanism; Hydrogen is neglected
for the simplicity of our model as that of other graph-based approaches owing to that the Hydrogen can be inferred with valences
and electrons provided.

