Uniform Convergence, Adversarial Spheres and a Simple Remedy

Gregor Bachmann 1 Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract
Previous work has cast doubt on the general
framework of uniform convergence and its ability
to explain generalization in neural networks. By
considering a specific dataset, it was observed that
a neural network completely misclassifies a projection of the training data (adversarial set), rendering any existing generalization bound based
on uniform convergence vacuous. We provide
an extensive theoretical investigation of the previously studied data setting through the lens of
infinitely-wide models. We prove that the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) also suffers from the
same phenomenon and we uncover its origin. We
highlight the important role of the output bias and
show theoretically as well as empirically how a
sensible choice completely mitigates the problem.
We identify sharp phase transitions in the accuracy
on the adversarial set and study its dependency
on the training sample size. As a result, we are
able to characterize critical sample sizes beyond
which the effect disappears. Moreover, we study
decompositions of a neural network into a clean
and noisy part by considering its canonical decomposition into its different eigenfunctions and show
empirically that for too small bias the adversarial
phenomenon still persists.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved astonishing performance
across many learning tasks such as in computer vision (He
et al., 2016), natural language processing (Devlin et al.,
2019) and graph learning (Kipf & Welling, 2017). The theoretical understanding of the generalization capability of
these models, on the other hand, has been lagging behind
in development and can so far only offer limited insights
into the inner workings of these algorithms. Almost every
work concerning generalization is based on the paradigm
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Gregor Bachmann <gregor.bachmann@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of uniform convergence as a tool to bound the capacity of
the model (Arora et al., 2018; Bartlett et al., 2019; 2017;
Neyshabur et al., 2015; 2018). Recently however, Nagarajan & Kolter (2019b) have cast doubt on the power of this
technique. By constructing a dataset consisting of two concentric spheres (referred to as adversarial spheres), they
were able to show that a neural network misclassifies a specific projection of the training data entirely. The existence
of such an adversarial dataset renders any generalization
bound based on uniform convergence vacuous. This surprising behaviour has been shown to hold empirically but,
to the best of our knowledge, neither a mathematical proof
nor a theoretical account of its origin has been given in the
literature.
In this work, we revisit the aforementioned dataset and study
the phenomenon of the model mathematically through the
lens of infinitely wide neural networks. We leverage the
analytic structure of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018) to prove the observed behaviour as well
as unravel the dependencies on different parameters such
as the sample size and the magnitude of the bias of the
output layer of the model. These theoretical findings suggest a very simple fix consisting in increasing the output
bias sufficiently. We validate our theoretical results using
numerical experiments on the adversarial spheres dataset.
Moreover, we explore the hypothesis put forth by Nagarajan
& Kolter (2019b) suggesting that there may exist a decomposition of the model into a clean and a noisy part. The
noisy submodel should encapsulate the observed degeneracies while the clean submodel enjoys good generalization
and robustness, making it amenable to uniform convergence.
We investigate the most natural decomposition induced by
the eigendecomposition of the kernel and show that even
a restriction to the optimal set of eigenfunctions does not
eliminate the adversarial effect.
Our mathematical analysis suggests that the failure of uniform convergence in this particular setting is not pointing
towards a deeper problem in neural architectures but is rather
a result of the specific dataset and the architectural bias encouraging the network to rely on angular features instead
of radial information. This questions the relevance of the
observation in Nagarajan & Kolter (2019b) regarding more
realistic datasets containing angular structure.

