No-regret Algorithms for Capturing Events in Poisson Point Processes

Mojmír Mutný 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Inhomogeneous Poisson point processes are
widely used models of event occurrences. We
address adaptive sensing of Poisson Point processes, namely, maximizing the number of captured events subject to sensing costs. We encode
prior assumptions on the rate function by modeling it as a member of a known reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). By partitioning the
domain into separate small regions, and using
heteroscedastic linear regression, we propose a
tractable estimator of Poisson process rates for
two feedback models: count-record, where exact
locations of events are observed, and histogram
feedback, where only counts of events are observed. We derive provably accurate anytime confidence estimates for our estimators for sequentially acquired Poisson count data. Using these,
we formulate algorithms based on optimism that
provably incur sublinear count-regret. We demonstrate the practicality of the method on problems
from crime modeling, revenue maximization as
well as environmental monitoring.

1. Introduction
Poisson point processes are widely used for modeling
discrete event occurrences, with a rich history in probability
theory (Kingman, 2002). Their modeling power is
demonstrated by a multitude of applications in engineering
(Snyder and Miller, 2012), crime rate modeling (Shirota
et al., 2017), measuring genetic biodiversity (Diggle et al.,
2013), environmental monitoring (Heikkinen and Arjas,
1999) and pollutant modeling (Diggle, 2013). In this work,
we design a sequential algorithm for adaptive sensing
of spatio-temporal Poisson processes. Our approach
adaptively focuses on particular regions of the space –
sensing regions – in order to maximize the number of events
captured over time subject to the costs of sensing. Crucially,
we allow the rate of event occurrence to vary smoothly
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Mojmír Mutný <mojmir.mutny@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

over the sensed domain. In particular, we assume the rate
function can be modeled as a member of a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) with a known kernel k.
As a running example, consider surveying spontaneous taxi
requests on a street, e.g., by a visual gesture. Recorded
requests over multiple days are depicted in Fig. 1a, along
with the inferred intensity. The rate function in this case can
be modeled as smooth function. For simplicity, suppose that
the intensity is time invariant. As operators, we might be interested in servicing as many requests as possible by allocating taxi cars to different areas. In this application, a sensing
action corresponds to such an allocation of sending taxis to
a certain region of a city and waiting there for requests. The
sensing regions are sets arising from hierarchically splitting
the domain (cf. Fig. 1a), corresponding roughly to small
city blocks. The cost of each action – sensing region – can
be reasonably chosen to be proportional to the area of the
sensing as it takes more taxi drivers to cover a larger area.

2. Background
Let D ⊂ Rd be a compact subset. An inhomogeneous
spatio-temporal Poisson point process P is a random process such that for any subset A ⊂ D, N (A) denotes the
random variable representing the number of events in A
for a unit duration and n(A) a realization of this random
variable. If A, B ⊂ D and A∩B = ∅ then N (A) and N (B)
are independent. In addition, the process has an associated
intensity function λ(x), where the number of events sensed
during unit time in A is distributed as,
Z

N (A) ∼ Poisson
λ(x)dx .
(1)
A

These conditions fully specify a Poisson process (Snyder
and Miller, 2012).
2.1. Sensing Problem: Capturing Events
We consider the problem of adaptive sensing of Poisson
processes – capturing of as many events of P as possible
subject to the cost of sensing. We act sequentially by picking
sensing regions, obtaining some feedback about the process
within them at some cost, with the goal minimize countregret. Below, we elaborate on these aspects.
Actions In our abstract framework, sensors can be placed
to monitor a subset of the domain D for a certain duration

