STRODE: Stochastic Boundary Ordinary Differential Equation

Hengguan Huang 1 Hongfu Liu 1 Hao Wang 2 Chang Xiao 1 Ye Wang 1

Abstract
Perception of time from sequentially acquired sensory inputs is rooted in everyday behaviors of individual organisms. Yet, most algorithms for timeseries modeling fail to learn dynamics of random
event timings directly from visual or audio inputs,
requiring timing annotations during training that
are usually unavailable for real-world applications.
For instance, neuroscience perspectives on postdiction imply that there exist variable temporal
ranges within which the incoming sensory inputs
can affect the earlier perception, but such temporal ranges are mostly unannotated for real applications such as automatic speech recognition (ASR).
In this paper, we present a probabilistic ordinary
differential equation (ODE), called STochastic
boundaRy ODE (STRODE), that learns both the
timings and the dynamics of time series data without requiring any timing annotations during training. STRODE allows the usage of differential
equations to sample from the posterior point processes, efficiently and analytically. We further
provide theoretical guarantees on the learning of
STRODE. Our empirical results show that our approach successfully infers event timings of time
series data. Our method achieves competitive
or superior performances compared to existing
state-of-the-art methods for both synthetic and
real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Perception of time from sequentially acquired sensory inputs
is rooted in the everyday behavior of the individual organism.
Numerous neuroscience studies have provided evidence
for close connections between time perception and sensory
input from multiple sensory modalities such as audition
and vision (Bolognini et al., 2012; Murai & Yotsumoto,
1
National University of Singapore 2 Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Hengguan Huang <hengguan@comp.nus.edu.sg>,
Ye Wang <wangye@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018; Ulrich et al., 1998). Decoupling the perception of
time and content from sensory inputs is crucial for real-time
perception in fast-changing environments (Staff, 2014; Toso
et al., 2020). For example, to perform interceptive actions
such as hitting a moving object, precise timing is required
due to significant response latency of neurons; to identify
ambiguous phoneme from the acoustic signal in real-time,
again, the timing is required such that the human brain
is able to strike a balance between postdiction (to ensure
sufficient information is integrated from subsequent context)
and prediction (to ensure decision outcomes are not delayed
relative to the external world) (Gwilliams et al., 2018).
Despite the enormous practical successes of machine learning (in particular, deep learning), most of the algorithms
for time-series modeling fail to learn dynamics of random
event timings directly from visual or audio inputs, and still
require their training data to have timing annotations, such
as Latent ODE (Rubanova et al., 2019). However, for some
real-world applications in which timing annotations are not
available, it is necessary to introduce a “time perception”
mechanism to handle such uncertainty. For instance, neuroscience perspectives on postdiction imply that there exist
variable temporal ranges within which the incoming sensory
inputs can affect the earlier perception, but such temporal
ranges are mostly unannotated for real applications such as
automatic speech recognition (ASR) (Yu & Li, 2018).
Can gaps between natural and artificial intelligence be
bridged further through introducing the “time perception”
mechanism? In this paper, we generalize neural ODE in
handling a special type of boundary value problem with
random boundary times which are described by a temporal
point process (TPP). We present a probabilistic ordinary differential equation (ODE) called stochastic boundary ODE
(STRODE) that infers both the timings and the dynamics of
the time series data without requiring any timing annotations
during training.
We adopt variational inference to optimize our model. The
boundary time variables involved in STRODE are described
as ODEs, consequently posing a major challenge for evaluating evidence lower bound (ELBO) with respect to sampling
and inference of such distributions. To mitigate this challenge, we propose a method that allows for joint inference
and differentiable sampling of such distributions through

