Oops I Took A Gradient: Scalable Sampling for Discrete Distributions
Will Grathwohl 1 2 Kevin Swersky 2 Milad Hashemi 2 David Duvenaud 1 2 Chris J. Maddison 1

Abstract
We propose a general and scalable approximate
sampling strategy for probabilistic models with
discrete variables. Our approach uses gradients
of the likelihood function with respect to its discrete inputs to propose updates in a MetropolisHastings sampler. We show empirically that this
approach outperforms generic samplers in a number of difficult settings including Ising models,
Potts models, restricted Boltzmann machines, and
factorial hidden Markov models. We also demonstrate the use of our improved sampler for training deep energy-based models (EBM) on high
dimensional discrete data. This approach outperforms variational auto-encoders and existing
energy-based models. Finally, we give bounds
showing that our approach is near-optimal in the
class of samplers which propose local updates.

1. Introduction
Discrete structure is everywhere in the real world, from
text to genome sequences. The scientific community is
building increasingly complex models for this discrete data,
increasing the need for methods to sample from discrete
distributions. Sampling from a discrete distribution may
seem like a simpler task than sampling from a continuous one: even a one-dimensional continuous distribution
can have an uncountable infinity of outcomes, whereas a
discrete distribution is at most countable. However, most
common continuous distributions have some kind of simplifying structure, such as differentiable densities, which can
be exploited to speed up sampling and inference.
Of course, many discrete distributions have structure as
well. Notably, discrete distributions over combinatorial
spaces often have some kind of block independence structure among their variables. Although this can be used to
speed up sampling and inference, it may be difficult to de1
University of Toronto and Vector Institute 2 Google Research,
Brain Team. Correspondence to: Will Grathwohl <wgrathwohl@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Our approach visualized. Often discrete distributions
are defined by continuous functions whose input is restricted to
a discrete set; here R2 restricted to Z 2 . We use a Taylor series
computed on the underlying continuous function to estimate likelihood ratios of making discrete moves; here ±1 in either direction.
These estimated likelihood ratios are used to inform a proposal
distribution over moves in the original discrete space.

tect such structure automatically. Typically, users need to
know this structure a priori and must hard-code it into an
algorithm to speed up sampling.
In search for a unifying structure, we notice that many discrete distributions are written (and implemented) as differentiable functions of real-valued inputs. The discrete
structure is created by restricting the continuous inputs to
a discrete subset of their domain. In this paper, we use the
gradients of these underlying continuous functions to inform
proposal distributions for MCMC sampling in large discrete
probabilistic models. This new family of gradient-informed
proposals for MCMC may be seen as a class of adaptive
Gibbs samplers or a fast approximation to locally-informed
proposals (Umrigar, 1993; Liu, 1996; Zanella, 2020).
As we show, this gradient information is cheaply available
for many discrete distributions and can lead to orders of
magnitude improvements in sampling efficiency. In some
cases, it even outperforms samplers that exploit hard-coded
independence structure.

