Randomized Algorithms for Submodular Function
Maximization with a k-System Constraint

Shuang Cui 1 Kai Han * 1 Tianshuai Zhu 1 Jing Tang 2 Benwei Wu 1 He Huang 3

Abstract
Submodular optimization has numerous applications such as crowdsourcing and viral marketing. In this paper, we study the problem of nonnegative submodular function maximization subject to a k-system constraint, which generalizes
many other important constraints in submodular optimization such as cardinality constraint,
matroid constraint, and k-extendible system constraint. The existing approaches for this problem
are all based on deterministic algorithmic frameworks, and the best approximation ratio achieved
by these algorithms
√ (for a general submodular
function) is k + 2 k + 2 + 3. We propose a randomized algorithm√with an improved approximation ratio of (1 + k)2 , while achieving nearlylinear time complexity significantly lower than
that of the state-of-the-art algorithm. We also
show that our algorithm can be further generalized to address a stochastic case where the elements can be adaptively selected,
√ and propose
an approximation ratio of (1 + k + 1)2 for the
adaptive optimization case. The empirical performance of our algorithms is extensively evaluated
in several applications related to data mining and
social computing, and the experimental results
demonstrate the superiorities of our algorithms in
terms of both utility and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Submodular optimization is an active research area in machine learning due to its wide applications such as crowdCo-first authors: Shuang Cui and Kai Han. The work of Shuang
Cui, Tianshuai Zhu and Benwei Wu is finished under the guidance
of their supervisor: Kai Han. 1 School of Computer Science and
Technology / SuZhou Research Institute, University of Science
and Technology of China; 2 Data Science and Analytics Thrust,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; 3 School
of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University. Correspondence to: Kai Han <hankai@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sourcing (Singla et al., 2016; Han et al., 2018a), clustering (Gomes & Krause, 2010; Han et al., 2019), viral marketing (Kempe et al., 2003; Han et al., 2018b), and data
summarization (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014; Iyer & Bilmes,
2013). A lot of the existing studies in this area aim to maximize a submodular function subject to a specific constraint,
and it is well known that these problems are generally NPhard. Therefore, extensive approximation algorithms have
been proposed, with the goal of achieving improved approximation ratios or lower time complexity.
Formally, given a ground set N with |N | = n, a constrained
submodular maximization problem can be written as:
max{f (S) : S ∈ I}

(1)

where f : 2N 7→ R≥0 is a submodular function satisfying
∀X, Y ⊆ N : f (X) + f (Y ) ≥ f (X ∪ Y ) + f (X ∩ Y ),
and I ⊆ 2N is the set of all feasible solutions. For example,
if I = {X : X ⊆ N ∧ |X| ≤ d} for a given d ∈ N, then
S ∈ I represents a cardinality constraint. We also call f (·)
“monotone” if it satisfies ∀X ⊆ Y ⊆ N : f (X) ≤ f (Y ),
otherwise f (·) is called “non-monotone”.
Although some application problems only have simple constraints like a cardinality constraint, many others have to
be cast as submodular maximization problems with more
complex “independence system” constraints such as matroid, k-matchoid, and k-system constraint. Among these
constraints, the k-system constraint is the most general one,
and a strict inclusion hierarchy of them is: cardinality ⊂ matroid ⊂ intersection of k matroids ⊂ k-matchoid ⊂ kextendible ⊂ k-system (Mestre, 2006). Due to the generality of k-system constraint, it can be used to model a lot
of constraints in various applications, such as graph matchings, spanning trees and scheduling (Feldman et al., 2020;
Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016).
It is recognized that submodular maximization with a ksystem constraint is one of the most fundamental problems
in submodular optimization (Calinescu et al., 2011; Feldman
et al., 2017; 2020), so a lot of efforts have been devoted to it
since the 1970s, and the state-of-the-art√approximation ratios
are k +1 (Fisher et al., 1978) and k +2 k + 2+3 (Feldman
et al., 2020) for monotone f (·) and non-monotone f (·), respectively. Feldman et al. (2020) also showed that, by weak-

