Hierarchical Clustering of Data Streams:
Scalable Algorithms and Approximation Guarantees

Anand Rajagopalan 1 Fabio Vitale 2 Danny Vainstein 3 Gui Citovsky 1 Cecilia M. Procopiuc 1 Claudio Gentile 1

Abstract
We investigate the problem of hierarchically clustering data streams containing metric data in
Rd . We introduce a desirable invariance property for such algorithms, describe a general family of hyperplane-based methods enjoying this
property, and analyze two scalable instances of
this general family against recently popularized
similarity/dissimilarity-based metrics for hierarchical clustering. We prove a number of new
results related to the approximation ratios of these
algorithms, improving in various ways over the
literature on this subject. Finally, since our algorithms are principled but also very practical,
we carry out an experimental comparison on both
synthetic and real-world datasets showing competitive results against known baselines.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical clustering (HC) is a fundamental tool of data
analysis by which data items are grouped together based on
some notion of (semantic) similarity working at different levels of granularity. The goal of a HC algorithm operating on
a dataset X is then to construct a tree whose leaves host the
data items in X, and whose internal nodes encode subsets
of X (that is, the clusters) at increasing levels of resolution
from root to leaves. Applications are ubiquitous, ranging
from phylogeny (e.g., (Eisen et al., 1998)) to data mining
and information retrieval (e.g., (Manning et al., 2008)), to
social network analysis (e.g., (Gilbert et al., 2011)), and
beyond.
In practice, HC methods are often deployed in data-intensive
applications, where massive datasets have to be hierarchically organized and connected to data-acquisition pipelines
1

Google Research, NY, USA 2 Lille University and INRIA
Lille, France 3 Tel-Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence
to: Anand Rajagopalan <anandbr@google.com>, Fabio Vitale
<fabio.vitale@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

within highly dynamic (and typically non-stationary) environments. In these contexts, it is crucial to devise adaptive HC solutions that enable the handling of massive data
streams in a robust and efficient manner. In HC for data
streams, it is a common desideratum to have a fast way of
updating the hierarchy with the newly acquired data without recomputing everything from scratch. Yet, at the same
time, we would like to do so without exposing ourselves to
unexpected temporal behaviors of the data stream that skew
the hierarchy towards undesirable configurations.
Contributions. In this paper, we present the general algorithmic framework of hyperplane-based HC for data streams
containing metric data. The (randomized) algorithms originating from this framework are purely geometric algorithms
that can interchangeably be described as batch HC solutions
(the dataset X is given up front in its entirety) or dynamic
(aka sequential) HC solutions (the data points in X are disclosed one by one or in small batches). Crucially, within
our framework, the two solutions turn out to be statistically
equivalent, in that the statistical properties of the trees computed in the batch mode are the same as those for trees
computed in the sequential mode. This means that the specific ordering of data by which the tree structure is grown
does not affect the properties of the final tree, thereby giving
our HC solutions a desirable robustness. We call this the
sequential property of HC algorithms (see Section 2 for a
formal definition). Moreover, the computed hierarchy is
fully online in the sense that points are inserted as siblings
of existing nodes, without changing the tree topology.
Quality measures: In order to evaluate the quality of our HC
solutions, we follow the recent trend initiated by Dasgupta
(2016), and further developed by a number of more recent
works (e.g., (Charikar & Chatziafratis, 2017; Cohen-addad
et al., 2019; Charikar et al., 2019b; Cohen-addad et al.,
2019; Naumov et al., 2020; Alon et al., 2020; Vainstein
et al., 2021)), who framed the HC problem as a combinatorial optimization problem over hierarchical structures
against exogenous pairwise similarity/dissimilarity information on individual data points. In practice, as emphasized,
e.g., by Charikar et al. (2019b); Naumov et al. (2020), data
are often described by feature vectors, so that this pairwise
information can be naturally delivered by the underlying

