Reasoning Over Virtual Knowledge Bases
With Open Predicate Relations

Haitian Sun * 1 Pat Verga 2 Bhuwan Dhingra 2 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 William W. Cohen 2

Abstract
We present the Open Predicate Query Language
(OPQL); a method for constructing a virtual KB
(VKB) trained entirely from text. Large Knowledge Bases (KBs) are indispensable for a widerange of industry applications such as question
answering and recommendation. Typically, KBs
encode world knowledge in a structured, readily
accessible form derived from laborious human annotation efforts. Unfortunately, while they are extremely high precision, KBs are inevitably highly
incomplete and automated methods for enriching
them are far too inaccurate. Instead, OPQL constructs a VKB by encoding and indexing a set of
relation mentions in a way that naturally enables
reasoning and can be trained without any structured supervision. We demonstrate that OPQL
outperforms prior VKB methods on two different
KB reasoning tasks and, additionally, can be used
as an external memory integrated into a language
model (OPQL-LM) leading to improvements on
two open-domain question answering tasks.

1. Introduction
Large knowledge bases (KBs) structure information around
triples of entities and relation types that describe the relationships between the subject and object entities, for example, [Charles Darwin, author of, On the Origin of Species].
While KBs have been a key component of artificial intelligence since the field’s inception (Newell & Simon, 1956;
Newell et al., 1959) broad-coverage KBs are inevitably incomplete (Min et al., 2013), despite efforts to automate
their creation through text extraction (Angeli et al., 2015;
Mitchell et al., 2015).

An alternative to extracting information to augment existing
KBs relies on directly answering queries using text corpora
(Chen et al., 2017). Recently, Dhingra et al. (2020) proposed DrKIT which answers questions based on a virtual
KB (VKB) constructed automatically from a text corpus.
The key idea behind DrKIT is to greatly simplify the construction of a KB by building a “soft KB”, closely related to
the original text, and compensate for the lack of structure in
the VKB by employing more sophisticated neural methods
to answer questions. In DrKIT, each element of the VKB is
composed of an entity mention and its surrounding context,
encoded into a dense embedding representation. Given a
query, a learned encoder projects that query into the same
embedding space of the VKB mentions. The query vector
is scored amongst all embedded mentions resulting in the
retrieval of relevant mentions, analogous to the retrieval of
a triple from a standard structured KB. Other neural operations can be used to differentiably reason over the VKB, for
instance by answering “multihop” questions that combine
information from multiple embedded mentions.
A weakness of DrKIT is that constructing the VKB relied
on distant supervision using existing KB triples. This leads
to two limitations: (1) it is unclear if the VKB will correctly encode relations not present in the original structured
KB used for distant supervision, and (2) the approach is
inapplicable in domains without existing structured KBs
(such as many technical areas.) To address these problems,
we introduce (1) a novel VKB construction method which
can be trained without any distant KB supervision and (2)
a set of differentiable reasoning operations on the VKB,
which we call the Open Predicate Query Language (OPQL).
Hence, unlike DrKIT’s procedure, an OPQL virtual KB can
be created from any entity-linked corpus.

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Haitian Sun (* Most work done at Google Research)
<haitians@cs.cmu.edu>, Pat Verga <patverga@google.com>,
Bhuwan Dhingra <bdhingra@google.com>, Ruslan Salakhutdinov <rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu>, William W. Cohen <wcohen@google.com>.

The key idea in constructing the OPQL VKB is to use a
dual-encoder pre-training process. Our process is similar to
that used in (Baldini Soares et al., 2019), which was shown
to be useful for tasks such as relation classification. Here
we show that this pre-training process can also construct
a VKB that effectively supports more complex reasoning
operations, and also that OPQL operations can be tightly
integrated with a neural language model (LM).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To summarize this paper’s contributions: (1) we describe
an effective VKB pre-training method that, unlike previous

