Distributed Second Order Methods with Fast Rates
and Compressed Communication

Rustem Islamov 1 2 Xun Qian 1 Peter Richtárik 1

Abstract

We develop several new communication-efficient
second-order methods for distributed optimization. Our first method, NEWTON-STAR, is a variant of Newton’s method from which it inherits its
fast local quadratic rate. However, unlike Newton’s method, NEWTON-STAR enjoys the same
per iteration communication cost as gradient descent. While this method is impractical as it relies
on the use of certain unknown parameters characterizing the Hessian of the objective function at
the optimum, it serves as the starting point which
enables us to design practical variants thereof
with strong theoretical guarantees. In particular,
we design a stochastic sparsification strategy for
learning the unknown parameters in an iterative
fashion in a communication efficient manner. Applying this strategy to NEWTON-STAR leads to
our next method, NEWTON-LEARN, for which we
prove local linear and superlinear rates independent of the condition number. When applicable,
this method can have dramatically superior convergence behavior when compared to state-of-theart methods. Finally, we develop a globalization
strategy using cubic regularization which leads to
our next method, CUBIC-NEWTON-LEARN, for
which we prove global sublinear and linear convergence rates, and a fast superlinear rate. Our
results are supported with experimental results on
real datasets, and show several orders of magnitude improvement on baseline and state-of-the-art
methods in terms of communication complexity.

1. Introduction
The prevalent paradigm for training modern supervised machine learning models is based on (regularized) empirical
risk minimization (ERM) (Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David,
2014), and the most commonly used optimization methods
deployed for solving ERM problems belong to the class of
stochastic first order methods (Robbins and Monro, 1951;
Nemirovski et al., 2009). Since modern training data sets
are very large and are becoming larger every year, it is
increasingly harder to get by without relying on modern
computing architectures which make efficient use of distributed computing. However, in order to develop efficient
distributed methods, one has to keep in mind that communication among the different parallel workers (e.g. processors
or compute nodes) is typically very slow, and almost invariably forms the main bottleneck in deployed optimization
software and systems (Bekkerman et al., 2011). For this
reason, further advances in the area of communication efficient distributed first order optimization methods for solving
ERM problems are highly needed, and research in this area
constitutes one of the most important fundamental endeavors in modern machine learning. Indeed, this research field
is very active, and numerous advances have been made over
the past decade (Seide et al., 2014; Wen et al., 2017; Alistarh
et al., 2017; Bernstein et al., 2018; Mishchenko et al., 2019;
Stich and Karimireddy, 2019; Tang et al., 2019).
1.1. Distributed optimization
We consider L2 regularized empirical risk minimization
problems of the form


min P (x) := f (x) + λ2 kxk2 ,

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a smooth1 convex function of the
“average of averages” structure
*

Equal contribution 1 King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia 2 Moscow Institute of
Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia. Correspondence
to: Rustem Islamov <islamov.ri@phystech.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

f (x) := n1

n
P
i=1

fi (x),

1
fi (x) := m

m
P

fij (x),

(2)

j=1

1
Function φ : Rd → R is smooth if it is differentiable, and has
Lφ Lipschitz gradient: k∇φ(x) − ∇φ(y)k ≤ Lφ kx − yk for all
x, y ∈ Rd . We say that Lφ is the smoothness constant of φ.

