Value Alignment Verification

Daniel S. Brown * 1 Jordan Schneider * 2 Anca Dragan 1 Scott Niekum 2

Abstract
As humans interact with autonomous agents to
perform increasingly complicated, potentially
risky tasks, it is important to be able to efficiently
evaluate an agent’s performance and correctness.
In this paper we formalize and theoretically analyze the problem of efficient value alignment
verification: how to efficiently test whether the
behavior of another agent is aligned with a human’s values. The goal is to construct a kind of
“driver’s test” that a human can give to any agent
which will verify value alignment via a minimal
number of queries. We study alignment verification problems with both idealized humans that
have an explicit reward function as well as problems where they have implicit values. We analyze
verification of exact value alignment for rational
agents and propose and analyze heuristic and approximate value alignment verification tests in a
wide range of gridworlds and a continuous autonomous driving domain. Finally, we prove that
there exist sufficient conditions such that we can
verify exact and approximate alignment across an
infinite set of test environments via a constantquery-complexity alignment test.

1. Introduction
If we desire autonomous agents that can interact with and
assist humans and other agents in performing complex, risky
tasks, then it is important that humans can verify that these
agents’ policies are aligned with what is expected and desired. This alignment is often termed value alignment and is
defined in the Asilomar AI Principles1 as follows: "Highly
autonomous AI systems should be designed so that their
goals and behaviors can be assured to align with human
values throughout their operation." In this paper, we pro*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley,
USA 2 University of Texas at Austin, USA. Correspondence
to: Daniel Brown <dsbrown@berkeley.edu>, Jordan Schneider
<joschnei@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://futureoflife.org/ai-principles/

vide a theoretical analysis of the problem of efficient value
alignment verification: how to efficiently test whether a
robot is aligned with a human’s values.
Existing work on value alignment often focuses on qualitative evaluation of trust (Huang et al., 2018) or asymptotic
alignment of an agent’s performance via interactions and active learning (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Christiano et al.,
2017; Sadigh et al., 2017). By contrast, our work analyzes
the difficulty of efficiently evaluating another agent’s correctness by formally defining value alignment and seeking
efficient tests for value alignment verification that are applicable when two or more agents already have learned a policy
or reward function and want to efficiently test compatibility.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to define and
analyze the problem of value alignment verification. In particular, we propose exact, approximate, and heuristic tests
that one agent can use to quickly and efficiently verify value
alignment with another agent.
As depicted in Figure 1, the goal of value alignment verification is to construct a kind of “driver’s test” that a human
can give to any agent which will verify value alignment and
consists of only a small number of queries. We define values
in the reinforcement learning sense, i.e., with respect to a reward function: a robot is exactly value aligned with a human
if the robot’s policy is optimal under the human’s reward
function. The two agents in a value alignment verification
problem (human and robot) may have different communication mechanisms and different value introspection abilities.
Thus, the way we analyze value alignment verification will
depend on whether the human’s and robot’s access to their
values is explicit, e.g., able to write down a value function or
reward function or implicit, e.g., able to answer preference
queries or sample actions from a policy. The most general
version of value alignment verification involves a human
with implicit values who seeks to verify the value alignment
of a robot with implicit values, e.g. a black-box policy. This
setting motivates our work; however, it is challenging and
we postpone many questions for future research.
We follow a ground-up approach where we analyze the difficulty of value alignment verification starting in the most
idealized setting, and then gradually relax our assumptions.
We first analyze sufficient conditions under which efficient
exact value alignment verification is possible in the explicit

