Multidimensional Scaling: Approximation and Complexity

Erik Demaine 1 Adam Hesterberg 2 Frederic Koehler 3 Jayson Lynch 4 John Urschel 3

Abstract
Metric Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a classical method for generating meaningful (nonlinear) low-dimensional embeddings of highdimensional data. MDS has a long history in the
statistics, machine learning, and graph drawing
communities. In particular, the Kamada-Kawai
force-directed graph drawing method is equivalent to MDS and is one of the most popular ways
in practice to embed graphs into low dimensions.
Despite its ubiquity, our theoretical understanding
of MDS remains limited as its objective function
is highly non-convex. In this paper, we prove that
minimizing the Kamada-Kawai objective is NPhard and give a provable approximation algorithm
for optimizing it, which in particular is a PTAS on
low-diameter graphs. We supplement this result
with experiments suggesting possible connections
between our greedy approximation algorithm and
gradient-based methods.

1. Introduction
Given the distances between data points living in a high
dimensional space, how can we meaningfully visualize their
relationships? This is a fundamental task in exploratory
data analysis for which a variety of different approaches
have been proposed. Many of these approaches seek to
visualize high-dimensional data by embedding it into lower
dimensional, e.g. two or three-dimensional, space.
Metric multidimensional scaling (MDS or mMDS) (Kruskal,
1964a; 1978) is a classical approach to this problem which
attempts to find a low-dimensional embedding that accurately represents the distances between points. Originally
motivated by applications in psychometrics, MDS has now
1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT,
Cambridge, MA, USA 2 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA 3 Department of Mathematics, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada. Correspondence to: Frederic Koehler
<fkoehler@mit.edu>.

been recognized as a fundamental tool for data analysis
across a broad range of disciplines. See the texts (Kruskal,
1978; Borg & Groenen, 2005) for more details, including a
discussion of applications to data from scientific, economic,
political, and other domains. Compared to other classical
visualization tools like PCA1 , metric multidimensional scaling has the advantage that it 1) is not restricted to linear
projections of the data, i.e. it is nonlinear, and 2) is applicable to data from an arbitrary metric space, rather than
just Euclidean space. Because of this versatility, MDS has
also become one of the most popular algorithms in the field
of graph drawing, where the goal is to visualize relationships between nodes (e.g. people in a social network). In
this context, MDS was independently proposed by Kamada
and Kawai (Kamada et al., 1989) as a force-directed graph
drawing method.
In this paper, we consider the algorithmic problem of computing the optimal embedding under the MDS/KamadaKawai objective. The Kamada-Kawai objective is to minimize the following energy/stress functional E : Rrn → R
2
X  kxi − xj k
E(x1 , . . . , xn ) =
−1 ,
(1)
d(i, j)
i<j
which corresponds to the physical situation where
x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rr are particles and for each i 6= j, particles
xi and xj are connected by an idealized spring with equilibrium length d(i, j) following Hooke’s law with spring
1
constant kij = d(i,j)
2 . In applications to visualization, the
choice of dimension is often small, i.e. r = 1, 2, 3. We
also note that in (1) the terms in the sum are sometimes
re-weighted with vertex or edge weights, which we discuss
in more detail later.
In practice, the MDS/Kamada-Kawai objective (1) is optimized via a heuristic procedure like gradient descent
(Kruskal, 1964b; Zheng et al., 2018) or stress majorization (De Leeuw et al., 1977; Gansner et al., 2004). Because
the objective is non-convex, these algorithms may not reach
the global minimum, but instead may terminate at approximate critical points of the objective function. Heuristics
such as restarting an algorithm from different initializations
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the literature, PCA is sometimes referred to as classical
multidimensional scaling, in contrast to metric multidimensional
scaling, which we study in this work.

