Temporal Difference Learning as Gradient Splitting

Rui Liu 1 Alex Olshevsky 2

Abstract
Temporal difference learning with linear function
approximation is a popular method to obtain a
low-dimensional approximation of the value function of a policy in a Markov Decision Process.
We provide an interpretation of this method in
terms of a splitting of the gradient of an appropriately chosen function. As a consequence of this
interpretation, convergence proofs for gradient
descent can be applied almost verbatim to temporal difference learning. Beyond giving a fuller
explanation of why temporal difference works,
this interpretation also yields improved conver√
gence times. We consider the setting with 1/ T
step-size, where previous comparable finite-time
convergence time bounds for temporal difference
learning had the multiplicative factor 1/(1 − γ)
in front of the bound, with γ being the discount
factor. We show that a minor variation on TD
learning which estimates the mean of the value
function separately has a convergence time where
1/(1 − γ) only multiplies an asymptotically negligible term.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning is a basic machine learning
paradigm which concerns learning optimal policies in
Markov Decision Processes (MDP). It has been applied to
many challenging practical problems, such as, autonomous
driving (Chen et al., 2015), robotics (Gu et al., 2017), bidding and advertising (Jin et al., 2018), and games (Silver
et al., 2016). An important problem in reinforcement learning is to estimate the value function for a given policy, often
referred to as the policy evaluation problem. Temporal difference (TD) learning originally proposed by Sutton (1988)
is one of the most widely used policy evaluation algorithms.
1 Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University, Boston,
MA, USA 2 Department of ECE and Division of Systems Engi-

neering, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Rui Liu <rliu@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

TD uses differences in predictions over successive time
steps to drive the learning process, with the prediction at
any given time step updated via a carefully chosen step-size
to bring it closer to the prediction of the same quantity at
the next time step.
Despite its simple implementation, theoretical analysis of
TD can be involved. This is particularly true when TD
methods are applied to problems with large state-spaces by
maintaining an approximation to the value function. Precise
conditions for the asymptotic convergence of TD with linear
function approximation were established by viewing TD as
a stochastic approximation for solving a suitable Bellman
equation in Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1997). Before the last
few years, there have been few non-asymptotic analyses of
TD methods. The first non-asymptotic bounds for TD(0)
with linear function approximation were given by Korda &
La (2015), obtaining an exponential convergence rate for
the centered variant of TD(0) when the underlying Markov
chain mixes fast. However, some issues with the proofs of
Korda & La (2015) were listed by the subsequent work of
Narayanan & Szepesvári (2017).
In Lakshminarayanan & Szepesvari (2018), it was shown
that TD algorithms with a problem independent constant
step size and iterate averaging, achieve a problem dependent
error that decays as O(1/t) with the number of iterations
t. Convergence rates in probability with an O(1/t) stepsize were provided by Dalal et al. (2018). Both analyses
of Dalal et al. (2018) and Lakshminarayanan & Szepesvari (2018) assume samples used by the algorithm are i.i.d.
rather than a trajectory in the underlying Markov chain. For
the Markov chain
√observation model, Bhandari et al. (2018)
provide a √
O(1/ T ) convergence rate with step-size that
scales as 1/ T and O((logt)/t) convergence rate with step
size O(1/t) for projected TD algorithm. The constant factors in the latter bounds depend on 1/(1 − γ), where γ is the
discount factor; this scaling is one of the things we will be
studying in this paper.
A number of papers also work on algorithms related to
and inspired by the classic TD algorithm in the setting with
Markovian sampling. Srikant & Ying (2019) give finite-time
bounds for the TD algorithms with linear function approximation and a constant step-size. The two time-scale TD with
gradient correction algorithm under a Markovian sampling

