Z-GCNETs: Time Zigzags at Graph Convolutional Networks
for Time Series Forecasting

Yuzhou Chen 1 2 Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez 3 4 Yulia R. Gel 3 2

Abstract
There recently has been a surge of interest in developing a new class of deep learning (DL) architectures that integrate an explicit time dimension
as a fundamental building block of learning and
representation mechanisms. In turn, many recent
results show that topological descriptors of the
observed data, encoding information on the shape
of the dataset in a topological space at different
scales, that is, persistent homology of the data,
may contain important complementary information, improving both performance and robustness
of DL. As convergence of these two emerging
ideas, we propose to enhance DL architectures
with the most salient time-conditioned topological information of the data and introduce the concept of zigzag persistence into time-aware graph
convolutional networks (GCNs). Zigzag persistence provides a systematic and mathematically
rigorous framework to track the most important
topological features of the observed data that tend
to manifest themselves over time. To integrate the
extracted time-conditioned topological descriptors into DL, we develop a new topological summary, zigzag persistence image, and derive its theoretical stability guarantees. We validate the new
GCNs with a time-aware zigzag topological layer
(Z-GCNETs), in application to traffic forecasting
and Ethereum blockchain price prediction. Our
results indicate that Z-GCNET outperforms 13
state-of-the-art methods on 4 time series datasets.

1

Department of Statistical Science, Southern Methodist University, TX, USA 2 Energy Storage & Distributed Resources Division,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA, USA 3 Department
of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, TX,
USA 4 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yuzhou Chen <yuzhouc@smu.edu>, Ignacio Segovia
Dominguez <ignacio.segoviadominguez@utdallas.edu>, Yulia R.
Gel <ygl@utdallas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Many real world phenomena are intrinsically dynamic by
nature, and ideally neural networks, encoding the knowledge about the world should also be based on more explicit
time-conditioned representation and learning mechanisms.
However, most currently available deep learning (DL) architectures are inherently static and do not systematically
integrate time-dimension into the learning process. As a
result, such model architectures often cannot reliably, accurately and on time learn many salient time-conditioned
characteristics of complex interdependent systems, resulting
in outdated decisions and requiring frequent model updates.
In turn, in the last few years we observe an increasing interest to integrate deep neural network architectures with
persistent homology representations of the learned objects,
typically in a form of some topological layer in DL (Hofer
et al., 2019; Carrière et al., 2020; Carlsson & Gabrielsson,
2020). Such persistent homology representations allow us to
extract and learn descriptors of the object shape. (By shape
here we broadly understand data characteristics that are invariant under continuous transformations such as bending,
stretching, and compressing.) Such interest in combining
persistent homology representations with DL is explained
by the complementary multi-scale information topological
descriptors deliver about the underlying objects, and higher
robustness of these salient object characterisations to perturbations.
Here we take the first step toward merging the two directions. To enhance DL with the most salient time-conditioned
topological information, we introduce the concept of zigzag
persistence into time-aware DL. Building on the fundamental results on quiver representations, zigzag persistence studies properties of topological spaces which are connected
via inclusions going in both directions (Carlsson & Silva,
2010; Tausz & Carlsson, 2011; Carlsson, 2019). Such generalization of ordinary persistent homology allows us to
track topological properties of time-conditioned objects by
extracting salient time-aware topological features through
time-ordered inclusions. We propose to summarize the
extracted time-aware persistence in a form of zigzag persistence images and then to integrate the resulting information
as a learnable time-aware zigzag layer into GCN.

