Disambiguation of Weak Supervision leading to Exponential Convergence rates

Vivien Cabannes 1 Francis Bach 1 Alessandro Rudi 1

Abstract
Machine learning approached through supervised
learning requires expensive annotation of data.
This motivates weakly supervised learning, where
data are annotated with incomplete yet discriminative information. In this paper, we focus on partial
labelling, an instance of weak supervision where,
from a given input, we are given a set of potential
targets. We review a disambiguation principle to
recover full supervision from weak supervision,
and propose an empirical disambiguation algorithm. We prove exponential convergence rates
of our algorithm under classical learnability assumptions, and we illustrate the usefulness of our
method on practical examples.

1. Introduction
In many applications of machine learning, such as recommender systems, where an input 𝑥 characterizing a user
should be matched with a target 𝑦 representing an ordering
of a large number 𝑚 of items, accessing fully supervised
data (𝑥, 𝑦) is not an option. Instead, one should expect weak
information on the target 𝑦, which could be a list of previously taken (if items are online courses), watched (if items
are plays), etc., items by a user characterized by the feature
vector 𝑥. This motivates weakly supervised learning, aiming
at learning a mapping from inputs to targets in such a setting
where tools from supervised learning can not be applied
off-the-shelves.
Recent applications of weakly supervised learning showcase impressive results in solving complex tasks such as
action retrieval on instructional videos (Miech et al., 2019),
image semantic segmentation (Papandreou et al., 2015),
salient object detection (Wang et al., 2017), 3D pose estimation (Dabral et al., 2018), text-to-speech synthesis (Jia et al.,
2018), to name a few. However, those applications of weakly
1 Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Au-

tomatique – Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure – PSL Research University. Correspondence to: Vivien
Cabannes <vivien.cabannes@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

supervised learning are usually based on clever heuristics,
and theoretical foundations of learning from weakly supervised data are scarce, especially when compared to statistical learning literature on supervised learning (Vapnik, 1995;
Boucheron et al., 2005; Steinwart & Christmann, 2008). We
aim to provide a step in this direction.
In this paper, we focus on partial labelling, a popular instance of weak supervision, approached with a structured
prediction point of view (Ciliberto et al., 2020). We detail
this setup in Section 2. Our contributions are organized as
follows.
• In Section 3, we introduce a disambiguation algorithm
to retrieve fully supervised samples from weakly supervised ones, before applying off-the-shelf supervised
learning algorithms to the completed dataset.
• In Section 4, we prove exponential convergence rates
of our algorithm, in term of the fully supervised excess
of risk, given classical learnability assumptions.
• In Section 5, we explain why disambiguation algorithms are intrinsically non-convex, and provide guidelines based on well-grounded heuristics to implement
our algorithm.
We end this paper with a review of literature in Section 6,
before showcasing the usefulness of our method on practical examples in Section 7, and opening on perspectives in
Section 8.

2. Disambiguation of Partial Labelling
In this section, we review the supervised learning setup,
introduce the partial labelling problem along with a principle
to tackle this instance of weak supervision.
Algorithms can be formalized as mapping an input 𝑥 to a
desired output 𝑦, respectively belonging to an input space X
and an output space Y. Machine learning consists in automating the design of the mapping 𝑓 : X → Y, based on
a joint distribution 𝜇 ∈ ΔX ×Y over input/output pairings
(𝑥, 𝑦) and a loss function ℓ : Y × Y → R, measuring the
error cost of outputting 𝑓 (𝑥) when one should have output
𝑦. The optimal mapping is defined as satisfying
𝑓 ∗ ∈ arg min E ( 𝑋,𝑌 )∼𝜇 [ℓ( 𝑓 (𝑋), 𝑌 )] .

(1)

𝑓 :X →Y

In supervised learning, it is assumed that one does not have

