The Impact of Record Linkage on Learning from Feature Partitioned Data

Richard Nock 1 Stephen Hardy 2 Wilko Henecka 2 Hamish Ivey-Law 3 Jakub Nabaglo 3 Giorgio Patrini 4
Guillaume Smith 2 Brian Thorne 5

Abstract

"when is a global trained model better ?"

There has been recently a significant boost to machine learning with distributed data, in particular
with the success of federated learning. A common and very challenging setting is that of vertical or feature partitioned data, when multiple
data providers hold different features about common entities. In general, training needs to be preceded by record linkage (RL), a step that finds the
correspondence between the observations of the
datasets. RL is prone to mistakes in the real world.
Despite the importance of the problem, there has
been so far no formal assessment of the way in
which RL errors impact learning models. Work
in the area either use heuristics or assume that the
optimal RL is known in advance. In this paper,
we provide the first assessment of the problem
for supervised learning. For wide sets of losses,
we provide technical conditions under which the
classifier learned after noisy RL converges (with
the data size) to the best classifier that would be
learned from mistake-free RL. This yields new
insights on the way the pipeline RL + ML operates, from the role of large margin classification
on dampening the impact of RL mistakes to clues
on how to further optimize RL as a preprocessing
step to ML. Experiments on a large UCI benchmark validate those formal observations.

In the context of learning from distributed data, approaches
can be segmented in terms of (a) whether the data is vertically or horizontally partitioned and (b) the family of models
being learned. The majority of previous work on (secure)
distributed learning considers a horizontal data partitioning in which data providers record the same features for
different entities or observations, yet real-world cases now
abound where the distribution of data rather fits to the vertical partition (or feature partitioned data) setting (Gu et al.,
2020a). In this case, data providers record different features
for the same entities / observations. This setting is more
challenging than the horizontal one (Gascón et al., 2017),
since it requires finding the correspondence between rows
across providers to create examples that span all features,
and this needs to be done before learning. The broad family
of related techniques are called Record Linkage (RL, or entity matching, entity resolution, Christen (2012)). Error-free
record linkage is often not available in the real-world for
two main reasons. Firstly, unintentional noise may affect
the quality of the linkage. Case studies report that exact
matching can be very damaging when identifiers are not stable and error-prone: 25% of true matches would have been
missed by exact matching in a census operation (Schnell,
2013; Winkler, 2009). The second reason is privacy: altering records with calibrated noise is a way to achieve specific
privacy requirements (Christen, 2016; Kairouz et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen a very steep increase of the
use of Machine Learning (ML) in the context of Federated Learning (Kairouz et al., 2021), a setting characterized
by decentralized data over peers or clients and privacy constraints for training. Experimental and theoretical challenges
abound, some of which are relevant beyond the privacy
realm of federated learning. One such problem is:
1
Google Research (Brain team) 2 Ambiata 3 The Australian National University 4 Sensity 5 HardByte. Correspondence to: Richard
Nock <richardnock@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While linking vertically partitioned data provides more features that should ultimately result in better ML models,
mistakes during record linkage can impair data and thereby
negatively affect ML models. Precisely quantifying the impact of record linkage on ML models is a non-trivial and
important open problem (Kairouz et al., 2021, Section 3),
all the more as RL algorithms now abound (Christophides
et al., 2020): abstracting and understanding their impact at
a high level on the RL + ML pipeline is crucial. Existing
approaches are either heuristic (Kang et al., 2020) or make
the assumption that the solution to RL is known a priori
(Gascón et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2020a;b), which would often
be violated in the real world (Hernández & Stolfo, 1998).
Our formal contribution provides a detailed coverage of
this problem for linear models, that are a key component to
federated learning (Gu et al., 2020a). Figure 1 presents a

