REPAINT: Knowledge Transfer in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yunzhe Tao 1 Sahika Genc 1 Jonathan Chung 1 Tao Sun 1 Sunil Mallya 1

Abstract
Accelerating learning processes for complex tasks
by leveraging previously learned tasks has been
one of the most challenging problems in reinforcement learning, especially when the similarity between source and target tasks is low. This work
proposes REPresentation And INstance Transfer (REPAINT) algorithm for knowledge transfer
in deep reinforcement learning. REPAINT not
only transfers the representation of a pre-trained
teacher policy in the on-policy learning, but also
uses an advantage-based experience selection approach to transfer useful samples collected following the teacher policy in the off-policy learning. Our experimental results on several benchmark tasks show that REPAINT significantly reduces the total training time in generic cases of
task similarity. In particular, when the source
tasks are dissimilar to, or sub-tasks of, the target tasks, REPAINT outperforms other baselines
in both training-time reduction and asymptotic
performance of return scores.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep reinforcement learning (RL)
has become more ubiquitous in solving sequential decisionmaking problems for many real-world applications, such
as game playing (OpenAI et al., 2019; Silver et al., 2016),
robotics (Kober et al., 2013; OpenAI et al., 2018), and autonomous driving (Sallab et al., 2017). However, most RL
methods train an agent from scratch, typically requiring a
huge amount of time and computing resources. Accelerating the learning processes for complex tasks has been one
of the most challenging problems in RL (Kaelbling et al.,
1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018). The computational cost of
learning grows as the task complexity increases in the realworld applications. Therefore, it is desirable for a learning
algorithm to leverage knowledge acquired in one task to
1

AI Labs, Amazon Web Services, Seattle, WA 98121, USA.
Correspondence to: Yunzhe Tao <yunzhe.tao@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

improve performance on other tasks.
Transfer learning has achieved significant success in computer vision, natural language processing, and other knowledge engineering areas (Pan & Yang, 2009). In transfer
learning, the source (teacher) and target (student) tasks are
not necessarily drawn from the same distribution (Taylor
et al., 2008a). The unseen target task may be a simple task
which is similar to the previously trained tasks, or a complex task with traits borrowed from significantly different
source tasks. Despite the prevalence of direct weight transfer, knowledge transfer from pre-trained agents for RL tasks
has not been gaining much attention until recently (Barreto
et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2018; Schmitt et al., 2018; Lazaric,
2012; Taylor & Stone, 2009). However, many transfer RL
algorithms are designed to select similar tasks or samples
from a set of source tasks, or learn representations of source
tasks. Hence they perform well only when the target tasks
are similar to the source tasks, but are usually not helpful
when the task similarity is low or the target tasks are much
more complex than the source tasks.
In this work, we propose an algorithm, i.e., REPresentation
And INstance Transfer (REPAINT), to address the aforementioned problem. The algorithm introduces an off-policy
instance transfer learning and combines it with an on-policy
representation transfer. The main contributions of this paper
are as follows. (1) We develop an advantage-based experience selection approach in the off-policy instance transfer,
which helps improve the sample efficiency by only transferring the useful instances. (2) The REPAINT algorithm is
simple to implement and can be naturally extended to any
policy gradient-based RL algorithms. In addition, we also
provide two variants of REPAINT for actor-critic RL and an
extension to Q-learning. (3) We clarify that our REPAINT
algorithm exploits the (semantic) relatedness between the
source samples and target tasks, instead of the task/sample
similarities that most transfer RL methods exploit. (4) On
several transfer learning tasks, we empirically demonstrate
that REPAINT significantly reduces the training time needed
to achieve certain performance level in generic cases of task
similarity. Moreover, when the source tasks are dissimilar
to, or sub-tasks of, complex target tasks, REPAINT greatly
outperforms other baseline methods in both training-time
reduction and asymptotic return scores.

