SiameseXML: Siamese Networks meet Extreme Classifiers with 100M Labels
Kunal Dahiya 1 Ananye Agarwal 1 Deepak Saini 2 Gururaj K 3 Jian Jiao 3 Amit Singh 3 Sumeet Agarwal 1
Purushottam Kar 4 2 Manik Varma 2 1

Abstract
Deep extreme multi-label learning (XML) requires training deep architectures that can tag
a data point with its most relevant subset of labels from an extremely large label set. XML
applications such as ad and product recommendation involve labels rarely seen during training
but which nevertheless hold the key to recommendations that delight users. Effective utilization of label metadata and high quality predictions for rare labels at the scale of millions of
labels are thus key challenges in contemporary
XML research. To address these, this paper develops the SiameseXML framework based on a
novel probabilistic model that naturally motivates
a modular approach melding Siamese architectures with high-capacity extreme classifiers, and
a training pipeline that effortlessly scales to tasks
with 100 million labels. SiameseXML offers predictions 2–13% more accurate than leading XML
methods on public benchmark datasets, as well
as in live A/B tests on the Bing search engine,
it offers significant gains in click-through-rates,
coverage, revenue and other online metrics over
state-of-the-art techniques currently in production. Code for SiameseXML is available at https:
//github.com/Extreme-classification/siamesexml

1. Introduction
Overview: Extreme Multi-label Learning (XML) involves
tagging a data point with its most relevant subset of labels
from an extremely large set. XML finds applications in myriad of ranking and recommendation tasks such as productto-product (Mittal et al., 2021a), product-to-query (Chang
et al., 2020a), query-to-product (Medini et al., 2019), queryto-bid-phrase (Dahiya et al., 2021), etc. Applications where
data points are endowed with short (3-10 tokens) textual
1
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi 2 Microsoft Research
Microsoft 4 Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur. Correspondence to: Kunal Dahiya <kunalsdahiya@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

descriptions e.g., product title, search query are known as
short-text applications. These accurately model the ranking
and recommendation tasks mentioned above and have attracted much attention recently (Chang et al., 2020a; Dahiya
et al., 2021; Medini et al., 2019; Mittal et al., 2021a).
XML with Label Metadata: Recent works such as (Mittal
et al., 2021a) have demonstrated that for applications where
labels (e.g., related items, bid-phrases) are also endowed
with textual descriptions, the use of such label metadata is
beneficial in accurately predicting rare labels for which very
little training data (often < 5 training points) is available
and hence, training data alone may not inform the classifier
model adequately. This is in sharp contrast with XML works
e.g., (Babbar & Schölkopf, 2019; Prabhu et al., 2018b; You
et al., 2019) that treat labels as identifiers devoid of descriptive features. Other forms of label metadata such as label
hierarchies could also be used but this paper focuses on
label text as a readily available form of label metadata.
Beyond Siamese Architectures: The presence of textual
descriptions on both data-point and label sides invites the
application of Siamese models (Chen et al., 2020; Schroff
et al., 2015; Yeh et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2020) that use
a shared architecture to embed both data-points and labels
such that related data-points and labels are embedded in
close proximity. However existing works on Siamese models focus largely on zero-shot cases i.e. predicting hitherto
unseen labels. While zero-shot cases present an important
use-case in several applications, an equally critical use-case
in ranking and recommendation scenarios is that of few-shot
labels which are indeed seen during training but perhaps
rarely. Note that the prediction problem for few-shot labels can be turned into a classification problem rather than
a mere retrieval problem. This presents opportunities for
models beyond those that are purely Siamese.
Contributions: This paper presents the SiameseXML
framework that generalizes existing Siamese models in fewshot scenarios by melding Siamese architectures with perlabel extreme classifiers at the scale of 100 million labels.
The SiameseXML framework is a) based on a novel probabilistic model that naturally motivates a modular approach
melding Siamese networks with extreme classifiers and b)
offers generalization bounds for its Siamese module that
are independent of the number of labels L based on a novel

