Data-driven Prediction of General Hamiltonian Dynamics
via Learning Exactly-Symplectic Maps

Renyi Chen 1 Molei Tao 1

Abstract

We consider the learning and prediction of nonlinear time series generated by a latent symplectic
map. A special case is (not necessarily separable) Hamiltonian systems, whose solution flows
give such symplectic maps. For this special case,
both generic approaches based on learning the
vector field of the latent ODE and specialized approaches based on learning the Hamiltonian that
generates the vector field exist. Our method, however, is different as it does not rely on the vector
field nor assume its existence; instead, it directly
learns the symplectic evolution map in discrete
time. Moreover, we do so by representing the
symplectic map via a generating function, which
we approximate by a neural network (hence the
name GFNN). This way, our approximation of
the evolution map is always exactly symplectic.
This additional geometric structure allows the local prediction error at each step to accumulate
in a controlled fashion, and we will prove, under reasonable assumptions, that the global prediction error grows at most linearly with long
prediction time, which significantly improves an
otherwise exponential growth. In addition, as a
map-based and thus purely data-driven method,
GFNN avoids two additional sources of inaccuracies common in vector-field based approaches,
namely the error in approximating the vector field
by finite difference of the data, and the error in
numerical integration of the vector field for making predictions. Numerical experiments further
demonstrate our claims.

1
School of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Molei Tao
<mtao@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Given a collection of sequences, each being a multidimensional time series produced by the same latent mechanism,
we consider learning this mechanism and predicting a sequence’s future evolution. More precisely, suppose there is
an unknown (possibly highly nonlinear) map φ that evolves
any initial condition in discrete time i according to
xi+1 = φ(xi ).
Provided with training data {xi,j }, where each j ∈ [M ]
corresponds to such a sequence (i ∈ {0, . . . , Nj }), we’d
like to learn φ purely from the data, or more precisely an
approximation of its image φ̃(x) ≈ φ(x) for any x in the
problem domain. This way, one can for example perform
continuation of existing sequences via x̃i+1,j = φ̃(x̃i,j ) for
i ≥ Nj and x̃Nj ,j = xNj ,j , or predict a sequence evolved
from a new initial condition via yi+1 = φ̃(yi ) for i > 0.
This task of course appears in many contexts (see e.g.,
Sec.1.1). This article considers a very specific one, for
which the latent map φ is assumed to be symplectic: for simplicity we will work with finite dim. vector spaces equipped
with canonical symplectic structure, which means each x
can be written as x = [p, q] where p, q ∈ Rd , and the
Jacobian of φ satisfies
(φ0 )T Jφ0 = J,

0 I
where J =
is a 2d-by-2d matrix with 0 and I
−I 0
being d-by-d blocks.


The consideration of symplectic evolution maps is largely
motivated by the learning and prediction of mechanical behaviors, which recently attracted significant attention (see
Sec.1.1 3rd paragraph). More precisely, if the latent evolution mechanism is provided by a Hamiltonian mechanical
system, each time series is given by a solution to the Hamiltonian ODE system sampled at discretized time points. That
is, xi = [pi , qi ], pi = p(ih), qi = q(ih), with
ṗ(t) = −

∂H
∂H
(p(t), q(t)), q̇(t) =
(p(t), q(t)), (1)
∂q
∂p

where H(·, ·) is the latent Hamiltonian function and h > 0
is the sampling time step. In this case, the latent φ we’re

