A Framework for Private Matrix Analysis in Sliding Window Model
Jalaj Upadhyay * 1 Sarvagya Upadhyay * 2

Abstract
We perform a rigorous study of private matrix
analysis when only the last W updates to matrices are considered useful for analysis. We show
the existing framework in the non-private setting
is not robust to noise required for privacy. We then
propose a framework robust to noise and use it to
give first efficient o(W ) space differentially private algorithms for spectral approximation, principal component analysis (PCA), multi-response
linear regression, sparse PCA, and non-negative
PCA. Prior to our work, no such result was known
for sparse and non-negative differentially private
PCA even in the static data setting. We also give
a lower bound to demonstrate the cost of privacy.

1. Introduction
Matrix analysis manifests itself in many walks of life such
as financial transactions, recommendation system, social
networks, machine learning, and learning kernels. In the recent past, there has been a paradigm shift in matrix analysis
in the era of big data. Two aspects that have become increasingly important are (i) protecting sensitive information and
(ii) the increasing frequency with which data is being continuously updated. An example that illustrates the importance
of these two aspects arises in several investment strategies in
a financial firm. The strategies rely on matrix analysis (such
as principal component analysis) of financial data that get
continuously updated. Most of these strategies make use of
“recent data" as opposed to the entire history. This heuristic
is rooted in the empirical observation that recent data are
better predictors of the future behavior of assets than older
data (Moore et al., 2013; Tsay, 2005), a theme also found in
many other applications of matrix analysis (Campos et al.,
2014; Quadrana et al., 2018).
Moreover, the strategies are sensitive and have to be kept
private. It is well documented that performing statistical
*
Equal contribution 1 Apple, USA (work done when the author
was between jobs). 2 Fujitsu Research of America, USA. Correspondence to: Jalaj Upadhyay <jalaj@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

analysis, including matrix analysis, accurately can leak private information (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2006). As a result, privacy preserving algorithms for matrix analysis with
robust privacy guarantees such as differential privacy are
known (Amin et al., 2019; Blum et al., 2005; Dwork et al.,
2014; Kapralov & Talwar, 2013; McSherry & Mironov,
2009; Hardt & Price, 2014; Hardt & Roth, 2012; Upadhyay,
2018)). However, these algorithms are not amenable to the
scenario where a collection of the most recent updates on
data is pertinent for analysis. In contrast, the current practical deployment of private algorithms (Erlingsson et al.,
2014; Thakurta et al., 2017) favors using only recent data
for a variety of reasons.
In view of this, we focus on a rigorous and comprehensive
study of privacy-preserving matrix analysis in the sliding
window model of privacy (Bolot et al., 2013; Chan et al.,
2012; Upadhyay, 2019). The model is parameterized by
the window size W , and assumes that the data arrive in the
form of (possibly infinite) stream over time. An analyst is
required to perform the analysis only on the W most recent
streams of data (usually referred to as a sliding window)
using o(W ) space. On the other hand, privacy is guaranteed
for the entire historical data, i.e., even if the data is not in
the current window, its privacy should not be compromised.
We give o(W ) space differentially private algorithms for several matrix analysis problems in the sliding window model
(see, Table 1). Here and henceforth, o(W ) will ignore other
factors such as matrix dimensions and privacy parameters.
A brief overview of our main contributions are as follows
(and annotate each of the points below with the corresponding appendix in the supplementary material).
1. (Limitations of known framework and algorithm).
We show that existing framework of spectral histogram
used in the non-private setting (Braverman et al., 2020)
is too stringent for privacy and algorithms in that framework are not robust to perturbation required for privacy.
We show rigorously that the strict constraint imposed
by spectral histogram only permits sub-optimal accurate private algorithms (Appendix B). That is, adding
appropriately scaled noise to the algorithm of (Braverman et al., 2020) does not suffice. This warrants a
robust framework for private matrix analysis.

