“Hey, that’s not an ODE”: Faster ODE Adjoints via Seminorms
Patrick Kidger 1 2 Ricky T. Q. Chen 3 4 Terry Lyons 1 2

Abstract
Neural differential equations may be trained
by backpropagating gradients via the adjoint
method, which is another differential equation
typically solved using an adaptive-step-size
numerical differential equation solver.
A
proposed step is accepted if its error, relative
to some norm, is sufficiently small; else it is
rejected, the step is shrunk, and the process
is repeated. Here, we demonstrate that the
particular structure of the adjoint equations
makes the usual choices of norm (such as L2 )
unnecessarily stringent. By replacing it with a
more appropriate (semi)norm, fewer steps are
unnecessarily rejected and the backpropagation
is made faster.
This requires only minor
code modifications. Experiments on a wide
range of tasks—including time series, generative
modeling, and physical control—demonstrate a
median improvement of 40% fewer function
evaluations. On some problems we see as much
as 62% fewer function evaluations, so that the
overall training time is roughly halved.

1. Introduction
We begin by recalling the usual set-up for neural
differential equations.
1.1. Neural ordinary differential equations
The general approach of neural ordinary differential
equations (E, 2017; Chen et al., 2018) is to use ODEs
as a learnable component of a differentiable framework.
Typically the goal is to approximate a map x 7→ y by
learning functions `1 ( · , φ), `2 ( · , ψ) and f ( · , · , θ), which
1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom 2 The Alan Turing Institute, The British
Library, London, United Kingdom 3 University of Toronto
4
The Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Patrick Kidger
<kidger@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

are composed such that
z(τ ) = `1 (x, φ),
Z t
z(t) = z(τ ) +
f (s, z(s), θ) ds
τ

y ≈ `2 (z(T ), ψ).

(1)

The variables φ, θ, ψ denote learnable parameters and the
ODE is solved over the interval [τ, T ]. We include the
(often linear) maps `1 ( · , φ), `2 ( · , ψ) for generality, as in
many contexts they are important for the expressiveness
of the model (Dupont et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020),
though our contributions will be focused around the ODE
component and will not depend on these maps.
Here we will consider neural differential equations that
may be interpreted as a neural ODE.
1.2. Applications
Neural differential equations have, to the best of our
knowledge, three main applications:
1. Time series modeling. Rubanova et al. (2019)
interleave Neural ODEs with RNNs to produce
ODEs with jumps.
Kidger et al. (2020) take
f (t, z, θ) = g(z, θ) dX
(t),
dependent on some timedt
varying input X, to produce a neural controlled
differential equation.
2. Continuous Normalising Flows as in Chen et al.
(2018); Grathwohl et al. (2019), in which the overall
model acts as coupling or transformation between
probability distributions,
3. Modeling or controlling physical environments, for
which a differential equation based model may be
explicitly desired, see for example Zhong et al. (2020).
1.3. Adjoint equations
The integral in equation (1) may be backpropagated
through either by backpropagating through the internal
operations of a numerical solver, or by solving the
backwards-in-time adjoint equations with respect to some

