Effcient Deviation Types and Learning for Hindsight Rationality in
Extensive-Form Games
Dustin Morrill 1 Ryan D’Orazio 2 Marc Lanctot 3 James R. Wright 1 Michael Bowling 1 3 Amy R. Greenwald 4

Abstract
Hindsight rationality is an approach to playing
general-sum games that prescribes no-regret learning dynamics for individual agents with respect
to a set of deviations, and further describes jointly
rational behavior among multiple agents with
mediated equilibria. To develop hindsight rational learning in sequential decision-making settings, we formalize behavioral deviations as a
general class of deviations that respect the structure of extensive-form games. Integrating the
idea of time selection into counterfactual regret
minimization (CFR), we introduce the extensiveform regret minimization (EFR) algorithm that
achieves hindsight rationality for any given set
of behavioral deviations with computation that
scales closely with the complexity of the set. We
identify behavioral deviation subsets, the partial
sequence deviation types, that subsume previously
studied types and lead to effcient EFR instances
in games with moderate lengths. In addition, we
present a thorough empirical analysis of EFR instantiated with different deviation types in benchmark games, where we fnd that stronger types
typically induce better performance.

1. Introduction
We seek more effective algorithms for playing multi-player,
general-sum extensive-form games (EFGs). The hindsight
rationality framework (Morrill et al., 2021) suggests a game
playing approach that prescribes no-regret dynamics and
describes jointly rational behavior with mediated equilibria (Aumann, 1974). Rationality within this framework is
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta;
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
2
DIRO, Université de Montr´eal; Mila, Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada
3
DeepMind 4 Computer Science Department, Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island, United States. Correspondence to:
Dustin Morrill <morrill@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

measured by regret in hindsight relative to strategy transformations, also called deviations, rather than as prospective
optimality with respect to beliefs. Each deviation transforms
the learner’s behavior into a competitor that the learner must
surpass, so a richer set of deviations pushes the learner to
perform better.
While larger deviation sets containing more sophisticated
deviations produce stronger competitors, they also tend to
raise computational and storage requirements. For example,
there is one external deviation (constant strategy transformation) for each strategy in a set of n, but there are n2 internal
deviations (Foster & Vohra, 1999) that transform one particular strategy into another, and the latter is fundamentally
stronger. Though even achieving hindsight rationality with
respect to external deviations appears intractable because
the number of strategies in an EFG grows exponentially
with the size of the game.
The counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich
et al., 2007) algorithm makes use of the EFG structure to be
effciently hindsight rational for external deviations. Modifcations to CFR by Celli et al. (2020) and Morrill et al. (2021)
are effciently hindsight rational for other types of deviations
as well. We generalize these algorithms as extensive-form
regret minimization (EFR), a simple and extensible algorithm that is hindsight rational for any given deviation set
where each deviation can be decomposed into action transformations at each decision point. It is generally intractable
to run EFR with all such behavioral deviations so we identify four subsets that lead to effcient EFR instantiations that
are hindsight rational for all previously studied tractable
deviation types (external, causal (Forges & von Stengel,
2002; von Stengel & Forges, 2008; Gordon et al., 2008;
Dudı́k & Gordon, 2009; Farina et al., 2020a), action (von
Stengel & Forges, 2008; Morrill et al., 2021), and counterfactual (Morrill et al., 2021)) simultaneously. We provide
EFR instantiations and sublinear regret bounds for each of
these new partial sequence deviation types.
We present a thorough empirical analysis of EFR’s performance with different deviation types in benchmark games
from OpenSpiel (Lanctot et al., 2019). Stronger deviation
types typically lead to better performance, and EFR with
the strongest type of partial sequence deviation often per-

