Principled Simplicial Neural Networks for Trajectory Prediction

T. Mitchell Roddenberry * 1 Nicholas Glaze * 1 Santiago Segarra 1

Abstract
We consider the construction of neural network
architectures for data on simplicial complexes. In
studying maps on the chain complex of a simplicial complex, we defne three desirable properties of a simplicial neural network architecture: namely, permutation equivariance, orientation equivariance, and simplicial awareness. The
frst two properties respectively account for the
fact that the indexing and orientations of simplices
in a simplicial complex are arbitrary. The last
property requires the output of the neural network
to depend on the entire simplicial complex and
not on a subset of its dimensions. Based on these
properties, we propose a simple convolutional architecture, rooted in tools from algebraic topology,
for the problem of trajectory prediction, and show
that it obeys all three of these properties when
an odd, nonlinear activation function is used. We
then demonstrate the effectiveness of this architecture in extrapolating trajectories on synthetic
and real datasets, with particular emphasis on the
gains in generalizability to unseen trajectories.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks have shown great promise in combining the representational power of neural networks with
the structure imparted by a graph. In essence, graph neural
networks compute a sequence of node representations by
aggregating information at each node from its neighbors and
itself, then applying a nonlinear transformation. Using variations on this approach, many architectures have exhibited
state-of-the-art performance in tasks including node classifcation (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018), link prediction (Zhang
& Chen, 2018), and graph classifcation (Hamilton et al.,
2017). Indeed, the strength of graph neural networks lies
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: TMR <mitch@rice.edu>, NG <nkg2@rice.edu>, SS
<segarra@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

in their ability to incorporate arbitrary pairwise relational
structures in their computations.
However, not all data is adequately expressed in terms of
pairwise relationships, nor is it strictly supported on the
nodes of a graph. Interactions in a social network, for instance, do not solely occur in a pairwise fashion but also
among larger groups of people. This warrants a higher-order
model in order to represent rich and complex datasets. One
such higher-order model is the (abstract) simplicial complex,
which describes relational structures that are closed under
restriction: if three people are all friends together, then each
pair of people in that group are also friends. We can understand data supported on simplicial complexes using tools
from algebraic topology (Hatcher, 2002; Carlsson, 2009;
Ghrist, 2014); in particular, we can analyze data supported
on the edges and higher-order structures using the spectrum
of certain linear operators on the simplicial complex. This
is analogous to the use of spectral graph theory (Chung,
1997) to understand the smoothness of data supported on
the nodes of a graph (Shuman et al., 2013).
1.1. Contribution
We study the extension of graph convolutional network architectures to process data supported on simplicial complexes. After establishing appropriate operators for such
data in Section 3, our frst contribution is to defne in Section 4 a notion of admissibility, in terms of three reasonable
properties that we require of neural networks for simplicial
complexes. We then focus on the problem of trajectory
prediction over a simplicial complex, proposing a simple
convolutional neural architecture in Section 5, which we design with admissibility in mind. In particular, we show that
the activation functions of the proposed architecture must
be odd and nonlinear in order to satisfy our requirements
for admissibility. We empirically illustrate how admissibility yields better generalizability to unseen trajectories in
Section 6.

2. Related work
2.1. Graph Neural Networks
Graph neural networks extend the success of convolutional
neural networks for Euclidean data to the graph domain,

