Elastic Graph Neural Networks

Xiaorui Liu 1 * Wei Jin 1 * Yao Ma 1 Yaxin Li 1 Hua Liu 2 Yiqi Wang 1 Ming Yan 3 Jiliang Tang 1

Abstract

architecture design has been motivated from spectral domain (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Defferrard et al., 2016) and
spatial domain (Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al.,
2017; Scarselli et al., 2008; Gilmer et al., 2017). Recent
study (Ma et al., 2020) has proven that the message passing
schemes in numerous popular GNNs, such as GCN, GAT,
PPNP, and APPNP, intrinsically perform the `2 -based graph
smoothing to the graph signal, and they can be considered
as solving the graph signal denoising problem:

While many existing graph neural networks
(GNNs) have been proven to perform `2 -based
graph smoothing that enforces smoothness globally, in this work we aim to further enhance the local smoothness adaptivity of GNNs via `1 -based
graph smoothing. As a result, we introduce a
family of GNNs (Elastic GNNs) based on `1 and
`2 -based graph smoothing. In particular, we propose a novel and general message passing scheme
into GNNs. This message passing algorithm is not
only friendly to back-propagation training but also
achieves the desired smoothing properties with a
theoretical convergence guarantee. Experiments
on semi-supervised learning tasks demonstrate
that the proposed Elastic GNNs obtain better adaptivity on benchmark datasets and are significantly
robust to graph adversarial attacks. The implementation of Elastic GNNs is available at https:
//github.com/lxiaorui/ElasticGNN.

arg min L(F) := kF − Xin k2F + λ tr(F> LF),

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) generalize traditional deep
neural networks (DNNs) from regular grids, such as image,
video, and text, to irregular data such as social networks,
transportation networks, and biological networks, which are
typically denoted as graphs (Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf
& Welling, 2016). One popular such generalization is the
neural message passing framework (Gilmer et al., 2017):
(k)

x(k+1)
= UPDATE(k) x(k)
u
u , mN (u)



(2)

F

(1)

(k)

where xu ∈ Rd denotes the feature vector of node u in
(k)
k-th iteration of message passing and mN (u) is the message aggregated from u’s neighborhood N (u). The specific
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, USA 2 School of Mathematics, Shandong University, China 3 Department of Computational
Mathematics, Science and Engineering, Michigan State University,
USA. Correspondence to: Xiaorui Liu <xiaorui@msu.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where Xin ∈ Rn×d is the input signal and L ∈ Rn×n is the
graph Laplacian matrix encoding the graph structure. The
first term guides F to be close to input signal Xin , while the
second term enforces global smoothness to the filtered signal F. The resulted message passing schemes can be derived
by different optimization solvers, and they typically entail
the aggregation of node features from neighboring nodes,
which intuitively coincides with the cluster or consistency
assumption that neighboring nodes should be similar (Zhu
& Ghahramani; Zhou et al., 2004). While existing GNNs
are prominently driven by `2 -based graph smoothing, `2 based methods enforce smoothness globally and the level
of smoothness is usually shared across the whole graph.
However, the level of smoothness over different regions of
the graph can be different. For instance, node features or labels can change significantly between clusters but smoothly
within the cluster (Zhu, 2005). Therefore, it is desired to
enhance the local smoothness adaptivity of GNNs.
Motivated by the idea of trend filtering (Kim et al., 2009;
Tibshirani et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016), we aim to achieve
the goal via `1 -based graph smoothing. Intuitively, compared with `2 -based methods, `1 -based methods penalize
large values less and thus preserve discontinuity or nonsmooth signal better. Theoretically, `1 -based methods tend
to promote signal sparsity to trade for discontinuity (Rudin
et al., 1992; Tibshirani et al., 2005; Sharpnack et al., 2012).
Owning to these advantages, trend filtering (Tibshirani et al.,
2014) and graph trend filter (Wang et al., 2016; Varma et al.,
2019) demonstrate that `1 -based graph smoothing can adapt
to inhomogenous level of smoothness of signals and yield
estimators with k-th order piecewise polynomial functions,
such as piecewise constant, linear and quadratic functions,
depending on the order of the graph difference operator.

