Understanding Noise Injection in GANs

Ruili Feng 1 Deli Zhao 2 Zheng-Jun Zha † 1

Abstract
Noise injection is an effective way of circumventing overfitting and enhancing generalization in
machine learning, the rationale of which has been
validated in deep learning as well. Recently, noise
injection exhibits surprising effectiveness when
generating high-fidelity images in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (e.g. StyleGAN). Despite its successful applications in GANs, the
mechanism of its validity is still unclear. In this
paper, we propose a geometric framework to theoretically analyze the role of noise injection in
GANs. First, we point out the existence of the adversarial dimension trap inherent in GANs, which
leads to the difficulty of learning a proper generator. Second, we successfully model the noise
injection framework with exponential maps based
on Riemannian geometry. Guided by our theories,
we propose a general geometric realization for
noise injection. Under our novel framework, the
simple noise injection used in StyleGAN reduces
to the Euclidean case. The goal of our work is to
make theoretical steps towards understanding the
underlying mechanism of state-of-the-art GAN algorithms. Experiments on image generation and
GAN inversion validate our theory in practice.

1. Introduction
Noise injection is usually applied as regularization to cope
with overfitting or facilitate generalization in neural networks (Bishop, 1995; An, 1996). The effectiveness of this
simple technique has also been proved in various tasks in
deep learning, such as learning deep architectures (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014; Noh et al., 2017),
defending adversarial attacks (He et al., 2019), facilitating stability of differentiable architecture search with reinforcement learning (Liu et al., 2019; Chu et al., 2020), and

quantizing neural networks (Baskin et al., 2018). In recent
years, noise injection1 has attracted more and more attention in the community of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014a). Extensive research
shows that it helps stabilize the training procedure (Arjovsky
& Bottou, 2017; Jenni & Favaro, 2019) and generate images
of high fidelity (Karras et al., 2019a;b; Brock et al., 2018).
Particularly, noise injection in StyleGAN (Karras et al.,
2019a;b) has shown the amazing capability of helping generate sharp details in images (see Fig. 1 for illustration),
shedding new light on obtaining high-quality photo-realistic
results using GANs. In other domains like variants of variational auto-encoder (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Child, 2020),
noise injection technique also contributes to the appealing
synthesis quality. Therefore, studying the underlying principle of noise injection in GANs is an important theoretical
work of understanding GAN algorithms.
In this paper, we propose a theoretical framework to explain
and improve the effectiveness of noise injection in GANs.
Our contributions are listed as follows:
• we uncover an intrinsic defect of GAN models that the
expressive power of generator is limited by the rank
of its Jacobian matrix, and the rank of Jacobian matrix
is monotonically (but not strictly) decreasing as the
network gets deeper.
• We prove that noise injection is an effective weapon to
enhance the expressive power of generators for GANs.
• Based on our theory, we propose a generalized form via
exponential maps for noise injection in GANs, which
can overcome the adversarial dimension trap. Experiments on the state-of-the-art GAN, StyleGAN2 (Karras
et al., 2019b), validate the effectiveness of our geometric model.

† Corresponding author. 1 University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 2 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Ruili Feng <ruilifengustc@gmail.com>, Deli Zhao
<zhaodeli@gmail.com>, Zhen-Jun Zha <zhazj@ustc.edu.cn>.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
theoretically draws the geometric picture of noise injection
in GANs, and uncover the intrinsic defect of the expressive
power of generators.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
It suffices to note that noise injection here is totally different
from adversarial attacks raised in (Goodfellow et al., 2014b).

