Causality-aware counterfactual confounding adjustment as an alternative to
linear residualization in anticausal prediction tasks based on linear learners

Elias Chaibub Neto 1

Abstract
Linear residualization is a common practice for
confounding adjustment in machine learning applications. Recently, causality-aware predictive
modeling has been proposed as an alternative
causality-inspired approach for adjusting for confounders. In this paper, we compare the linear
residualization approach against the causalityaware confounding adjustment in anticausal prediction tasks. Our comparisons include both the
settings where the training and test sets come from
the same distributions, as well as, when the training and test sets are shifted due to selection biases.
In the absence of dataset shifts, we show that
the causality-aware approach tends to (asymptotically) outperform the residualization adjustment
in terms of predictive performance in linear learners. Importantly, our results still holds even when
the true model generating the data is not linear.
We illustrate our results in both regression and
classification tasks. Furthermore, in the presence
of dataset shifts in the joint distribution of the
confounders and outcome variables, we show that
the causality-aware approach is more stable than
linear residualization.

1. Introduction
Linear residualization is a common technique for confounding adjustment in applied machine learning (ML) work. The
basic idea is to regress the input data on the observed confounders and use the residuals of the regression fits as the
new inputs for ML algorithms. The technique is widely
used in applied fields such as social sciences, bioinformatics/genomics, neuroimaging, and others. For instance, as
pointed by Snoek et al. (2019), linear residualization is perhaps the most common confounding adjustment approach
1

Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, United States. Correspondence to:
Elias Chaibub Neto <elias.chaibub.neto@sagebase.org>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

in neuroimage studies1 .
In this paper, we focus on anticausal prediction tasks
(Schölkopf et al., 2012), namely, ML tasks where the output variable has a causal influence on the inputs, and we
provide a “head-to-head” comparison between the ad hoc
linear residualization technique against the recently proposed causality-aware adjustment (Chaibub Neto, 2020) which is implemented by regressing each input on both the
confounders and output, and then generating counterfactual
inputs by adding back the estimated residuals to a linear
predictor that no longer includes the confounder variables.
The new counterfactual inputs are then used as the inputs
for the ML algorithm.
We focus on anticausal prediction tasks because, from
a causality perspective, the residualization procedure
performs the wrong adjustment in this setting. By
failing to include the outcome variable as a covariate in the regression models, the residualization approach removes not only the direct causal influence
of the confounders from the inputs, but also the indirect influences that are mediated by the outcome variable. In a sense, it goes too far and removes too much.
For example, consider
(a)
(b)
the toy model in Figure
A γY A
A γY A
γXA
1a, where X, Y , and A



Xc o γ
X o γ
Y
Y
represent, respectively,
XY
XY
an input, the outcome,
Figure 1. Anticausal prediction
and a confounder varitask.
able, and γXA , γY A , and
γXY , represent the causal effects among these variables.
We see that by regressing X on A alone the residualized
input Xr = X − ωA is obtained by removing the total
effect ω = γXA + γXY γY A of A from X, whereas by regressing X on both A and Y the causality-aware input,
Xc = γXY Y + WX = X − γXA A is obtained by remov1

Examples of works that either apply, discuss, or evaluate
linear residualization in neuroimage studies include Abdulkadir
et al (2014), Dubois et al (2017) Dukart et al (2011), Kostro et
al (2014), Rao et al (2017), Todd et al (2013), Greenstein et al
(2012), Doan et al (2017), Friston et al (1994), and Maglanoc et al
(2020). Also, note that the term “linear residualization” is similarly
denoted as “confounding regression”, “image correction”, or as
“regressing out” confounding effects in this applied literature.

