CARTL: Cooperative Adversarially-Robust Transfer Learning

Dian Chen 1 Hongxin Hu 2 Qian Wang 1 Yinli Li 1 Cong Wang 3 Chao Shen 4 Qi Li 5

Abstract
Transfer learning eases the burden of training a
well-performed model from scratch, especially
when training data is scarce and computation
power is limited. In deep learning, a typical strategy for transfer learning is to freeze the early layers of a pre-trained model and fine-tune the rest
of its layers on the target domain. Previous work
focuses on the accuracy of the transferred model
but neglects the transfer of adversarial robustness.
In this work, we first show that transfer learning
improves the accuracy on the target domain but
degrades the inherited robustness of the target
model. To address such a problem, we propose
a novel cooperative adversarially-robust transfer
learning (CARTL) by pre-training the model via
feature distance minimization and fine-tuning the
pre-trained model with non-expansive fine-tuning
for target domain tasks. Empirical results show
that CARTL improves the inherited robustness by
about 28% at most compared with the baseline
with the same degree of accuracy. Furthermore,
we study the relationship between the batch normalization (BN) layers and the robustness in the
context of transfer learning, and we reveal that
freezing BN layers can further boost the robustness transfer.

1. Introduction
The immense progress of deep neural networks (DNNs)
leads interactions with machines to a new era. In many
fields, DNNs achieve high performance, even better than
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, Hubei, China 2 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
HK SAR, China 4 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, Shanxi, China 5 Institute for
Network Sciences and Cyberspace & BNRist, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China. Correspondence to: Qian Wang <qianwang@whu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

humans. However, training such a model requires a welldesigned network architecture, massive high-quality training
data, and extensive computational resources. Obviously, it
is impractical for small-scale scenarios due to limited GPUs
or insufficient training datasets.
When further implementing DNNs, we are facing more
problems. Numerous research efforts have revealed the brittle robustness of DNNs, which hinders their applications in
many security-critical scenarios. Previous work on adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Papernot et al., 2016a;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Kurakin et al., 2017) demonstrated that DNNs can be deceived
when given the input with a carefully-crafted perturbation.
To solve this problem, adversarial training (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018; Kannan et al., 2018) has
been considered as a promising defensive approach for improving the adversarial robustness of DNNs. The key idea
of these approaches is to generate adversarial examples during model training and add them to training datasets. An
extra computational burden, however, is introduced to the
model training process.
Regarding the above prerequisites of model training,
prior work (Pan & Yang, 2010; Bengio, 2012; Yosinski
et al., 2014) proposed transfer learning to obtain highperformance DNN models with significantly reduced efforts.
It can greatly ease the burden in the (adversarially) training
process, especially for those with limited capabilities. Thus,
it has been considered as a promising machine learning as
a service (MLaaS) technique in the industry (Liakhovich
& Mbemba, 2017; Li & Li, 2018). The idea of transfer
learning is similar to the knowledge transfer in the human
world, where the knowledge obtained from the source domain is applied to the target domain for improving model
performance. For DNNs, the “knowledge” is included in
the weights of models. We call the model trained on the
source domain the source model and the one for the target
domain the target model (Utrera et al., 2021).
So far, most research efforts have mainly been devoted to
improving the accuracy of the target model (Kornblith et al.,
2019; Utrera et al., 2021; Salman et al., 2020), but neglecting its robustness. The most recent work from Shafahi
et al. (2020) discussed how the robustness transfers in transfer learning and pointed out that the target model can in-

