Unsupervised Skill Discovery with Bottleneck Option Learning

Jaekyeom Kim * 1 Seohong Park * 1 Gunhee Kim 1

Abstract
Having the ability to acquire inherent skills from
environments without any external rewards or supervision like humans is an important problem.
We propose a novel unsupervised skill discovery method named Information Bottleneck Option
Learning (IBOL). On top of the linearization of
environments that promotes more various and distant state transitions, IBOL enables the discovery of diverse skills. It provides the abstraction
of the skills learned with the information bottleneck framework for the options with improved
stability and encouraged disentanglement. We
empirically demonstrate that IBOL outperforms
multiple state-of-the-art unsupervised skill discovery methods on the information-theoretic evaluations and downstream tasks in MuJoCo environments, including Ant, HalfCheetah, Hopper
and D’Kitty. Our code is available at https:
//vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/ibol.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has recently shown great
advancement in solving various tasks, from playing video
games (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Berner et al., 2019) to controlling robot navigation (Kahn et al., 2018). While the
standard RL is to maximize rewards from environments as
a form of supervision, there has been a surge of interest
in unsupervised learning without the assumption of extrinsic rewards (Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; Shyam et al., 2019).
Discovering inherent skills in environments without supervision is important and desirable for multiple reasons. First,
since it is still challenging to define an effective reward
function for practical tasks (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017;
Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019), unsupervised skill discovery
helps reduce the burden of it by identifying effective skills
for environments. Second, in sparse-reward environments,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea. Correspondence to: Gunhee Kim <gunhee@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learned skills can encourage the exploration for encountering rewards, not only by providing useful primitives for the
exploration but also by reducing the effective horizon. Third,
those skills can be directly used to solve downstream tasks,
for example, by employing a meta-controller on top of the
discovered skills in a hierarchical manner (Achiam et al.,
2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020b). Finally,
discovered skills could help better understand environments
by providing interpretable sets of behaviors.
Unsupervised skill discovery can be formalized with the
options framework (Sutton et al., 1999), which generalizes
primitive actions with the notion of options. For ease of
learning, options, or synonymously skills, are often formulated by introducing a skill latent parameter z to an ordinary
policy, resulting in a skill policy with a form of π(a|s, z)
keeping the same z for multiple steps or the full episode
horizon (Gregor et al., 2016; Achiam et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020b). In recent research
on the unsupervised skill discovery problem, informationtheoretic approaches have been prevalent (Gregor et al.,
2016; Achiam et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma
et al., 2020b).
In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised skill discovery method named Information Bottleneck Option Learning
(IBOL), whose two major novelties over existing approaches
are (i) the linearizer and (ii) the information bottleneckbased skill learning. First, the linearizer is a kind of lowlevel policy to be suitable for skill discovery by converting
a given environment into one with simplified dynamics. It
reduces the skill discovery algorithm’s burden to learn how
to make transitions to diverse states in a given environment
without any external rewards, which is not a straightforward job with fairly complex dynamics such as Ant and
Humanoid from MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). Once the
linearizer is trained, it can be reused for multiple training
sessions with different skill discovery approaches. Figure 1
compares the qualitative visualization of the skills learned
by different methods in the locomotion (i.e. x-y) plane, in
Ant. As shown, DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019), VALOR
(Achiam et al., 2018) and DADS (Sharma et al., 2020b) with
the linearizer (with suffix ‘-L’) learn far more diverse skills
than the same methods without the linearizer.
Leveraging the environment simplified with the linearizer,

