A Precise Performance Analysis of Support Vector Regression

Houssem Sifaou 1 Abla Kammoun 1 Mohamed-Slim Alouini 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the hard and soft support
vector regression techniques applied to a set of n
linear measurements of the form yi = β T? xi + ni
n
where β ? is an unknown vector, {xi }i=1 are the
n
feature vectors and {ni }i=1 model the noise. Particularly, under some plausible assumptions on the
statistical distribution of the data, we characterize the feasibility condition for the hard support
vector regression in the regime of high dimensions and, when feasible, derive an asymptotic
approximation for its risk. Similarly, we study
the test risk for the soft support vector regression
as a function of its parameters. Our results are
then used to optimally tune the parameters intervening in the design of hard and soft support
vector regression algorithms. Based on our analysis, we illustrate that adding more samples may
be harmful to the test performance of support vector regression, while it is always beneficial when
the parameters are optimally selected. Such a result reminds a similar phenomenon observed in
modern learning architectures according to which
optimally tuned architectures present a decreasing
test performance curve with respect to the number
of samples.

1. Introduction
Motivation. Recent works have demonstrated that the test
performance of modern learning architectures exhibits both
model-wise and sample-wise double descent phenomena
that defy conventional statistical intuition. Model-wise
descent, reported in recent works (Belkin et al., 2019a;c;
Geiger et al., 2019), suggests that, for very large architectures, performance improves with the number of parameters,
thus contradicting the bias-variance trade-off. On the other
hand, sample-wise descent, discussed recently in the works
1

Computer, Electrical, and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Houssem
Sifaou <houssem.sifaou@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of Nakkiran et al. (Nakkiran et al., 2020a;b) indicates that
more data may harm the performance. One potential solution to avoid such a behavior consists in optimally tuning
the involved parameters. In doing so, the test performance
in most scenarios decreases with the number of samples.
In this paper, we investigate the sample-wise double descent
phenomenon for basic linear models. More precisely, we
assume independent data samples (xi , yi ), i = 1, · · · , n
distributed as:
yi = β T? xi + σni ,
where xi ∈ Rp is the feature vector assumed to have zero
mean and covariance Ip , yi represent the scalar response
variables while σni stands for zero-mean noise with variance σ 2 . To estimate β ? , we consider support vector regression techniques: hard-support vector regression (H-SVR),
which estimates the regression vector β with minimum `2
norm that satisfies the constraints yi = β T xi up to a maximum error , and soft-support regression (S-SVR) which
uses a regularization constant C that aims to create a tradeoff between the minimization of the training error and the
minimization of the model complexity. SVR has been extesively used in several applications that vary from biomedical
analysis (Hamdi et al., 2018) to financial time series (Ju
et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2009; Qu & Zhang) and weather
forecasting (Guajardo et al., 2006).
We study the performance of H-SVR and S-SVR when
the number of features p and the sample size n grow simultaneously large such that np → δ with δ > 0 and the
norm of kβ ? k converges to β. One major outcome of the
present work is to recover interesting behaviors observed
in large-scale machine learning architectures. Particularly,
we show numerically that the double descent behavior appears only when the H-SVR or S-SVR parameters are not
properly tuned. Such a behavior reminds the recent findings
in (Nakkiran et al., 2020b) that suggest that unregularized
models often suffer from the sample-wise double descent
phenomenon, while optimally tuned models usually present
a monotonic risk with respect to the number of samples.
Contributions. This paper investigates the test risk behavior as a function of the sample size for H-SVR and S-SVR
techniques. Contrary to least squares regression, which involves explicit form expressions for the solution, H-SVR
and S-SVR require solving convex-optimization problems,

