Lottery Ticket Preserves Weight Correlation: Is it Desirable or Not?

Ning Liu 1 * Geng Yuan 2 * Zhengping Che 3 Xuan Shen 2 Xiaolong Ma 2 Qing Jin 2 Jian Ren 4 Jian Tang 1 †
Sijia Liu 5 Yanzhi Wang 2 †

Abstract
In deep model compression, the recent finding
“Lottery Ticket Hypothesis” (LTH) (Frankle &
Carbin, 2018) pointed out that there could exist a winning ticket (i.e., a properly pruned subnetwork together with original weight initialization) that can achieve competitive performance
than the original dense network. However, it is not
easy to observe such winning property in many
scenarios, where for example, a relatively large
learning rate is used even if it benefits training
the original dense model. In this work, we investigate the underlying condition and rationale
behind the winning property, and find that the underlying reason is largely attributed to the correlation between initialized weights and final-trained
weights when the learning rate is not sufficiently
large. Thus, the existence of winning property
is correlated with an insufficient DNN pretraining, and is unlikely to occur for a well-trained
DNN. To overcome this limitation, we propose
the “pruning & fine-tuning” method that consistently outperforms lottery ticket sparse training
under the same pruning algorithm and the same
total training epochs. Extensive experiments over
multiple deep models (VGG, ResNet, MobileNetv2) on different datasets have been conducted to
justify our proposals.

1. Introduction
Weight pruning has been widely studied and utilized to
effectively remove the redundant weights in the overparameterized deep neural networks (DNNs) while maintaining the accuracy performance (Han et al., 2015a; 2016;
Wen et al., 2016; He et al., 2017; Min et al., 2018; He et al.,
2019; Dai et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020; He et al., 2020). The
*

1
Equal contribution.
Midea Group, Beijing, China
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 3 Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China 4 Snap Inc., CA, USA 5 Michigan State University, MI,
USA. † Corresponding author.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

typical pruning pipeline has three main stages: 1) train an
over-parameterized DNN, 2) prune the unimportant weights
in the original DNN, and 3) fine-tune the pruned DNN to
restore accuracy.
Many works have been proposed to investigate the behaviors
on weight pruning (Tanaka et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020;
Renda et al., 2020; Malach et al., 2020). The Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) reveals that,
inside a dense network with randomly initialized weights,
a small sparse subnetwork, when trained in isolation using
the identical initial weights, can reach a similar accuracy
as the dense network. Such a sparse subnetwork with the
initial weights is called the winning ticket.
For a more rigorous definition, let f (x; θ0 ) be a given
network initialization, where θ0 ∼ Dθ denotes the initial weights. We then formalize pre-training, pruning and
sparse training below. Pre-training: The network is trained
for T epochs arriving at weights θT and network function
f (x; θT ). Pruning: Based on the pretrained weights θT ,
adopt certain pruning algorithm to generate a sparse mask
|θ|
m ∈ {0, 1} . Sparse Training: The LTH paper considers
two cases of sparse training. The first (“winning ticket”) is
the direct application of mask m to initial weights θ0 , resulting in weights θ0 m and network function f (x; θ0 m).
The second (random reinitialization) is the application of
mask m to a random initialization of weights θ00 ∼ Dθ , resulting in weights θ00 m and network function f (x; θ00 m).
The winning property has two aspects ¬-­ for identification: ¬ Training f (x; θ0 m) for T epochs (or fewer) will
result in similar accuracy as that of the dense pre-trained
network f (x; θT ). ­ There should be a notable accuracy
gap between training f (x; θ0 m) for T epochs and training
f (x; θ00 m), and the former shall be higher.
In the standard LTH setup (Frankle & Carbin, 2018), the
winning property can be observed in the case of low learning
rate via the simple iterative magnitude pruning algorithm,
but fails to occur at higher initial learning rates especially
in deeper neural networks. For instance, the LTH work
identifies the winning tickets on the CIFAR-10 dataset for
the CONV-2/4/6 architectures (the down-scaled variants
of VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014)), with the initial
learning rate as low as 0.0001. For deeper networks such as

