Estimation and Quantization of Expected Persistence Diagrams

Vincent Divol * 1 Théo Lacombe * 1

Abstract
Persistence diagrams (PDs) are the most common descriptors used to encode the topology of
structured data appearing in challenging learning tasks; think e.g. of graphs, time series or
point clouds sampled close to a manifold. Given
random objects and the corresponding distribution of PDs, one may want to build a statistical summary—such as a mean—of these random
PDs, which is however not a trivial task as the
natural geometry of the space of PDs is not linear. In this article, we study two such summaries,
the Expected Persistence Diagram (EPD), and its
quantization. The EPD is a measure supported
on R2 , which may be approximated by its empirical counterpart. We prove that this estimator
is optimal from a minimax standpoint on a large
class of models with a parametric rate of convergence. The empirical EPD is simple and efficient
to compute, but possibly has a very large support, hindering its use in practice. To overcome
this issue, we propose an algorithm to compute
a quantization of the empirical EPD, a measure
with small support which is shown to approximate with near-optimal rates a quantization of the
theoretical EPD.

1. Introduction
Topological data analysis (TDA) is a modern field in data
science which has found a variety of succesful domains
of application such as material science (Saadatfar et al.,
2017; Buchet et al., 2018), cellular data (Cámara, 2017),
social graph classification (Zhao & Wang, 2019; Carrière
et al., 2020), shape analysis (Li et al., 2014; Carrière et al.,
2015) to name a few. It provides a machinery to encode the
topological properties (such as the presence of connected
components, loops, cavities, etc.) of a structured object in a
*

Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France. Correspondence to: Vincent Divol <vincent.divol@inria.fr>, Théo
Lacombe <theo.lacombe@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

multi-scale fashion. Relying on persistent homology theory
(Edelsbrunner et al., 2000; Zomorodian & Carlsson, 2005;
Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010), its main output is a descriptor
called
a persistence diagram (PD): it is a discrete measure
P
δ
i∈I xi (roughly, a set of points) supported on the open
half-plane Ω = {(t1 , t2 ) ∈ R2 , t2 > t1 }, where each point
xi of the PD accounts in a quantitative way for the presence
of a topological feature in a given object. The space of PDs,
D, is equipped with an optimal partial transport metric
OTp , where 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞, which shares similarities with
the so-called Wasserstein metric Wp used in the optimal
transport literature (Villani, 2008; Santambrogio, 2015).
Statistics with PDs. In applications, one is generally led to
consider a sample of several PDs, say µ1 , . . . , µn , encoding
the topology of some underlying phenomenon generating
the different observations. Assuming that these PDs are
sampled i.i.d. according to some underlying distribution P ,
it is natural to search for some characteristic quantities to
describe P . As the space of PDs (D, OTp ) is not a vector
space, but only a metric space, even building elementary
statistics is a difficult task. For instance, approximating
Fréchet means (a.k.a. barycenters) of a sample of PDs with
respect to OTp metrics requires to develop specific techniques (Turner et al., 2014; Lacombe et al., 2018; Vidal
et al., 2019), while their exact computation is intractable.
An alternative is to embed the PDs in a Hilbert or Banach
space, using explicit vectorizations (Bubenik, 2015; Adams
et al., 2017) or implicit through kernel methods (Reininghaus et al., 2015; Carrière et al., 2017), then using standard
statistical and learning tools. However, such embeddings
do not preserve the metric structure of the space of PDs
(Bubenik & Wagner, 2020; Wagner, 2021) nor the interpretability of PDs. In comparison, the expected persistence
diagram (EPD) E(P ) of a distribution P of PDs lies in a
natural metric extension of the space of PDs while its empirical counterpart can be computed faithfully. Originally
introduced in (Divol & Chazal, 2019), the EPD is a measure
on Ω which associates to each set A ⊂ Ω the expected number of points which belongs to A in the random diagrams
µ ∼ P . The properties of this object were studied in (Divol
& Chazal, 2019; Divol & Lacombe, 2020).
Contributions. We consider the situation where one has
access to a n-sample of PDs µ1 , . . . , µn following some
(unknown) law P . A natural way to estimate the EPD of P

