Distribution-Free Calibration Guarantees for Histogram Binning
without Sample Splitting

Chirag Gupta 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1

Abstract
We prove calibration guarantees for the popular histogram binning (also called uniform-mass
binning) method of Zadrozny and Elkan (2001).
Histogram binning has displayed strong practical performance, but theoretical guarantees have
only been shown for sample split versions that
avoid ‘double dipping’ the data. We demonstrate
that the statistical cost of sample splitting is practically significant on a credit default dataset. We
then prove calibration guarantees for the original method that double dips the data, using a certain Markov property of order statistics. Based
on our results, we make practical recommendations for choosing the number of bins in histogram binning. In our illustrative simulations,
we propose a new tool for assessing calibration—
validity plots—which provide more information
than an ECE estimate.

1. Introduction
In classification, the goal is to learn a model that uses observed feature measurements to make a class prediction on
the categorical outcome. However, for safety-critical areas such as medicine and finance, a single class prediction
might be insufficient and reliable measures of confidence
or certainty may be desired. Such uncertainty quantification is often provided by predictors that produce not just a
class label, but a probability distribution over the labels. If
the predicted probability distribution is consistent with observed empirical frequencies of labels, the predictor is said
to be calibrated (Dawid, 1982).
In this paper we study the problem of calibration for binary classification; let X and Y “ t0, 1u denote the feature
and label spaces. We focus on the recalibration or posthoc calibration setting, a standard statistical setting where
1

Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Chirag
Gupta <chiragg@cmu.edu>.

the goal is to recalibrate existing (‘pre-learnt’) classifiers
that are powerful and (statistically) efficient for classification accuracy, but do not satisfy calibration properties
out-of-the-box. This setup is popular for recalibrating pretrained deep nets. For example, Guo et al. (2017, Figure
4) demonstrated that a pre-learnt ResNet is initially miscalibrated, but can be effectively post-hoc calibrated. In
the case of binary classification, the pre-learnt model can
be an arbitrary predictor function that provides a classification ‘score’ g P G, where G is the space of all measurable functions from X Ñ r0, 1s. Along with g, we
are given access to a calibration dataset of size n P N,
Dn “ tpXi , Yi quiPrns , drawn independently from a distribution P ” PX ˆ PY |X . The goal is to define a calibrator H : G ˆ pX ˆ r0, 1sqn Ñ G, that ‘recalibrates’ g to an
approximately calibrated predictor Hpg, Dn q (formally defined shortly). We denote Hpg, Dn q as h. All probabilities
in this paper are conditional on g and thus conditional on
the data on which g is learnt.
Let E r¨s denote the expectation operator associated with P ,
interpreted marginally or conditionally depending on the
context. The predictor h is said to be perfectly calibrated if
E rY | hpXqs “ hpXq (almost surely). While perfect calibration is impossible in finite samples, we desire a framework to make transparent claims about how close h is to being perfectly calibrated. The following notion proposed by
Gupta et al. (2020) defines a calibrator that provides probably approximate calibration for chosen levels of approximation ε P p0, 1q and failure α P p0, 1q. For brevity, we
skip the qualification ‘probably approximate’.
Definition 1 (Marginal calibration1 ). A calibrator H :
pg, Dn q ÞÑ h is said to be pε, αq-marginally calibrated if for
every predictor g P G and distribution P over X ˆ r0, 1s,
P p|E rY |hpXqs ´ hpXq| ď εq ě 1 ´ α.

The above probability is taken over both X and Dn
since h “ Hpg, Dn q contains the randomness of Dn .
The qualification marginal signifies that the inequality
|E rY | hpXqs ´ hpXq| ď ε may not hold conditioned on
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(1)

This definition is unrelated to that of Gneiting et al. (2007,
Definition 1c), where marginal calibration refers to an asymptotic
notion of calibration in the regression setting.

