Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Angelina Wang and Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University

Abstract
Mitigating bias in machine learning systems
requires reﬁning our understanding of bias
propagation pathways: from societal structures
to large-scale data to trained models to impact
on society. In this work, we focus on one aspect
of the problem, namely bias ampliﬁcation: the
tendency of models to amplify the biases present
in the data they are trained on. A metric for
measuring bias ampliﬁcation was introduced
in the seminal work by Zhao et al. (2017);
however, as we demonstrate, this metric suffers
from a number of shortcomings including
conﬂating different types of bias ampliﬁcation
and failing to account for varying base rates of
protected attributes. We introduce and analyze
a new, decoupled metric for measuring bias
ampliﬁcation, BiasAmp! (Directional Bias
Ampliﬁcation). We thoroughly analyze and
discuss both the technical assumptions and
normative implications of this metric. We
provide suggestions about its measurement by
cautioning against predicting sensitive attributes,
encouraging the use of conﬁdence intervals due
to ﬂuctuations in the fairness of models across
runs, and discussing the limitations of what
this metric captures. Throughout this paper,
we work to provide an interrogative look at the
technical measurement of bias ampliﬁcation,
guided by our normative ideas of what we want
it to encompass. Code is located at https:
//github.com/princetonvisualai/
directional-bias-amp.

1. Introduction
The machine learning community is becoming increasingly
cognizant of problems surrounding fairness and bias, and
.
Correspondence to:
gelina.wang@princeton.edu>.

Angelina

Wang

<an-

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

correspondingly, a plethora of new algorithms and metrics
are being proposed (see e.g., Mehrabi et al. (2019) for a survey). The analytic gatekeepers of the systems often take the
form of fairness evaluation metrics, and it is vital that these
be deeply investigated both technically and normatively. In
this paper, we endeavor to do this for bias ampliﬁcation.
Bias ampliﬁcation occurs when a model exacerbates biases
from the training data at test time. It is the result of the
algorithm (Foulds et al., 2018), and unlike some other forms
of bias, cannot be solely attributed to the dataset.
Directional bias ampliﬁcation metric. We propose a new
way of measuring bias ampliﬁcation, BiasAmp! (Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation),1 that builds off a prior metric
from “Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias
Ampliﬁcation using Corpus-level Constraints” (Zhao et al.,
2017), that we will call BiasAmpMALS . Our metric’s technical composition aligns with the real-world qualities we
want it to encompass, addressing a number of the previous
metric’s shortcomings by being able to: 1) focus on both
positive and negative correlations, 2) take into account the
base rates of each protected attribute, and most importantly
3) disentangle the directions of ampliﬁcation.
As an example, consider a visual dataset (Fig. 1) where
each image has a label for the task T , which is painting
or not painting, and further is associated with a protected
attribute A, which is woman or man.2 If the gender of
the person biases the prediction of the task, we consider
this A ! T bias ampliﬁcation; if the reverse happens, then
T ! A. Bias ampliﬁcation as it is currently being measured
merges together these two different paths which have different normative implications and therefore demand different
remedies. This speaks to a larger problem of imprecision
when discussing problems of bias (Blodgett et al., 2020).
For example, “gender bias” can be vague; it is unclear if the
system is assigning gender in a biased way, or if there is a
disparity in model performance between different genders.
Both are harmful in different ways, but the conﬂation of
1

The arrow is meant to signify the direction that bias ampliﬁcation is ﬂowing, and not intended to be a claim about causality.
2
We use the terms man and woman to refer to binarized sociallyperceived (frequently annotator-inferred) gender expression, recognizing these labels are not inclusive and may be inaccurate.

