Barlow Twins: Self-Supervised Learning via Redundancy Reduction

Jure Zbontar * 1 Li Jing * 1 Ishan Misra 1 Yann LeCun 1 2 Stéphane Deny 1

Abstract

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is rapidly closing
the gap with supervised methods on large computer vision benchmarks. A successful approach
to SSL is to learn embeddings which are invariant
to distortions of the input sample. However, a
recurring issue with this approach is the existence
of trivial constant solutions. Most current methods avoid such solutions by careful implementation details. We propose an objective function
that naturally avoids collapse by measuring the
cross-correlation matrix between the outputs of
two identical networks fed with distorted versions
of a sample, and making it as close to the identity
matrix as possible. This causes the embedding
vectors of distorted versions of a sample to be similar, while minimizing the redundancy between
the components of these vectors. The method is
called BARLOW T WINS, owing to neuroscientist
H. Barlow’s redundancy-reduction principle applied to a pair of identical networks. BARLOW
T WINS does not require large batches nor asymmetry between the network twins such as a predictor network, gradient stopping, or a moving
average on the weight updates. Intriguingly it benefits from very high-dimensional output vectors.
BARLOW T WINS outperforms previous methods
on ImageNet for semi-supervised classification in
the low-data regime, and is on par with current
state of the art for ImageNet classification with
a linear classifier head, and for transfer tasks of
classification and object detection.1

Figure 1. BARLOW T WINS’s objective function measures the crosscorrelation matrix between the embeddings of two identical networks fed with distorted versions of a batch of samples, and tries to
make this matrix close to the identity. This causes the embedding
vectors of distorted versions of a sample to be similar, while minimizing the redundancy between the components of these vectors.
BARLOW T WINS is competitive with state-of-the-art methods for
self-supervised learning while being conceptually simpler, naturally avoiding trivial constant (i.e. collapsed) embeddings, and
being robust to the training batch size.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning aims to learn useful representations of the input data without relying on human annotations. Recent advances in self-supervised learning for visual
data (Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a; Grill et al., 2020;
He et al., 2019; Misra & van der Maaten, 2019) show that
it is possible to learn self-supervised representations that
are competitive with supervised representations. A common
underlying theme that unites these methods is that they all
aim to learn representations that are invariant under different
distortions (also referred to as ‘data augmentations’). This
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research 2 New York
University, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Jure Zbontar <jzb@fb.com>, Li Jing <ljng@fb.com>, Ishan Misra
<imisra@fb.com>, Yann LeCun <yann@fb.com>, Stéphane
Deny <stephane.deny.pro@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code and pre-trained models (in PyTorch) are available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/barlowtwins

