Preferential Temporal Difference Learning

Nishanth Anand 1 2 Doina Precup 1 2 3

Abstract
Temporal-Difference (TD) learning is a general
and very useful tool for estimating the value function of a given policy, which in turn is required
to find good policies. Generally speaking, TD
learning updates states whenever they are visited.
When the agent lands in a state, its value can
be used to compute the TD-error, which is then
propagated to other states. However, it may be
interesting, when computing updates, to take into
account other information than whether a state is
visited or not. For example, some states might be
more important than others (such as states which
are frequently seen in a successful trajectory). Or,
some states might have unreliable value estimates
(for example, due to partial observability or lack
of data), making their values less desirable as targets. We propose an approach to re-weighting
states used in TD updates, both when they are the
input and when they provide the target for the update. We prove that our approach converges with
linear function approximation and illustrate its
desirable empirical behaviour compared to other
TD-style methods.

1. Introduction
The value function is a crucial quantity in reinforcement
learning (RL), summarizing the expected long-term return
from a state or a state-action pair. The agent uses this
knowledge to make informed action decisions. Temporal
Difference (TD) learning methods (Sutton, 1988) enable
updating the value function before the end of an agent’s
trajectory by contrasting its return predictions over consecutive time steps, i.e., computing the temporal difference error
(TD-error). State-of-the-art RL algorithms, e.g. Mnih et al.
(2015); Schulman et al. (2017) use this idea coupled with
function approximation.
1

Mila (Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute), Montreal,
Canada 2 School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 3 Deepmind, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Nishanth Anand <nishanth.anand@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

TD-learning can be viewed as a way to approximate dynamic programming algorithms in Markovian environments (Barnard, 1993). But, if the Markovian assumption
does not hold (as is the case when function approximation
is used to estimate the value function), its use can create
problems (Gordon, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018). To see
this, consider the situation depicted in Figure 1a, where an
agent starts in a fully observable state and chooses one of
two available actions. Each action leads to a different longterm outcome, but the agent navigates through aliased states
that are distinct but have the same representation before
observing the outcome. This setting poses two challenges:
1. Temporal credit assignment: The starting state and the
outcome state are temporally distant. Therefore, an efficient
mechanism is required to propagate the credit (or blame)
between them.
2. Partial observability: With function approximation, updating one state affects the value prediction at other states.
If the generalization is poor, TD-updates at partially observable states can introduce errors, which propagate to
estimates at fully observable states.
TD(λ) is a well known class of span independent algorithm (van Hasselt & Sutton, 2015) for temporal credit assignment introduced by Sutton (1988) and further developed
in many subsequent works, e.g. Singh & Sutton (1996); Seijen & Sutton (2014), which uses a recency heuristic: any
TD-error is attributed to preceding states with an exponentially decaying weight. However, recency can lead to inefficient propagation of credit (Aberdeen, 2004; Harutyunyan
et al., 2019). Generalized TD(λ) with a state-dependent λ
can tackle this problem (Sutton, 1995; Sutton et al., 1999;
2016; Yu et al., 2018). This approach mainly modifies the
target used in the update, not the extent to which any state
is updated. Besides, the update sequence may not converge.
Emphatic TD (Sutton et al., 2016) uses an independent interest function, not connected to the eligibility parameter,
in order to modulate how much states on a trajectory are
updated.
In this paper, we introduce and analyze a new algorithm:
Preferential Temporal Difference (Preferential TD or PTD)
learning, which uses a single state-dependent preference
function to emphasize the importance of a state both as an
input for the update, as well as a participant in the target. If

