Perceiver: General Perception with Iterative Attention

Andrew Jaegle 1 Felix Gimeno 1 Andrew Brock 1 Andrew Zisserman 1 Oriol Vinyals 1 Joao Carreira 1

Abstract
Biological systems perceive the world by simultaneously processing high-dimensional inputs from
modalities as diverse as vision, audition, touch,
proprioception, etc. The perception models used
in deep learning on the other hand are designed
for individual modalities, often relying on domainspecific assumptions such as the local grid structures exploited by virtually all existing vision
models. These priors introduce helpful inductive biases, but also lock models to individual
modalities. In this paper we introduce the Perceiver – a model that builds upon Transformers
and hence makes few architectural assumptions
about the relationship between its inputs, but that
also scales to hundreds of thousands of inputs,
like ConvNets. The model leverages an asymmetric attention mechanism to iteratively distill inputs
into a tight latent bottleneck, allowing it to scale
to handle very large inputs. We show that this
architecture is competitive with or outperforms
strong, specialized models on classification tasks
across various modalities: images, point clouds,
audio, video, and video+audio. The Perceiver
obtains performance comparable to ResNet-50
and ViT on ImageNet without 2D convolutions
by directly attending to 50,000 pixels. It is also
competitive in all modalities in AudioSet.

1. Introduction
Inductive biases such as spatial locality in early vision are
clearly valuable and are famous for drastically increasing
the efficiency of learning perceptual models. But, given the
increasing availability of large datasets, is the choice to bake
such biases into our models with hard architectural decision
the correct one? Or are we better off building in as much
flexibility as possible, and encouraging the data to speak for
itself (LeCun et al., 2015)?
1

DeepMind – London, UK. Correspondence to: Andrew Jaegle
<drewjaegle@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

One glaring issue with strong architectural priors is that they
are often modality-specific. For example, if we assume that
the input is a single image, we can use our knowledge of
its 2D grid structure and build an efficient architecture that
relies on 2D convolutional operations. But if we move to a
stereo pair, we must decide how to modify this structure to
jointly process the pixels from both sensors: should we use
an early or late fusion architecture (Karpathy et al., 2014)
or should we sum or concatenate features? If we move to
audio, then the merits of a 2D grid are no longer as clear,
and a different type of model, such as 1D convolutions
or an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Graves
et al., 2013), may be warranted instead. If we want to
process point clouds – a common concern for self-driving
cars equippped with Lidar sensors – then we can longer rely
on models that scale best for fixed, low-resolution grids. In
short, using standard tools, we are forced to redesign the
architecture we use every time the input changes.
In this paper we introduce the Perceiver, a model designed
to handle arbitrary configurations of different modalities
using a single Transformer-based architecture. Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are very flexible architectural
blocks that make few assumptions about their inputs, but
that also scale quadratically with the number of inputs, in
terms of both memory and computation. Recent work has
shown impressive performance using Transformers on images, but this work relies on the pixels’ grid structure to
reduce computational complexity, by first processing pixels using a 2D convolution (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2020), factorizing the image into columns and
rows (Ho et al., 2019; Child et al., 2019), or by aggressive
subsampling (Chen et al., 2020a). Instead, we propose a
mechanism that can handle high-dimensional inputs while
retaining the expressivity and flexibility needed to deal with
arbitrary input configurations.
Our core idea is to introduce a small set of latent units that
forms an attention bottleneck through which the inputs must
pass (Fig. 1). This eliminates the quadratic scaling problem
of all-to-all attention of a classical Transformer and decouples the network depth from the input’s size, allowing us
to construct very deep models. By attending to the inputs
iteratively, the Perceiver can channel its limited capacity to
the most relevant inputs, informed by previous steps. But
spatial or temporal information is crucial for many modali-

