Simultaneous Similarity-based Self-Distillation for Deep Metric Learning

Karsten Roth 1 2 Timo Milbich 2 Björn Ommer 2 Joseph Paul Cohen * 3 Marzyeh Ghassemi * 4 1

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) provides a crucial tool for visual similarity and zero-shot applications by learning generalizing embedding
spaces, although recent work in DML has shown
strong performance saturation across training objectives. However, generalization capacity is
known to scale with the embedding space dimensionality. Unfortunately, high dimensional embeddings also create higher retrieval cost for downstream applications. To remedy this, we propose
Simultaneous Similarity-based Self-distillation
(S2SD). S2SD extends DML with knowledge distillation from auxiliary, high-dimensional embedding and feature spaces to leverage complementary context during training while retaining testtime cost and with negligible changes to the training time. Experiments and ablations across different objectives and standard benchmarks show
S2SD offers notable improvements of up to 7%
in Recall@1, while also setting a new state-ofthe-art. Code available at https://github.
com/MLforHealth/S2SD.

1. Introduction
Deep Metric Learning (DML) aims to learn embedding
space models in which a predefined distance metric reflects
not only the semantic similarities between training samples,
but also transfers to unseen classes. The generalization capabilities of these models are important for applications in
image retrieval (Wu et al., 2017), face recognition (Schroff
et al., 2015), clustering (Bouchacourt et al., 2018) and representation learning (He et al., 2020). Still, transfer learning
into unknown test distributions remains an open problem,
with Roth et al. (2020b) and Musgrave et al. (2020) revealing strong performance saturation across DML training objectives. However, Roth et al. (2020b) also show
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Heidelberg University, IWR 3 Mila, Université de Montréal 4 MIT.
Correspondence to: Karsten Roth <karsten.rh1@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

that embedding space dimensionality can be a driver for
generalization across objectives due to higher representation capacity. Indeed, this insight can be linked to recent
work targeting other objective-independent improvements to
DML via artificial samples (Zheng et al., 2019), higher feature distribution moments (Jacob et al., 2019) or orthogonal
features (Milbich et al., 2020), which have shown promising relative improvements over selected DML objectives.
Unfortunately, these methods come at a cost; be it longer
training times or limited applicability. Similarly, drawbacks
can be found when naively increasing the operating (base)
dimensionality, incurring increased cost for data retrieval at
test time, which is especially problematic on larger datasets.
This limits realistically usable embedding dimensionalities
and leads to benchmarks being evaluated against fixed, predefined dimensionalities.
In this work, we propose Simultaneous Similarity-based
Self-Distillation (S2SD) to show that complex higherdimensional information can actually be effectively leveraged in DML without changing the base dimensionality
and test time cost, which we motivate from two key elements. Firstly, in DML, an additional embedding space
can be spanned by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) operating
over the feature representation shared with the base embedding space (see e.g. Milbich et al. (2020)). With larger
dimensionalities, we can thus cheaply learn a secondary
high-dimensional representation space simultaneously, also
denoted as target embedding space. Relative to the large
feature backbone, and with the batchsize capping the number of additional high dimensional operations, only little
additional training cost is introduced. While we can not
utilize the high-dimensional target embedding space at test
time for aforementioned reasons, we may utilize it to boost
the performance of the base embeddings.
Unfortunately, a simple connection of base and additional
target embedding spaces through the shared feature backbone is insufficient for the base representation space to
benefit from the auxiliary, high-dimensional information.
Thus, secondly, to efficiently leverage the high-dimensional
context, we use insights from knowledge distillation (Hinton
et al., 2015), where a small “student” model is trained to approximate a larger “teacher” model. However, while knowledge distillation can be found in DML (Chen et al., 2018),
few-shot learning (Tian et al., 2020) and self-supervised
extensions thereof (Rajasegaran et al., 2020), the reliance

