SinIR: Effcient General Image Manipulation with Single Image
Reconstruction
Jihyeong Yoo 1 Qifeng Chen 1

Abstract
We propose SinIR, an effcient reconstructionbased framework trained on a single natural image for general image manipulation, including
super-resolution, editing, harmonization, paint-toimage, photo-realistic style transfer, and artistic
style transfer. We train our model on a single image with cascaded multi-scale learning, where
each network at each scale is responsible for
image reconstruction. This reconstruction objective greatly reduces the complexity and running time of training, compared to the GAN objective. However, the reconstruction objective
also exacerbates the output quality. Therefore,
to solve this problem, we further utilize simple
random pixel shuffing, which also gives control over manipulation, inspired by the Denoising Autoencoder. With quantitative evaluation,
we show that SinIR has competitive performance
on various image manipulation tasks. Moreover,
with a much simpler training objective (i.e., reconstruction), SinIR is trained 33.5 times faster
than SinGAN (for 500 × 500 images) that solves
similar tasks. Our code is publicly available at
github.com/YooJiHyeong/SinIR.

1. Introduction
Researchers in image processing have increasing interests in
deep internal learning, which can solve image manipulation
problems by training a model on one single image and
not relying on a large-scale dataset. Training on a single
image is plausible as the statistics of a single image have
abundant information that can be used as a powerful prior
for solving various problems (Shaham et al., 2019). Internal
learning has long been employed in prior work even before
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay,
Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Qifeng Chen <cqf@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

deep learning became popular, proving internal approaches
can be successfully applied to several image manipulation
tasks (e.g., super-resolution (Glasner et al., 2009), editing
(He & Sun, 2012), dehazing (Bahat & Irani, 2016), texture
synthesis (Efros & Leung, 1999), and segmentation (Bagon
et al., 2008)).
Recently, several deep internal learning methods (Shocher
et al., 2018) are proposed and achieve remarkable performance that is comparable to that of external methods trained
on large-scale datasets. For example, they solve superresolution (Shocher et al., 2018; Ulyanov et al., 2018; BellKligler et al., 2019), restoration (Zhang et al., 2019b; Mastan & Raman, 2020), refection removal (Fan et al., 2019),
deblur (Ren et al., 2019), segmentation and dehazing (Gandelsman et al., 2019), denoising, and inpainting (Ulyanov
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019a) tasks. Utilizing Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
several approaches (Li & Wand, 2016; Jetchev et al., 2016;
Bergmann et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2018) solve texture generation from a single texture image. Expanding the capacity
of GANs, InGAN (Shocher et al., 2019) and DCIL (Mastan & Raman, 2020) solve retargeting with a single natural
image.
However, these methods have critical problems that prevent
the practical application of deep internal learning. First,
most of these methods are image-specifc in terms of manipulation, except for MGANs (Li & Wand, 2016). This means
that the trained models can only manipulate the training
images, and for other images, separate models have to be
trained. Second, most of these methods are task-specifc.
This means that the trained models can only perform one
specifc image manipulation. Although DIP (Ulyanov et al.,
2018), Double-DIP (Gandelsman et al., 2019), and DCIL
(Mastan & Raman, 2020) can solve several tasks, these models can only conduct one specifc manipulation at a time.
SinGAN (Shaham et al., 2019), one of the most recent works
in deep internal learning, was the frst to achieve general
image manipulation, where one trained model can solve
various problems, including super-resolution, editing, paintto-image, and harmonization. SinGAN learns unconditional
generation (i.e., mapping noise to images, not images to
images) and then uses the generative power for image ma-

