Near-optimal Algorithms for Explainable k-Medians and k-Means

Konstantin Makarychev * 1 Liren Shan * 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of explainable kmedians and k-means introduced by Dasgupta,
Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian (ICML 2020).
In this problem, our goal is to find a threshold decision tree that partitions data into k clusters and
minimizes the k-medians or k-means objective.
The obtained clustering is easy to interpret because every decision node of a threshold tree splits
data based on a single feature into two groups. We
propose a new algorithm for this problem which
is Õ(log k) competitive with k-medians with `1
norm and Õ(k) competitive with k-means. This
is an improvement over the previous guarantees
of O(k) and O(k 2 ) by Dasgupta et al (2020). We
3
also provide a new algorithm which is O(log /2 k)
competitive for k-medians with `2 norm. Our first
algorithm is near-optimal: Dasgupta et al (2020)
showed a lower bound of Ω(log k) for k-medians;
in this work, we prove a lower bound of Ω̃(k)
for k-means. We also provide a lower bound of
Ω(log k) for k-medians with `2 norm.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we investigate the problem of explainable
k-means and k-medians clustering which was recently introduced by Dasgupta, Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian
(2020). Suppose, we have a data set which we need to partition into k clusters. How can we do it? Of course, we
could use one of many standard algorithms for k-means or
k-medians clustering. However, we want to find an explainable clustering – clustering which can be easily understood
by a human being. Then, k-means or k-medians clustering
may not be the best options for us.
Note that though every cluster in a k-means and k-medians
clustering has a simple mathematical description, this de*
Equal contribution 1 Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Liren Shan <lirenshan2023@u.northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

scription is not necessarily easy to interpret for a human.
Every k-medians or k-means clustering is defined by a set
of k centers c1 , c2 , . . . , ck , where each cluster is the set of
points located closer to a fixed center ci than to any other
center cj . That is, for points in cluster i, we must have
arg minj kx − cj k = i. Thus, in order to determine to
which cluster a particular point belongs, we need to compute distances from point x to all centers cj . Each distance
depends on all coordinates of the points. Hence, for a human, it is not even easy to figure out to which cluster in
k-means or k-medians clustering a particular point belongs
to; let alone interpret the entire clustering.
In every day life, we are surrounded by different types
of classifications. Consider the following examples from
Wikipedia: (1) Performance cars are capable of going from
0 to 60 mph in under 5 seconds; (2) Modern sources currently define skyscrapers as being at least 100 metres or 150
metres in height; (3) Very-low-calorie diets are diets of 800
kcal or less energy intake per day, whereas low-calorie diets
are between 1000-1200 kcal per day. Note that all these
definitions depend on a single feature which makes them
easy to understand.
The above discussion leads us to the idea of Dasgupta et al.
(2020), who proposed to use threshold (decision) trees to
describe clusters (see also Liu, Xia, and Yu (2005), Fraiman,
Ghattas, and Svarc (2013), Bertsimas, Orfanoudaki, and
Wiberg (2018), and Saisubramanian, Galhotra, and Zilberstein (2020)).
A threshold tree is a binary classification tree with k leaves.
Every internal node u of the tree splits the data into two
sets by comparing a single feature iu of each data point
with a threshold θu . The first set is the set of points with
xiu ≤ θu ; the second set is the set of points with xiu > θu .
These two sets are then recursively partitioned by the left
and right children of u. Thus, each point x in the data set
is eventually assigned to one of k leaves of the threshold
tree T . This gives us a partitioning of the data set X into
clusters P = (P1 , . . . , Pk ). We note that threshold decision
trees are special cases of binary space partitioning (BSP)
trees and similar to k-d trees (Bentley, 1975).
Dasgupta et al. (2020) suggested that we measure the quality of a threshold tree using the standard k-means and kmedians objectives. Specifically, the k-medians in `1 cost

