Improved Contrastive Divergence Training of Energy-Based Models

Yilun Du 1 Shuang Li 1 Joshua Tenenbaum 1 Igor Mordatch 2

Abstract
Contrastive divergence is a popular method of
training energy-based models, but is known to
have difficulties with training stability. We propose an adaptation to improve contrastive divergence training by scrutinizing a gradient term that
is difficult to calculate and is often left out for
convenience. We show that this gradient term
is numerically significant and in practice is important to avoid training instabilities, while being
tractable to estimate. We further highlight how
data augmentation and multi-scale processing can
be used to improve model robustness and generation quality. Finally, we empirically evaluate stability of model architectures and show improved
performance on a host of benchmarks and use
cases,such as image generation, OOD detection,
and compositional generation.

1

Introduction

Energy-Based models (EBMs) have received an influx of
interest recently and have been applied to realistic image
generation (Han et al., 2019; Du & Mordatch, 2019), 3D
shapes synthesis (Xie et al., 2018b) , out of distribution
and adversarial robustness (Lee et al., 2018; Du & Mordatch, 2019; Grathwohl et al., 2019), compositional generation (Hinton, 1999; Du et al., 2020a), memory modeling
(Bartunov et al., 2019), text generation (Deng et al., 2020),
video generation (Xie et al., 2017), reinforcement learning
(Haarnoja et al., 2017; Du et al., 2019), continual learning
(Li et al., 2020), protein design and folding (Ingraham et al.;
Du et al., 2020b) and biologically-plausible training (Scellier & Bengio, 2017). Contrastive divergence is a popular
and elegant procedure for training EBMs proposed by (Hinton, 2002) which lowers the energy of the training data and
raises the energy of the sampled confabulations generated
by the model. The model confabulations are generated via
an MCMC process (commonly Gibbs sampling or Langevin
1

MIT CSAIL 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Yilun Du
<yilundu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: (Left) 128x128 samples on unconditional CelebA-HQ.
(Right) 128x128 samples on unconditional LSUN Bedroom.
dynamics), leveraging the extensive body of research on
sampling and stochastic optimization. The appeal of contrastive divergence is its simplicity and extensibility. It does
not require training additional auxiliary networks (Kim &
Bengio, 2016; Dai et al., 2019) (which introduce additional
tuning and balancing demands), and can be used to compose
models zero-shot.
Despite these advantages, training EBMs with contrastive
divergence has been challenging due to training instabilities.
Ensuring training stability required either combinations of
spectral normalization and Langevin dynamics gradient clipping (Du & Mordatch, 2019), parameter tuning (Grathwohl
et al., 2019), early stopping of MCMC chains (Nijkamp
et al., 2019b), or avoiding the use of modern deep learning
components, such as self-attention or layer normalization
(Du & Mordatch, 2019). These requirements limit modeling
power, prevent the compatibility with modern deep learning
architectures, and prevent long-running training procedures
required for scaling to larger datasets. With this work, we
aim to maintain the simplicity and advantages of contrastive
divergence training, while resolving stability issues and incorporating complementary deep learning advances.
An often overlooked detail of contrastive divergence formulation is that changes to the energy function change the
MCMC samples, which introduces an additional gradient
term in the objective function (see Section 2.1 for details).
This term was claimed to be empirically negligible in the
original formulation and is typically ignored (Hinton, 2002;
Liu & Wang, 2017) or estimated via high-variance likelihood ratio approaches (Ruiz & Titsias, 2019). We show that
this term can be efficiently estimated for continuous data via
a combination of auto-differentiation and nearest-neighbor
entropy estimators. We also empirically show that this term
contributes significantly to the overall training gradient and
has the effect of stabilizing training. It enables inclusion
of self-attention blocks into network architectures, removes
the need for capacity-limiting spectral normalization, and

