Differentiable Sorting Networks for Scalable Sorting and Ranking Supervision

Felix Petersen 1 Christian Borgelt 2 Hilde Kuehne 3 4 Oliver Deussen 1

Abstract
Sorting and ranking supervision is a method for
training neural networks end-to-end based on ordering constraints. That is, the ground truth order
of sets of samples is known, while their absolute
values remain unsupervised. For that, we propose
differentiable sorting networks by relaxing their
pairwise conditional swap operations. To address
the problems of vanishing gradients and extensive
blurring that arise with larger numbers of layers,
we propose mapping activations to regions with
moderate gradients. We consider odd-even as well
as bitonic sorting networks, which outperform existing relaxations of the sorting operation. We
show that bitonic sorting networks can achieve
stable training on large input sets of up to 1024
elements.

1. Introduction
Sorting and ranking as the ability to score elements by their
relevance is an essential task in numerous applications. It
can be used for choosing the best results to display by a
search engine or organize data in memory. Starting in the
1950s, sorting networks have been presented to address the
sorting task (Knuth, 1998). Sorting networks are sorting
algorithms with a fixed execution structure, which makes
them suitable for hardware implementations, e.g., as part of
circuit designs. They are oblivious to the input, i.e., their
execution structure is independent of the data to be sorted.
As such hardware implementations are significantly faster
than conventional multi-purpose hardware, they are of interest for sorting in high performance computing applications
(Govindaraju et al., 2006). This motivated the optimization
of sorting networks toward faster networks with fewer layers, which is a still-standing problem (Bidlo & Dobeš, 2019).
Note that, although the name is similar, sorting networks
are not neural networks that perform sorting.
1
University of Konstanz, Germany 2 University of Salzburg,
Austria 3 University of Frankfurt, Germany 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI
Lab. Correspondence to: Felix Petersen <felix.petersen@uni.kn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Recently, the idea of end-to-end training of neural networks
with sorting and ranking supervision by a continuous relaxation of the sorting and ranking functions has been presented by Grover et al. (2019). Sorting supervision means
the ground truth order of some samples is known while their
absolute values remain unsupervised. As the error has to
be propagated in a meaningful way back to the neural network, it is necessary to use a continuous and continuously
differentiable sorting function. Several such differentiable
relaxations of the sorting and ranking functions have been
introduced, e.g., by Adams & Zemel (2011), Grover et al.
(2019), Cuturi et al. (2019), and Blondel et al. (2020). For
example, they enable training a CNN based on ordering
and ranking information instead of absolute ground truth
values. As sorting a sequence of values requires finding the
respective ranking order, we use the terms “sorting” and
“ranking” interchangeably.
In this work, we propose to combine traditional sorting
networks and differentiable sorting functions by presenting
smooth differentiable sorting networks.
Sorting networks are conventionally non-differentiable as
they use min and max operators for conditionally swapping
elements. Thus, we relax these operators by building on the
softmin and softmax operators. However, due to the nature
of the sorting network, values with large as well as very
small differences are compared in each layer. Comparing
values with large differences causes vanishing gradients,
while comparing values with very small differences can
modify, i.e., blur, values as they are only partially swapped.
This is because softmin and softmax are based on the logistic function which is saturated for large inputs but also
returns a value close to the mean for inputs that are close
to each other. Based on these observations, we propose an
activation replacement trick, which avoids vanishing gradients as well as blurring. That is, we modify the distribution
of the differences between compared values to avoid small
differences close to 0 as well as large differences.
To validate the proposed idea and to show its generalization,
we evaluate two sorting network architectures, the odd-even
as well as the bitonic sorting network. The idea of odd-even
sort is to iteratively compare adjacent elements and swap
pairs that are in the wrong order. The method alternately
compares all elements at odd and even indices with their

