Isometric Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model
for Dissimilarity Data

Martin Jørgensen 1 Søren Hauberg 2

Abstract
We present a probabilistic model where the latent
variable respects both the distances and the topology of the modeled data. The model leverages
the Riemannian geometry of the generated manifold to endow the latent space with a well-defined
stochastic distance measure, which is modeled
locally as Nakagami distributions. These stochastic distances are sought to be as similar as possible to observed distances along a neighborhood
graph through a censoring process. The model
is inferred by variational inference based on observations of pairwise distances. We demonstrate
how the new model can encode invariances in the
learned manifolds.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction aims to compress data to a lower
dimensional representation while preserving the underlying signal and suppressing noise. Contemporary nonlinear
methods mostly call upon the manifold assumption (Bengio
et al., 2013) stating that the observed data is distributed near
a low-dimensional manifold embedded in the observation
space. Beyond this unifying assumption, methods often
differ by focusing on one of three key properties (Table 1).
Topology preservation. A topological space is a set of
points whose connectivity is invariant to continuous deformations. For finite data, connectivity is commonly interpreted as a clustering structure, such that topology preserving methods do not form new clusters or break apart existing ones. For visualization purposes, the uniform manifold
approximation projection (UMAP) (McInnes et al., 2018)
appears to be the current state-of-the-art within this domain.
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical
University of Denmark. Correspondence to: Martin Jørgensen
<martinj@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Søren Hauberg <sohau@dtu.dk>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

PCA
MDS
IsoMap
t-SNE
UMAP
GPLVM
Iso-GPLVM (our)

Probabilistic
(3)
7
7
7
7
3
3

Topology
7
7
(7)
(3)
3
7
3

Distance
(3)
3
3
3
3
7
3

Table 1. A list of common dimensionality reduction methods and
coarse overview of their features.

Distance preservation. Methods designed to find lowdimensional representation with pairwise distances that are
similar to those of the observed data may generally be
viewed as a variant of multi-dimensional scaling (MDS)
(Ripley, 2007). Usually, this is achieved by a direct minimization of the stress defined as
X
stress =
(dij − kz i − z j k)2 ,
(1)
i<j≤N

where dij are the dissimilarity (or distance) of two data
points xi and xj , and Z = {z i }N
i=1 denote the lowdimensional representation in Rq .
More advanced methods have been built on top of this idea.
In particular, IsoMap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000) computes
dij along a neighborhood graph using Dijkstra’s algorithm.
This bears some resemblance to t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton,
2008) that uses the Kullback-Leibler divergence to match
distribution in low-dimensional Euclidean spaces with the
data in high dimensions.
Probabilistic models. A common trait for the mentioned
methods is that they learn features in a mapping from highdimensions to low, but not the reverse. This makes the
methods mostly useful for visualization. Generative models
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Lawrence,
2005; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015)
allow us to make new samples in high-dimensional space.
Of particular relevance to us, is the Gaussian process latent variable model (GP-LVM) (Lawrence, 2005; Titsias
& Lawrence, 2010) which learns a stochastic mapping
f : Rq → RD jointly with the latent representations z.

