Bias-Variance Reduced Local SGD for Less Heterogeneous Federated Learning

Tomoya Murata 1 2 Taiji Suzuki 2 3

Abstract
Recently, local SGD has got much attention and
been extensively studied in the distributed learning community to overcome the communication
bottleneck problem. However, the superiority
of local SGD to minibatch SGD only holds in
quite limited situations. In this paper, we study
a new local algorithm called Bias-Variance Reduced Local SGD (BVR-L-SGD) for nonconvex
distributed optimization. Algorithmically, our proposed bias and variance reduced local gradient
estimator fully utilizes small second-order heterogeneity of local objectives and suggests randomly
picking up one of the local models instead of
taking the average of them when workers are synchronized. Theoretically, under small heterogeneity of local objectives, we show that BVR-L-SGD
achieves better communication complexity than
both the previous non-local and local methods
under mild conditions, and particularly BVR-LSGD is the first method that breaks the barrier of
communication complexity Θ(1/ε) for general
nonconvex smooth objectives when the heterogeneity is small and the local computation budget
is large. Numerical results are given to verify the
theoretical findings and give empirical evidence
of the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, optimization problems arising in machine learning are often large and require huge computational time.
Distributed learning is one of the attractive approaches to
reduce the computational time by utilizing parallel computing. In classical distributed learning, each worker has
the whole dataset used in optimization or a random sub1

NTT DATA Mathematical Systems Inc., Tokyo, Japan
2
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 3 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Tomoya Murata <murata@msi.co.jp>, Taiji Suzuki <taiji@mist.i.utokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

set of the whole dataset which is not explicitly exchanged.
In recent federated learning, introduced by Konečnỳ et al.
(2015); Shokri & Shmatikov (2015); McMahan et al. (2017),
we build a global model across multiple devices or servers
without explicitly exchanging their own local datasets, and
local datasets can be heterogeneous, i.e., each local dataset
may be generated from a different distribution. There are
various federated learning scenarios (e.g., personalization,
preservation of the privacy of local information, robustness
to attacks and failures, guarantees of fairness) and refer to
the extensive survey (Kairouz et al., 2019) for these topics.
One of the most naive and widely used approaches to distributed learning is minibatch Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) (Dekel et al., 2012), which is also called as Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017). Each
worker computes minibatch stochastic gradient of the own
local objective and then their average is used to update
the global model. Also, more computationally efficient
methods including minibatch Stochastic Variance Reduced
Gradient (SVRG) (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Allen-Zhu &
Hazan, 2016; Reddi et al., 2016a) and its variant (Lei et al.,
2017), minibatch StochAstic Recursive grAdient algoritHm
(SARAH) (Nguyen et al., 2017; 2019) and its variants (Fang
et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2018) are applicable to the problem.
Particularly, SARAH achieves the optimal total computational complexity in nonconvex optimization.
Unfortunately, minibatch methods suffer from their communication cost because of the necessity to communicate
local gradients for every single global update. One of the
possible solutions is using a large batch to compute local
gradients (Goyal et al., 2017), but the communication complexity, that is the necessary number of communication
rounds to optimize, is theoretically never smaller than the
one of deterministic GD and thus communication cost is
still problematic.
To overcome the communication bottleneck problem, local methods have got much attention due to its empirical
effectiveness (Konečnỳ et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2018). In
local SGD (also called Parallel Restart SGD), each worker
independently updates the local model based on his own
local dataset, and periodically communicates and averages
the local models. Many papers (Stich, 2018; Yu et al., 2019;
Haddadpour & Mahdavi, 2019; Haddadpour et al., 2019;

