RATT: Leveraging Unlabeled Data to Guarantee Generalization

Saurabh Garg 1 Sivaraman Balakrishnan 1 2 J. Zico Kolter 3 Zachary C. Lipton 1

Abstract
To assess generalization, machine learning scientists typically either (i) bound the generalization
gap and then (after training) plug in the empirical risk to obtain a bound on the true risk; or
(ii) validate empirically on holdout data. However, (i) typically yields vacuous guarantees for
overparameterized models; and (ii) shrinks the
training set and its guarantee erodes with each reuse of the holdout set. In this paper, we leverage
unlabeled data to produce generalization bounds.
After augmenting our (labeled) training set with
randomly labeled data, we train in the standard
fashion. Whenever classifiers achieve low error
on the clean data but high error on the random
data, our bound ensures that the true risk is low.
We prove that our bound is valid for 0-1 empirical risk minimization and with linear classifiers
trained by gradient descent. Our approach is especially useful in conjunction with deep learning
due to the early learning phenomenon whereby
networks fit true labels before noisy labels but
requires one intuitive assumption. Empirically,
on canonical computer vision and NLP tasks, our
bound provides non-vacuous generalization guarantees that track actual performance closely. This
work enables practitioners to certify generalization even when (labeled) holdout data is unavailable and provides insights into the relationship
between random label noise and generalization.

1. Introduction
Typically, machine learning scientists establish generalization in one of two ways. One approach, favored by learning
theorists, places an a priori bound on the gap between the
empirical and true risks, usually in terms of the complex1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie
Mellon University 3 Computer Science Department, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Saurabh Garg
<sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ity of the hypothesis class. After fitting the model on the
available data, one can plug in the empirical risk to obtain
a guarantee on the true risk. The second approach, favored
by practitioners, involves splitting the available data into
training and holdout partitions, fitting the models on the
former and estimating the population risk with the latter.
Surely, both approaches are useful, with the former providing theoretical insights and the latter guiding the development of a vast array of practical technology. Nevertheless,
both methods have drawbacks. Most a priori generalization bounds rely on uniform convergence and thus fail to
explain the ability of overparameterized networks to generalize (Zhang et al., 2016; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019b). On
the other hand, provisioning a holdout dataset restricts the
amount of labeled data available for training. Moreover,
risk estimates based on holdout sets lose their validity with
successive re-use of the holdout data due to adaptive overfitting (Murphy, 2012; Dwork et al., 2015; Blum & Hardt,
2015). However, recent empirical studies suggest that on
large benchmark datasets, adaptive overfitting is surprisingly
absent (Recht et al., 2019).
In this paper, we propose Randomly Assign, Train and Track
(RATT), a new method that leverages unlabeled data to provide a post-training bound on the true risk (i.e., the population error). Here, we assign random labels to a fresh batch
of unlabeled data, augmenting the clean training dataset
with these randomly labeled points. Next, we train on this
data, following standard risk minimization practices. Finally, we track the error on the randomly labeled portion of
training data, estimating the error on the mislabeled portion
and using this quantity to upper bound the population error.
Counterintuitively, we guarantee generalization by guaranteeing overfitting. Specifically, we prove that Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM) with 0-1 loss leads to lower error on the mislabeled training data than on the mislabeled
population. Thus, if despite minimizing the loss on the combined training data, we nevertheless have high error on the
mislabeled portion, then the (mislabeled) population error
will be even higher. Then, by complementarity, the (clean)
population error must be low. Finally, we show how to obtain this guarantee using randomly labeled (vs mislabeled
data), thus enabling us to incorporate unlabeled data.
To expand the applicability of our idea beyond ERM on 0-1

