TeraPipe: Token-Level Pipeline Parallelism for Training
Large-Scale Language Models

Zhuohan Li 1 Siyuan Zhuang 1 Shiyuan Guo 1 Danyang Zhuo 2 Hao Zhang 1 Dawn Song 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract
Model parallelism has become a necessity for
training modern large-scale deep language models. In this work, we identify a new and orthogonal dimension from existing model parallel approaches: it is possible to perform pipeline
parallelism within a single training sequence for
Transformer-based language models thanks to its
autoregressive property. This enables a more finegrained pipeline compared with previous work.
With this key idea, we design TeraPipe, a highperformance token-level pipeline parallel algorithm for synchronous model-parallel training
of Transformer-based language models. We develop a novel dynamic programming-based algorithm to calculate the optimal pipelining execution scheme given a specific model and cluster configuration. We show that TeraPipe can
speed up the training by 5.0x for the largest GPT3 model with 175 billion parameters on an AWS
cluster with 48 p3.16xlarge instances compared
with state-of-the-art model-parallel methods. The
code for reproduction can be found at https:
//github.com/zhuohan123/terapipe

1. Introduction
Transformer-based language models (LMs) have revolutionized the area of natural language processing (NLP) by
achieving state-of-the-art results for many NLP tasks, including text classification, question answering, and text generation (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al.). The accuracy of
a Transformer-based LM grows substantially with its model
size, attributing to the fact that they can be unsupervisedly
trained on almost unlimited text data. Today, a large LM,
such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), can have more than
175B parameters, which amounts to 350 GB, assuming 16UC Berkeley 2 Duke University. Correspondence to: Zhuohan
Li <zhuohan@cs.berkeley.edu>.

bit floating-point numbers. This significantly exceeds the
memory capacity of existing hardware accelerators, such
as GPUs and TPUs, which makes model-parallel training
a necessity, i.e., partitioning the model on multiple devices
during the training process.
Because of the demands for efficient LM training, many
researchers and industry practitioners have proposed different ways for model parallel training. One approach is to
partition the weight matrices and dispatch smaller matrix
operations to parallel devices (Figure 1b; Shoeybi et al.,
2019; Shazeer et al., 2018). Another approach is to split
a batch of training data into many microbatches and then
evenly pipeline the layer computations across different microbatches and devices (Figure 1c; Huang et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, these approaches either introduce excessive
communication overheads between compute devices, or lead
to reduced efficiency due to pipeline “bubbles” (i.e. device
idle time, see Section 2 and 3.2 for details).
Our key observation in this paper is that Transformer-based
language models have a key property: the computation of a
given input token only depends on previous tokens, but not
on future tokens. This lack of dependency on future tokens
provides new opportunities for pipeline parallel training.1
In particular, it allows us to create a fine-grained pipeline
within a single training sequence for Transformer-based
LMs, by parallelizing the computation of the current token
on the current layer with the computation of the previous
token on the next layer of the model. For example, in Figure 1d, we can pipeline the execution across all 5 devices
within a single input sequence. Similar to other synchronous
model parallel training methods, e.g., Gpipe (Huang et al.,
2019), Megatron-LM (Shoeybi et al., 2019), we do not
change the underlying optimization algorithm, so the resulting model has exactly the same accuracy.
However, leveraging the token dimension for efficient model
parallel training raises several challenges. First, if the partitioning along the token dimension is too fine-grained, it
leads to under-utilization on devices that require large blocks

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1

In this paper, we focus on unidirectional autoregressive language models (e.g., GPT (Radford et al.; Brown et al., 2020))
but not bidirectional models like masked language models (e.g.,
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)).

