A Differentiable Point Process with Its Application to Spiking Neural Networks

Hiroshi Kajino 1

Abstract
This paper is concerned about a learning algorithm for a probabilistic model of spiking neural
networks (SNNs). Jimenez Rezende & Gerstner (2014) proposed a stochastic variational inference algorithm to train SNNs with hidden neurons.
The algorithm updates the variational distribution
using the score function gradient estimator, whose
high variance often impedes the whole learning
algorithm. This paper presents an alternative gradient estimator for SNNs based on the path-wise
gradient estimator. The main technical difficulty
is a lack of a general method to differentiate a
realization of an arbitrary point process, which
is necessary to derive the path-wise gradient estimator. We develop a differentiable point process,
which is the technical highlight of this paper, and
apply it to derive the path-wise gradient estimator
for SNNs. We investigate the effectiveness of our
gradient estimator through numerical simulation.

1. Introduction
A spiking neural network (SNN) is an artificial neural network (ANN) where neurons communicate with each other
using spikes rather than real values as the conventional
ANNs do. The conventional ANN is a special case of SNN
where information is encoded into the firing rate of neurons (which we call the rate coding) and the rate serves as
the communication currency. This specification facilitates
developing learning algorithms for ANNs, leading to the
recent great success of deep neural networks. On the other
hand, in the community of neuroscience, experimental evidence on biological neurons indicates that the rate coding
alone cannot explain the whole brain activity (Bothe, 2004)
and more precise modeling of neural coding is anticipated.
Since there still exist performance gaps between the ratebased ANNs and biological neural networks (i.e., brains)
in terms of inference capability and energy efficiency, this
1

IBM Research - Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Hiroshi Kajino <kajino@jp.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

raises the following question: how much of the current performance gaps can be attributed to this difference on neural
coding? This open problem motivates us to study SNNs.
One of the major obstacles towards answering it is a lack
of practical learning algorithms for SNNs, which discourages us from empirical investigation. While there exist a
number of attempts to develop learning algorithms, most of
them have more or less limited applicability. We consider
a practical learning algorithm should at least be (i) theoretically grounded, (ii) empirically confirmed to work well,
and (iii) easy to simulate (fewer hyperparameters, less computation time, etc.)1 . For example, theoretical aspects of
the algorithms based on spike-timing-dependent plasticity (Chapter 19 (Gerstner et al., 2014)) are not well understood. For another example, simulating learning algorithms
for continuous-time deterministic SNNs requires the stepsize parameter of time-axis discretization when the dynamics of a neuron is described by differential equations (e.g.,
(Huh & Sejnowski, 2018)). The step-size parameter brings
about the trade-off between the simulation quality and computation time, which makes the simulation more intricate.
These examples illustrate that even major approaches do not
satisfy all the requirements above, and therefore, there still
exists much room for improvement.
Among a number of approaches, we employ as a foundation
a probabilistic formulation of SNNs (Pfister et al., 2006),
which models spike trains (temporal sequence of spikes
emitted from neurons) as a realization of a multivariate
point process. It is easier for us to start from it than others
because it already satisfies requirements (i) and (iii), which
are more intrinsic properties than requirement (ii). In fact,
learning algorithms are formalized by maximum likelihood
estimation, and its exact simulation has no trade-off hyperparameter as will be explained in Section 2.2. Therefore,
the remaining concern is its empirical performance.
One of the state-of-the-art learning algorithms for probabilistic SNNs is the work by Jimenez Rezende & Gerstner (2014). The authors propose a stochastic variational
inference algorithm for SNNs with hidden neurons. Since
spike trains of hidden neurons are unobservable and it is
intractable to compute the marginal likelihood, an evidence
1
Biological plausibility is of another great interest, but is not
mentioned because it is not mandatory for engineering purposes.

