In-Database Regression in Input Sparsity Time

Rajesh Jayaram 1 Alireza Samadian 2 David P. Woodruff 1 Peng Ye 3

Abstract

Sketching is a powerful dimensionality reduction
technique for accelerating algorithms for data
analysis. A crucial step in sketching methods
is to compute a subspace embedding (SE) for a
large matrix A ∈ RN ×d . SE’s are the primary
tool for obtaining extremely efficient solutions for
many linear-algebraic tasks, such as least squares
regression and low rank approximation. Computing an SE often requires an explicit representation
of A and running time proportional to the size
of A. However, if A = T1 o
n T2 o
n ··· o
n Tm
is the result of a database join query on several
smaller tables Ti ∈ Rni ×di , then this running
time can be prohibitive, as A itself can have as
many as O(n1 n2 · · · nm ) rows. In this work, we
design subspace embeddings for database joins
which can be computed significantly faster than
computing the join. For the case of a two table
join A = T1 o
n T2 we give input-sparsity algorithms for computing subspace embeddings, with
running time bounded by the number of non-zero
entries in T1 , T2 . This results in input-sparsity
time algorithms for high accuracy regression, significantly improving upon the running time of
prior FAQ-based methods for regression. We extend our results to arbitrary joins for the ridge
regression problem, also considerably improving
the running time of prior methods. Empirically,
we apply our method to real datasets and show
that it is significantly faster than existing algorithms.

1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, United States. 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, United States.
3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.. Correspondence to: David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Sketching is an important tool for dimensionality reduction, whereby one quickly reduces the size of a large-scale
optimization problem while approximately preserving the
solution space. One can then solve the lower-dimensional
problem much more efficiently, and the sketching guarantee
ensures that the resulting solution is approximately optimal
for the original optimization problem. In this paper we focus on the notion of a subspace embedding (SE), and its
applications to problems in databases. Formally, given a
large matrix A ∈ RN ×d , an -subspace embedding for A
is a matrix SA, where S ∈ Rk×N , with the property that
kSAxk2 = (1 ± )kAxk2 simultaneously for all x ∈ Rd .
A prototypical example of how a subspace embedding can
be applied to solve an optimization problem is linear regression, where one wants to solve minx kAx − bk2 for a
tall matrix A ∈ RN ×d where N  d contains many data
points (rows). Instead of directly solving for x, which requires computing the covariance matrix of A and which
would require O(N d2 ) time for general A1 , one can first
compute a sketch SA, Sb of the problem, where S ∈ Rk×N
is a random matrix which can be quickly applied to A and
b. If [SA, Sb] is an -subspace embedding for [A, b], it
follows that the regression problem using the solution x̂ to
minx kSAx − Sbk2 will be within a (1 + ) factor of the
optimal solution cost. However, if k  N , then solving
for x̂ can now be accomplished much faster – in O(kd2 )
time. SEs and similar tools for dimensionality reduction
can also be used to speed up the running time of algorithms
for `p regression, low rank approximation, and many other
problems. We refer the reader to the survey (Woodruff et al.,
2014) for a survey of applications of sketching to randomized numerical linear algebra.
One potential downside of most standard subspace embeddings is that the time required to compute SA often scales
linearly with the input sparsity of A, meaning the number of non-zero entries of A, which we denote by nnz(A).
This dependence on nnz(A) is in general necessary just
to read all of the entries of A. However, in many applications the dataset A is highly structured, and is itself the
result of a query performed on a much smaller dataset.
1
This can be sped up to O(N dω−1 ) time in theory, where
ω ≈ 2.373 is the exponent of matrix multiplication.

