Latent Programmer: Discrete Latent Codes for Program Synthesis

Joey Hong 1 David Dohan 1 Rishabh Singh 1 Charles Sutton 1 Manzil Zaheer 1

Abstract
A key problem in program synthesis is searching
over the large space of possible programs. Human
programmers might decide the high-level structure of the desired program before thinking about
the details; motivated by this intuition, we consider two-level search for program synthesis, in
which the synthesizer first generates a plan—a
sequence of symbols that describes the desired
program at a high level—before generating the
program. We propose to learn representations of
programs that can act as plans to organize such
a two-level search. Discrete latent codes are appealing for this purpose, and can be learned by
applying recent work on discrete autoencoders.
Based on these insights, we introduce the Latent
Programmer (LP), a program synthesis method
that first predicts a discrete latent code from input/output examples, and then generates the program in the target language. We evaluate the LP
on two domains, demonstrating that it yields an
improvement in accuracy, especially on longer
programs for which search is most difficult.

1. Introduction
Program synthesis is a longstanding grand challenge in artificial intelligence (Manna & Waldinger, 1971; Summers,
1977). The objective of program synthesis is to automatically write a program given a specification of its intended
behavior, such as a natural language description or a small
set of input-output examples (Alur et al., 2013; Gulwani
et al., 2017). However, program synthesis requires solving
a difficult search problem over a large space of possible
programs. Search methods that have been explored include
top-down search (Lee et al., 2018), bottom up search (Udupa
et al., 2013; Odena et al., 2020; Barke et al., 2020), beam
search (Devlin et al., 2017), and many others (see Section 2).
Our work is motivated by an intuition about the way people
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Mountain View, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Joey Hong <jxihong@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

write programs. Synthesis methods often search through
programs in an order determined by the token sequence, by
a syntax tree, or by a logical solver. In contrast, we imagine
that a programmer often starts by thinking about the highlevel structure of the desired program — such as what library
functions to call, or the overall program structure — and
then fills in the details. For example, for a program that
processes a list of people’s names, a programmer might
first plan that the program should extract the person’s name
followed by the person’s last initial, and only then think
about details such as which library functions to use.
Based on this intuition, we propose two-level search for
program synthesis. In two-level search, the synthesizer first
produces a plan that describes the desired program, and
then synthesizes a program based on that plan. For us, a
plan is simply a sequence of symbols that describes the
code to be generated at a high level, without specifying
the syntactic and semantic details. The goal is that plans
can provide a way to organize search over programs. In
the name-processing example, suppose that an initial plan
incorrectly specifies to extract the first instead of the last
initial. Searching in plan space could easily find the small
change required to yield the correct plan, even if this would
correspond to a large change in the program. This allows
two-level search to explore a more diverse set of programs,
improving the chance of finding the correct one.
A key design decision is defining the space of possible plans.
For example, sketches could be used as plans (Nye et al.,
2019; Murali et al., 2018). In this work, we explore whether
it is possible to learn a representation of programs that is
useful for constructing plans that guide search. Instead of
having a deterministic heuristic for mapping programs to
plans, we let a model discover what plans are useful for representing programs, and how to infer them from the specification. To tackle this problem, we make use of recent work
in learning discrete unsupervised representations (van den
Oord et al., 2017; Roy et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2018).
These are self-supervised methods that given a dataset, assign each data item to a discrete latent code (a sequence of
symbols from an arbitrary set) in such a way that the latent
code provides a good description of the data item. The main
hypothesis of our work is that discrete latent codes can be
used as plans for two-level search.

