Query Complexity of Adversarial Attacks

¨
Grzegorz Głuch 1
Rudiger Urbanke 1

Abstract
There are two main attack models considered in
the adversarial robustness literature: black-box
and white-box. We consider these threat models
as two ends of a fine-grained spectrum, indexed
by the number of queries the adversary can ask.
Using this point of view we investigate how many
queries the adversary needs to make to design
an attack that is comparable to the best possible attack in the white-box model. We give a
lower bound on that number of queries in terms
of entropy of decision boundaries of the classifier.
Using this result we analyze two classical learning algorithms on two synthetic tasks for which
we prove meaningful security guarantees. The
obtained bounds suggest that some learning algorithms are inherently more robust against querybounded adversaries than others.

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks achieve high accuracy on tasks
such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) or
speech recognition (Collobert & Weston, 2008). However,
they are typically susceptible to small, adversarially-chosen
perturbations of the inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014; Nguyen
et al., 2015): more precisely, given a correctly-classified
input x, one can typically find a small perturbation δ such
that x+δ is misclassified by the network while to the human
eye this perturbation is not perceptible.
There are two main threat models considered in the literature: black-box and white-box. In the white-box model,
on the one hand, the attacker (Biggio et al., 2013; Zheng
et al., 2019) is assumed to have access to a full description
of the model. For the case of neural networks that amounts
to a knowledge of the architecture and the weights. In the
black-box model, on the other hand, the adversary (Papernot
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2016; Xiao et al.,
1
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Grzegorz Głuch <grzegorz.gluch@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018; Hayes & Danezis, 2017) can only observe the inputoutput behavior of the model. Many defenses have been
proposed to date. To mention just some – adversarial learn`
ing (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018; Tramer
et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2019), input denoising (Bhagoji
et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2017), or more recently, randomized
smoothing ´
(Lecuyer et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019; Salman
et al., 2019; Gluch & Urbanke, 2019). Unfortunately, most
heuristic defenses break in the presence of suitably strong
adversaries (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al., 2018;
Uesato et al., 2018) and provable defenses are often impractical or allow only very small perturbations. Thus a full
defense remains elusive. The current literature on this topic
is considerable. We refer the reader to Chakraborty et al.
(2018) for an overview of both attacks and defenses and to
Bhambri et al. (2019) for a survey focused on black-box
attacks.
We consider black-box and white-box models as the extreme
points of a spectrum parameterized by the number of queries
allowed for the adversary. This point of view is related to
Ilyas et al. (2018) where the authors design a black-box
attack with a limited number of queries. Intuitively, the
more queries the adversary can make the more knowledge
he gains about the classifier. When the number of queries
approaches infinity then we transition from a black-box to
a white-box model as in this limit the adversary knows the
classifying function exactly. Using this point of view we
ask:
How many queries does the adversary need to make to
reliably find adversarial examples?
By “reliably” we mean comparable with the informationtheoretic white-box performance. To be more formal, we
assume that there is a distribution D and a high-accuracy
classifier f that maps Rd to classes Y. The adversary A
only has black-box access to f . Moreover,  ∈ R+ is an
upper bound on the norm (usually `p norm) of the allowed
adversarial perturbation. Assume that f is susceptible to
-bounded adversarial perturbations for an η-fraction of the
underlying distribution D. The quantity η is the largest error
an adversary, who has access to unbounded computational
resources and fully knows f , can achieve. We ask: How
many queries to the classifier f does A need to make in
order to be able to find adversarial examples for say an

