Predict then Interpolate: A Simple Algorithm to Learn Stable Classifiers
Yujia Bao 1 Shiyu Chang 2 Regina Barzilay 3

Abstract
We propose Predict then Interpolate (PI), a simple algorithm for learning correlations that are
stable across environments. The algorithm follows from the intuition that when using a classifier trained on one environment to make predictions on examples from another environment,
its mistakes are informative as to which correlations are unstable. In this work, we prove that
by interpolating the distributions of the correct
predictions and the wrong predictions, we can uncover an oracle distribution where the unstable
correlation vanishes. Since the oracle interpolation coefficients are not accessible, we use group
distributionally robust optimization to minimize
the worst-case risk across all such interpolations.
We evaluate our method on both text classification and image classification. Empirical results
demonstrate that our algorithm is able to learn
robust classifiers (outperforms IRM by 23.85%
on synthetic environments and 12.41% on natural environments). Our code and data are available at https://github.com/YujiaBao/
Predict-then-Interpolate.

1. Introduction
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) alleviates model
biases by minimizing the worst-case risk over a set of
human-defined groups. However, in order to construct these
groups, humans must identify and annotate these biases,
a process as expensive as annotating the label itself (BenTal et al., 2013; Duchi & Namkoong, 2018 ; Sagawa et al.,
2019). In this paper we propose a simple algorithm to create
groups that are informative of these biases, and use these
groups to train stable classifiers.
Our algorithm operates on data split among multiple environments, across which correlations between bias features and
1

MIT CSAIL 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Yujia Bao <yujia@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the label may vary. Instead of handcrafting environments
based on explicit, task-dependent biases, these environments
can be determined by generic information that is easy to
collect (Peters et al., 2015). For example, environments can
represent data collection circumstances, like location and
time. Our goal is to learn correlations that are stable across
these environments.
Given these environments, one could directly use them as
groups for DRO. Doing so would optimize the worst-case
risk over all interpolations of the training environments.
However, if the unstable (bias) features are positively and
differentially correlated with the label in all training environments, the unstable correlation will be positive in any
of their interpolations. DRO, optimizing for the best worstcase performance, will inevitably exploit these unstable
features, and we fail to learn a stable classifier.
In this work, we propose Predict then Interpolate (PI), a
simple recipe for creating groups whose interpolation yields
a distribution with only stable correlations. Our idea follows
from the intuition that when using a classifier trained on
one environment to make predictions on examples from a
different environment, its mistakes are informative of the
unstable correlations. In fact, we can prove that if the unstable features and the label are positively correlated across all
environments, the same correlation flips to negative in the
set of mistakes. Therefore, by interpolating the distributions
of correct and incorrect predictions, we can uncover an “oracle” distribution in which only stable features are correlated
with the label. Although the oracle interpolation coefficients
are not accessible, we can minimize the worst-case risk over
all interpolations, providing an upper bound of the risk on
the oracle distribution.
Our learning paradigm consists of three steps. First, we train
an individual classifier for each environment to estimate the
conditional distribution of the label given the input. These
classifiers are biased, as they may rely on any correlations in
the dataset. Next, we apply each environment’s classifier to
partition all other environments, based on prediction correctness. Finally, we obtain our robust classifier by minimizing
the worst-case risk over all interpolations of the partitions.
Empirically, we evaluate our approach on both synthetic and
real-world environments. First, we simulate unstable correlations in synthetic environments by appending spurious

