Deep Reinforcement Learning amidst Continual Structured Non-Stationarity

Annie Xie 1 James Harrison 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
As humans, our goals and our environment are
persistently changing throughout our lifetime
based on our experiences, actions, and internal
and external drives. In contrast, typical reinforcement learning problem set-ups consider decision
processes that are stationary across episodes. Can
we develop reinforcement learning algorithms
that can cope with the persistent change in the
former, more realistic problem settings? While
on-policy algorithms such as policy gradients in
principle can be extended to non-stationary settings, the same cannot be said for more efficient
off-policy algorithms that replay past experiences
when learning. In this work, we formalize this
problem setting, and draw upon ideas from the
online learning and probabilistic inference literature to derive an off-policy RL algorithm that
can reason about and tackle such lifelong nonstationarity. Our method leverages latent variable models to learn a representation of the environment from current and past experiences, and
performs off-policy RL with this representation.
We further introduce several simulation environments that exhibit lifelong non-stationarity, and
empirically find that our approach substantially
outperforms approaches that do not reason about
environment shift.

1. Introduction
In the standard reinforcement learning (RL) set-up, the agent
is assumed to operate in a stationary environment, i.e., under
fixed dynamics and reward. However, the assumption of
stationarity rarely holds in more realistic settings, such as
in the context of lifelong learning systems (Thrun, 1998).
That is, over the course of its lifetime, an agent may be
subjected to environment dynamics and rewards that vary
with time. In robotics applications, for example, this non1

Stanford University. Correspondence to: Annie Xie <anniexie@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

stationarity manifests itself in changing terrains and weather
conditions. In some situations, not even the objective is
necessarily fixed: consider an assistive robot helping a human whose preferences gradually change over time. And,
because stationarity is a core assumption in many existing
RL algorithms, they are unlikely to perform well in these
environments.
Crucially, in each of the above scenarios, the environment
is specified by unknown, time-varying parameters. These
latent parameters are also not i.i.d., and in fact have associated but unobserved dynamics. For example, outdoor
robots experience weather conditions that are determined
by the season; a user-facing robot’s task depends on the
user’s preferences which can vary based on their day-to-day
routine. We formalize this problem setting with the dynamic parameter Markov decision process (DP-MDP). The
DP-MDP corresponds to a sequence of stationary MDPs,
related through a set of latent parameters governed by an autonomous dynamical system. While non-stationary MDPs
are special instances of the partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998), in this
setting, we can leverage structure available in the dynamics
of the hidden parameters and avoid solving POMDPs in the
general case.
On-policy RL algorithms can in principle cope with such
non-stationarity (Sutton et al., 2007). However, in highly
dynamic environments, only a limited amount of interaction
is permitted before the environment changes, and on-policy
methods may fail to adapt rapidly enough in this low-shot
setting (Al-Shedivat et al., 2017). Instead, we desire an
off-policy RL algorithm that can use past experience both
to improve sample efficiency and to reason about the environment dynamics. In order to adapt, the agent needs the
ability to predict how the MDP parameters will shift. We
thus require a representation of the MDP as well as a model
of how parameters evolve in this space, both of which can
be learned from off-policy experience.
To this end, our core contribution is an off-policy RL algorithm that can operate under non-stationarity by jointly
learning (1) a latent variable model, which lends a compact
representation of the MDP, and (2) a maximum entropy
policy with this representation. We validate our approach,
which we call Lifelong Latent Actor-Critic (LILAC), on a

