Blind Pareto Fairness and Subgroup Robustness

Natalia Martinez * 1 Martin Bertran * 1 Afroditi Papadaki 2 Miguel Rodrigues 2 Guillermo Sapiro 1

Abstract
Much of the work in the field of group fairness
addresses disparities between predefined groups
based on protected features such as gender, age,
and race, which need to be available at train, and
often also at test, time. These approaches are
static and retrospective, since algorithms designed
to protect groups identified a priori cannot anticipate and protect the needs of different at-risk
groups in the future. In this work we analyze
the space of solutions for worst-case fairness beyond demographics, and propose Blind Pareto
Fairness (BPF), a method that leverages no-regret
dynamics to recover a fair minimax classifier that
reduces worst-case risk of any potential subgroup
of sufficient size, and guarantees that the remaining population receives the best possible level
of service. BPF addresses fairness beyond demographics, that is, it does not rely on predefined notions of at-risk groups, neither at train
nor at test time. Our experimental results show
that the proposed framework improves worst-case
risk in multiple standard datasets, while simultaneously providing better levels of service for the
remaining population. The code is available at
github.com/natalialmg/BlindParetoFairness.

1. Introduction
A large body of literature has shown that machine learning
(ML) algorithms trained to maximize average performance
on existing datasets may present discriminatory behaviour
across pre-defined demographic groups (Barocas & Selbst,
2016; Hajian et al., 2016), meaning that segments of the
overall population are measurably under-served by the ML
model. This has sparked interest in the study on why these
disparities arise, and on how they can be addressed (Mitchell
et al., 2018; Chouldechova & Roth, 2018; Barocas et al.,
Equal contribution 1 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Natalia Martinez <natalia.martinez@duke.edu>, Martin Bertran
<martin.bertran@duke.edu>.

2019). One popular notion is group fairness, where the
algorithm has access to a set of predefined demographic
groups during training, and the goal is to learn a model
that satisfies a certain notion of fairness across these groups
(e.g., statistical parity, equality of opportunity) (Dwork et al.,
2012; Hardt et al., 2016); this is usually achieved by adding a
constraint to the standard optimization objective. It has been
shown that optimality may be in conflict with some notions
of fairness (e.g., the optimal risk is different across groups)
(Kaplow & Shavell, 1999; Chen et al., 2018), and perfect
fairness can, in general, only be achieved by degrading the
performance on the benefited groups without improving the
disadvantaged ones. This conflicts with notions of no-harm
fairness such as in (Ustun et al., 2019), which are appropriate
where quality of service is paramount. Notions such as
minimax fairness, commonly known as Rawlsian max-min
fairness from an utility maximization perspective (Rawls,
2001; 2009), combined with Pareto efficiency, naturally
address this no-harm concern (Martinez et al., 2020; Diana
et al., 2020).
Recent works study fairness in ML when no information
about the protected demographics is available, for example,
due to privacy or legal regulations (Kallus et al., 2019). This
is an important research direction and has been identified as
a major industry concern (Veale & Binns, 2017; Holstein
et al., 2019), since many applications and datasets in ML
currently lack demographic records. We therefore study the
problem of building minimax Pareto fair algorithms beyond
demographics, meaning that not only we lack group membership records but also have no prior knowledge about the
demographics to be considered (e.g., any subset of the population can be a valid protected group, see computationally
identifiable groups (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018)). This has
the advantage of making the model robust to any potential
demographic even if they are unknown at the time of design, or change through time; it is also efficient, since the
model offers the best level of service to all the remaining
(i.e., non-critical) population.

*

2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Main Contributions. We analyze subgroup robustness,
where a model is minimax fair w.r.t. any group of sufficient
size, regardless of any preconceived notion of protected
groups; we also adhere to the notion of no-harm fairness by
requiring our minimax model to be Pareto efficient (Mas-

