Markpainting: Adversarial Machine Learning meets Inpainting

David Khachaturov * 1 Ilia Shumailov * 1 2 Yiren Zhao 1 Nicolas Papernot 2 Ross Anderson 1

Abstract
Inpainting is a learned interpolation technique that
is based on generative modeling and used to populate masked or missing pieces in an image; it
has wide applications in picture editing and retouching. Recently, inpainting started being used
for watermark removal, raising concerns. In this
paper we study how to manipulate it using our
markpainting technique. First, we show how an
image owner with access to an inpainting model
can augment their image in such a way that any attempt to edit it using that model will add arbitrary
visible information. We find that we can target
multiple different models simultaneously with our
technique. This can be designed to reconstitute
a watermark if the editor had been trying to remove it. Second, we show that our markpainting
technique is transferable to models that have different architectures or were trained on different
datasets, so watermarks created using it are difficult for adversaries to remove. Markpainting is
novel and can be used as a manipulation alarm
that becomes visible in the event of inpainting.
Source code is available at: https://github.
com/iliaishacked/markpainting.

1. Introduction
Improvements to machine learning (ML) have enabled automatic content creation (Ramesh et al., 2021) and manipulation (Yu et al., 2018): a user just needs to provide an image
and describe the changes they want as the input to a generative model (Goodfellow, 2016; Korshunova et al., 2017;
Antic, 2018). Computer graphics tools brought us digital inpainting: programs such as Photoshop enable manipulation
of digital images with powerful software and, more recently,
ML support (Vincent, 2020). Modern inpainting software
lets the user select a patch to be filled in; it then fills this
*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge 2 University of Toronto and Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Ilia Shumailov <ilia.shumailov@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

area in with artificially generated content.
One increasingly popular application of inpainting is the
removal of objects from photographs. This can be done
for malicious purposes. For example, many images are distributed with a watermark that asserts copyright or carries a
marketing message; people wishing to reuse the image without permission may want to remove the mark and restore
a plausible background in its place. This naturally leads to
the question of how we can make watermarks more robust,
i.e. difficult to remove. There is substantial literature on
using classic signal-processing techniques for mark removal,
e.g. from Cox et al. (2007), but such tricks predate recent
advances in ML and inpainting more specifically.
In this paper we investigate whether ML inpainters can
be manipulated using techniques adapted from the field of
adversarial machine learning. Our technique, which we
dub markpainting, allows for arbitrary manipulation of how
inpainters fill in the patch defined by a given 2-bit image
mask. We do this by setting an arbitrary target image which
we wish to appear in the filled-in area. We then generate
perturbations – small pixel-wise augmentations – which are
applied to the original image to manipulate the inpainting
algorithms into producing something resembling our target.
For example, in Figure 1a, the original image is a blackand-white cartoon; we set the target image to be the same
cartoon but with La Gioconda pasted onto the otherwise
blank canvas. After the application of our technique, the
perturbations to the original image ensure that the resulting
infilled patch does indeed resemble our target.
We find that the introduction of minor perturbations to input images can force many inpainters to generate arbitrary
patches — even patterns not present in the training datasets.
Consequently, setting the target to be the original image
and applying our markpainting technique makes the image
robust against watermark removal as shown in Figure 2. The
original (left-most) image has an unsightly watermark that
was removed successfully in the middle image by an inpainter. However, after treating the original image with our
markpainting technique – setting the target to be the original
image itself, to preserve the watermark – the attempt to paint
out the watermark fails.
Figure 1b demonstrates the effect of markpainting on six different inpainters. The resulting markpainted sample (bottom

