Self Normalizing Flows

T. Anderson Keller 1 2 Jorn W.T. Peters 1 2 Priyank Jaini 1 2 Emiel Hoogeboom 1 2 Patrick Forré 2 Max Welling 2

Abstract
Efficient gradient computation of the Jacobian
determinant term is a core problem in many machine learning settings, and especially so in the
normalizing flow framework. Most proposed flow
models therefore either restrict to a function class
with easy evaluation of the Jacobian determinant,
or an efficient estimator thereof. However, these
restrictions limit the performance of such density
models, frequently requiring significant depth to
reach desired performance levels. In this work,
we propose Self Normalizing Flows, a flexible
framework for training normalizing flows by replacing expensive terms in the gradient by learned
approximate inverses at each layer. This reduces
the computational complexity of each layer’s exact update from O(D3 ) to O(D2 ), allowing for
the training of flow architectures which were otherwise computationally infeasible, while also providing efficient sampling. We show experimentally that such models are remarkably stable and
optimize to similar data likelihood values as their
exact gradient counterparts, while training more
quickly and surpassing the performance of functionally constrained counterparts.

1. Introduction
The framework of normalizing flows (Tabak & Turner, 2013)
allows for powerful exact density estimation through the
change of variables formula (Rudin, 1987). A significant
challenge with this approach is the Jacobian determinant
in the objective, which is generally expensive to compute.
A large body of work has therefore focused on methods
to evaluate the Jacobian determinant efficiently, usually by
limiting the expressivity of the transformation. Two classes
of functions have been proposed to achieve this: i) those
with triangular Jacobians, such that the determinant only
1
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab 2 University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Correspondence to: T. Anderson Keller
<t.anderson.keller@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

depends on the diagonal (Bogachev et al., 2005; Marzouk
et al., 2016; Jaini et al., 2019), and ii) those which are Lipschitz continuous such that Jacobian determinant can be
approximated at each iteration through an infinite series
(Behrmann et al., 2019; Grathwohl et al., 2019). The drawback of both of these approaches is that they rely on strong
functional constraints.
Recently, a number of works have pursued an alternative
approach to training unconstrained normalizing flows by
avoiding the expensive computation of the Jacobian determinant altogether during training (Gresele et al., 2020; Krämer
et al., 2020). However, these works restrict the parametrization of the transformation, or the parameter updates. As a
result, it can be difficult to scale these to higher dimensional
data such as images.
In this work we introduce a new framework to avoid the determinant computation during training, which we name the
Self Normalizing Framework. Instead of computing the log
Jacobian determinant, we approximate its gradient directly.
This can be achieved through the insight that the derivative
of the log Jacobian determinant is given by the inverse of the
Jacobian itself. In the framework, flow components learn
to approximate their own inverse through a self-supervised
layer-wise reconstruction loss. Further, we then define the
overall density model as a mixture of the probability induced by both the forward and inverse transformations and
show how both transformations can be updated symmetrically using their respective learned inverses directly in the
gradient. Ultimately, this avoids the O(D3 ) complexity required for computing the determinant of each layer at each
training iteration, instead substituting it with an additional
backwards pass of order O(D2 ) required to propagate the
reconstruction error gradients.

2. Related Work
The field of normalizing flows can be broadly divided into
linear and non-linear flows (Papamakarios et al., 2019). Nonlinear flows are generally constructed either by constraining
the Jacobian to be triangular (Kingma et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2017; van den Berg et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2018; Jaini et al., 2019) or by constraining a residual function to be Lipschitz (Grathwohl et al., 2019; Behrmann et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Perugachi-Diaz et al., 2020). Linear

