Decoupling Value and Policy for Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

Roberta Raileanu 1 Rob Fergus 1

Abstract
Standard deep reinforcement learning algorithms
use a shared representation for the policy and
value function, especially when training directly
from images. However, we argue that more information is needed to accurately estimate the value
function than to learn the optimal policy. Consequently, the use of a shared representation for
the policy and value function can lead to overfitting. To alleviate this problem, we propose
two approaches which are combined to create
IDAAC: Invariant Decoupled Advantage ActorCritic. First, IDAAC decouples the optimization
of the policy and value function, using separate
networks to model them. Second, it introduces
an auxiliary loss which encourages the representation to be invariant to task-irrelevant properties
of the environment. IDAAC shows good generalization to unseen environments, achieving a new
state-of-the-art on the Procgen benchmark and
outperforming popular methods on DeepMind
Control tasks with distractors. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/
rraileanu/idaac.

ization (Farebrother et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018a; Cobbe
et al., 2018; Igl et al., 2019), data augmentation (Cobbe
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al.,
2020; Laskin et al., 2020; Raileanu et al., 2020), or representation learning (Zhang et al., 2020a;c; Mazoure et al., 2020;
Stooke et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021).
Here we consider the problem of generalizing to unseen instances (or levels) of procedurally generated environments,
after training on a relatively small number of such instances.
While the high-level goal is the same, the background, dynamics, layouts, as well as the locations, shapes, and colors
of various entities, differ across instances.
In this work, we identify a new factor that leads to overfitting in such settings, namely the use of a shared representation for the policy and value function. We point out that
accurately estimating the value function requires instancespecific features in addition to the information needed to
learn the optimal policy. When training a common network
for the policy and value function (as is currently standard
practice in pixel-based RL), the need for capturing levelspecific features in order to estimate the value function can
result in a policy that does not generalize well to new task
instances.
1.1. Policy-Value Representation Asymmetry

1. Introduction
Generalization remains one of the main challenges of deep
reinforcement learning (RL). Current methods fail to generalize to new scenarios even when trained on semantically
similar environments with the same high-level goal but
different dynamics, layouts, and visual appearances (Farebrother et al., 2018; Packer et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018a;
Cobbe et al., 2018; Gamrian & Goldberg, 2019; Cobbe
et al., 2019; Song et al., 2020). This indicates that standard RL agents memorize specific trajectories rather than
learning transferable skills. Several strategies have been
proposed to alleviate this problem, such as the use of regular1
Deptartment of Computer Science, New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Roberta Raileanu
<raileanu@cs.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To illustrate this phenomenon, which we call the policyvalue representation asymmetry, consider the example in
Figure 1 which shows two different levels from the Procgen
game Ninja (Cobbe et al., 2019). The first observations
of the two levels are semantically identical and could be
represented using the same features (describing the locations
of the agent, the bombs, and the platform, while disregarding
the background patterns and wall colors). An optimal agent
should take the same action in both levels, namely that of
moving to the right to further explore the level and move
closer to the goal (which is always to its right in this game).
However, these two observations have different values. Note
that Level 1 is much shorter than Level 2, and the levels
look quite different from each other after the initial part.
A standard RL agent (e.g. PPO (Schulman et al., 2017))
completes the levels in 24 and 50 steps, respectively. The
true value of the initial observation is the expected return (i.e.
sum of discounted rewards) received during the episode. In

