Function Contrastive Learning of Transferable Meta-Representations

Muhammad Waleed Gondal 1 Shruti Joshi 1 Nasim Rahaman 1 2 Stefan Bauer 1 3 Manuel Wüthrich 1
Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
Meta-learning algorithms adapt quickly to new
tasks that are drawn from the same task distribution as the training tasks. The mechanism leading
to fast adaptation is the conditioning of a downstream predictive model on the inferred representation of the task’s underlying data generative
process, or function. This meta-representation,
which is computed from a few observed examples of the underlying function, is learned jointly
with the predictive model. In this work, we study
the implications of this joint training on the transferability of the meta-representations. Our goal
is to learn meta-representations that are robust
to noise in the data and facilitate solving a wide
range of downstream tasks that share the same underlying functions. To this end, we propose a decoupled encoder-decoder approach to supervised
meta-learning, where the encoder is trained with
a contrastive objective to find a good representation of the underlying function. In particular, our
training scheme is driven by the self-supervision
signal indicating whether two sets of examples
stem from the same function. Our experiments
on a number of synthetic and real-world datasets
show that the representations we obtain outperform strong baselines in terms of downstream performance and noise robustness, even when these
baselines are trained in an end-to-end manner.

1. Introduction
Many supervised learning problems are concerned with approximating a data-generating function f : X → Y given
a finite set of N samples, {xi , yi = f (xi )}N
i=1 . Expressive
models, such as deep neural networks, are known to excel
at this function approximation task, but they often heavily
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Mila, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada 3 CIFAR
Azrieli Global Scholar. Correspondence to: Muhammad Waleed
Gondal <waleed.gondal@tue.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rely on the number of samples N being large. This poses
further challenges: in many domains of interest, sourcing
enough data is a challenging endeavour; further, the process
of training such models can be prohibitively slow for many
applications. This is exacerbated by the fact that in the
typical setting, each new data-generating function encountered requires that the model be retrained. In other words,
the model is not shared between data-generating functions,
even when training a model to approximate one function can
potentially be beneficial for approximating another function.
To overcome these challenges, a variety of meta-learning
methods have been proposed (Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell
et al., 2017; Garnelo et al., 2018a; Ravi & Larochelle, 2016;
Finn et al., 2017). In the present work, we are interested in a
class of models that use encoder-decoder architectures such
as Conditional Neural Processes (CNPs) (Garnelo et al.,
2018a) and Generative Query Networks (GQNs) (Eslami
et al., 2018). In the first stage, an encoder is used to infer
a fixed-dimensional representation of a given function f
from just a few input-output examples Of = {(xi , yi )}i ,
the context dataset. We call it the meta-representation of the
function r = hφ (Of ), where h is an encoder parameterized
by φ. In the second stage, the meta-representation is then
used to condition a predictive model in order to solve a
downstream prediction task related to that function. For
instance, the task may consist of predicting the function
value y at unseen locations x or classifying images after
observing only a few pixels (in that case, x is the pixel
location and y is the pixel value). This two-stage process has
multiple benefits. First, the extraction of prior knowledge
about f directly from the training data, in the form of metarepresentation, reduces the need for specifying inductive
biases (model architectures, training details, etc.) particular
to f . Thus, it allows learning to be shared between functions
such that a single model can be trained on a distribution over
functions. Second, the computation of meta-representations
is efficient and can be done online. Third, the computation
of meta-representations provides flexibility to solve a variety
of downstream tasks concerning a specific function.
However, CNPs optimize encoder jointly with the decoder
on the downstream prediction task, i.e., prediction of function values y at unseen locations x, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). This ties the meta-representation’s quality to the

