Adversarial Policy Learning in Two-player Competitive Games

Wenbo Guo 1 Xian Wu 1 Sui Huang 2 Xinyu Xing 1

Abstract
In a two-player deep reinforcement learning task,
recent work shows an attacker could learn an
adversarial policy that triggers a target agent to
perform poorly and even react in an undesired
way. However, its efficacy heavily relies upon
the zero-sum assumption made in the two-player
game. In this work, we propose a new adversarial learning algorithm. It addresses the problem by resetting the optimization goal in the
learning process and designing a new surrogate
optimization function. Our experiments show
that our method significantly improves adversarial agents’ exploitability compared with the
state-of-art attack. Besides, we also discover
that our method could augment an agent with
the ability to abuse the target game’s unfairness.
Finally, we show that agents adversarially retrained against our adversarial agents could obtain stronger adversary-resistance.

1. Introduction
Along with the great success of Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) in the application of two-player games
comes a new form of attack that exploits the weakness
of a policy network to fail the corresponding game agent.
In the past, the development of this new kind of attack
makes many unrealistic assumptions. The most common
one is that an attacker has the capability of manipulating
the observation of an agent by altering the environment
with which the agent interacts. Under this assumption, researchers have proposed a variety of technical methods,
demonstrating significant effectiveness in failing a game
agent in a complicated game task (e.g., (Huang et al., 2017;
Lin et al., 2020)).
Sharing the similar viewpoint elaborated in (Gleave et al.,
1

College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, USA 2 Netflix
Inc., Los Gatos, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Wenbo Guo
<wzg13@ist.psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020), we argue that attacks developed under this assumption are not practical. For example, given a master agent
deployed in an online video game platform playing with
hundreds of thousands of professional participants, the
manipulation of the agent’s observation could mean the
free alternation of pixel values in the game environment
(e.g., changing the canvas color of the Atari game (ATARI,
2006)). In this context, to achieve this objective, an attacker
might have to spend thousands of hours of effort on hacking the game platform and expect to obtain unauthorized
access to the master agent and the environment with which
it interacts. Given the advance of software hardening technology, such an expectation cannot always be guaranteed.
In this work, we do not bake in this assumption and propose a new attack in the context of a two-player competitive
game. Like the recent research (Gleave et al., 2020), we
train an adversarial agent that interacts with a well-trained
victim agent in a two-player game environment and triggers it to react in an undesired fashion. Differently, as we
will elaborate in Section 3.1, our learning method, however, relaxes an implicit and sometimes unrealistic assumption – a two-player game must strictly follow a zero-sum
setting. We show this relaxation makes adversarial learning effective for more sophisticated games (e.g., StarCraft).
Besides, our learning method goes beyond exploiting the
weakness of a victim agent. It demonstrates an ability
to abuse the target game’s unfairness when an adversarial
agent has minimal impact on the victim’s decision making.
Technically, instead of the straightforward adoption of an
existing RL approach as is proposed in (Gleave et al.,
2020), our adversarial learning method introduces a new
learning algorithm that not only maximizes the expected
reward of the adversarial agent but, more importantly, minimizes that of the victim. As is specified in Section 3.2, to
build our learning algorithm correctly, we have to tackle a
monotonicity challenge or, in other words, ensure the update of an adversarial policy does not incur the random
fluctuation of the learning objective. To do this, we first
remodel a two-player game and define both the adversary
and victim’s expected rewards as a function of the adversarial policy. Second, we carefully design a new objective
function that could theoretically guarantee the monotonic
property in the entire policy learning process.

