Randomized Entity-wise Factorization for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Shariq Iqbal 1 Christian A. Schroeder de Witt 2 Bei Peng 2 Wendelin Böhmer 3 Shimon Whiteson 2 Fei Sha 1 4

Abstract
Multi-agent settings in the real world often involve tasks with varying types and quantities
of agents and non-agent entities; however, common patterns of behavior often emerge among
these agents/entities. Our method aims to leverage these commonalities by asking the question: “What is the expected utility of each agent
when only considering a randomly selected subgroup of its observed entities?” By posing this
counterfactual question, we can recognize stateaction trajectories within sub-groups of entities
that we may have encountered in another task
and use what we learned in that task to inform
our prediction in the current one. We then reconstruct a prediction of the full returns as a
combination of factors considering these disjoint
groups of entities and train this “randomly factorized” value function as an auxiliary objective
for value-based multi-agent reinforcement learning. By doing so, our model can recognize and
leverage similarities across tasks to improve learning efficiency in a multi-task setting. Our approach, Randomized Entity-wise Factorization
for Imagined Learning (R E F I L), outperforms
all strong baselines by a significant margin in
challenging multi-task StarCraft micromanagement settings.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning techniques often focus
on learning in settings with fixed groups of agents and entities; however, many real-world multi-agent settings contain
tasks across which an agent must deal with varying quan1
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 3 Department of Software Technology, Delft University of
Technology 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Shariq Iqbal
<shariqiq@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Breakaway sub-scenario in soccer. Agents in the yellow square can generalize this experience to similar subsequent
experiences, regardless of the state of agents outside the square.

tities and types of cooperative agents, antagonists, or other
entities. This variability in type and quantity of entities results in a combinatorial growth in the number of possible
configurations, aggravating the challenge of learning control policies that generalize. For example, the sport of soccer
exists in many forms, from casual 5 vs. 5 to full scale 11 vs.
11 matches, with varying formations within each consisting
of different quantities of player types (defenders, midfielders, forwards, etc.). Within these varied tasks, however, exist common patterns. For instance, a “breakaway” occurs
in soccer when an attacker with the ball passes the defense
and only needs to beat the goalkeeper in order to score (Figure 1). The goalkeeper and attacker can apply what they
have learned in a breakaway to the next one, regardless of
the task (e.g., 5 vs. 5). If players can disentangle their understanding of common patterns from their surroundings, they
should be able to learn more efficiently as well as share
their experiences across all forms of soccer. These repeated
patterns within sub-groups of entities can, in fact, be found
in a wide variety of multi-agent tasks (e.g., heterogeneous
swarm control (Prorok et al., 2017) and StarCraft unit micromanagement (Samvelyan et al., 2019)). Our work1 aims
to develop a methodology for artificial agents to incorporate
knowledge of these shared patterns to accelerate learning in
a multi-task setting.
One way to leverage structural independence among agents,
as in our soccer example, is to represent value functions as
a combination of factors that depend on disjunct subsets of
the state and action spaces (Koller & Parr, 1999). These subsets are typically fixed in advance using domain knowledge
and thus do not scale to complex domains where dependencies are unknown and may shift over time. Recent ap1

Code available at: https://github.com/shariqiqbal2810/REFIL

