Nearly Optimal Reward-Free Reinforcement Learning
Zihan Zhang 1 Simon S. Du 2 Xiangyang Ji 1

Abstract
We study the reward-free reinforcement learning framework, which is particularly suitable for
batch reinforcement learning and scenarios where
one needs policies for multiple reward functions.
This framework has two phases: in the exploration phase, the agent collects trajectories by interacting with the environment without using any
reward signal; in the planning phase, the agent
needs to return a near-optimal policy for arbitrary
reward functions. We give a new efficient algorithm, Staged Sampling + Truncated Planning
(SSTP), ⇣which interacts with the
⌘ environment at
2
most O S✏2A poly log SAH
episodes in the
✏
exploration phase, and guarantees to output a nearoptimal policy for arbitrary reward functions in
the planning phase, where S is the size of state
space, A is the size of action space, H is the
planning horizon, and ✏ is the target accuracy
relative to the total reward. Notably, our sample complexity scales only logarithmically with
H, in contrast to all existing results which scale
polynomially with H. Furthermore, this
⇣ 2 bound
⌘
matches the minimax lower bound ⌦ S✏2A up
to logarithmic factors. Our results rely on three
new techniques : 1) A new sufficient condition
for the dataset to plan for an ✏-suboptimal policy ; 2) A new way to plan efficiently under the
proposed condition using soft-truncated planning;
3) Constructing extended MDP to maximize the
truncated accumulative rewards efficiently.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem in which
an agent aims to maximize its accumulative rewards by interaction with an unknown environment. A major challenge in
1

2

Tsinghua University University of Washington. Correspondence to: Zihan Zhang <zihan-zh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>, Xiangyang Ji
<xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

RL is exploration for which the agent needs to strategically
visit new states to learn transition and reward information
therein. To execute efficient exploration, the agent must
follow a well-designed adaptive strategy by which the agent
is properly guided by the reward and transition information,
other than the trivial random exploration. Provably algorithms have been proposed to help the agent visit new states
efficiently with a fixed reward and transition model. See
Section 2 for a review.
However, in various applications, it is necessary to re-design
the reward function to incentivize the agent to learn new desired behavior (Altman, 1999; Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler
et al., 2018; Miryoosefi et al., 2019). To avoid repeatedly
invoking the learning algorithm and interacting with the
environment, it is desired to let the agent efficiently explore
the environment without the reward signal and collect data
based on which the agent can compute a near-optimal policy
for any reward function.
The main challenge of this problem is that the agent needs
to collect data that sufficiently covers the state space. This
problem was previous studied in (Brafman & Tennenholtz,
2003; Hazan et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019). Recently, Jin et al.
(2020) formalized the setting, and named it reward-free RL.
In this setting, the agent first collects a dataset by interacting
with the environment, and then is required to compute an
✏-optimal policy given any proper reward function.
Jin et al. (2020) gave a formal theoretical treatment of this
setting. They designed
which
guarantees that
⇣⇣ 2 3a method
⌘
⌘
S AH
S 4 AH 5
by collecting O
+
poly
log
(SAH/✏)
2
✏
✏
episodes, the agent is able to output an ✏-optimal policy,
where S is the number of states, A is the number of actions,
1
and
⇣ H2 is⌘ the planning horizon. They also provided an
⌦ S✏2A lower bound. Recently, Kaufmann et al. (2020);
Ménard et al. (2020) gave tighter sample complexity bound.
We refer the readers to table 1 for more details.
Unfortunately, it remains open what is the fundamental limit
of the sample complexity of reward-free RL. In particular,
2
compared to the ⌦( S✏2A ) lower bound, all existing upper
bounds have a polynomial dependence on H. The gap be1
Because we consider reward function satisfying the total reward bounded by 1 setting (instead of H in their paper) this paper,
we rescale the error ✏ to ✏H in the bound .

