Bayesian Attention Belief Networks

Shujian Zhang * 1 Xinjie Fan * 1 Bo Chen 2 Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract
Attention-based neural networks have achieved
state-of-the-art results on a wide range of tasks.
Most such models use deterministic attention
while stochastic attention is less explored due to
the optimization difficulties or complicated model
design. This paper introduces Bayesian attention
belief networks, which construct a decoder network by modeling unnormalized attention weights
with a hierarchy of gamma distributions, and
an encoder network by stacking Weibull distributions with a deterministic-upward-stochasticdownward structure to approximate the posterior.
The resulting auto-encoding networks can be optimized in a differentiable way with a variational
lower bound. It is simple to convert any models
with deterministic attention, including pretrained
ones, to the proposed Bayesian attention belief
networks. On a variety of language understanding
tasks, we show that our method outperforms deterministic attention and state-of-the-art stochastic attention in accuracy, uncertainty estimation,
generalization across domains, and robustness
to adversarial attacks. We further demonstrate
the general applicability of our method on neural
machine translation and visual question answering, showing great potential of incorporating our
method into various attention-related tasks.

1. Introduction
Attention-based architectures were originally proposed to
induce useful inductive biases by aggregating features with
learnable weights for sequence models (Sutskever et al.,
2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015). Since the introduction of the
attention-based Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), attention has become the foundation for many state-of-the-art
models. Due to the computational efficiency and scalability
*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Texas at Austin
Xidian University. Correspondence to: Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of the Transformer structure, it becomes possible to train
unprecedented large models on big datasets (Devlin et al.,
2018), which stimulates a great amount of research to pretrain models on large unlabeled datasets. In an unsupervised
manner, this approach learns useful representations that
benefit downstream tasks, achieving tremendous success in
natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Lan et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2019), compute vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020), and multi-modal tasks (Chen et al.,
2019; Lu et al., 2019).
Most of the attention networks treat attention weights as
deterministic rather than random variables, leading to the
whole networks mostly composed of deterministic mappings. Such networks, although simple to optimize, are
often incapable of modeling complex dependencies in data
(Chung et al., 2015). By contrast, stochastic belief networks
(Neal, 1992; Hinton et al., 2006; Gan et al., 2015; Zhou et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Fan et al.,
2021; Bayer & Osendorfer, 2014; Bowman et al., 2016),
stacking stochastic neural network layers, have shown great
advantages over deterministic networks in not only modeling highly structured data but also providing uncertainty
estimation.
This paper proposes Bayesian attention belief networks
(BABN), where we build deep stochastic networks by modeling unnormalized attention weights as random variables.
First, we construct the generative (decoder) network with
a hierarchy of gamma distributions. Second, the inference
(encoder) network is a stack of Weibull distributions with
a deterministic-upward and a stochastic-downward path.
Third, we leverage the efficient structure of existing deterministic attention networks and use the keys and queries
of current attention networks to parameterize the distributions of BABN. This efficient architecture design enables
us to easily convert any existing deterministic attention networks, including pretrained ones, to BABN. Meanwhile, it
imposes natural parameter and computational sharing within
the networks, maintaining computation efficiency and preventing overfitting. Finally, we optimize both the decoder
and encoder networks with an evidence lower bound. As
the encoder network is composed of a reparameterizable distribution, i.e., Weibull distribution, the training objective is
differentiable. Further, leveraging the fact that the Kullback–

