A Functional Perspective on Learning Symmetric Functions with Neural
Networks
Aaron Zweig 1 Joan Bruna 1 2

Abstract
Symmetric functions, which take as input an unordered, fixed-size set, are known to be universally representable by neural networks that enforce permutation invariance. These architectures
only give guarantees for fixed input sizes, yet
in many practical applications, including point
clouds and particle physics, a relevant notion of
generalization should include varying the input
size. In this work we treat symmetric functions (of
any size) as functions over probability measures,
and study the learning and representation of neural networks defined on measures. By focusing
on shallow architectures, we establish approximation and generalization bounds under different choices of regularization (such as RKHS and
variation norms), that capture a hierarchy of functional spaces with increasing degree of non-linear
learning. The resulting models can be learned efficiently and enjoy generalization guarantees that
extend across input sizes, as we verify empirically.

1. Introduction
Deep learning becomes far more efficient with prior knowledge of function invariants. This knowledge underlies architectural choices that enforce the invariance or equivariance
in the network, including Convolutional Neural Networks
(LeCun et al., 1998) which encode translation symmetries,
and Graph Neural Networks (Scarselli et al., 2008) which
encode conjugate permutation symmetries. For functions
with invariance to permutation of the input elements, several
universal architectures encode this invariance by treating
the input as a set (Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017). However, these formulations assume a constant input size, which
precludes learning an entire family of symmetric functions.
1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York 2 Center for Data Science, New York University,
New York. Correspondence to: Aaron Zweig <az831@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Such symmetric functions appear naturally across several
domains, including particle physics, computer graphics, population statistics and cosmology. Yet, in most of these applications, the input size corresponds to a sampling parameter
that is independent of the underlying symmetric function
of interest. As a motivating example, consider the function
family induced by the max function, where for varying N ,
fN ({x1 . . . xN }) = maxi≤N xi . It is natural to ask if a
network can simultaneously learn all these functions.
In this work, we interpret input sets as an empirical measure
defined over the base space I, and develop families of neural
networks defined over the space of probability measures
probability measures of I, as initially suggested in (Pevny &
Kovarik, 2019; De Bie et al., 2019). We identify functional
spaces characterized by neural architectures and provide
generalization bounds that showcase a natural hierarchy
among spaces of symmetric functions. In particular, our
framework allows us to understand the question of generalizing across input sizes as a corollary. Our constructions rely
on the theory of infinitely wide neural networks (Bengio
et al., 2006; Rosset et al., 2007; Bach, 2017a), and provide a
novel instance of depth separation leveraging the symmetric
structure of the input.
Summary of Contributions: We consider the infinitewidth limit of neural networks taking as domain the space
of probability measures in order to formalize learning of
symmetric function families. We prove a necessary and
sufficient condition for which symmetric functions can be
learned. By controlling the amount of non-linear learning,
we partition the space of networks on measures into several function classes, proving a separation result among the
classes as well as proving a generalization result and empirically studying the performance of these classes to learn
symmetric functions on synthetic and real-world data.
Related Work Several works consider representing symmetric functions of fixed input size with invariant neural
networks, and in particular there are two main universal architectures, DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017) and PointNet (Qi
et al., 2017). An alternative generalization of DeepSets
is given in (Maron et al., 2019), which proves the universality of tensor networks invariant to any subgroup of the

