Learning Neural Network Subspaces

Mitchell Wortsman 1 Maxwell Horton 2 Carlos Guestrin 2 Ali Farhadi 2 Mohammad Rastegari 2

Abstract
Recent observations have advanced our understanding of the neural network optimization landscape, revealing the existence of (1) paths of
high accuracy containing diverse solutions and
(2) wider minima offering improved performance.
Previous methods observing diverse paths require
multiple training runs. In contrast we aim to leverage both property (1) and (2) with a single method
and in a single training run. With a similar computational cost as training one model, we learn lines,
curves, and simplexes of high-accuracy neural networks. These neural network subspaces contain
diverse solutions that can be ensembled, approaching the ensemble performance of independently
trained networks without the training cost. Moreover, using the subspace midpoint boosts accuracy, calibration, and robustness to label noise,
outperforming Stochastic Weight Averaging.

1. Introduction
Optimizing a neural network is often conceptualized as
ﬁnding a minimum in an objective landscape. Therefore,
understanding the geometric properties of this landscape
has emerged as an important goal. Recent work has illuminated many intriguing phenomena. Garipov et al. (2018);
Draxler et al. (2018) determine that independently trained
models are connected by a curve in weight space along
which loss remains low. Additionally, Frankle et al. (2020)
demonstrate that networks which share only a few epochs
of their optimization trajectory are connected by a linear
path of high accuracy. However, the connected regions in
weight space found by Garipov et al. (2018); Draxler et al.
(2018); Frankle et al. (2020) require approximately twice
the training time compared with standard training, as two
separate minima are ﬁrst identiﬁed then connected.

Figure 1. Schematic for learning a line of neural networks compared with standard training. The midpoint outperforms standard
training in terms of accuracy, calibration, and robustness. Models
near the endpoints enable high-accuracy ensembles in a single
training run.

tionally diverse regions in solution space. In contrast to prior
work, our aim is to directly parameterize and learn these
neural network subspaces from scratch in a single training
run. For instance, when training a line (Figure 1) we begin
with two randomly initialized endpoints and consider the
neural networks on the linear path which connects them. At
each iteration we use a randomly sampled network from the
line, backpropagating the training loss to update the endpoints. Central to our method is a regularization term which
encourages orthogonality between the endpoints, just as two
independently trained networks are orthogonal (Fort et al.,
2019). When the line settles into a low loss region we ﬁnd
that models from opposing ends are functionally diverse.

1
University of Washington (work completed during internship at Apple). 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Mitchell Wortsman
<mitchnw@cs.washington.edu>.

In addition to lines, we learn curves and simplexes of highaccuracy neural networks (Figure 2). We also uncover beneﬁts beyond functional diversity. Lines and simplexes identify and traverse large ﬂat minima, with endpoints near the
periphery. The midpoint corresponds to a less sharp solution,
which is associated with better generalization (Dziugaite &
Roy, 2018). Using this midpoint corresponds to ensembling
in weight space, producing a single model which requires
no additional compute during inference. We ﬁnd that taking
the midpoint of a simplex can boost accuracy, calibration,
and robustness to label noise.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The rest of the paper is organized via the following contributions:

This work is motivated by the existence of connected, func-

