Probabilistic Programs with Stochastic Conditioning

David Tolpin 1 Yuan Zhou 2 Tom Rainforth 3 Hongseok Yang 4

Abstract
We tackle the problem of conditioning probabilistic programs on distributions of observable variables. Probabilistic programs are usually conditioned on samples from the joint data distribution,
which we refer to as deterministic conditioning.
However, in many real-life scenarios, the observations are given as marginal distributions, summary
statistics, or samplers. Conventional probabilistic
programming systems lack adequate means for
modeling and inference in such scenarios. We
propose a generalization of deterministic conditioning to stochastic conditioning, that is, conditioning on the marginal distribution of a variable
taking a particular form. To this end, we first define the formal notion of stochastic conditioning
and discuss its key properties. We then show how
to perform inference in the presence of stochastic conditioning. We demonstrate potential usage
of stochastic conditioning on several case studies
which involve various kinds of stochastic conditioning and are difficult to solve otherwise. Although we present stochastic conditioning in the
context of probabilistic programming, our formalization is general and applicable to other settings.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic programs implement statistical models.
Mostly, probabilistic programming closely follows the
Bayesian approach (Kim & Pearl, 1983; Gelman et al.,
2013): a prior distribution is imposed on latent random
variables, and the posterior distribution is conditioned on
observations (data). The conditioning may take the form of
a hard constraint (a random variate must have a particular
value, e.g. as in Church (Goodman et al., 2008)), but a
more common practice is that conditioning is soft — the
observation is assumed to come from a distribution, and
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Center, DII 3 University of Oxford 4 School
of Computing, KAIST. Correspondence to: David Tolpin
<david.tolpin@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the probability (mass or density) of the observation given
the distribution is used in inference (Carpenter et al., 2017;
Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2014; Tolpin et al., 2016; Ge et al.,
2018). In the standard setting, the conditioning is deterministic — observations are fixed samples from the joint data
distribution. For example, in the model of an intensive care
unit patient, an observation may be a vector of vital sign
readings at a given time. This setting is well-researched,
widely applicable, and robust inference is possible (Hoffman & Gelman, 2011; Wood et al., 2014; TensorFlow, 2018;
Bingham et al., 2019).
However, instead of samples from the joint data distribution,
observations may be independent samples from marginal
data distributions of observable variables, summary statistics, or even data distributions themselves, provided in
closed form or as samplers. These cases naturally appear
in real life scenarios: samples from marginal distributions
arise when different observations are collected by different
parties, summary statistics are often used to represent data
about a large population, and data distributions may express
uncertainty during inference about future states of the world,
e.g. in planning. Consider the following situations:
• A study is performed in a hospital on a group of patients carrying a certain disease. To preserve the patients’ privacy, the information is collected and presented as summary statistics of each of the monitored
symptoms, such that only marginal distributions of the
symptoms are approximately characterized. It would
be natural to condition the model on a combination of
symptoms, but such combinations are not observable.
• A traveller regularly drives between two cities and
wants to minimize the time this takes. However, some
road sections may be closed due to bad weather, which
can only be discovered at a crossing adjacent to the
road section. A policy that minimizes average travel
time, given the probabilities of each road closure, is
required, but finding this policy requires us to condition on the distribution of states (Papadimitriou &
Yannakakis, 1989).
Most existing probabilistic programming systems, which
condition on samples from the joint data distribution, cannot
be directly applied to such scenarios for either model specification or performing inference. In principle, such models

