Near-Optimal Linear Regression under Distribution Shift

Qi Lei 1 Wei Hu 1 Jason D. Lee 1

Abstract
Transfer learning is essential when sufficient data
comes from the source domain, with scarce labeled data from the target domain. We develop
estimators that achieve minimax linear risk for linear regression problems under distribution shift.
Our algorithms cover different transfer learning
settings including covariate shift and model shift.
We also consider when data are generated from either linear or general nonlinear models. We show
that linear minimax estimators are within an absolute constant of the minimax risk even among
nonlinear estimators for various source/target distributions.

1. Introduction
The success of machine learning crucially relies on the availability of labeled data. The data labeling process usually
requires extensive human labor and can be very expensive
and time-consuming, especially for large datasets like ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). On the other hand, models trained
on one dataset, despite performing well on test data from
the same distribution they are trained on, are often sensitive
to distribution shifts, i.e., they do not adapt well to related
but different distributions. Even small distributional shift
can result in substantial performance degradation (Recht
et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2020).
Transfer learning has been an essential paradigm to tackle
the challenges associated with insufficient labeled data (Pan
& Yang, 2009; Weiss et al., 2016; Long et al., 2017). The
main idea is to make use of a source domain with plentiful
labeled data (e.g., ImageNet) and to learn a model that
performs well on the target domain (e.g., medical images)
where few or no labels are available. Despite the lack of
labeled data, we may still use unlabeled data from the target
domain, which are usually much easier to obtain and can
1
Princeton University.
Correspondence to:
Qi Lei
<qilei@princeton.edu>, Wei Hu <huwei@cs.princeton.edu>,
Jason D. Lee <jasonlee@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

provide helpful marginal distribution information about the
target domain. Although this approach is integral to many
applications, many fundamental questions are left open even
in very basic settings.
In this work, we focus on the setting of linear regression
under distribution shift and ask the fundamental question of
how to optimally learn a linear model for the target domain,
using labeled data from a source domain and unlabeled data
(and possibly limited unlabeled data) from the target domain. We design a two-stage meta-algorithm that addresses
this problem in various settings, including covariate shift
(i.e., when p(x) changes) and model shift (i.e., when p(y|x)
changes). Following the meta-algorithm, we develop estimators that achieve near minimax risk (up to universal
constant factors) among all linear estimation rules under
some standard data concentration properties. Here linear
estimators refer to all estimators that depend linearly on
the label vector; these include almost all popular estimators
known in linear regression, such as ridge regression and its
variants. When the second moment matrix of input variables
in source and target domains commute, we prove that our
estimators achieve near minimax risk among all possible
estimators. We also provide a separation result demonstrating our algorithm can be better than ridge regression by a
multiplicative factor of Õ(d−1/4 ).
A crucial insight from our results is that when covariate shift
is present, we need to apply data-dependent regularization
that adapts to changes in the input distribution. For linear
regression, this is characterized by the input covariances
of source and target tasks, estimated using unlabeled data.
Our experiments verify that our estimator has significant
improvement over ridge regression and similar heuristics.
1.1. Related work
Different types of distribution shift are introduced in
Storkey (2009); Quionero-Candela et al. (2009). Specifically, covariate shift occurs when the marginal distribution on P (x) changes from source to target domain (Heckman, 1979; Shimodaira, 2000; Huang et al., 2007). Wang
et al. (2014); Wang & Schneider (2015) tackle model shift
(P (y|x)) provided the change is smooth as a function of x.
Sun et al. (2011) design a two-stage reweighting method
based on both covariate shift and model shift. Other meth-

