How rotational invariance of common kernels prevents generalization
in high dimensions

Konstantin Donhauser 1 Mingqi Wu 1 Fanny Yang 1

Abstract
Kernel ridge regression is well-known to achieve
minimax optimal rates in low-dimensional settings. However, its behavior in high dimensions
is much less understood. Recent work establishes
consistency for high-dimensional kernel regression for a number of specific assumptions on the
data distribution. In this paper, we show that in
high dimensions, the rotational invariance property of commonly studied kernels (such as RBF,
inner product kernels and fully-connected NTK
of any depth) leads to inconsistent estimation unless the ground truth is a low-degree polynomial.
Our lower bound on the generalization error holds
for a wide range of distributions and kernels with
different eigenvalue decays. This lower bound
suggests that consistency results for kernel ridge
regression in high dimensions generally require
a more refined analysis that depends on the structure of the kernel beyond its eigenvalue decay.

1. Introduction
Traditional analysis establishes good generalization properties of kernel ridge regression when the dimension d is relatively small compared to the number of samples n. These
minimax optimal and consistency results, however, do not reflect observations for modern datasets with large d close to n.
High dimensional statistical theory (Vaart, 1998; Bühlmann
and Van De Geer, 2011; Wainwright, 2019) aims to fill the
gap and obtain bounds that are predictive for large d. One
popular approach is to consider the high-dimensional asymptotic regime n, d → ∞, d/nβ → γ resulting in bounds that
often match the behavior of empirical observations for large
finite dimension d quite well.
While recent work (Dobriban and Wager, 2018; Hastie et al.,
2019; Bartlett et al., 2020) establishes explicit asymptotic
upper bounds for the bias and variance for high-dimensional
linear regression, the results for kernel regression are less
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Konstantin Donhauser <donhausk@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

conclusive in the regime d/nβ → c with β ∈ (0, 1). In particular, even though several papers (Ghorbani et al., 2021;
2020; Liang et al., 2020a) show that the variance decreases
with the dimensionality of the data, the bounds on the bias
are inconclusive. On the one hand, Liang et al. (2020a)
prove asymptotic consistency for ground truth functions
with asymptotically bounded Hilbert norms for neural tangent kernels (NTK) and inner product (IP) kernels. In contrast, Ghorbani et al. (2021; 2020) show that for uniform
distributions on the product of two spheres, consistency
cannot be achieved unless the ground truth is a low-degree
polynomial. This polynomial approximation barrier can
also be observed for random feature and neural tangent
regression (Mei and Montanari, 2019; Mei et al., 2021a;
Ghorbani et al., 2021).
Notably, the two seemingly contradictory consistency
results hold for different distributional settings and are
based on vastly different proof techniques. While (Liang
et al., 2020a) proves consistency for general input distributions including isotropic Gaussians, the lower bounds
in the papers (Ghorbani et al., 2021; 2020) are limited to
data that is uniformly sampled from the product of two
spheres. Hence, it is a natural question to ask whether
the polynomial approximation barrier is a more general
phenomenon or restricted to the explicit settings studied
in (Ghorbani et al., 2021; 2020). Concretely, this paper
addresses the following question:
Can we overcome the polynomial approximation barrier
when considering different high-dimensional input distributions, eigenvalue decay rates or scalings of the kernel
function?
We unify previous distributional assumptions in one proof
framework and thereby characterize how the rotational invariance property of common kernels induces a bias towards
low-degree polynomials. Specifically, we show that the polynomial approximation barrier persists for
• a broad range of common rotationally invariant kernels
such as radial basis functions (RBF) with vastly different eigenvalue decay rates, inner product kernels and
NTK of any depth (Jacot et al., 2018).

