Domain Generalization using Causal Matching

Divyat Mahajan 1 Shruti Tople 2 Amit Sharma 1

Abstract
In the domain generalization literature, a common
objective is to learn representations independent
of the domain after conditioning on the class label. We show that this objective is not sufficient:
there exist counter-examples where a model fails
to generalize to unseen domains even after satisfying class-conditional domain invariance. We
formalize this observation through a structural
causal model and show the importance of modeling within-class variations for generalization.
Specifically, classes contain objects that characterize specific causal features, and domains can
be interpreted as interventions on these objects
that change non-causal features. We highlight
an alternative condition: inputs across domains
should have the same representation if they are
derived from the same object. Based on this objective, we propose matching-based algorithms
when base objects are observed (e.g., through
data augmentation) and approximate the objective when objects are not observed (MatchDG).
Our simple matching-based algorithms are competitive to prior work on out-of-domain accuracy for rotated MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, PACS,
and Chest-Xray datasets. Our method MatchDG
also recovers ground-truth object matches: on
MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, top-10 matches
from MatchDG have over 50% overlap with
ground-truth matches.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization is the task of learning a machine
learning model that can generalize to unseen data distributions, after training on more than one data distributions. For
example, a model trained on hospitals in one region may be
deployed to another, or an image classifier may be deployed
on slightly rotated images. Typically, it is assumed that
1

Microsoft Research, India 2 Microsoft Research, UK.. Correspondence to: Divyat Mahajan <divyatmahajan@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the different domains share some “stable” features whose
relationship with the output is invariant across domains (Piratla et al., 2020) and the goal is to learn those features. A
popular class of methods aim to learn representations that
are independent of domain conditional on class (Li et al.,
2018c;d; Ghifary et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2019), based on
evidence of their superiority (Zhao et al., 2019) to methods
that learn representations that are marginally independent
of domain (Muandet et al., 2013; Ganin et al., 2016).
In this work, we show that the class-conditional domaininvariant objective for representations is insufficient. We
provide counter-examples where a feature representation
satisfies the objective but still fails to generalize to new
domains, both theoretically and empirically. Specifically,
when the distribution of the stable features to be learnt varies
across domains, class-conditional objective is insufficient
to learn the stable features (they are optimal only when the
distribution of stable features is the same across domains).
Differing distributions of stable features within the same
class label is common in real-world datasets, e.g., in digit
recognition, the stable feature shape may differ based on
people’s handwriting, or medical images may differ based
on variation in body characteristics across people. Our
investigation reveals the importance of considering withinclass variation in the stable features.
To derive a better objective for domain generalization, we
represent the within-class variation in stable features using
a structural causal model, building on prior work (HeinzeDeml & Meinshausen, 2019) from single-domain generalization. Specifically, we construct a model for the data generation process that assumes each input is constructed from
a mix of stable (causal) and domain-dependent (non-causal)
features, and only the stable features cause the output. We
consider domain as a special intervention that changes the
non-causal features of an input, and posit that an ideal classifier should be based only on the causal features. Using
d-separation, we show that the correct objective is to build a
representation that is invariant conditional on each object,
where an object is defined as a set of inputs that share the
same causal features (e.g., photos of the same person from
different viewpoints or augmentations of an image in different rotations, color or background). When the object
variable is observed (e.g., in self-collected data or by dataset
augmentation), we propose a perfect-match regularizer for

