Infinite-Dimensional Optimization for Zero-Sum Games via Variational
Transport

Lewis Liu 1 Yufeng Zhang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3 Reza Babanezhad 4 Zhaoran Wang 2

Abstract
Game optimization has been extensively studied
when decision variables lie in a finite-dimensional
space, of which solutions correspond to pure
strategies at the Nash equilibrium (NE), and the
gradient descent-ascent (GDA) method works
widely in practice. In this paper, we consider
infinite-dimensional zero-sum games by a minmax distributional optimization problem over a
space of probability measures defined on a continuous variable set, which is inspired by finding a
mixed NE for finite-dimensional zero-sum games.
We then aim to answer the following question:
Will GDA-type algorithms still be provably efficient when extended to infinite-dimensional zerosum games?
To answer this question, we propose a particlebased variational transport algorithm based on
GDA in the functional spaces. Specifically, the
algorithm performs multi-step functional gradient
descent-ascent in the Wasserstein space via pushing two sets of particles in the variable space. By
characterizing the gradient estimation error from
variational form maximization and the convergence behavior of each player with different objective landscapes, we prove that a theoretical version of the generalized GDA algorithm converges
to the NE or the value of the game efficiently for a
class of games under the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL)
condition. To conclude, we provide complete statistical and convergence guarantees for solving an
infinite-dimensional zero-sum game via a provably efficient particle-based method. Additionally,
our work provides the first thorough statistical
analysis for the particle-based algorithm to learn
an objective functional with a variational form using universal approximators (i.e., neural networks
1

Université de Montréal, Canada 2 Northwestern University,
United States 3 Princeton University, United States 4 Samsung
SAIT AI Lab, Canada. Correspondence to: Lewis Liu <allis.algo2@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(NNs)), which is of independent interest.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a resurgence in zero-sum
games for machine learning applications, where two players’ strategies are usually parameterized with two finitedimensional decision variables. The optimal strategies define the pure NE in the sense that they identify two deterministic strategies. Motivating examples include generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (Nowozin et al., 2016; Sanjabi
et al., 2018a; Gidel et al., 2018a; Sinha et al., 2017), reinforcement learning (Dai et al., 2017; Ho & Ermon, 2016),
distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Van Parys et al.,
2017; Ghosh et al., 2018), and learning exponential families (Dai et al., 2018), among others. Such zero-sum games
have been extensively analyzed in convex-concave settings,
where a global Nash equilibrium (NE) can be computed by
gradient descent-ascent (GDA) type algorithms (Facchinei
& Pang, 2007; Hamedani et al., 2018; Monteiro & Svaiter,
2010; Nemirovski, 2004). Nonetheless, in the nonconvexnonconcave setting, these methods stagger, and a crucial
issue arises: What if the pure NE does not exist (Arora et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2019)? The finite-dimensional formulation naturally excludes a potentially better or even the only
existential mixed NE, and meanwhile is restricted to local
convergence in the absence of convexity.
To alleviate the concern above and to further understand the
difficulty at the boundary of contemporary game optimization, we consider a class of zero-sum infinite-dimensional
games where each decision variable is a probability measure representing the mixed strategies over the spaces of
pure strategies. In addition, we assume this distributional
games to satisfy Riemannian Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) and
smoothness conditions, which cover a range of nonconvexnonconcave landscapes and the practical training objectives
such as GANs with regularization (Arora et al., 2017). A
natural approach to distributional optimization problems is
the particle-based method (Raginsky et al., 2017; Wibisono,
2018; Zou et al., 2018), where stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics (SGLD) is adopted to draw a sample from the desired distribution via discretization of stochastic differential

