SoundDet: Polyphonic Sound Event Detection and Localization from Raw
Waveform
Yuhang He 1 Niki Trigoni 1 Andrew Markham 1

Abstract
We present a new framework SoundDet, which
is an end-to-end trainable and light-weight framework, for polyphonic moving sound event detection and localization. Prior methods typically approach this problem by preprocessing raw
waveform into time-frequency representations,
which is more amenable to process with wellestablished image processing pipelines. Prior
methods also detect in segment-wise manner, leading to incomplete and partial detections. SoundDet takes a novel approach and directly consumes the raw, multichannel waveform and treats
the spatio-temporal sound event as a complete
“sound-object” to be detected. Specifically, SoundDet consists of a backbone neural network and
two parallel heads for temporal detection and spatial localization, respectively. Given the large
sampling rate of raw waveform, the backbone
network first learns a set of phase-sensitive and
frequency-selective bank of filters to explicitly retain direction-of-arrival information, whilst being
highly computationally and parametrically efficient than standard 1D/2D convolution. A dense
sound event proposal map is then constructed to
handle the challenges of predicting events with
large varying temporal duration. Accompanying the dense proposal map are a temporal overlapness map and a motion smoothness map that
measure a proposal’s confidence to be an event
from temporal detection accuracy and movement
consistency perspective. Involving the two maps
guarantees SoundDet to be trained in a spatiotemporally unified manner. Experimental results
on the public DCASE dataset show the advantage of SoundDet on both segment-based and our
newly proposed event-based evaluation system.
1

Department of Computer Science,
University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Email:
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk.
Correspondence to: Andrew
Markham <andrew.markham@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Acoustic source detection, classification and localization is
a key task for a wide variety of applications, such as smart
speakers/assistants, interactive robotics and scene visualization. Broadly, a microphone array (typically with four
microphones) receives sound events from the environment,
which are corrupted by background noise. The task is to
firstly detect events, classify them, and finally estimate the
physical location or direction-of-arrival angle (DoA).
Early work has demonstrated how deep learning techniques
can be used to provide good performance for sound event
detection and localization. However, the majority of these
works treat event detection and localization as separate
problems(Grondin et al., 2019)(Tho Nguyen et al., 2020).
For example, a framewise classifier and regressor are used
separately (Tho et al., 2014)(Grondin & Glass, 2018) to
obtain event class and spatial location. In addition, they
also rely heavily on handcrafted pre-processing to convert
the raw waveforms into time-frequency representations (e.g.
log-mel spectrograms, gcc-phat(Brandstein & Silverman,
1997)) that are more amenable to process with mature 2-D
CNN networks like ResNet(He et al., 2016) followed by
LSTM(Hochreiter & Jug̈en, 1997) or GRU(Chung et al.,
2014) network for handling temporal dependencies. Lastly,
sound event detection is typically achieved following a
segment-based approach (e.g. cut the waveform into secondlong snippet) which inevitably leads to incomplete or partial
detection that span segment boundaries.
The relatively unexplored area becomes more challenging
when it considers polyphonic event detection where events
with different DoAs overlap temporally. In addition, rather
than necessarily being stationary, these events undergo a
motion. This increased realism leads to poor performance
or even incapability of existing methods(Mesaros et al.,
2019)(Grondin et al., 2019) that make a strong assumption
that only a single and stationary event exists at a time slot.
In this paper, we rethink the polyphonic sound event detection and localization problem. We draw inspiration from
the success of object detection in 2-D images and 3-D point
clouds, and think of an event as being analogous to a “soundobject” that has a specific location (spatial and temporal

