SigGPDE: Scaling Sparse Gaussian Processes on Sequential Data

Maud Lemercier 1 Cristopher Salvi 2 Thomas Cass 3 Edwin V. Bonilla 4 Theodoros Damoulas 1 Terry Lyons 2

Abstract
Making predictions and quantifying their uncertainty when the input data is sequential is a fundamental learning challenge, recently attracting
increasing attention. We develop SigGPDE, a new
scalable sparse variational inference framework
for Gaussian Processes (GPs) on sequential data.
Our contribution is twofold. First, we construct
inducing variables underpinning the sparse approximation so that the resulting evidence lower
bound (ELBO) does not require any matrix inversion. Second, we show that the gradients of the
GP signature kernel are solutions of a hyperbolic
partial differential equation (PDE). This theoretical insight allows us to build an efficient backpropagation algorithm to optimize the ELBO. We
showcase the significant computational gains of
SigGPDE compared to existing methods, while
achieving state-of-the-art performance for classification tasks on large datasets of up to 1 million
multivariate time series.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) models provide a sound mathematical framework for supervised learning that allows the incorporation of prior assumptions and provides uncertainty
estimates when modelling unknown functions (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2006). This is usually achieved by specifying
a GP prior over functions with a suitable covariance (or
kernel) along with a conditional likelihood. With this, the
problem boils down to that of estimating the posterior over
the function (values) given the observed data.
However, this posterior distribution is often analytically
intractable and, even when the conditional likelihood is a
Gaussian, GP models scale poorly on the number of obser1
University of Warwick and Alan Turing Institute 2 University
of Oxford and Alan Turing Institute 3 Imperial College London and Alan Turing Institute 4 CSIRO’s Data61 and The
University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Maud Lemercier
<maud.lemercier@warwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

vations N , with naïve approaches having a time complexity
O(N 3 ). From a wide range of approximate techniques
to scale inference in GP models to large datasets, “sparse”
methods based on variational inference (VI) have emerged
as one of the dominant approaches (Titsias, 2009). They consist in defining a family of approximate posteriors through
M inducing variables, and selecting the distribution in this
family that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the approximation and the true posterior. This is
achieved by minimizing the so-called evidence lower bound
(ELBO). When the likelihood factorizes over datapoints,
training can be done in minibatches of size Ñ resulting in
a per-iteration computational cost O(Ñ M 2 + M 3 ), where
the O(M 3 ) cost is due to the inversion of the covariance
matrix of the M inducing variables. This yields significant
computational savings when M  N .
In the seminal work of Titsias (2009) the inducing variables
correspond to evaluations of the GP at M pseudo input locations, which typically results in a dense covariance matrix
to invert. Subsequently, other ways of constructing inducing variables have been introduced in order to mitigate the
O(M 3 ) cost (Hensman et al., 2017; Burt et al., 2020b). The
core idea consists in defining (almost) independent inducing
variables, such that their covariance matrix is (almost) diagonal. These inducing variables correspond to projections of
the GP on basis functions, such that the covariance matrix
is a Gramian matrix with respect to some inner-product. Orthogonal basis functions yield diagonal Gramian matrices,
hence these methods are often referred to as variational orthogonal features (VOFs) . However existing VOF methods
are limited to stationary kernels on X ⊂ Rd (d ∈ N).
In this work we are interested in generalizing the VOF
paradigm to the case where the input space X is a set of
sequences of vectors in Rd . One may be tempted to naively
concatenate each vector in a sequence of length ` to form a
flat vector in R`d . However in this case existing VOF methods cannot be directly applied because they are limited to
low dimensional vectors, with d ≤ 8 (Dutordoir et al., 2020).
Thus, one needs kernel functions specifically designed for
sequential data. The signature kernel (Cass et al., 2020)
is a natural choice that has recently emerged as a leading
machine learning tool for learning on sequential data. In
particular, Toth & Oberhauser (2020) have proposed GPSig,
a GP inference framework leveraging an approximation of

