Active Covering

Heinrich Jiang 1 Afshin Rostamizadeh 1

Abstract
We analyze the problem of active covering, where
the learner is given an unlabeled dataset and can
sequentially label query examples. The objective
is to label query all of the positive examples in
the fewest number of total label queries. We show
under standard non-parametric assumptions that
a classical support estimator can be repurposed
as an offline algorithm attaining an excess query
e D/(D+1) ) compared to the optimal
cost of Θ(n
learner, where n is the number of datapoints and
D is the dimension. We then provide a simple
active learning method that attains an improved
e (D−1)/D ). Furthermore,
excess query cost of O(n
the proposed algorithms only require access to
the positive labeled examples, which in certain
settings provides additional computational and
privacy benefits. Finally, we show that the active
learning method consistently outperforms offline
methods as well as a variety of baselines on a
wide range of benchmark image-based datasets.

1. Introduction
Active learning is an increasingly important practical area
of machine learning as the amount of data grows faster than
the resources to label these datapoints, which can be costly.
In this paper, we introduce a variant of the active learning
problem, called active covering, where the goal is to label
query all of the positive examples given an unlabeled dataset
in as few total queries as possible.
Active covering arises in many machine learning problems.
In credit card fraud detection, one goal is to find the instances of fraud with as few queries as possible to the user
asking if a transaction was fraudulent (Awoyemi et al., 2017).
In mineral exploration, the goal is to find all of the valuable
resources with as little exploration as necessary (Acosta
et al., 2019). In computational drug discovery, one goal is to
discover all of the effective drugs with as few suggested can1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Heinrich Jiang <heinrichj@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

didates as possible, as running trials on each candidate can
be costly (Ou-Yang et al., 2012). In bank loan applications,
a label query means granting the loan to an applicant (as the
only way to know if the applicant would default or not)– as
such, negative label queries can be costly (Khandani et al.,
2010). Finally, many internet applications need to moderate
abusive content, and the goal is to quickly identify and remove all of the abusive content with as few label queries as
possible to human operators (Nobata et al., 2016).
For our analysis, we assume that an unlabeled pool of n
datapoints is generated by drawing i.i.d. samples from a
mixture of two distributions, where one of the distributions
represents the positive examples and the other the negative
examples. Our goal is to retrieve all of the positive examples
from this pool with as few label queries as possible. Furthermore, we assume that the support of the positive examples
is compact and its density function is lower bounded by
a positive quantity. Finally, we leverage a few additional
standard and mild nonparametric regularity assumptions
on the the curvature of the support of positive examples.
These assumptions allow for a wide range of distributions
(e.g. mixtures of truncated multivariate Gaussians), and in
particular the support of positives and negatives can be of
any shape and can arbitrarily overlap.
We first establish the optimal active covering algorithm,
which has knowledge of the support of positive examples.
This algorithm, thus, will query all of the examples that lie
in the support of positive examples (which will contain some
negative examples where there is an overlap with support
of negative examples). Then, the performance of any active
covering algorithm can be compared to the optimal learner
via the expected excess query cost that the algorithm incurs
in addition to what the optimal learner is expected to incur.
To begin with, we analyze an offline algorithm that is based
on a classical method in support estimation, providing both
upper and lower bounds on the excess query cost. We then
provide an active learning procedure based on the explorethen-commit strategy, where we first explore with an initial
random sample, and then exploit by querying the example
closest to any of the positive examples found thus far. We
show that the active learning procedure achieves a provably
better excess query cost than the offline algorithm.
The presented methods also have the beneficial property of

