Connecting Interpretability and Robustness in Decision Trees through
Separation
Michal Moshkovitz 1 Yao-Yuan Yang 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
Recent research has recognized interpretability
and robustness as essential properties of trustworthy classification. Curiously, a connection
between robustness and interpretability was empirically observed, but the theoretical reasoning
behind it remained elusive. In this paper, we
rigorously investigate this connection. Specifically, we focus on interpretation using decision
trees and robustness to l1 -perturbation. Previous works defined the notion of r-separation
as a sufficient condition for robustness. We
prove upper and lower bounds on the tree size
in case the data is r-separated. We then show
that a tighter bound on the size is possible when
the data is linearly separated. We provide the
first algorithm with provable guarantees both
on robustness, interpretability, and accuracy in
the context of decision trees. Experiments confirm that our algorithm yields classifiers that are
both interpretable and robust and have high accuracy. The code for the experiments is available
at https://github.com/yangarbiter/
interpretable-robust-trees.

1. Introduction
Deploying machine learning (ML) models in high-stakes
fields like healthcare, transportation, and law, requires the
ML models to be trustworthy. Essential ingredients of trustworthy models are explainability and robustness: if we do
not understand the reasons for the model’s prediction, we
cannot trust the model; if small changes in the input modifies
the model’s prediction, we cannot trust the model. Previous works hypothesized that there is a strong connection
between robustness and explainability. They empirically observed that robust models lead to better explanations (Chen
1
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to:
Michal Moshkovitz <mmoshkovitz@eng.ucsd.edu>, Yao-Yuan
Yang <yay005@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2019; Ross & Doshi-Velez, 2017). In this work, we
take a rigorous approach towards understanding the connection between robustness and interpretability.
We focus on binary predictions, where each example has d
features and the label of each example is in { 1, +1}, so an
ML model is a hypothesis f : Rd ! { 1, 1}. We want our
model to be (i) robust to adversarial `1 perturbations, i.e.,
for a small distortion, k k1 , the model’s response is similar,
f (x) = f (x + ), for most examples x, (ii) interpretable,
i.e., the model itself is simple and so self-explanatory, and
(iii) have high-accuracy. A common type of interpretable
models are decision trees (Molnar, 2019), which we call
tree-based explanation and focus on in this paper.
Prior literature (Yang et al., 2020b) showed that data separation is a sufficient condition for a robust and accurate
classifier. A dataset is r-separated if the distance between
the two closest examples with different labels is at least 2r.
Intuitively, if r is large, then the data is well-separated. A
separated data guarantees that points with opposite labels
are far from each other, which is essential to construct a
robust model.
In this paper, we examine whether separation implies treebased explanation. We first show that for a decision tree to
have accuracy strictly above 1/2 (i.e., better than random),
the data must be bounded. Henceforth, we assume that the
data is in [ 1, 1]d . We start with a trivial algorithm that
constructs a tree-based explanation with complexity (i.e.,
tree size) 2O(d/r) . For constant r, we show a matching lower
bound of 2⌦(d) . Thus, we have a matching lower and upper
bound on the explanation size of 2⇥(d) . Thus, separation
implies robustness and interpretability. Unfortunately, for a
large number of features, d, the explanation size is too high
to be useful in practice.
In this paper, we show that designing a simpler explanation is possible with a stronger separability assumption —
linear separability with a -margin. This assumption was
recently used to gain a better understanding of neural networks (Soudry et al., 2018; Nacson et al., 2019; Shamir,
2020). More formally, this assumption means that there is a
vector w with kwk = 1 such that yw·x
for each labeled
example (x, y) 2 Rd ⇥ { 1, 1} in the data (Shalev-Shwartz

