Revealing the Structure of Deep Neural Networks via Convex Duality

Tolga Ergen 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
We study regularized deep neural networks
(DNNs) and introduce a convex analytic framework to characterize the structure of the hidden
layers. We show that a set of optimal hidden
layer weights for a norm regularized DNN training problem can be explicitly found as the extreme points of a convex set. For the special case
of deep linear networks, we prove that each optimal weight matrix aligns with the previous layers via duality. More importantly, we apply the
same characterization to deep ReLU networks
with whitened data and prove the same weight
alignment holds. As a corollary, we also prove
that norm regularized deep ReLU networks yield
spline interpolation for one-dimensional datasets
which was previously known only for two-layer
networks. Furthermore, we provide closed-form
solutions for the optimal layer weights when data
is rank-one or whitened. The same analysis also
applies to architectures with batch normalization even for arbitrary data. Therefore, we obtain a complete explanation for a recent empirical observation termed Neural Collapse where
class means collapse to the vertices of a simplex
equiangular tight frame.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become extremely
popular due to their success in machine learning applications. Even though DNNs are highly over-parameterized
and non-convex, simple first-order algorithms, e.g.,
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), can be used to successfully train them. Moreover, recent work has shown that
highly over-parameterized networks trained with SGD obtain simple solutions that generalize well (Savarese et al.,
2019; Parhi & Nowak, 2019; Ergen & Pilanci, 2020a;b),
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tolga Ergen <ergen@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where two-layer ReLU networks with the minimum Euclidean norm solution and zero training error are proven
to fit a linear spline model in 1D regression. In addition, a recent series of work (Pilanci & Ergen, 2020; Ergen
& Pilanci, 2021; Sahiner et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021)
showed that regularized two-layer ReLU network training
problems exhibit a convex loss landscape in a higher dimensional space, which was previously attributed to the
benign impacts of overparameterization (Brutzkus et al.,
2017; Li & Liang, 2018; Du et al., 2018b; Ergen & Pilanci,
2019). Therefore, regularizing the solution towards smaller
norm weights might be the key to understand the generalization properties and loss landscape of DNNs. However,
analyzing DNNs is still theoretically elusive even in the absence of nonlinear activations. To this end, we study norm
regularized DNNs and develop a framework based on convex duality to characterize a set of optimal solutions to the
training problem.
Deep linear networks have been the subject of extensive
theoretical analysis due to their tractability. A line of research (Saxe et al., 2013; Arora et al., 2018a; Laurent &
Brecht, 2018; Du & Hu, 2019; Shamir, 2018) focused on
GD training dynamics, however, they lack the analysis of
solution set and generalization properties of deep networks.
Another line of research (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Arora
et al., 2019; Bhojanapalli et al., 2016) studied the generalization properties via matrix factorization and showed that
linear networks trained with GD converge to minimum nuclear norm solutions. Later on, (Arora et al., 2018b; Du
et al., 2018a) showed that gradient flow enforces the layer
weights to align. (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019) further proved
that each layer weight matrix is asymptotically rank-one.
These results provide insights to characterize the structure
of the optimal layer weights, however, they require multiple strong assumptions, e.g., linearly separable training
data and strictly decreasing loss function, which makes
the results impractical. Furthermore, (Zhang et al., 2019)
provided some characterizations for nonstandard networks,
which are valid for hinge loss with an uncommon regularization. Unlike these studies, we introduce a complete characterization for regularized deep network training problems
without requiring such assumptions.

