EMaQ: Expected-Max Q-Learning Operator
for Simple Yet Effective Ofﬂine and Online RL

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour * 1 2 Dale Schuurmans 3 Shixiang Shane Gu 3

Abstract
Off-policy reinforcement learning (RL) holds the
promise of sample-efﬁcient learning of decisionmaking policies by leveraging past experience.
However, in the ofﬂine RL setting – where a ﬁxed
collection of interactions are provided and no further interactions are allowed – it has been shown
that standard off-policy RL methods can signiﬁcantly underperform. In this work, we closely investigate an important simpliﬁcation of BCQ (Fujimoto et al., 2018a) – a prior approach for ofﬂine
RL – removing a heuristic design choice. Importantly, in contrast to their original theoretical considerations, we derive this simpliﬁed algorithm
through the introduction of a novel backup operator, Expected-Max Q-Learning (EMaQ), which
is more closely related to the resulting practical algorithm. Speciﬁcally, in addition to the
distribution support, EMaQ explicitly considers
the number of samples and the proposal distribution, allowing us to derive new sub-optimality
bounds. In the ofﬂine RL setting – the main focus
of this work – EMaQ matches and outperforms
prior state-of-the-art in the D4RL benchmarks (Fu
et al., 2020a). In the online RL setting, we demonstrate that EMaQ is competitive with Soft Actor
Critic (SAC). The key contributions of our empirical ﬁndings are demonstrating the importance
of careful generative model design for estimating behavior policies, and an intuitive notion of
complexity for ofﬂine RL problems. With its simple interpretation and fewer moving parts, such
as no explicit function approximator representing
the policy, EMaQ serves as a strong yet easy to
implement baseline for future work.
*Author goes by Kamyar. Work done while author was an
intern at Google. 1 Department of Computer Science, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour <kamyar@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Leveraging past interactions in order to improve a decisionmaking process is the hallmark goal of off-policy reinforcement learning (RL) (Precup et al., 2001; Degris et al., 2012).
Effectively learning from past experiences can signiﬁcantly
reduce the amount of online interaction required to learn a
good policy, and is a particularly crucial ingredient in settings where interactions are costly or safety is of great importance, such as robotics (Gu et al., 2017; Kalashnikov et al.,
2018a), health (Murphy et al., 2001), dialog agents (Jaques
et al., 2019), and education (Mandel et al., 2014). In recent
years, with neural networks taking a more central role in
the RL literature, there have been signiﬁcant advances in
developing off-policy RL algorithms for the function approximator setting, where policies and value functions are represented by neural networks (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Gu et al., 2016b;a; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto
et al., 2018b). Such algorithms, while off-policy in nature,
are typically trained in an online setting where algorithm
updates are interleaved with additional online interactions.
However, in purely ofﬂine RL settings, where a dataset of
interactions are provided ahead of time and no additional interactions are allowed, the performance of these algorithms
degrades drastically (Fujimoto et al., 2018a; Jaques et al.,
2019).
A number of recent methods have been developed to address
this shortcoming of off-policy RL algorithms. A particular
class of algorithms for ofﬂine RL that have enjoyed recent
success are those based on dynamic programming and value
estimation (Fujimoto et al., 2018a; Jaques et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020). Most
proposed algorithms are designed with a key intuition that
it is desirable to prevent policies from deviating too much
from the provided collection of interactions. By moving far
from the actions taken in the ofﬂine data, any subsequently
learned policies or value functions may not generalize well
and lead to the belief that certain actions will lead to better
outcomes than they actually would. Furthermore, due to
the dynamics of the MDP, taking out-of-distribution actions
may lead to states not covered in the ofﬂine data, creating
a snowball effect (Ross et al., 2011). In order to prevent
learned policies from straying from the ofﬂine data, various

