Sinkhorn Label Allocation:
Semi-Supervised Classification via Annealed Self-Training

Kai Sheng Tai 1 Peter Bailis 1 Gregory Valiant 1

Abstract
Self-training is a standard approach to semisupervised learning where the learner’s own predictions on unlabeled data are used as supervision during training. In this paper, we reinterpret
this label assignment process as an optimal transportation problem between examples and classes,
wherein the cost of assigning an example to a
class is mediated by the current predictions of the
classifier. This formulation facilitates a practical
annealing strategy for label assignment and allows for the inclusion of prior knowledge on class
proportions via flexible upper bound constraints.
The solutions to these assignment problems can
be efficiently approximated using Sinkhorn iteration, thus enabling their use in the inner loop of
standard stochastic optimization algorithms. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on
the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and SVHN datasets
in comparison with FixMatch, a state-of-the-art
self-training algorithm.

1. Introduction
In semi-supervised learning (SSL), we are given a
partially-labeled training set consisting of labeled examples {(xi , yi ) | i = 1, . . . , n` } and unlabeled examples
{xi | i = n` + 1, . . . , n}, with x ∈ X and y ∈ Y. Our
goal in this setting is to leverage our access to unlabeled
data in order to learn a predictor f : X → Y that is more
accurate than a predictor trained using the labeled data alone.
This setup is motivated by the high cost of obtaining human
annotations in practice, which results in a relative scarcity
of labeled examples in comparison with the total volume of
unlabeled data available for training. Consequently, we are
typically interested in the regime where n`  n.

sification tasks. Self-training, also known as self-labeling,
is an SSL method where the classifier’s own predictions
on unlabeled data are used as additional supervision during
training. Specifically, self-training involves the following
alternating process: in each iteration, the classifier’s outputs are used to assign labels to unlabeled examples; these
artificially labeled examples are then used as supervision
to update the parameters of the classifier. This intuitive
bootstrapping procedure was first studied in the signal processing and statistics communities (Scudder, 1965; McLachlan, 1975; Widrow et al.; Nowlan & Hinton, 1993) and was
later adopted for natural language processing (Yarowsky,
1995; Blum & Mitchell, 1998; Riloff et al., 2003) and computer vision applications (Rosenberg et al., 2005). More
recently, methods based on self-training have been used to
achieve strong empirical results on semi-supervised image
classification tasks (Xie et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2020).
The label assignment step is critical to the success of selftraining. Incorrect assignments during training may cause
further misclassifications in subsequent iterations, resulting
in a feedback loop of self-reinforcing errors that ultimately
yields a low-accuracy classifier. As a result, self-training
algorithms commonly incorporate various heuristics for
mitigating label noise. For instance, the state-of-the-art
FixMatch algorithm (Sohn et al., 2020) uses a confidence
thresholding rule wherein gradient updates only involve examples that are classified with a model probability above a
user-defined threshold.
Our main contribution is a new label assignment method,
Sinkhorn Label Allocation (SLA), that models the task of
matching unlabeled examples to labels as a convex optimization problem. More precisely: in a classification problem
where Y = {1, . . . , k}, we seek an assignment Q ∈ Rn×k
of n examples
P to k classes that minimizes the total assignment cost ij Qij Cij (θ), where the cost Cij (θ) of assigning example i to class j is given by the corresponding negative log probability under the model distribution pθ :

This paper focuses on self-training for semi-supervised clas1

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kai Sheng Tai <kst@cs.stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Cij (θ) = − log pθ (j | xi ).

(1)

This formulation is desirable for several reasons. First,
we are able to subsume several commonly used label assignment heuristics within a single, principled optimization

