ConViT: Improving Vision Transformers
with Soft Convolutional Inductive Biases
Stéphane d’Ascoli 1 2 Hugo Touvron 2 Matthew L. Leavitt 2 Ari S. Morcos 2 Giulio Biroli 1 2 Levent Sagun 2

Abstract
Convolutional architectures have proven extremely successful for vision tasks. Their hard
inductive biases enable sample-efficient learning,
but come at the cost of a potentially lower performance ceiling. Vision Transformers (ViTs) rely
on more flexible self-attention layers, and have
recently outperformed CNNs for image classification. However, they require costly pre-training
on large external datasets or distillation from pretrained convolutional networks. In this paper, we
ask the following question: is it possible to combine the strengths of these two architectures while
avoiding their respective limitations? To this
end, we introduce gated positional self-attention
(GPSA), a form of positional self-attention which
can be equipped with a “soft” convolutional inductive bias. We initialize the GPSA layers to
mimic the locality of convolutional layers, then
give each attention head the freedom to escape
locality by adjusting a gating parameter regulating the attention paid to position versus content information. The resulting convolutionallike ViT architecture, ConViT, outperforms the
DeiT (Touvron et al., 2020) on ImageNet, while
offering a much improved sample efficiency. We
further investigate the role of locality in learning by first quantifying how it is encouraged in
vanilla self-attention layers, then analyzing how it
is escaped in GPSA layers. We conclude by presenting various ablations to better understand the
success of the ConViT. Our code and models are
released publicly at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/convit.

1
Department of Physics, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris,
France 2 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Stéphane d’Ascoli <stephane.dascoli@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning over the last decade has largely
been fueled by models with strong inductive biases, allowing efficient training across domains (Mitchell, 1980;
Goodfellow et al., 2016). The use of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1998; 1989), which have
become ubiquitous in computer vision since the success of
AlexNet in 2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2017), epitomizes this
trend. Inductive biases are hard-coded into the architectural
structure of CNNs in the form of two strong constraints
on the weights: locality and weight sharing. By encouraging translation equivariance (without pooling layers) and
translation invariance (with pooling layers) (Scherer et al.,
2010; Schmidhuber, 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016), the
convolutional inductive bias makes models more sampleefficient and parameter-efficient (Simoncelli & Olshausen,
2001; Ruderman & Bialek, 1994). Similarly, for sequencebased tasks, recurrent networks with hard-coded memory
cells have been shown to simplify the learning of long-range
dependencies (LSTMs) and outperform vanilla recurrent
neural networks in a variety of settings (Gers et al., 1999;
Sundermeyer et al., 2012; Greff et al., 2017).
However, the rise of models based purely on attention in
recent years calls into question the necessity of hard-coded
inductive biases. First introduced as an add-on to recurrent
neural networks for Sequence-to-Sequence models (Bahdanau et al., 2014), attention has led to a breakthrough in
Natural Language Processing through the emergence of
Transformer models, which rely solely on a particular kind
of attention: Self-Attention (SA) (Vaswani et al., 2017).
The strong performance of these models when pre-trained
on large datasets has quickly led to Transformer-based approaches becoming the default choice over recurrent models
like LSTMs (Devlin et al., 2018).
In vision tasks, the locality of CNNs impairs the ability to
capture long-range dependencies, whereas attention does
not suffer from this limitation. Chen et al. (2018) and Bello
et al. (2019) leveraged this complementarity by augmenting
convolutional layers with attention. More recently, Ramachandran et al. (2019) ran a series of experiments replacing some or all convolutional layers in ResNets with attention, and found the best performing models used convolu-

