Fast Stochastic Bregman Gradient Methods:
Sharp Analysis and Variance Reduction

Radu-Alexandru Dragomir * 1 2 Mathieu Even * 2 3 Hadrien Hendrikx * 2 3

Abstract

goal is to recover an unknown signal from a large number
of noisy observations. First-order methods are often very
efficient for solving problems such as (1), but computing a
gradient ∇f might be very expensive for large-scale problems (large number of components fξ ), and even impossible
in the case of true risk minimization (infinite number of
fξ ). In this case, stochastic gradient methods have proven
to be particularly effective thanks to their low cost per iteration. The simplest one, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD),
consists in updating xt as


1
xt+1 = arg min ηt gt> x + kx − xt k2
x∈C
2

We study the problem of minimizing a relativelysmooth convex function using stochastic Bregman
gradient methods. We first prove the convergence
of Bregman Stochastic Gradient Descent (BSGD)
to a region that depends on the noise (magnitude
of the gradients) at the optimum. In particular,
BSGD with a constant step-size converges to the
exact minimizer when this noise is zero (interpolation setting, in which the data is fit perfectly).
Otherwise, when the objective has a finite sum
structure, we show that variance reduction can be
used to counter the effect of noise. In particular,
fast convergence to the exact minimizer can be
obtained under additional regularity assumptions
on the Bregman reference function. We illustrate
the effectiveness of our approach on two key applications of relative smoothness: tomographic
reconstruction with Poisson noise and statistical
preconditioning for distributed optimization.

where gt is a gradient estimate such that E [gt ] = ∇f (xt ).
In our case, a natural choice would be gt = ∇fξt (xt ) for
some ξt . The choice of the step size ηt is crucial for obtaining good performances and is typically related to the
smoothness of f with respect to the Euclidean norm.
Beyond simply adapting the step size, a powerful generalization of SGD consists in refining the geometry and performing instead Bregman gradient (a.k.a mirror) steps as

1. Introduction


xt+1 = arg min ηt gt> x + Dh (x, xt ) ,
x∈C

We are interested in solving the minimization problem
min f (x), where f (x) = Eξ [fξ (x)] ,
x∈C

(1)

where C is a closed convex subset of Rd and fξ are differentiable convex functions. These problems typically arise
in machine learning when performing (empirical) risk minimization, in which case fξ is for instance a loss function for
some random sample ξ. Problem (1) is also encountered in
signal processing applications such as image deblurring or
tomographic reconstruction inverse problems, in which the
*

1
Equal contribution
Université Toulouse 1 Capitole
D.I. Ecole Normale Supérieure, CRNS, PSL University,
Paris 3 INRIA Paris. Correspondence to: Radu-Alexandru
Dragomir
<radu-alexandru.dragomir@inria.fr>,
Mathieu Even <mathieu.even@ens.psl.eu>, Hadrien Hendrikx
<hadrien.hendrikx@inria.fr>.

(2)

where the Euclidean distance has been replaced by the
Bregman divergence with respect to a reference function h,
which writes:
Dh (x, y) = h(x) − h(y) − ∇h(y)> (x − y),

(3)

for all x ∈ dom h, y ∈ int dom h. We make the following
blanket assumptions on h throughout the article, which
guarantee well-posedness of the update (2).
Assumption 1. The function h : Rn → R ∪ {∞} is twice
continuously differentiable and strictly convex on int C.
Moreover, for every y ∈ Rd , the problem

2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

min h(x) − x> y
x∈C

has a unique solution, which lies in int C.
The standard SGD algorithm corresponds to the case where
h = 12 k·k2 . However, a different choice of h might better fit

