Continual Learning in the Teacher-Student Setup: Impact of Task Similarity

Sebastian Lee 1 Sebastian Goldt 2 Andrew Saxe 3 4 5

Abstract

Continual learning—the ability to learn many
tasks in sequence—is critical for artificial learning
systems. Yet standard training methods for deep
networks often suffer from catastrophic forgetting,
where learning new tasks erases knowledge of earlier tasks. While catastrophic forgetting labels the
problem, the theoretical reasons for interference
between tasks remain unclear. Here, we attempt
to narrow this gap between theory and practice by
studying continual learning in the teacher-student
setup. We extend previous analytical work on
two-layer networks in the teacher-student setup
to multiple teachers. Using each teacher to represent a different task, we investigate how the
relationship between teachers affects the amount
of forgetting and transfer exhibited by the student when the task switches. In line with recent
work, we find that when tasks depend on similar features, intermediate task similarity leads to
greatest forgetting. However, feature similarity
is only one way in which tasks may be related.
The teacher-student approach allows us to disentangle task similarity at the level of readouts
(hidden-to-output weights) and features (input-tohidden weights). We find a complex interplay
between both types of similarity, initial transfer/forgetting rates, maximum transfer/forgetting,
and long-term transfer/forgetting. Together, these
results help illuminate the diverse factors contributing to catastrophic forgetting.

1
Imperial College, London, UK 2 International School of
Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy 3 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK 4 CIFAR
Azrieli Global Scholars program, CIFAR, Toronto, Canada
5
Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Sebastian
Lee <sebastian.lee14@imperial.ac.uk>, Andrew Saxe <andrew.saxe@psy.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
One of the biggest open challenges in machine learning is
the ability to effectively perform continual learning: learning tasks sequentially. A significant hurdle in getting systems to do this effectively is that models trained on task A
followed by task B will struggle to learn task B without
un-learning task A. This is known as catastrophic interference or catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Goodfellow et al., 2013), which occurs because weights
that contain important information for the first task are overwritten by information relevant to the second. The harmful
effects of catastrophic forgetting are not limited to continual
learning. They also play a role in multi-task learning, reinforcement learning and standard supervised learning, for
example under distribution shift (Arivazhagan et al., 2019;
Toneva et al., 2018).
As a result, the phenomenon has received increased interest in recent years. In neuroscience, much work has been
done to understand the brain’s ability to consolidate learning from earlier tasks, thereby making it relatively robust to
forgetting (Flesch et al., 2018; Cichon & Gan, 2015; Yang
et al., 2014). Similarly, a series of works has started a systematic empirical analysis of this phenomenon in deep networks (Parisi et al., 2019; Mirzadeh et al., 2020; Neyshabur
et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2019; Ruder & Plank, 2017).
These works consistently observed a counter-intuitive role
of the similarity between tasks A and B, with intermediate
task similarity leading to worst forgetting (Ramasesh et al.,
2020; Doan et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2019).
The purpose of this work is to tackle continual learning from
the complementary perspective of high-dimensional teacherstudent models (Gardner & Derrida, 1989; Seung et al.,
1992; Biehl & Schwarze, 1993; Zdeborová & Krzakala,
2016). These models are a popular framework for studying
machine learning problems in a controlled setting, and have
recently seen a surge of interest in attempts to understand
generalisation in deep neural networks.
Main contributions
• We analyse continual learning in two-layer neural networks by deriving a closed set of equations which predict the test error of the network trained on a succession
of tasks using one-pass (or online) SGD, extending

