Large-Scale Meta-Learning with Continual Trajectory Shifting

JaeWoong Shin * 1 Hae Beom Lee * 1 Boqing Gong 2 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3

Abstract
Meta-learning of shared initialization parameters has shown to be highly effective in solving
few-shot learning tasks. However, extending the
framework to many-shot scenarios, which may
further enhance its practicality, has been relatively
overlooked due to the technical difficulties of
meta-learning over long chains of inner-gradient
steps. In this paper, we first show that allowing
the meta-learners to take a larger number of inner gradient steps better captures the structure
of heterogeneous and large-scale task distributions, thus results in obtaining better initialization
points. Further, in order to increase the frequency
of meta-updates even with the excessively long
inner-optimization trajectories, we propose to estimate the required shift of the task-specific parameters with respect to the change of the initialization
parameters. By doing so, we can arbitrarily increase the frequency of meta-updates and thus
greatly improve the meta-level convergence as
well as the quality of the learned initializations.
We validate our method on a heterogeneous set
of large-scale tasks and show that the algorithm
largely outperforms the previous first-order metalearning methods in terms of both generalization
performance and convergence, as well as multitask learning and fine-tuning baselines.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998)
is a framework for learning a learning process itself by
extracting common knowledge over a task distribution. As
this meta-knowledge allows task learners to adapt to newly
given tasks in a sample efficient manner, meta-learning has
frequently been used for solving few-shot learning problems
where each of the task learners is given only a few training
*
Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of AI, KAIST, South
Korea 2 Google, LA 3 AITRICS, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

examples (Lake et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Santoro
et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017). While there
exists a vast literature on meta-learning methods that tackle
few-shot learning, one of the most popular approaches is
the optimization-based method such as Model Agnostic
Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), which aims
to improve the generalization ability of few-shot learners
by learning good initialization parameters, from which the
model can rapidly adapt to novel tasks within only a few
gradient steps.
Then, a natural question is if the same meta-learning strategy is applicable to tasks with a larger number of examples, for instance STL10 (Coates et al., 2011) and Stanford
Cars (Krause et al., 2013). It is well known that such standard learning tasks with a large number of training examples
also benefit from good initialization parameters for better
convergence and generalization, when compared with random initializations (Kornblith et al., 2019). A prevalent
approach to enhance generalization for large-scale tasks
is to pre-train the model with a large dataset such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), and further finetune the
pretrained model parameters with the target dataset. This
demonstrates that knowledge transfer is also highly beneficial for tasks with larger training sets.
However, the meta-learning of shared initialization parameters for many-shot learning problems has not received much
attention. One reason may be that ImageNet pretraining
has been practically effective for most of the standard object classification tasks or other computer vision problems.
However, Kornblith et al. (2019) empirically show that ImageNet pretraining may not obtain meaningful performance
gains on fine-grained classification tasks. This is because
fine-grained classification tasks may require features that
are more domain-specific or local for the discrimination
of highly similar visual classes, for which the ImageNet
features learned for general object classification may be ineffective. In other words, pretraining neural networks only
on a single large-scale dataset will not sufficiently cover the
heterogeneity of datasets and tasks that the model needs to
handle at inference time. One of the effective ways to handle
such heterogeneity is to train the model via meta-learning
over a heterogeneous task distribution.
There have been several attempts to apply meta-learning to

