Improving Molecular Graph Neural Network Explainability
with Orthonormalization and Induced Sparsity

Ryan Henderson 1 Djork-Arné Clevert 1 Floriane Montanari 1

Abstract
Rationalizing which parts of a molecule drive the
predictions of a molecular graph convolutional
neural network (GCNN) can be difficult. To help,
we propose two simple regularization techniques
to apply during the training of GCNNs: Batch
Representation Orthonormalization (BRO) and
Gini regularization. BRO, inspired by molecular
orbital theory, encourages graph convolution operations to generate orthonormal node embeddings.
Gini regularization is applied to the weights of
the output layer and constrains the number of dimensions the model can use to make predictions.
We show that Gini and BRO regularization can
improve the accuracy of state-of-the-art GCNN attribution methods on artificial benchmark datasets.
In a real-world setting, we demonstrate that medicinal chemists significantly prefer explanations extracted from regularized models. While we only
study these regularizers in the context of GCNNs,
both can be applied to other types of neural networks.

1. Introduction
Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have
shown particular promise in predicting properties of small
molecules. These properties can be biological activity
against protein targets (Yang et al., 2020; Sakai et al., 2021;
Nguyen et al., 2020), more general pharmacokinetics and
physicochemical properties (Montanari et al., 2019; Peng
et al., 2020; Feinberg et al., 2020) or toxicity (Ma et al.,
2020). Using accurate in silico predictions of such properties to prioritize the synthesis of compounds can lead to
tremendous time and cost savings during drug discovery
projects.
1
Digital Technologies, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Ryan Henderson <ryan.henderson@bayer.com>,
Floriane Montanari <floriane.montanari@bayer.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, the opaque nature of artificial neural networks
has long been a stumbling block for wider adoption. In
particular, the difficulty in extracting a straightforward rationalization for a molecular prediction in terms of atomic
or fragment contributions limits the adoption of machine
learning models among medicinal chemists.
What makes a good rationalization? In the case of explaining molecular properties, the answer is often site attribution.
A chemist, when presented with an image of a molecule,
may infer properties like solubility and melting point from
a few specific atoms and fragments rather than the molecule
as a whole. Explaining the predictions in terms of atomic
contributions helps build trust in deep learning for molecular
properties.

2. Our Contribution
In a GCNN, particular combinations of dimensions of
the learned representations can be visually mapped onto
the molecule after any convolution. Existing attribution
methods for GCNNs make use of that fact. If these
dimensions are correlated or if a particular prediction
makes use of very many dimensions, the resulting explanations may be confusing and overwhelming for the
end user. To mitigate these problems, we introduce two
new methods to improve the interpretability of GCNN
predictions: Batch Representation Orthonormalization
(BRO) and Gini regularization. Both are available in
the Pytorch Geometric library (Fey & Lenssen, 2019):
https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/modules/nn.html#functional.
An overview of our approach is shown in Figure 1.
2.1. Batch Representation Orthonormalization (BRO)
Our work is loosely inspired by linear combination of atomic
orbitals (LCAO) theory (Albright et al., 2013). In LCAO
theory, a complete set of molecular orbitals ψ is built from
the superposition of an orthonormal
PN basis set of atomic
electronic wavefunctions: ψj = i cij φi where φi are the
electronic atomic basis functions. The molecular orbitals
must also be mutually orthonormal–that is, the coefficients
cij must be normalized so that ψj∗ ψj = 1 and ψj∗ ψj 0 = 0.

