Exploiting Shared Representations for Personalized Federated Learning

Liam Collins 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Aryan Mokhtari 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have shown the ability to
extract universal feature representations from data
such as images and text that have been useful
for a variety of learning tasks. However, the
fruits of representation learning have yet to be
fully-realized in federated settings. Although data
in federated settings is often non-i.i.d. across
clients, the success of centralized deep learning
suggests that data often shares a global feature
representation, while the statistical heterogeneity across clients or tasks is concentrated in the
labels. Based on this intuition, we propose a
novel federated learning framework and algorithm
for learning a shared data representation across
clients and unique local heads for each client.
Our algorithm harnesses the distributed computational power across clients to perform many
local-updates with respect to the low-dimensional
local parameters for every update of the representation. We prove that this method obtains linear
convergence to the ground-truth representation
with near-optimal sample complexity in a linear
setting, demonstrating that it can efficiently reduce the problem dimension for each client. Further, we provide extensive experimental results
demonstrating the improvement of our method
over alternative personalized federated learning
approaches in heterogeneous settings.

1. Introduction
Many of the most heralded successes of modern machine
learning have come in centralized settings, wherein a single
model is trained on a large amount of centrally-stored data.
The growing number of data-gathering devices, however,
calls for a distributed architecture to train models. Federated learning aims at addressing this issue by providing a
platform in which a group of clients collaborate to learn

effective models for each client by leveraging the local computational power, memory, and data of all clients (McMahan
et al., 2017). The task of coordinating between the clients
is fulfilled by a central server that combines the models
received from the clients at each round and broadcasts the
updated information to them. Importantly, the server and
clients are restricted to methods that satisfy communication and privacy constraints, preventing them from directly
applying centralized techniques.
However, one of the most important challenges in federated
learning is the issue of data heterogeneity, where the underlying data distribution of client tasks could be substantially
different from each other. In such settings, if the server
and clients learn a single shared model (e.g., by minimizing
average loss), the resulting model could perform poorly for
many of the clients in the network (and also not generalize
well across diverse data (Jiang et al., 2019)). In fact, for
some clients, it might be better to simply use their own
local data (even if it is small) to train a local model; see
Figure 1. Finally, the (federated) trained model may not
generalize well to unseen clients that have not participated
in the training process. These issues raise this question:
“How can we exploit the data and computational
power of all clients in data heterogeneous settings
to learn a personalized model for each client?”
We address this question by taking advantage of the common representation among clients. Specifically, we view
the data heterogeneous federated learning problem as n parallel learning tasks that they possibly have some common
structure, and our goal is to learn and exploit this common representation to improve the quality of each client’s
model. Indeed, this would be in line with our understanding
from centralized learning, where we have witnessed success
in training multiple tasks simultaneously by leveraging a
common (low-dimensional) representation in popular machine learning tasks (e.g., image classification, next-word
prediction) (Bengio et al., 2013; LeCun et al., 2015).

University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Liam Collins <liamc@utexas.edu>.

Main Contributions. We introduce a novel federated learning framework and an associated algorithm for data heterogeneous settings. Next, we present our main contributions.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(i) FedRep Algorithm. Federated Representation Learn-

1

