Bridging Multi-Task Learning and Meta-Learning:
Towards Efficient Training and Effective Adaptation

Haoxiang Wang 1 Han Zhao 1 Bo Li 1

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) aims to improve the
generalization of several related tasks by learning
them jointly. As a comparison, in addition to the
joint training scheme, modern meta-learning allows unseen tasks with limited labels during the
test phase, in the hope of fast adaptation over them.
Despite the subtle difference between MTL and
meta-learning in the problem formulation, both
learning paradigms share the same insight that the
shared structure between existing training tasks
could lead to better generalization and adaptation.
In this paper, we take one important step further
to understand the close connection between these
two learning paradigms, through both theoretical analysis and empirical investigation. Theoretically, we first demonstrate that MTL shares
the same optimization formulation with a class
of gradient-based meta-learning (GBML) algorithms. We then prove that for over-parameterized
neural networks with sufficient depth, the learned
predictive functions of MTL and GBML are close.
In particular, this result implies that the predictions given by these two models are similar over
the same unseen task. Empirically, we corroborate our theoretical findings by showing that,
with proper implementation, MTL is competitive against state-of-the-art GBML algorithms
on a set of few-shot image classification benchmarks. Since existing GBML algorithms often
involve costly second-order bi-level optimization,
our first-order MTL method is an order of magnitude faster on large-scale datasets such as miniImageNet. We believe this work could help bridge
the gap between these two learning paradigms,
and provide a computationally efficient alternative
to GBML that also supports fast task adaptation.
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
Correspondence to: Haoxiang Wang <hwang264@illinois.edu>,
Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning has demonstrated its efficiency and effectiveness on learning shared representations with training
data from multiple related tasks simultaneously (Caruana,
1997; Ruder, 2017; Zhang & Yang, 2017). Such shared
representations could transfer to many real-world applications, such as object detection (Zhang et al., 2014), image
segmentation (Kendall et al., 2018), multi-lingual machine
translation (Dong et al., 2015), and language understanding
evaluation (Wang et al., 2019). On the other hand, in addition to the joint training scheme, modern meta-learning
can leverage the shared representation to fast adapt to unseen tasks with only minimum limited data during the test
phase (Hospedales et al., 2020). As a result, meta-learning
has drawn increasing attention and been applied to a wide
range of learning tasks, including few-shot learning (Snell
et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2019b), meta
reinforcement learning (Finn et al., 2017), speech recognition (Hsu et al., 2020) and bioinformatics (Luo et al., 2019).
Despite their subtle differences in problem formulation and
objectives, both MTL and meta-learning aim to leverage the
correlation between different tasks to enable better generalization to either seen or unseen tasks. However, a rigorous
exploration of this intuitive observation is severely lacking
in the literature. As a result, while being effective on fast
adaptation to unseen tasks, many meta-learning algorithms
still suffer from expensive computational costs (Nichol et al.,
2018a; Antoniou et al., 2019; Hospedales et al., 2020). On
the other hand, while being efficient in training, due to its
problem formulation, MTL does not allow adaptation to
unseen tasks, at least in a straightforward manner. Hence, a
natural question to ask is,
Can we combine the best of both worlds from MTL
and meta-learning, i.e., fast adaptation to unseen
tasks with efficient training?
To answer this question, one needs to first understand the relationship between MTL and meta-learning in greater depth.
To this end, in this paper, we take the first attempt with
the goal to bridge these two learning paradigms. In particular, we focus on a popular class of meta-learning methods, gradient-based meta-learning (GBML), which takes a

