An Exact Solver for the Weston-Watkins SVM Subproblem

Yutong Wang 1 Clayton Scott 1 2

Abstract
Recent empirical evidence suggests that the
Weston-Watkins support vector machine is
among the best performing multiclass extensions of the binary SVM. Current state-of-the-art
solvers repeatedly solve a particular subproblem
approximately using an iterative strategy. In this
work, we propose an algorithm that solves the
subproblem exactly using a novel reparametrization of the Weston-Watkins dual problem. For
linear WW-SVMs, our solver shows significant
speed-up over the state-of-the-art solver when the
number of classes is large. Our exact subproblem
solver also allows us to prove linear convergence
of the overall solver.

1. Introduction
Support vector machines (SVMs) (Boser et al., 1992;
Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) are a powerful class of algorithms
for classification. In the large scale studies by FernándezDelgado et al. (2014) and by Klambauer et al. (2017),
SVMs are shown to be among the best performing classifers.
The original formulation of the SVM handles only binary
classification. Subsequently, several variants of multiclass
SVMs have been proposed (Lee et al., 2004; Crammer
& Singer, 2001; Weston & Watkins, 1999). However, as
pointed out by Doǧan et al. (2016), no variant has been
considered canonical.
The empirical study of Doǧan et al. (2016) compared nine
prominent variants of multiclass SVMs and demonstrated
that the Weston-Watkins (WW) and Crammer-Singer (CS)
SVMs performed the best with the WW-SVM holding a
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan. 2 Department of Statistics, University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Yutong Wang <yutongw@umich.edu>, Clayton Scott <clayscot@umich.edu>.

slight edge in terms of both efficiency and accuracy. This
work focuses on the computational issues of solving the
WW-SVM optimization efficiently.
SVMs are typically formulated as quadratic programs.
State-of-the-art solvers such as LIBSVM (Chang & Lin,
2011) and LIBLINEAR (Fan et al., 2008) apply block coordinate descent to the associated dual problem, which entails repeatedly solving many small subproblems. For the
binary case, these subproblems are easy to solve exactly.
The situation in the multiclass case is more complex, where
the form of the subproblem depends on the variant of the
multiclass SVM. For the CS-SVM, the subproblem can be
solved exactly in O(k log k) time where k is the number
of classes (Crammer & Singer, 2001; Duchi et al., 2008;
Blondel et al., 2014; Condat, 2016). However, for the WWSVM, only iterative algorithms that approximate the subproblem minimizer have been proposed, and these lack runtime guarantees (Keerthi et al., 2008; Igel et al., 2008).
In this work, we propose an algorithm called Walrus1 that
finds the exact solution of the Weston-Watkins subproblem in O(k log k) time. We implement Walrus in C++ inside the LIBLINEAR framework, yielding a new solver for
the linear WW-SVM. For datasets with large number of
classes, we demonstrate significant speed-up over the stateof-the-art linear solver Shark (Igel et al., 2008). We also
rigorously prove the linear convergence of block coordinate
descent for solving the dual problem of linear WW-SVM,
confirming an assertion of Keerthi et al. (2008).
1.1. Related works
Existing literature on solving the optimization from SVMs
largely fall into two categories: linear and kernel SVM
solvers. The seminal work of Platt (1998) introduced the
sequential minimal optimization (SMO) for solving kernel
SVMs. Subsequently, many SMO-type algorithms were introduced which achieve faster convergence with theoretical
guarantees (Keerthi et al., 2001; Fan et al., 2005; Steinwart
et al., 2011; Torres-Barrán et al., 2021).
1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

WW-subproblem analytic log-linear runtime solver

