Off-Belief Learning

Hengyuan Hu 1 Adam Lerer 1 Brandon Cui 1 Luis Pineda 1 Noam Brown 1 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
The standard problem setting in Dec-POMDPs is
self-play, where the goal is to find a set of policies that play optimally together. Policies learned
through self-play may adopt arbitrary conventions
and implicitly rely on multi-step reasoning based
on fragile assumptions about other agents’ actions
and thus fail when paired with humans or independently trained agents at test time. To address
this, we present off-belief learning (OBL). At each
timestep OBL agents follow a policy π1 that is
optimized assuming past actions were taken by a
given, fixed policy (π0 ), but assuming that future
actions will be taken by π1 . When π0 is uniform
random, OBL converges to an optimal policy that
does not rely on inferences based on other agents’
behavior (an optimal grounded policy). OBL can
be iterated in a hierarchy, where the optimal policy from one level becomes the input to the next,
thereby introducing multi-level cognitive reasoning in a controlled manner. Unlike existing approaches, which may converge to any equilibrium
policy, OBL converges to a unique policy, making it suitable for zero-shot coordination (ZSC).
OBL can be scaled to high-dimensional settings
with a fictitious transition mechanism and shows
strong performance in both a toy-setting and the
benchmark human-AI & ZSC problem Hanabi.

1. Introduction
An important goal of multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) research is to develop AI systems that can coordinate with novel partners, such as humans or other artificial
agents, unseen at training time. However, the standard problem setting in cooperative MARL is self-play (SP), where a
team of agents is trained to find near optimal joint policies.
Crucially, SP assumes that at test time all parties follow
this policy faithfully, without considering the performance
1

Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Hengyuan Hu
<hengyuan@fb.com>, Jakob Foerster <jnf@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

when paired with other agents. As a result, strong joint policies for SP often rely on efficient, yet arbitrary conventions
(Foerster et al., 2019).
Although SP agents achieve high scores among themselves,
they often perform very poorly when paired with other,
independently-trained agents or with humans because they
cannot decipher the other agents’ signals and intentions, and
vice versa (Carroll et al., 2019; Bard et al., 2020; Hu et al.,
2020). Such agents fail because they rely too heavily on
conventions and other inferences that finely depend on their
partner’s policy, rather than on grounded information.
For example, suppose in the board game Hanabi (detailed
game rules in Section 6) our partner reveals the color of
a particular card, e.g. green. We now know that the card
is green. This is grounded information. But we may also
infer other information. If we have agreed on a convention
to only reveal the color of a card if it is playable, we can
infer that the green card must also be playable. So under
this shared convention in this situation “green” also means
“playable”, not simply “green”.
Conventions may also be iterated to higher levels of cognitive depth, where agents build more complex conventions
on top of the baseline expectation that others are following
earlier conventions. For example, not playing a card that
was hinted to be playable could be used as a signal for an
even higher priority action.
Agents trained via self-play tend to learn sets of conventions
where the meaning of each action in each situation can vary
unpredictably between different training runs. These conventions can be of arbitrarily high cognitive depth, which
each agent expects the other to understand perfectly. By
contrast, humans often limit themselves to a cognitive depth
of only a few levels (Camerer et al., 2003), and fewer when
other agents are anticipated to be less experienced (Agranov
et al., 2012), across a wide variety of competitive and collaborative games. When collaborating with unknown partners
for the first time, humans may still successfully communicate by simple grounded information sharing. They can
avoid making fragile inferences based on their partner’s unknown policy, while still planning their own actions and
assuming that other players will respond “reasonably”. This
is a behavior that current methods cannot replicate.

