Progressive-Scale Boundary Blackbox Attack via Projective Gradient
Estimation
Jiawei Zhang * 1 Linyi Li * 2 Huichen Li 2 Xiaolu Zhang 3 Shuang Yang 4 Bo Li 2

Abstract
Boundary based blackbox attack has been recognized as practical and effective, given that an
attacker only needs to access the final model prediction. However, the query efficiency of it is
in general high especially for high dimensional
image data. In this paper, we show that such
efficiency highly depends on the scale at which
the attack is applied, and attacking at the optimal
scale significantly improves the efficiency. In particular, we propose a theoretical framework to analyze and show three key characteristics to improve
the query efficiency. We prove that there exists
an optimal scale for projective gradient estimation. Our framework also explains the satisfactory
performance achieved by existing boundary blackbox attacks. Based on our theoretical framework,
we propose Progressive-Scale enabled projective
Boundary Attack (PSBA) to improve the query efficiency via progressive scaling techniques. In particular, we employ Progressive-GAN to optimize
the scale of projections, which we call PSBAPGAN. We evaluate our approach on both spatial and frequency scales. Extensive experiments
on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CelebA, and ImageNet
against different models including a real-world
face recognition API show that PSBA-PGAN significantly outperforms existing baseline attacks in
terms of query efficiency and attack success rate.
We also observe relatively stable optimal scales
for different models and datasets. The code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
AI-secure/PSBA.

*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, China (work done
during remote internship at UIUC) 2 UIUC, USA 3 Ant Financial,
China 4 Alibaba Group US, USA. Correspondence to: Linyi Li
<linyi2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Blackbox attacks against machine learning (ML) models
have raised great concerns recently given the wide application of ML (Krizhevsky et al., 2009; He et al., 2016; Vaswani
et al., 2017). Among these blackbox attacks, boundary
blackbox attack (Brendel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020)
has shown to be effective. However, it usually requires a
large number of queries against the target model given the
high-dimensional search space. Recent research shows that
it is possible to sample the queries from a lower dimensional sampling space first and project them back to the
original space for gradient estimation to reduce the query
complexity (Li et al., 2020a; 2021). These observations
raise additional questions: What is the “optimal” projection
subspace that we can sample from? How effective such
projective attack would be? What is the query complexity
for such projective gradient estimation approach? To answer these questions, in this paper we analyze the general
Projective Boundary blackbox Attack framework (PBA), for
which only the decision boundary information (i.e. label)
is revealed, and propose Progressive-Scale enabled projective Boundary blackbox Attack (PSBA) to gradually search
for the optimal sampling space, which can boost the query
efficiency of PBA both theoretically and empirically.
The overall pipeline of PSBA and the corresponding analysis framework are shown in Fig. 1, where an attacker starts
with a source image and manipulate it to be “visually close”
with a target image while preserving its label and therefore
fool a ML model via progressive-scale based projective gradient estimation. In particular, an attacker first conducts
binary search to find a boundary point based on the source
image; then samples several perturbation vectors from a
low-dimensional sampling space and project them back to
the projection subspace via a projection function f to estimate the gradient. Finally, the attacker will move along
the estimated gradient direction to construct the adversarial
instance. The main goal of PSBA is to search for the optimal
projection subspace for attack efficiency and effectiveness
purpose, and we explore such optimal projection subspace
both theoretically and empirically.
Theoretically, we develop a general framework to analyze
the query efficiency of gradient estimation for PBA. With the

