Improving Predictors via Combination Across Diverse Task Categories

Kwang In Kim 1

Abstract
Predictor combination is the problem of improving a task predictor using predictors of other
tasks when the forms of individual predictors are
unknown. Previous work approached this problem by nonparametrically assessing predictor relationships based on their joint evaluations on a
shared sample. This limits their application to
cases where all predictors are defined on the same
task category, e.g. all predictors estimate attributes
of shoes. We present a new predictor combination algorithm that overcomes this limitation. Our
algorithm aligns the heterogeneous domains of
different predictors in a shared latent space to facilitate comparisons of predictors independently
of the domains on which they are originally defined. We facilitate this by a new data alignment
scheme that matches data distributions across task
categories. Based on visual attribute ranking experiments on datasets that span diverse task categories (e.g. shoes and animals), we demonstrate
that our approach often significantly improves the
performances of the initial predictors.

1. Introduction
Can a predictor of a shoe attribute be improved by leveraging knowledge gained from learning animal attributes?
Predictor combination (PC) aims to improve a target predictor of some task based on reference predictors of other
tasks when the forms of individual predictors are not known.
This scenario occurs when reference predictors are precompiled software libraries or Web services. Further, in PC the
unknown reference forms are different from each other and
from the target predictor. For example, a support vector
machine (SVM) ranker might be determined as the best
model for a target task, with Gaussian process (GP) regressors and deep neural network (DNN) classifiers presented
as references.
1

UNIST, Ulsan, Korea. Correspondence to: Kwang In Kim
<kimki@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Predictor combination is related to multi-task learning
(MTL) and transfer learning (TL). However, since no access
to the forms of the references are provided, existing MTL
and TL approaches, e.g. hard or soft sharing of predictor
parameters (Vandenhende et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2019;
Misra et al., 2016), enforcing parameter similarities (Agarwal et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2009; Argyriou et al., 2008), or
embedding these parameters into a shared latent space (Sanh
et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2012; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla,
2011; Luo et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019)
are not directly applicable. Furthermore, it is not known in
advance whether a given reference is relevant (i.e. useful in
improving the target) and therefore naı̈vely exploiting all references could even degrade the performance similarly to the
case of negative transfer commonly observed in MTL (Lee
et al., 2016; Maninis et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2020).
(Kim et al., 2017a) approached this problem by nonparametrically assessing the task relevance: Evaluating all predictors
on a sample dataset, the relevance of a reference is measured
based on the similarity of its sample evaluation to the corresponding target evaluation. Under this setting, the target
is improved by selectively enhancing these reference similarities. This instantiates a nonparametric extension of the
classical MTL where the similarities of predictor parameters
are enforced (Agarwal et al., 2010; Argyriou et al., 2008).
(Kim et al., 2020) improved upon this first PC approach by
adopting a Bayesian framework, casting the determination
of relevant references into Bayesian automatic relevance
determination (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006).
Existing PC approaches meet the challenging requirements
of automatically identifying relevant references and improving the target without requiring known reference forms.
They demonstrated that significant performance improvements can be achieved when the target and references predictors are defined on the same task category (Kim et al., 2017a;
2020): For example, when the target estimates how formal
shoes are while the references are specialized for sporty and
pointy-at-the-front attributes, all predictors belong to the
same Shoes task category (see Sec. 3).
However, these approaches cannot be directly applied when
the target and references lie in different categories, e.g. the
target is constructed for shoe attributes while the presented
references correspond to animal or human face attributes.

