What’s in the Box?
Exploring the Inner Life of Neural Networks with Robust Rules

Jonas Fischer 1 Anna Oláh 1 Jilles Vreeken 2

Abstract
We propose a novel method for exploring how
neurons within neural networks interact. In particular, we consider activation values of a network
for given data, and propose to mine noise-robust
rules of the form X → Y , where X and Y are sets
of neurons in different layers. We identify the best
set of rules by the Minimum Description Length
principle, as those rules that together are most descriptive of the activation data.To learn good rule
sets in practice, we propose the unsupervised E X PLAI NN algorithm. Extensive evaluation shows
that the patterns it discovers give clear insight
into how networks perceive the world: they identify shared and class-specific traits, compositionality, as well as locality in convolutional layers.
Moreover, they are not only easily interpretable,
but also super-charge prototyping by identifying
which neurons to consider in unison.

1. Introduction
Neural networks achieve state of the art performance in
many settings. However, how they perform their tasks, how
they perceive the world, and especially, how the neurons
within the network operate in concert, remains largely elusive. While there exists a plethora of methods for explaining
neural networks, most of these focus either on the mapping
between input and output (e.g. model distillation) or only
characterize a given set of neurons, but can not identify
which set to look at in the first place (e.g. prototyping). In
this paper, we introduce a new approach to explain how the
neurons in a neural network interact. In particular, we consider the activations of neurons in the network over a given
dataset, and propose to characterize these in terms of rules
X → Y , where X and Y are sets of neurons in different
layers of the network. A rule hence represents that neurons
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany 2 CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany. Correspondence to: Jonas Fischer <fischer@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Y are typically active when neurons X are. For robustness
we explicitly allow for noise, and to ensure that we discover a succinct yet descriptive set of rules that captures the
regularities in the data, we formalize the problem in terms
of the Minimum Description Length principle (Grünwald
& Roos, 2019). To discover good rule sets, we propose
the unsupervised E XPLAI NN algorithm and show that the
rules we discover give clear insight in how networks performs their tasks. As we will see, these identify what the
network deems similar and different between classes, how
information flows within the network, and which convolutional filters it expects to be active where. Our rules are
easily interpretable, give insight in the differences between
datasets, show the effects of fine-tuning, as well as supercharge prototyping as they tell which neurons to consider in
unison.
Explaining neural networks is of widespread interest, and
especially important with the emergence of applications in
healthcare and autonomous driving. In the interest of space
we here only shortly introduce the work most relevant to
ours, while we refer to surveys for more information (Adadi
& Berrada, 2018; Ras et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2020; Gilpin
et al., 2018). There exist several proposals for investigating
how networks arrive at a decision for a given sample, with
saliency mapping techniques for CNNs among the most
prominent (Bach et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017). Although these
provide insight on what parts of the image are used, they
are inherently limited to single samples, and do not reveal
structure across multiple samples or classes. For explaining the inner working of a CNN, research mostly focuses
on feature visualization techniques (Olah et al., 2017) that
produce visual representations of the information captured
by neurons (Mordvintsev et al., 2015; Gatys et al., 2015).
Although these visualizations provide insight on how CNNs
perceive the world (Øygard, 2016; Olah et al., 2018) it has
been shown that concepts are often encoded over multiple
neurons, and that inspecting individual neurons does not
provide meaningful information about their role (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Bau et al., 2017). How to find such groups of
neurons, and how the information is routed between layers
in the networks, however, remains unsolved.

