Class2Simi: A Noise Reduction Perspective on Learning with Noisy Labels

Bo Han

2

Songhua Wu * 1 Xiaobo Xia * 1 Tongliang Liu 1
Mingming Gong 3 Nannan Wang 4 Haifeng Liu 5 Gang Niu 6

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels has attracted a lot of
attention in recent years, where the mainstream
approaches are in pointwise manners. Meanwhile,
pairwise manners have shown great potential in
supervised metric learning and unsupervised contrastive learning. Thus, a natural question is
raised: does learning in a pairwise manner mitigate label noise? To give an affirmative answer,
in this paper, we propose a framework called
Class2Simi: it transforms data points with noisy
class labels to data pairs with noisy similarity labels, where a similarity label denotes whether a
pair shares the class label or not. Through this
transformation, the reduction of the noise rate is
theoretically guaranteed, and hence it is in principle easier to handle noisy similarity labels. Amazingly, DNNs that predict the clean class labels can
be trained from noisy data pairs if they are first
pretrained from noisy data points. Class2Simi
is computationally efficient because not only this
transformation is on-the-fly in mini-batches, but
also it just changes loss computation on top of
model prediction into a pairwise manner. Its effectiveness is verified by extensive experiments.

1. Introduction
It is difficult to label large-scale data accurately. Therefore,
datasets with label noise are ubiquitous in the era of big
data. However, label noise will degenerate the performance
of deep networks, because deep networks will easily overfit
label noise (Zhang et al., 2017). Almost all existing methods
*

1

Equal contribution Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab,
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne 4 ISN State Key Laboratory, School of Telecommunications
Engineering, Xidian University 5 Brain-Inspired Technology Co.,
Ltd. 6 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project. Correspondence to: Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

deal with the label noise problem in pointwise manners.
Namely, these methods use pointwise losses (e.g., crossentropy loss), and pointwise noise corrections (e.g., sample
selection, loss correction, label correction, and others) (Xia
et al., 2020a; Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018b; Xia et al.,
2020d; Han et al., 2020b).
On the other hand, methods employing pairwise manners are
very prevailing and have made a great success in machine
learning, e.g., supervised metric learning and unsupervised
contrastive learning (Qi et al., 2019; Boudiaf et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020), where relationships
between data points are exploited. Intuitively, the pairwise
manners require less pointwise supervision information, i.e.,
class labels, and might be robust to label noise. In this paper,
we naturally ask a question: does learning in a pairwise
manner mitigate label noise? This motivates us to introduce
a pairwise manner to deal with label noise.
Here we propose a noise reduction perspective on handling
label noise: Class2Simi, i.e., transforming training data
with noisy class labels into data pairs with noisy similarity
labels. A class label shows the class that an instance belongs
to, while a similarity label indicates whether or not two
instances belong to the same class. We theoretically prove
that through this transformation, the noise rate becomes
lower (see Theorem 2). This is because, given a data pair, of
which if one point has an incorrect class label or even if both
points have incorrect class labels, the similarity label could
be correct. Moreover, this transformation also reduces a
multi-class classification problem into a binary classification
problem. In label noise learning, the binary problem is easier
to handle and a lower noise rate usually results in higher
classification performance (Patrini et al., 2017).
Specifically, we illustrate the transformation and the robustness of similarity labels in Figure 1. In the middle
column, we can see the noisy similarity labels of examplepairs (x2 , x5 ) and (x2 , x4 ) are correct, although there is
one mislabeled point in (x2 , x5 ), and two mislabeled points
in (x2 , x4 ). Moreover, if we assume that the noisy class
labels in Figure 1 are generated according to the latent clean
class labels and the class transition matrix (the ij-th entry
of this matrix denotes the probability that the clean class
label i flips into the noisy class label j), the noise rate of

