Optimal Transport Kernels for Sequential and Parallel
Neural Architecture Search
Vu Nguyen∗ 1 Tam Le∗ 2 Makoto Yamada 2 3 Michael A. Osborne 4

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) automates the
design of deep neural networks. One of the
main challenges in searching complex and noncontinuous architectures is to compare the similarity of networks that the conventional Euclidean
metric may fail to capture. Optimal transport
(OT) is resilient to such complex structure by considering the minimal cost for transporting a network into another. However, the OT is generally
not negative definite which may limit its ability
to build the positive-definite kernels required in
many kernel-dependent frameworks. Building
upon tree-Wasserstein (TW), which is a negative
definite variant of OT, we develop a novel discrepancy for neural architectures, and demonstrate it
within a Gaussian process (GP) surrogate model
for the sequential NAS settings. Furthermore,
we derive a novel parallel NAS, using quality kdeterminantal point process on the GP posterior,
to select diverse and high-performing architectures from a discrete set of candidates. We empirically demonstrate that our TW-based approaches
outperform other baselines in both sequential and
parallel NAS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) is the process of automating architecture engineering to find the best design of our
neural network model. This output architecture will perform well for a given dataset. With the increasing interest
in deep learning in recent years, NAS has attracted significant research attention (Dong & Yang, 2019; Elsken et al.,
2019a; Liu et al., 2018; 2019; Luo et al., 2018; Real et al.,
2019; 2017; Shah et al., 2018; Suganuma et al., 2017; Xie
& Yuille, 2017; Yao et al., 2020). We refer the interested
*
Equal contribution 1 Amazon Adelaide (work done prior to
joining Amazon) 2 RIKEN AIP 3 Kyoto University 4 University of
Oxford. Correspondence to: Vu Nguyen <vu@ieee.org>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

readers to the survey (Elsken et al., 2019b) for a detailed
review of NAS and to the comprehensive list1 for all of the
related papers in NAS.
Bayesian optimization (BO) utilizes a probabilistic model,
particularly Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen, 2006), for
determining future evaluations and its evaluation efficiency
makes it well suited for the expensive evaluations of NAS.
However, the conventional BO approaches (Shahriari et al.,
2016; Snoek et al., 2012) are not suitable to capture the
complex and non-continuous designs of neural architectures.
Recent work (Kandasamy et al., 2018) has considered optimal transport (OT) for measuring neural architectures. This
views two networks as logistical suppliers and receivers,
then optimizes to find the minimal transportation cost as
the distance, i.e., similar architectures will need less cost
for transporting and vice versa. However, the existing OT
distance for architectures, such as OTMANN (Kandasamy
et al., 2018), do not easily lend themselves to the creation of
the positive semi-definite (p.s.d.) kernel (covariance function) due to the indefinite property of OT (Peyré & Cuturi,
2019) (§8.3). It is critical as the GP is not a valid random
process when the covariance function (kernel) is not p.s.d.
(see Lem. 2.1). In addition, there is still an open research
direction for parallel NAS where the goal is to select multiple high-performing and diverse candidates from a discrete
set of candidates for parallel evaluations. This discrete property makes the parallel NAS interesting and different from
the existing batch BO approaches (Desautels et al., 2014;
González et al., 2016), which are typically designed to handle continuous observations.
We propose a negative definite tree-Wasserstein (TW) distance for neural network architectures based on a novel design which captures both global and local information via ngram and indegree/outdegree representations for networks.
In addition, we propose the k-determinantal point process
(k-DPP) quality for selecting diverse and high-performing
architectures from a discrete set. This discrete property of
NAS makes k-DPP ideal in sampling the choices overcoming the greedy selection used in the existing batch Bayesian
optimization (Desautels et al., 2014; González et al., 2016;
1
https://www.automl.org/automl/
literature-on-neural-architecture-search

