Value Iteration in Continuous Actions, States and Time

Michael Lutter 1 2 Shie Mannor 1 3 Jan Peters 2 Dieter Fox 1 4 Animesh Garg 1 5
Value Iteration

Abstract
Classical value iteration approaches are not applicable to environments with continuous states and
actions. For such environments, the states and
actions are usually discretized, which leads to an
exponential increase in computational complexity.
In this paper, we propose continuous fitted value
iteration (cFVI). This algorithm enables dynamic
programming for continuous states and actions
with a known dynamics model. Leveraging the
continuous-time formulation, the optimal policy
can be derived for non-linear control-affine dynamics. This closed-form solution enables the efficient
extension of value iteration to continuous environments. We show in non-linear control experiments
that the dynamic programming solution obtains
the same quantitative performance as deep reinforcement learning methods in simulation but excels when transferred to the physical system. The
policy obtained by cFVI is more robust to changes
in the dynamics despite using only a deterministic model and without explicitly incorporating
robustness in the optimization. Videos of the physical system are available at https://sites.
google.com/view/value-iteration.

learn policies for various applications including robotics
(Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI et al., 2019; Da et al., 2020).
However, the fixed pre-determined time discretization is a
limitation when dealing with physical phenomena evolving
in continuous time. For such environments, the time-step can
be chosen to fit the environment. For example, in robotics
the control frequency is only limited by the sampling frequencies of sensors and actuators, which is commonly much
higher than the control frequency of deep RL agents. To
avoid the fixed time steps, we use the continuous-time RL
objective to frame an optimization that is agnostic to the
time-discretization. Furthermore, this formulation simplifies
the optimization as many robot dynamics are control affine
at the continuous-time limit.

Reinforcement learning (RL) maximizes the scalar rewards 𝑟
by trying different actions u selected by the policy 𝜋. For a
deterministic policy and deterministic dynamics, the discrete
time optimization is described by

𝜋

∞
Õ

𝛾 𝑖 𝑟 (x𝑖 , u𝑖 ),

Continuous Fitted Value Iteration

Figure 1. Value iteration (VI) can compute the optimal value function 𝑉 ∗ and policy 𝜋 ∗ for discrete state and action environments.
Fitted value iteration extends VI to continuous states and discrete
actions. Our proposed continuous fitted value iteration enables
value iteration for continuous states and continuous actions, e.g., a
car with steering rather than a car moving left, right, up and down.

1. Introduction

𝜋 ∗ (x) = arg max

Fitted Value Iteration

(1)

𝑖=0

with the dynamics x𝑖+1 = 𝑓 (x𝑖 , u𝑖 ), the state x and discounting factor 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1) (Bellman, 1957; Puterman, 1994).
The discrete time framework has been very successful to
1 NVIDIA 2 Technical University of Darmstadt 3 Technion, Israel

Institute of Technology 4 University of Washington 5 University of
Toronto & Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Michael Lutter
<michael@robot-learning.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To solve the continuous-time RL problem, we use classical
value iteration where the dynamics and reward function are
known. For robotics, this setting is commonly a reasonable
assumption. The reward is known as it is manually tuned
to achieve the task without violating system constraints.
The equations of motion and system parameters of robots
are approximately known. The model is not perfect as
the actuators are not ideal and the physical parameters
vary slightly. However, the overall system behavior is
approximately correct. The same assumption is also used
within the vast sim2real literature to enable the sample
efficient transfer to the physical world (Ramos et al., 2019;
Chebotar et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2021).
In this paper we show for the continuous-time RL that
(1) classical value iteration (Bellman, 1957) can be extended to environments with continuous actions and states
if the dynamics are control affine and the reward separable.
Learning the value function 𝑉 is sufficient as the policy can

