Principled Exploration via Optimistic Bootstrapping and Backward Induction

Chenjia Bai 1 Lingxiao Wang 2 Lei Han 3 Jianye Hao 4 Animesh Garg 5 Peng Liu 1 Zhaoran Wang 2

Abstract
One principled approach for provably efficient
exploration is incorporating the upper confidence
bound (UCB) into the value function as a bonus.
However, UCB is specified to deal with linear and
tabular settings and is incompatible with Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL). In this paper, we
propose a principled exploration method for DRL
through Optimistic Bootstrapping and Backward
Induction (OB2I). OB2I constructs a generalpurpose UCB-bonus through non-parametric bootstrap in DRL. The UCB-bonus estimates the epistemic uncertainty of state-action pairs for optimistic exploration. We build theoretical connections between the proposed UCB-bonus and
the LSVI-UCB in a linear setting. We propagate future uncertainty in a time-consistent manner through episodic backward update, which exploits the theoretical advantage and empirically
improves the sample-efficiency. Our experiments
in the MNIST maze and Atari suite suggest that
OB2I outperforms several state-of-the-art exploration approaches.

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), an
agent aims to maximize the long-term return by interacting
with an unknown environment. To find the optimal policy,
the agent is required to sufficiently explore the unknown environment and exploit in depth along the optimal trajectory.
Devising efficient exploration algorithms thus becomes an
attractive topic in recent years of RL research. The theoretical achievements in RL offer various provably efficient
exploration methods in tabular and linear Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) based on the fundamental value iteration
algorithm Least-Squares Value Iteration (LSVI). Among
these, optimism in the face of uncertainty (Auer & Ortner,
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 2 Northwestern
University, Evanston, USA 3 Tencent Robotics X 4 Tianjin University 5 University of Toronto, Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Chenjia Bai <bai chenjia@stu.hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2007; Jin et al., 2018) is a principled approach for efficient
exploration with well theoretical guarantees. In tabular
cases, the optimism-based methods incorporate the Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB) into the value function as bonus
and attain the optimal worst-case regret (Azar et al., 2017;
Jaksch et al., 2010; Dann & Brunskill, 2015). Randomized
value function based on posterior sampling chooses actions
according to the randomly sampled statistically plausible
value function and is known to achieve near-optimal worstcase and Bayesian regrets (Osband & Van Roy, 2017; Russo,
2019). Recently, the theoretical analyses in tabular cases
have been extended to linear MDPs where the transition and
reward function are assumed to be linear. In linear cases,
LSVI-UCB (Jin et al., 2020) has been demonstrated to enjoy
a near-optimal worst-case regret using a provably efficient
bonus. Randomized LSVI (Zanette et al., 2020) also obtains
a near-optimal worst-case regret.
Although the analyses in tabular and linear cases have induced attractive approaches for efficient exploration, it is
still challenging in developing a practical exploration algorithm that is essentially suitable for Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) (Mnih et al., 2015), which is necessary to
achieve human-level performance in large-scale tasks such
as Atari games and robotic tasks. A simple evidence is that,
in linear case, the bonus in LSVI-UCB (Jin et al., 2020) and
nontrivial noise in randomized LSVI (Zanette et al., 2020)
are specifically designed for linear models (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011), without generalizations to fit powerful function
approximations such as neural networks.
In this paper, we propose a principled exploration method
for DRL through Optimistic Bootstrapping and Backward Induction (OB2I). OB2I is an instantiation of LSVIUCB (Jin et al., 2020) in DRL by using a general-purpose
UCB-bonus to provide an optimistic Q-value and a randomized value function to perform temporally-extended exploration. This general-purpose UCB-bonus represents the
disagreement of bootstrapped Q-functions (Osband et al.,
2016) to measure the epistemic uncertainty of the unknown
optimal value function. Importantly, this proposed UCBbonus can also be theoretically demonstrated to be equivalent to the bonus-term in LSVI-UCB (Jin et al., 2020),
when moving back in linear MDPs. In our case, the Q-value
plus the general-purpose UCB-bonus is shown to be an optimistic Q+ function that is higher than the Q-value for

