Weight-Covariance Alignment for Adversarially Robust Neural Networks

Panagiotis Eustratiadis 1 Henry Gouk 1 Da Li 1 2 Timothy Hospedales 1 2

Abstract
Stochastic Neural Networks (SNNs) that inject
noise into their hidden layers have recently been
shown to achieve strong robustness against adversarial attacks. However, existing SNNs are
usually heuristically motivated, and often rely
on adversarial training, which is computationally
costly. We propose a new SNN that achieves
state-of-the-art performance without relying on
adversarial training, and enjoys solid theoretical
justification. Specifically, while existing SNNs
inject learned or hand-tuned isotropic noise, our
SNN learns an anisotropic noise distribution to optimize a learning-theoretic bound on adversarial
robustness. We evaluate our method on a number of popular benchmarks, show that it can be
applied to different architectures, and that it provides robustness to a variety of white-box and
black-box attacks, while being simple and fast to
train compared to existing alternatives.

1. Introduction
It has been shown that deep convolutional neural networks,
while displaying exceptional performance in computer vision problems such as image recognition (He et al., 2016),
are vulnerable to input perturbations that are imperceptible
to the human eye (Szegedy et al., 2014). The perturbed input
images, known as adversarial examples, can be generated by
single-step (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and multi-step (Madry
et al., 2018; Kurakin et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017)
updates using both gradient-based optimization methods and
derivative-free approaches (Chen et al., 2017). This vulnerability raises the question of how one can go about ensuring
the security of machine learning systems, thus preventing a
malicious entity from exploiting instabilities (Biggio et al.,
1
University of Edinburgh 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge.
Correspondence to:
Panagiotis Eustratiadis
<p.eustratiadis@ed.ac.uk>,
Henry
Gouk
<henry.gouk@ed.ac.uk>, Da Li <dali.academic@gmail.com>,
Timothy Hospedales <t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2013). In order to tackle this problem, many adversarial
defense algorithms have been proposed in the literature.
Among them, Stochastic Neural Networks (SNNs) that inject fixed or learnable noise into their hidden layers have
shown promising results (Liu et al., 2018; 2019; He et al.,
2019; Jeddi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021).
In this paper, we identify three limitations of the current
state-of-the-art stochastic defense methods. First, most contemporary adversarial defense methods use a mixture of
clean and adversarial (or even purely adversarial) samples
during training, i.e., adversarial training (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Mustafa et al.,
2019; He et al., 2019; Jeddi et al., 2020). However, generating strong adversarial examples during training leads to
significantly higher computational cost and longer training
time. Second, many existing adversarial defenses (Mustafa
et al., 2019), and especially stochastic defenses (Jeddi et al.,
2020) are heuristically motivated. Although they may be
empirically effective against existing attacks, they lack theoretical support. Third, the noise incorporated by existing
stochastic models is isotropic (i.e., generated from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a diagonal covariance
matrix), meaning that it perturbs the learned features of different dimensions independently. Our theoretical analysis
will show that this is a strong assumption and best performance is expected from anisotropic noise.
We address the aforementioned limitations and propose an
SNN that makes use of learnable anisotropic noise. We
theoretically analyse the margin between the clean and adversarial performance of a stochastic model and derive an
upper bound on the difference between these two quantities.
This novel theoretical insight suggests that the anisotropic
noise covariance in an SNN should be optimized to align
with the classifier weights, which has the effect of tightening the bound between clean and adversarial performance. This leads to an easy-to-implement regularizer,
which can be efficiently optimized on clean samples alone
without need for adversarial training. We show that our
method, called Weight-Covariance Alignment (WCA), can
be applied to architectures of varied depth and complexity
(namely, LeNet++ and ResNet-18), and achieves state-ofthe-art robustness across several widely used benchmarks,
including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN and F-MNIST.
Moreover, this high level of robustness is demonstrated for

