Implicit-PDF: Non-Parametric Representation of Probability Distributions on
the Rotation Manifold
Kieran Murphy * 1 Carlos Esteves * 1 Varun Jampani 1 Srikumar Ramalingam 1 Ameesh Makadia 1

Abstract
Single image pose estimation is a fundamental
problem in many vision and robotics tasks, and
existing deep learning approaches suffer by not
completely modeling and handling: i) uncertainty
about the predictions, and ii) symmetric objects
with multiple (sometimes infinite) correct poses.
To this end, we introduce a method to estimate
arbitrary, non-parametric distributions on SO(3).
Our key idea is to represent the distributions implicitly, with a neural network that estimates the
probability given the input image and a candidate
pose. Grid sampling or gradient ascent can be
used to find the most likely pose, but it is also
possible to evaluate the probability at any pose,
enabling reasoning about symmetries and uncertainty. This is the most general way of representing distributions on manifolds, and to showcase
the rich expressive power, we introduce a dataset
of challenging symmetric and nearly-symmetric
objects. We require no supervision on pose uncertainty – the model trains only with a single pose
per example. Nonetheless, our implicit model is
highly expressive to handle complex distributions
over 3D poses, while still obtaining accurate pose
estimation on standard non-ambiguous environments, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
Pascal3D+ and ModelNet10-SO(3) benchmarks.
Code, data, and visualizations may be found at
implicit-pdf.github.io.

1. Introduction
There is a growing realization in deep learning that bestowing a network with the ability to express uncertainty
is universally beneficial and of crucial importance to systems where safety and interpretability are primary concerns (Leibig et al., 2017; Han et al., 2007; Ching et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: <implicitpdf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018). A quintessential example is the task of 3D pose estimation – pose estimation is both a vital ingredient in many
real-world robotics and computer vision applications where
propagating uncertainty can facilitate complex downstream
reasoning (McAllister et al., 2017), as well as an inherently
ambiguous problem due to the abundant approximate and
exact symmetries in our 3D world.
Many everyday objects possess symmetries such as the box
or vase depicted in Fig. 1 (a). It is tempting to formulate
a model of uncertainty that precisely mirrors the pose ambiguities of such shapes; however it becomes immediately
evident that such an approach is not scalable, as it is unrealistic to enumerate or characterize all sources of pose
uncertainty. Even in a simple scenario such as a coffee
mug with self-occlusion, the pose uncertainty manifests as
a complex distribution over 3D orientations, as in Fig. 1 (b).
This paper addresses two long-standing and open challenges
in pose estimation (a) what is the most general representation for expressing arbitrary pose distributions, including
the challenging ones arising from symmetrical and nearsymmetrical objects, in a neural network and (b) how do
we effectively train the model in typical scenarios where
the supervision is a single 3D pose per observation (as in
Pascal3D+ (Xiang et al., 2014), ObjectNet3D (Xiang et al.,
2016), ModelNet10-SO(3) (Liao et al., 2019)), i.e. without
supervision on the distribution, or priors on the symmetries.
To this end, we propose an implicit representation for nonparametric probability distributions over the rotation manifold SO(3) (we refer to our model as implicit-PDF, or
IPDF for short). Such an implicit representation can be parameterized with a neural network and successfully trained
with straightforward sampling strategies – uniform or even
random querying of the implicit function is sufficient to
reconstruct the unnormalized distribution and approximate
the normalizing term. For inference, in addition to reconstructing the full probability distribution we can combine
the sampling strategy with gradient ascent to make pose
predictions at arbitrary (continuous) resolution. The use
of a non-parametric distribution, while being simple, offers maximal expressivity for arbitrary densities and poses
arising from symmetrical and near symmetrical 3D objects.
The simplicity of our approach is in stark contrast to com-

