Soft then Hard: Rethinking the Quantization in Neural Image Compression

Zongyu Guo 1 Zhizheng Zhang 1 Runsen Feng 1 Zhibo Chen 1

Abstract
Quantization is one of the core components in
lossy image compression. For neural image compression, end-to-end optimization requires differentiable approximations of quantization, which
can generally be grouped into three categories:
additive uniform noise, straight-through estimator
and soft-to-hard annealing. Training with additive
uniform noise approximates the quantization error
variationally but suffers from the train-test mismatch. The other two methods do not encounter
this mismatch but, as shown in this paper, hurt
the rate-distortion performance since the latent
representation ability is weakened. We thus propose a novel soft-then-hard quantization strategy
for neural image compression that first learns an
expressive latent space softly, then closes the traintest mismatch with hard quantization. In addition,
beyond the fixed integer quantization, we apply
scaled additive uniform noise to adaptively control the quantization granularity by deriving a new
variational upper bound on actual rate. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed methods are
easy to adopt, stable to train, and highly effective
especially on complex compression models.

1. Introduction
Lossy image compression is a fundamental technique for
image transmission and storage. Over the past several years,
deep learning methods are reshaping this field. Despite the
short history, learned image compression schemes (Toderici
et al., 2017; Rippel & Bourdev, 2017; Ballé et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2018; Minnen et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Cheng
et al., 2020) have surpassed almost all classical standards in
terms of rate-distortion performance. Moreover, neural image compression is promising to be more perceptual friendly
(Blau & Michaeli, 2019; Mentzer et al., 2020).
1
University of Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Zongyu Guo <guozy@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Zhibo Chen
<chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Quantization is one of the key challenges for neural image
compression. Since the gradient of quantization is zero almost everywhere, it makes the standard back-propagation
inapplicable. Although some recent works try to forgo the
quantization process entirely (Havasi et al., 2019; Flamich
et al., 2020), these methods are computationally costly and
statistically inefficient (Agustsson & Theis, 2020). Therefore, quantization remains indispensable for designing an
efficient neural image codec. To enable end-to-end optimization, a popular approach is to train with additive uniform
noise to approximate the test-time quantization (Ballé et al.,
2017). However, this method introduces stochasticity during
training, leading to the train-test mismatch and thus hurting
the rate-distortion performance in this way.
Other competitive alternatives for quantization include
straight-through estimator (STE) with its variants (Bengio
et al., 2013; Theis et al., 2017; Mentzer et al., 2018) and recently, soft-to-hard annealing (Agustsson et al., 2017; Yang
et al., 2020; Agustsson & Theis, 2020), both of which avoid
the mismatch issue. In this paper, we introduce a new analysis of these three quantization methods and argue that:
• Training with STE or soft-to-hard annealing is equal
to optimizing a deterministic autoencoder, in which it
is hard to learn a smooth latent space due to the lack
of regularization term at training (Ghosh et al., 2019).
• STE-based or annealing-based quantization suffers
from some training troubles such as biased gradient or
unstable gradient, rendering the encoder suboptimal.
• Therefore, these two quantization methods cannot ensure the latent representation ability. Expressive latent
variables are significant for compression, where transmitted symbol is expected to convey more information.
• In contrast, optimizing a compression model with additive uniform noise can be interpreted as variational
optimization (Ballé et al., 2017) and does not encounter
the training troubles. It is superior in learning an expressive latent space, as we demonstrate in this paper.
In short, additive uniform noise is particularly well-suited to
train a compression model except for the mismatch between
training and test phases. Unlike the posterior and prior mismatch in VAEs (Kingma et al., 2016; Dai & Wipf, 2019),

