Chebyshev Polynomial Codes: Task Entanglement-based Coding
for Distributed Matrix Multiplication

Sangwoo Hong* 1 Heecheol Yang* 2 Yeongseok Yoon 1 Taehyeon Cho 1 Jungwoo Lee 1

Abstract
Distributed computing has been a prominent solu­
tion to efﬁciently process massive datasets in par­
allel. However, the existence of stragglers is one
of the major concerns that slows down the overall
speed of distributed computing. To deal with this
problem, we consider a distributed matrix multi­
plication scenario where a master assigns multiple
tasks to each worker to exploit stragglers’ comput­
ing ability (which is typically wasted in conven­
tional distributed computing). We propose Cheby­
shev polynomial codes, which can achieve orderwise improvement in encoding complexity at the
master and communication load in distributed ma­
trix multiplication using task entanglement. The
key idea of task entanglement is to reduce the
number of encoded matrices for multiple tasks
assigned to each worker by intertwining encoded
matrices. We experimentally demonstrate that,
in cloud environments, Chebyshev polynomial
codes can provide signiﬁcant reduction in overall
processing time in distributed computing for ma­
trix multiplication, which is a key computational
component in modern deep learning.

1. Introduction
Matrix multiplication is one of the most basic building
blocks in machine learning and deep learning. As the size of
data required for deep learning grows, distributed computing
is receiving signiﬁcant attention due to its ability to handle
the large dataset in a parallel manner. However, many stud­
ies (Dean & Barroso, 2013), (Huang et al., 2017), (Tandon
et al., 2017) have reported that stragglers, which compute
*

Equal contribution 1 Communications and Machine Learn­
ing Lab., Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea 2 Division
of Computer Convergence, Chungnam National University, Dae­
jeon, 34134, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jungwoo Lee
<junglee@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a given task much slower than other workers, deteriorate
the computation capability of the system. Accordingly, the
existence of stragglers has arose as an important issue in dis­
tributed computing since it is a major bottleneck in overall
processing time.
To handle straggler issue in distributed computing, several
methods have been proposed, which are depicted in Fig.
1. One of the conventional methods (Wang et al., 2014)
is to replicate the computational tasks and allocate them
to several workers. On the other hand, (Lee et al., 2018)
were the ﬁrst to suggest coded distributed computing, which
can effectively utilize redundancy in task allocation by a
coding theoretic approach, in order to alleviate the strag­
gler problem. Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b) show examples of
distributed matrix multiplication on C = A × B, where a
master uses replication-based task allocation and coded task
allocation schemes with four workers. In Fig. 1(a), two
tasks are replicated and allocated to two workers under the
assumption that A is divided into two matrices A1 and A2
of the same size, i.e., A = [A1 ; A2 ]. In this scheme, the
master can tolerate one straggler per task to get the compu­
tation result C. However, if both workers responsible for
the same task compute and return their results slowly as in
Fig. 1(a), the master cannot decode the ﬁnal computation
result. On the other hand, in Fig. 1(b), the master utilizes a
coded computation scheme which uses maximum distance
separable (MDS) codes for task allocation. In this case, the
master can decode the ﬁnal computation result C from two
of the fastest computation returns, thus it can tolerate any
two stragglers among four workers.
For matrix multiplication, a coded computation scheme is
expanded into various ways with different matrix partition­
ing parameters. Polynomial codes have been suggested in
(Yu et al., 2017), which are designed to encode both input
matrices by polynomial functions. In (Dutta et al., 2019), the
authors have proposed a different matrix partitioning scheme
for distributed matrix multiplication, achieving signiﬁcant
reduction in memory overhead at workers. Furthermore,
in (Dutta et al., 2019), polydot codes that generalize the
previously proposed schemes was introduced, which show
trade-offs between recovery threshold, communication load,
and computational load at workers. Finally, the authors

