Controlling Graph Dynamics with
Reinforcement Learning and Graph Neural Networks

Eli A. Meirom 1 Haggai Maron 1 Shie Mannor 1 Gal Chechik 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of controlling a partiallyobserved dynamic process on a graph by a limited
number of interventions. This problem naturally
arises in contexts such as scheduling virus tests to
curb an epidemic; targeted marketing in order to
promote a product; and manually inspecting posts
to detect fake news spreading on social networks.
We formulate this setup as a sequential decision
problem over a temporal graph process. In face of
an exponential state space, combinatorial action
space and partial observability, we design a novel
tractable scheme to control dynamical processes
on temporal graphs. We successfully apply our approach to two popular problems that fall into our
framework: prioritizing which nodes should be
tested in order to curb the spread of an epidemic,
and influence maximization on a graph.

1. Introduction
Consider an epidemic spreading in the population. To contain the disease and prevent it from spreading, it becomes
critical to detect infected carriers and isolate them; see Fig. 1
for an illustration. As the epidemic spreads, the demand
for tests outgrows their availability, and not all potential
carriers can be tested. It becomes necessary to identify the
most likely epidemic carriers using limited testing resources.
How should we rank candidates and prioritize vaccines and
tests to prevent the disease from spreading? As a second example, imagine a seemingly very different problem, where
one would like to promote an opinion or support product
adaption by advertisements or information sharing on a
social graph. If an impactful node is convinced, it may influence other nodes towards the desired opinion, creating a
cascade of information diffusion.
These two problems are important examples of a larger
1

NVIDIA Research, Israel. Correspondence to: Eli Meirom
<emeirom@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A viral infection process on a graph and an intervention
aimed to stop its spread. Here, graph nodes represent people and
edges represent interactions. At t = 1 only two people are infected
(red). At t = 2 several interactions resulted in new exposed people
(yellow); At t = 3 the blue node was selected to be quarantined to
stop the viral spread. This paper presents a general framework for
learning how to control such dynamic processes on graphs.

family of problems: controlling diffusive processes over networks through nodal interventions. Other examples include
viruses inflicting computer networks or cascades of failures
in power networks. In all these cases, an agent can steer the
dynamics of the system using interventions that modify the
states of a (relatively) small number of nodes. For instance,
infected people can be asked to self-quarantine, preventing
the spread of a disease, and key twitters may be targeted
with coupons. However, a key difficulty is that the current
state is often not fully observed, for example, we don’t know
the ground truth infection status for every node in the graph.
More formally, we consider a graph G(t) = (V, E(t))
whose structure changes in time. V is the set of nodes
and E(t) = {euv (t)} is the set of edges at step t. The state
of a node v ∈ V is a random variable that depends on the
interactions between v and its neighbors. At each turn, the
agent may select a subset of nodes and attempt to change
their state. The goal is to minimize an objective that depends on the number of nodes in each state. For example,
consider a setup where the agent tries to promote its product
or opinion. At each step, the agent may select a set of seed

