Relative Deviation Margin Bounds

Corinna Cortes 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1

Abstract
We present a series of new and more favorable
margin-based learning guarantees that depend on
the empirical margin loss of a predictor. We give
two types of learning bounds, in terms of either
the Rademacher complexity or the empirical `∞ covering number of the hypothesis set used, both
distribution-dependent and valid for general families. Furthermore, using our relative deviation
margin bounds, we derive distribution-dependent
generalization bounds for unbounded loss functions under the assumption of a finite moment.
We also briefly highlight several applications of
these bounds and discuss their connection with
existing results.

1. Introduction
Margin-based learning bounds provide a fundamental tool
for the analysis of generalization in classification (Vapnik, 1998; 2006; Schapire et al., 1997; Koltchinskii and
Panchenko, 2002; Taskar et al., 2003; Bartlett and ShaweTaylor, 1998; Cortes et al., 2014; Kuznetsov et al., 2014;
Cortes et al., 2017). These are guarantees that hold for realvalued functions based on the notion of confidence margin.
Unlike worst-case bounds based on standard complexity
measures such as the VC-dimension, margin bounds provide optimistic guarantees: a strong guarantee holds for
predictors that achieve a relatively small empirical margin
loss, for a relatively large value of the confidence margin.
More generally, guarantees similar to margin bounds can be
derived based on notion of a luckiness (Shawe-Taylor et al.,
1998; Koltchinskii and Panchenko, 2002).
Notably, margin bounds do not have an explicit dependency
on the dimension of the feature space for linear or kernelbased hypotheses. They provide strong guarantees for largemargin maximization algorithms such as Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995), including when
1
Google Research, New York, NY; 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY;. Correspondence to: Ananda
Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

they are used with positive definite kernels such as Gaussian kernels, for which the dimension of the feature space
is infinite. Similarly, margin-based learning bounds have
helped derive significant guarantees for AdaBoost (Freund
and Schapire, 1997; Schapire et al., 1997). More recently,
margin-based learning bounds have been derived for feedforward artificial neural networks (NNs) (Neyshabur et al.,
2015; Bartlett et al., 2017) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Long and Sedghi, 2020).
An alternative family of tighter learning guarantees is that of
relative deviation bounds (Vapnik, 1998; 2006; Anthony and
Shawe-Taylor, 1993; Cortes et al., 2019). These are bounds
on the difference of the generalization and the empirical
error scaled by the square-root of the generalization error
or empirical error, or some other power of the error. The
scaling is similar to dividing by the standard deviation since,
for smaller values of the error, the variance of the error of a
predictor roughly coincides with its error. These guarantees
translate into very useful bounds on the difference of the
generalization error and empirical error whose complexity
terms admit the empirical error as a factor.
This paper presents relative deviation margin bounds. These
are new learning bounds that combine the benefit of standard margin bounds and that of standard relative deviation
bounds, thereby resulting in tighter margin-based guarantees (Section 5.2). Our bounds are distribution-dependent
and valid for general hypothesis sets. They can be viewed as
“second-order” margin-based guarantees. For a sample size
m, they are based on an interpolation between a √1m -term
that includes the square-root of the empirical margin loss
1
as a factor and another term in m
. In particular, when the
1
empirical margin loss is zero, the bound only admits the m
fast rate term.
As an example, our learning bounds provide tighter guarantees for margin-based algorithms such as SVM and boosting
than existing ones. We give two new families of relative
deviation bounds, both distribution-dependent and valid for
general hypothesis sets. Additionally, both families of guarantees hold for an arbitrary α-moment, with α ∈ (1, 2]. The
guarantees for general α-moments admit interesting applications in other areas. We describe one such application
to deriving generalization guarantees for unbounded loss
functions in Section 5.1.

