Accumulated Decoupled Learning with Gradient Staleness Mitigation for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Huiping Zhuang 1 Zhenyu Weng 1 Fulin Luo 1 Kar-Ann Toh 2 Haizhou Li 3 Zhiping Lin 1

Abstract
Gradient staleness is a major side effect in decoupled learning when training convolutional neural
networks asynchronously. Existing methods that
ignore this effect might result in reduced generalization and even divergence. In this paper,
we propose an accumulated decoupled learning
(ADL), which includes a module-wise gradient
accumulation in order to mitigate the gradient
staleness. Unlike prior arts ignoring the gradient
staleness, we quantify the staleness in such a way
that its mitigation can be quantitatively visualized.
As a new learning scheme, the proposed ADL is
theoretically shown to converge to critical points
in spite of its asynchronism. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets are
conducted, demonstrating that ADL gives promising generalization results while the state-of-theart methods experience reduced generalization
and divergence. In addition, our ADL is shown to
have the fastest training speed among the compared methods. The code will be ready soon
in https://github.com/ZHUANGHP/AccumulatedDecoupled-Learning.git.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1998)
are normally trained by backpropagation (BP) which runs
a forward pass followed by a backward one synchronously
through a network before parameter update. The synchronism of BP is mainly characterized by three lockings (Jaderberg et al., 2016), i.e., the forward, the backward and the
update lockings (see details in Section 3.1), which render the
majority of a network idle during training. To improve the
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University. 2 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University. 3 School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, National Univeristy of Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhiping Lin <ezplin@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

efficiency, the decoupled learning (Jaderberg et al., 2016)
emerges by addressing one or more of these lockings.
The decoupled learning partitions a network depth-wise into
several modules with each module containing a stack of layers, and facilitates a parallel training among the partitioned
modules. A large number of partitioned modules would
encourage a high degree of efficiency being improved. For
convenience, the partition size (PS) is taken as the number
of modules being partitioned from a network. Methods of
decoupled learning seek to deliver comparable generalization performance to its BP counterpart under various PS. We
divide these prior arts into two groups: the delayed gradient (DG) based methods and the local error learning (LEL)
based methods.
The DG-based methods (Huo et al., 2018a;b; Zhuang et al.,
2021) adopt DGs to avoid the synchronism of BP. They
deliver comparable generalization performance relative to
the BP baseline, but introduce the gradient staleness (or the
stale gradient effect). Such a staleness has limited the DGbased methods towards a small PS. That is, most DG-based
methods only perform well for PS ≤ 4 (Huo et al., 2018a;b).
This is because the gradient staleness grows as PS increases,
causing a reduced generalization or even divergence.
The staleness issue does not appear in the LEL-based methods as they sever the gradient flow between adjacent modules by building auxiliary networks to generate local error
gradients. This allows the modules to avoid the global BP
thereby addressing all the three lockings. Methods in this
group is distinguished by the design of auxiliary networks.
The LEL-based methods do not experience divergence as PS
increases, but usually encounter generalization loss instead.
In summary, the DG-based methods can give better generalization results than LEL-methods but they are constrained
by a limited PS due to the staleness issue. Dwelling on
the DG-based methods, we aim to scale the learning to a
large PS with comparable generalization performance (see
Table 1). To this end, the key is to reduce the gradient staleness. Here, we propose an accumulated decoupled learning
(ADL), which effectively incorporates a module-wise gradient accumulation (mGA) technique in the partitioned modules to mitigate the gradient staleness. This work include
the following contributions:

