On Reinforcement Learning with Adversarial Corruption
and Its Application to Block MDP

Tianhao Wu * 1 2 Yunchang Yang * 3 Simon S. Du 4 Liwei Wang 3 5

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) in episodic
tabular MDPs with adversarial corruptions, where
some episodes can be adversarially corrupted.
When the total number of corrupted episodes
is known, we propose an algorithm, Corruption Robust Monotonic Value Propagation
(CR-MVP),
which achieves a regret bound
√

of Õ
SAK + S 2 A + CSA) polylog(H) ,
where S is the number of states, A is the number
of actions, H is the planning horizon, K is the
number of episodes, and C is the known corruption level. We also provide a novel lower bound,
which indicates that our upper bound is nearly
tight. Finally, as an application, we study RL with
rich observations in the block MDP model.√We
provide the first algorithm that achieves a Ktype regret in this setting and is oracle efficient.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has become a ubiquitous
paradigm for decision-making in multi-stage environments.
In a reinforcement learning problem, an agent is trained to
interact with an environment in order to maximize its cumulative rewards through time. We model the environment as a
Markov decision process (MDP) whose transition dynamics
are unknown. As the agent interacts with the environment
it observes the states, actions and rewards generated by the
system dynamics. This has seen widespread applications
in many areas including robotics (Kober et al., 2013), computer gaming (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017) and
stock market (Yang et al., 2020a).

is vulnerable to corrupted data stemming from malicious
entities (Huang et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2019), non-malicious
yet non-stationary behavior, or simply errors in the system.
Data corruption may lead the agent to exhibit inefficient and
often unsafe behavior. In order to guarantee the safety and
robustness of the agent against data corruption, it is of great
importance to design efficient algorithms that are robust to
data corruption in RL.
Previous works handling corruption mainly focus on the
multi-armed bandit setting (Lykouris et al., 2018; Gupta
et al., 2019), which is not directly applicable to the RL setting. Recently, Lykouris et al. (2019) initiates the study of
episodic reinforcement learning under adversarial corruptions. They assume that both the reward and the transition
of the underlying system can be corrupted. √
In this case
they present an algorithm that achieves Õ(C SAHK +
CS 2 A + C 2 SA) regret bound,1 where S is the number of
episodes, A is the number of actions, H is the planning
horizon, K is the number of episodes, and C is the known
number of corrupted episodes (also called
corruption level).

√
Unfortunately, when C is large, say C = Ω
K , their
bound becomes vacuous. Therefore, a better bound with
respect to C is needed. Furthermore, they assume that the
adversary decides whether to corrupt one episode after seeing the agent’s policy, but before the agent takes its action
at each step. However, in many real-world applications,
the adversary is allowed to make such decision after the
agent takes an action. For example, in the stock market, the
opponent may choose whether to manipulate the price of
the stock after seeing your operation. This kind of adversary
is typically stronger as it receives more information before
it decides whether to corrupt the environment. In this paper,
we take a step towards answering the following question:

However, in many real world applications, a trained agent
*
1
Equal contribution
Peking University 2 Pazhou Lab,
Guangzhou, 510330, China 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University 4 University of Washington 5 Key Laboratory of Machine
Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University. Correspondence to: Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.

Can we achieve a tight regret bound in RL with
stronger adversarial corruptions?

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1e
O (·) hides logarithmic factors.
Sometime we write
polylog(H) to highlight the dependency on H.

