Boosting the Throughput and Accelerator Utilization of Specialized CNN
Inference Beyond Increasing Batch Size

Jack Kosaian 1 * Amar Phanishayee 2 Matthai Philipose 2 Debadeepta Dey 2 K. V. Rashmi 1

Abstract
Datacenter vision systems widely use small, specialized convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
trained on speciﬁc tasks for high-throughput inference. These settings employ accelerators with
massive computational capacity, but which specialized CNNs underutilize due to having low
arithmetic intensity. This results in suboptimal
application-level throughput and poor returns on
accelerator investment. Increasing batch size is
the only known way to increase both applicationlevel throughput and accelerator utilization for
inference, but yields diminishing returns; specialized CNNs poorly utilize accelerators even
with large batch size. We propose FoldedCNNs,
a new approach to CNN design that increases inference throughput and utilization beyond large
batch size. FoldedCNNs rethink the structure of
inputs and layers of specialized CNNs to boost
arithmetic intensity: in FoldedCNNs, f images
with C channels each are concatenated into a single input with f C channels and jointly classiﬁed
by a wider CNN. Increased arithmetic intensity in
FoldedCNNs increases the throughput and GPU
utilization of specialized CNN inference by up to
2.5× and 2.8×, with accuracy close to the original
CNN in most cases.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are widely deployed
for high-throughput vision tasks. Many such tasks target
highly speciﬁc events for which general-purpose CNNs
trained on diverse data (e.g., ResNet-50 on ImageNet) are
overkill; an application detecting red trucks does not need
a CNN capable of classifying animals. It has thus become
popular to employ small specialized CNNs trained only for
such focused tasks (Shen et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2017;
*
Work done in part as an intern at Microsoft Research.
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Jack Kosaian <jkosaian@cs.cmu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Hsieh et al., 2018; Kang et al., 2020). In being trained for
highly speciﬁc tasks, specialized CNNs can typically be
much smaller than general-purpose CNNs, and thus operate
at higher application-level throughput (e.g., images/sec).
Specialized CNNs are heavily used for inference in both
datacenters and edge clusters (Kang et al., 2017; Hsieh et al.,
2018; Mullapudi et al., 2019; Bhardwaj et al., 2020), and
occasionally on constrained devices (e.g., cameras) (Canel
et al., 2019). We focus on specialized CNNs used for highthroughput vision in datacenters/clusters. A popular usecase
in this setting is ofﬂine video analytics, in which all video
frames are processed by a specialized CNN, and only frames
for which the specialized CNN is uncertain are processed
by a slower, general-purpose CNN (Kang et al., 2017). The
throughput of the specialized CNN is critical to that of the
overall system, as all frames are processed by the specialized
CNN and only a small fraction by the general-purpose CNN.
Aiding the case for high-throughput CNNs, server-grade
deep learning hardware accelerators offer unprecedented
performance in FLOPs/sec, and thus are used for inference
in datacenters (e.g., V100 and T4 GPUs, TPUs) and edge
clusters (e.g., AWS Outposts and Azure Stack Edge with
T4 GPUs). It is critical that these accelerators be highly
utilized, with software running on an accelerator ideally
achieving FLOPs/sec near the accelerator’s theoretical peak
FLOPs/sec. Given the high cost of accelerators and the operational costs incurred in deploying them (e.g., power) (Barroso et al., 2013), poorly utilizing an accelerator leads to a
poor return on investment. Furthermore, underutilization
results in suboptimal application-level throughput.
However, current specialized CNNs signiﬁcantly underutilize server-grade accelerators: we ﬁnd that specialized
CNNs used in production at Microsoft achieve less than
20% of the peak FLOPs/sec of GPUs employed in datacenters, even with large batch sizes (which are common for
high-throughput inference), and when using techniques that
improve throughput, such as reduced precision (see Fig. 1).
While specialized CNNs might better utilize weaker devices,
we ﬁnd that server-grade GPUs, such as V100 and T4, offer the highest cost-normalized throughput for the CNNs
described above, motivating their deployment in production.

