The Power of Adaptivity for Stochastic Submodular Cover

Rohan Ghuge 1 Anupam Gupta 2 Viswanath Nagarajan 1

Abstract
In the stochastic submodular cover problem, the
goal is to select a subset of stochastic items of
minimum expected cost to cover a submodular
function. Solutions in this setting correspond to
sequential decision processes that select items one
by one “adaptively” (depending on prior observations). While such adaptive solutions achieve
the best objective, the inherently sequential nature
makes them undesirable in many applications. We
ask: how well can solutions with only a few adaptive rounds approximate fully-adaptive solutions?
We give nearly tight answers for both independent
and correlated settings, proving smooth tradeoffs
between the number of adaptive rounds and the
solution quality, relative to fully adaptive solutions. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets
show qualitative improvements in the solutions
as we allow more rounds of adaptivity; in practice, solutions with a few rounds of adaptivity are
nearly as good as fully adaptive solutions.

1. Introduction
Submodularity is a fundamental notion that arises in applications such as image segmentation, data summarization (Simon et al., 2007; Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Sipos et al., 2012),
hypothesis identification (Barinova et al., 2012; Chen et al.,
2014), information gathering (Radanovic et al., 2018), and
social networks (Kempe et al., 2015) . The submodular
cover optimization problem requires us to pick a minimumcost subset S of items to cover a monotone submodular
function f . Submodular cover has been extensively studied in machine learning, computer science and operations
research (Wolsey, 1982; Golovin & Krause, 2011; Mirza1
Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Research supported in part
by NSF grants CMMI-1940766 and CCF-2006778. 2 Department
of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
USA. Supported in part by NSF awards CCF-1907820, CCF1955785, and CCF-2006953.. Correspondence to: Rohan Ghuge
<rghuge@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

soleiman et al., 2015; Bateni et al., 2018): here are two
examples from sensor deployment and medical diagnosis.
In the sensor deployment setting, we consider the problem
of deploying a collection of sensors to monitor some phenomenon (Krause & Guestrin, 2007; Mini et al., 2014; Sun
et al., 2019), for example: we may wish to monitor air
quality or traffic situations. The area each sensor can cover
depends on its sensing range. The goal of the problem is to
deploy as few sensors as possible to cover a desired region
entirely. The area covered as a function of the sensors deployed is a submodular function, and we can cast the sensor
deployment problem as a special case of submodular cover.
In the medical diagnosis example, we have s possible conditions (hypotheses) the patient may suffer from along with the
priors on their occurrence, and our goal is to perform tests to
identify the correct condition as quickly as possible (Garey
& Graham, 1974; Kosaraju et al., 1999; Dasgupta, 2004;
Cicalese et al., 2014). This can be cast as submodular cover
by viewing each test as eliminating all inconsistent hypotheses. Hence we want a coverage value of s − 1: once s − 1
inconsistent hypotheses are eliminated, the remaining one
must be correct.
Observe that both these applications involve uncertain data:
the precise area covered by a sensor is not known before
the sensor is actually setup and the precise outcome (positive/negative) of a test is not known until the action has been
taken. This uncertainty can be modeled using stochastic
submodular optimization, where the items are stochastic.
As a simple example of the stochastic nature, each item may
be active or inactive (with known probabilities), and only
active items contribute to the submodular function.
A solution for stochastic submodular cover is now a sequential decision process. At each step, an item is probed and
its realization (e.g., active or inactive) is observed. The process is typically adaptive, where all the information from
previously probed items is used to identify the next item to
probe. This process continues until the submodular function
is covered, and the goal is to minimize the expected cost of
probed items. Such adaptive solutions are inherently fully
sequential, which is undesirable if probing an item is timeconsuming. E.g., in sensor deployment, probing a sensor
corresponds to physically deploying a sensor and observing
whether it functions as expected, which may take hours or

