Learning disentangled representations via product manifold projection

Marco Fumero 1 Luca Cosmo 1 2 Simone Melzi 1 Emanuele Rodolà 1

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to disentangle the
generative factors of variation underlying a given
set of observations. Our method builds upon the
idea that the (unknown) low-dimensional manifold underlying the data space can be explicitly
modeled as a product of submanifolds. This definition of disentanglement gives rise to a novel
weakly-supervised algorithm for recovering the
unknown explanatory factors behind the data. At
training time, our algorithm only requires pairs of
non i.i.d. data samples whose elements share at
least one, possibly multidimensional, generative
factor of variation. We require no knowledge on
the nature of these transformations, and do not
make any limiting assumption on the properties
of each subspace. Our approach is easy to implement, and can be successfully applied to different
kinds of data (from images to 3D surfaces) undergoing arbitrary transformations. In addition
to standard synthetic benchmarks, we showcase
our method in challenging real-world applications,
where we compare favorably with the state of the
art.

this research field is disentangled representations, which advocates that a representation of an entity should capture the
different latent factors of variation in the world where that
entity is observed. This abstract concept has led to several
formalizations, but the community has not yet settled on a
common definition.
In this work, we propose a new interpretation of disentanglement, based on the concept of projection over product
spaces, and we provide an algorithm to compute disentangled representations by a weakly supervised approach.
Since we do not require much knowledge of the data and
their variations, our method fits different applications. Our
main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We reinterpret the notion of disentanglement in terms
of geometric notions, and we show that our theoretical framework entails a generalization of current approaches.
• Relying on assumptions of the sample distribution, we
provide a weakly supervised recipe that is simple to
integrate into standard neural network models.
• We widely test our approach on synthetic datasets and
more challenging real-world scenarios, outperforming
the state of the art in several cases.

1. Introduction
1.1. Related work
Human intelligence is often understood as a process of turning experience into new behavior, knowledge, and skills
(Locke, 1689). Humans achieve this by constructing small
models of the world in their brains to explain the sensory
experience and use them to infer new consequences. These
models can be understood as turning experience into compact representations: functions of the experienced data
which are useful for a given task. Representation learning (Bengio et al., 2014) aims to mimic this process with
machines, via studying and formalizing what makes a good
representation of high dimensional data, and how can we
compute it in the form of an algorithm. A central topic in
1
Sapienza, University of Rome, Rome, Italy 2 Università della
Svizzera italiana, Lugano, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Marco
Fumero <fumero@di.uniroma1.it>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The task of identifying the underlying factors of variation in
the data has been a primary goal in representation learning
research (Bengio et al., 2014).
The problem of recovering independent components in a
generative process relates to the independent component
analysis (ICA). Given a multivariate signal, ICA aims to
separate it into additive elements generated by independent
non-Gaussian sources (Comon, 1994). While in the nonlinear case, observing i.i.d. samples, ICA was proven to
be unidentifiable (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999), recent approaches (Hyvärinen et al., 2019; Hyvärinen & Morioka,
2016) have built on the assumption of having some degree
of supervision to couple ICA and disentanglement.
A recent and promising line of research (Higgins et al., 2017;
Kumar et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Kim & Mnih, 2018)
aimed to attain disentanglement in a fully unsupervised way,

