Deciding What to Learn: A Rate-Distortion Approach

Dilip Arumugam 1 Benjamin Van Roy 1

Abstract
Agents that learn to select optimal actions represent a prominent focus of the sequential decisionmaking literature. In the face of a complex environment or constraints on time and resources,
however, aiming to synthesize such an optimal
policy can become infeasible. These scenarios
give rise to an important trade-off between the
information an agent must acquire to learn and
the sub-optimality of the resulting policy. While
an agent designer has a preference for how this
trade-off is resolved, existing approaches further
require that the designer translate these preferences into a fixed learning target for the agent. In
this work, leveraging rate-distortion theory, we
automate this process such that the designer need
only express their preferences via a single hyperparameter and the agent is endowed with the
ability to compute its own learning targets that
best achieve the desired trade-off. We establish a
general bound on expected discounted regret for
an agent that decides what to learn in this manner along with computational experiments that
illustrate the expressiveness of designer preferences and even show improvements over Thompson sampling in identifying an optimal policy.

1. Introduction
Learning is a process of acquiring information that reduces
an agent’s uncertainty about its environment. Anything that
an agent may endeavor to learn requires obtaining a precise
amount of information about the environment; naturally,
as measured by this requisite information, some things are
easier to learn than others. When interacting with a complex
environment, however, the agent is spoiled for choice as
there is too much to learn within any reasonable time frame,
and the agent must prioritize. A simple approach is to designate a learning target, which can be thought of as a corpus

of information that, while insufficient to fully identify the
environment, suffices to guide effective decisions. Then,
the agent can prioritize gathering of information about this
learning target.
One possible learning target, which has dominated the
bandit-learning literature (Bubeck et al., 2012; Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020), is an action-selection policy that would
be optimal given full information about the environment.
While suitable for simple environments, like multi-armed
bandits with few arms, this concept does not scale well with
the size of the action space. Moreover, in complex environments, there is typically too much to learn about the optimal
policy within any reasonable time frame.
Recent work has highlighted conditions under which it is
helpful to target a near-optimal or satisficing policy (Russo
& Van Roy, 2018b). Such a learning target is not without precedent and has been studied implicitly in a variety
of contexts (Bubeck et al., 2011; Kleinberg et al., 2008;
Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010; Ryzhov et al., 2012;
Deshpande & Montanari, 2012; Berry et al., 1997; Wang
et al., 2008; Bonald & Proutiere, 2013). There is an important tension between information requirements for policy
learning and policy performance; as one is more permissive
of increasingly sub-optimal policies, the requisite amount of
information for learning such policies decreases. Crucially,
a satisficing policy can be manually specified by an agent
designer in order to strike the desired balance. To do so,
however, it is incumbent upon the designer to have sufficient
knowledge of the problem structure in order to negotiate the
information-performance trade-off.

Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Dilip Arumugam <dilip@cs.stanford.edu>.

We consider the design of an agent that selects its own
learning target. This shifts the agent designer’s role from
specifying one to endowing the agent with the ability to designate and to suitably adapt the target as learning progresses.
The designer can specify the general form of this learning
target as part of the scaffold for a learning algorithm. More
traditional, fixed-target learning algorithms can then be repurposed as subroutines an agent may use to achieve its own
goals. We introduce in this paper what is possibly the first
principled approach to address a fundamental question: how
should an agent decide what to learn?

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

As a first step, this work offers one concrete answer to
this question by introducing an agent that adaptively learns

1

