Policy Information Capacity:
Information-Theoretic Measure for Task Complexity
in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Hiroki Furuta 1 Tatsuya Matsushima 1 Tadashi Kozuno 2 Yutaka Matsuo 1
Sergey Levine 3 Ofir Nachum 3 Shixiang Shane Gu 3

Abstract

Progress in deep reinforcement learning (RL) research is largely enabled by benchmark task environments. However, analyzing the nature of
those environments is often overlooked. In particular, we still do not have agreeable ways to
measure the difficulty or solvability of a task,
given that each has fundamentally different actions, observations, dynamics, rewards, and can
be tackled with diverse RL algorithms. In this
work, we propose policy information capacity
(PIC) – the mutual information between policy parameters and episodic return – and policy-optimal
information capacity (POIC) – between policy
parameters and episodic optimality – as two
environment-agnostic, algorithm-agnostic quantitative metrics for task difficulty. Evaluating our
metrics across toy environments as well as continuous control benchmark tasks from OpenAI
Gym and DeepMind Control Suite, we empirically demonstrate that these information-theoretic
metrics have higher correlations with normalized
task solvability scores than a variety of alternatives. Lastly, we show that these metrics can also
be used for fast and compute-efficient optimizations of key design parameters such as reward
shaping, policy architectures, and MDP properties
for better solvability by RL algorithms without
ever running full RL experiments1 .

1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 3 Google Research, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Hiroki Furuta <furuta@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
The code is available at https://github.com/frt03/
pic.

1. Introduction
The myriad recent successes of reinforcement learning (RL)
have arguably been enabled by the proliferation of deep
neural network function approximators applied to rich observational inputs (Mnih et al., 2015; Hessel et al., 2018;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018), enabling an agent to adeptly manage long-term sequential decision making in complex environments. While in the past much of the empirical RL
research has focused on tabular or linear function approximation case (Dietterich, 1998; McGovern & Barto, 2001;
Konidaris & Barto, 2009), the impressive successes of recent years (and anticipation of domains ripe for subsequent
successes) has spurred the creation of non-tabular benchmarks – i.e., continuous control and/or continuous observation – in which neural network function approximators are
effectively a prerequisite (Bellemare et al., 2013; Brockman
et al., 2016; Tassa et al., 2018). Accordingly, empirical RL
research is presently heavily focused on the use of neural
network function approximators, spurring new algorithmic
developments in both model-free (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016b;
2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018) and model-based (Chua et al.,
2018; Janner et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020a) RL.
Despite the impressive progress of RL algorithms, the analysis of the RL environments has been difficult and stagnant,
precisely due to the complexity of modern benchmarks and
neural network architectures required to solve them. Most
prior works analyzing sample complexity (a common measure of task complexity) focus on tabular MDPs with finite
state and action dimensionalities (Strehl et al., 2006; 2009)
or MDPs with simple dynamics (Recht, 2018), and are not
applicable or measurable for typical deep RL benchmark
tasks. Besides the fact that the components of the environments – observations, actions, dynamics, and rewards
– are drastically different in typical benchmarks, the investigation into task solvability is further complicated by the
diversity of deep RL algorithms used in practice (Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016b;a;
2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2018; Salimans
et al., 2017), where each algorithm has distinct convergence

