Neural-Pull: Learning Signed Distance Functions from Point Clouds by
Learning to Pull Space onto Surfaces

Baorui Ma * 1 Zhizhong Han * 2 Yu-Shen Liu 1 Matthias Zwicker 3

Abstract
Reconstructing continuous surfaces from 3D
point clouds is a fundamental operation in 3D
geometry processing. Several recent state-of-theart methods address this problem using neural
networks to learn signed distance functions (SDFs). In this paper, we introduce Neural-Pull, a new
approach that is simple and leads to high quality
SDFs. Specifically, we train a neural network to
pull query 3D locations to their closest points on
the surface using the predicted signed distance
values and the gradient at the query locations,
both of which are computed by the network itself.
The pulling operation moves each query location
with a stride given by the distance predicted by
the network. Based on the sign of the distance,
this may move the query location along or against
the direction of the gradient of the SDF. This is a
differentiable operation that allows us to update
the signed distance value and the gradient simultaneously during training. Our outperforming results under widely used benchmarks demonstrate
that we can learn SDFs more accurately and flexibly for surface reconstruction and single image
reconstruction than the state-of-the-art methods. Our code and data are available at https:
//github.com/mabaorui/NeuralPull.

1. Introduction
Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) have been an important
3D shape representation for deep learning based 3D shape
analysis (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020; Michalkiewicz et al., 2019; Saito et al.,
2019; Rematas et al., 2021; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Ost et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China 2 Department of Computer
Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA.
Correspondence to: Yu-Shen Liu <liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020; Takikawa et al., 2021; Martel et al., 2021; Oechsle
et al., 2021; Azinovic et al., 2021; Dupont et al., 2021),
due to their advantages over other representations in representing high resolution shapes with arbitrary topology.
Given ground truth signed distance values, it is intuitive to
learn an SDF by training a deep neural network to regress
signed distance values for query 3D locations, where an image (Michalkiewicz et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019) or a point
cloud (Jia & Kyan, 2020; Erler et al., 2020) representing
the shape can serve as a condition which is an additional
input of the network. It has also been shown how to learn
SDFs from multiple 2D images rather than 3D information
using differentiable renderers (Liu et al., 2020; Jiang et al.,
2020b; Zakharov et al., 2020; Wu & Sun, 2020). In this
paper, we address the problem of learning SDFs from raw
point clouds and propose a new method that outperforms
the state-of-the-art on widely used benchmarks.
Current solutions (Gropp et al., 2020; Chibane et al., 2020b;
Atzmon & Lipman, 2020a;b) aim to estimate unsigned distance fields by leveraging additional constraints. The rationale behind these solutions is that an unsigned distance field
can be directly learned from the distances between a set of
query 3D locations and their nearest neighbors on the 3D
point clouds, while the signs of these distances require more
information to infer, such as geometric regularization (Gropp et al., 2020), sign agnostic learning (Atzmon & Lipman,
2020a;b), or analytical gradients (Chibane et al., 2020b).
In this paper, we propose a method to learn SDFs directly
from raw point clouds without requiring ground truth signed
distance values. Our method learns the SDF from a point
cloud, or from multiple point clouds with conditions by
training a neural network to learn to pull the surrounding
3D space onto the surface represented by the point cloud.
Hence we call our method Neural-Pull. Specifically, given
a 3D query location as input to the network, we ask the
network to pull it to its closest point on the surface using
the predicted signed distance value and the gradient at the
query location, both of which are calculated by the network
itself. The pulling operation is differentiable, and depending
on the sign of the predicted distance, it moves the query
location along or against the direction of the gradient with
a stride given by the signed distance. Since our training

