Interpreting and Disentangling Feature Components
of Various Complexity from DNNs

Jie Ren * 1 Mingjie Li * 1 Zexu Liu 1 Quanshi Zhang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated significant success in various tasks. Besides the superior performance of DNNs, some attempts have been made to investigate the interpretability of DNNs in recent years. Previous
studies of interpreting DNNs can be roughly summarized
into two types, i.e. the explanation of DNNs in a post-hoc
manner (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016), and
the analysis of the representation capacity of a DNN (Higgins et al., 2017; Achille & Soatto, 2018a;b; Fort et al.,
2019; Liang et al., 2019).
This study focuses on a new perspective of analyzing the
representation capacity of DNNs. I.e. we define, visualize,
and analyze the complexity of features in DNNs. Previous
research usually analyzed the theoretic maximum complexity of a DNN according to network architectures (Arora
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Raghu et al., 2017; Manu*
Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2 Quanshi
Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the John Hopcroft
Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to:
Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

𝒇(𝒙)

=

𝒄𝒍𝒐𝒘

feature
of low
complexity

+

𝒄𝒎𝒊𝒅 +

𝒄𝒉𝒊𝒈𝒉 + 𝚫𝒇
feature
of high
complexity
• reliability
• noise?

...

This paper aims to define, visualize, and analyze
the feature complexity that is learned by a DNN.
We propose a generic definition for the feature
complexity. Given the feature of a certain layer in
the DNN, our method decomposes and visualizes
feature components of different complexity orders from the feature. The feature decomposition
enables us to evaluate the reliability, the effectiveness, and the significance of over-fitting of these
feature components. Furthermore, such analysis helps to improve the performance of DNNs.
As a generic method, the feature complexity also
provides new insights into existing deep-learning
techniques, such as network compression and
knowledge distillation.

• over-fitted?

input
image

Figure 1. We decompose the raw feature into feature components
of different complexity orders. We further visualize and analyze
the feature components using some generic metrics.

rangsi & Reichman, 2018). In comparison, we propose to
measure the complexity of features by analyzing the complexity of nonlinear transformations. The actual complexity
of features caused by nonlinear transformations is usually
different from the maximum complexity computed based
on the network architecture.
In this paper, given the feature of a specific intermediate
layer, we define the complexity of this feature as the minimum number of nonlinear transformations required to compute this feature under certain constraints. However, the
quantification of nonlinear transformations presents significant challenges to state-of-the-art algorithms. Thus, we use
the number of nonlinear layers to approximate the feature
complexity. I.e. if a feature component can be computed
using k nonlinear layers with a fixed width, but cannot be
computed with k − 1 nonlinear layers, we consider its complexity to be of the k-th order.
Analyzing DNNs using feature complexity. Based on the
above definition, we decompose an intermediate-layer feature into feature components of different complexity orders,
as Figure 1 shows. The clear feature decomposition enables both qualitative and quantitative analysis of a DNN as
follows.
• We first visualize feature components of different complexity orders. Then, we explore the relationship between the
feature complexity and the task difficulty. The distribution

