Memory Efficient Online Meta Learning

Durmus Alp Emre Acar 1 Ruizhao Zhu 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We propose a novel algorithm for online meta
learning where task instances are sequentially revealed with limited supervision and a learner is
expected to meta learn them in each round, so as
to allow the learner to customize a task-specific
model rapidly with little task-level supervision.
A fundamental concern arising in online metalearning is the scalability of memory as more
tasks are viewed over time. Heretofore, prior
works have allowed for perfect recall leading to
linear increase in memory with time. Different
from prior works, in our method, prior task instances are allowed to be deleted. We propose
to leverage prior task instances by means of a
fixed-size state-vector, which is updated sequentially. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that
our proposed memory efficient online learning
(MOML) method suffers sub-linear regret with
convex loss functions and sub-linear local regret
for nonconvex losses. On benchmark datasets we
show that our method can outperform prior works
even though they allow for perfect recall.

1. Introduction
Meta Learning (Vinyals et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2016) is
defined as a problem of learning to learn new tasks. This
is typically accomplished by training a meta-model on a
diverse set of tasks, such that the meta-model can in turn
train and output a classifier on a new task using only a few
training examples. There has been a burst of activity on
meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Zhou et al., 2019) recently with much of it devoted to the
batch setting. Namely, during training, datasets composed
of different tasks are provided, and the goal is to train a metalearner, which at test-time can be rapidly re-purposed for a
new task by training on relatively few annotated examples.
1
Boston University, Boston, MA. Correspondence to:
Durmus Alp Emre Acar <alpacar@bu.edu>, Ruizhao Zhu
<rzhu@bu.edu>, Venkatesh Saligrama <srv@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While human learning is evidently the inspiration for traditional meta-learning approaches, there are significant differences. Humans learn continually by dynamically and
continuously adapting their representations, beliefs and predictions as they encounter new tasks (Lake et al., 2017).
Motivated by applications that involve such continual and
lifelong learning, Finn et al. (2019) advocate an online metalearning approach, in order to bridge the seeming gap between online learning and meta-learning. Their point is that
online learning (Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2007) mirrors
the way in which humans sequentially encounter new tasks
one after another, but unlike humans, online learning does
not allow for either task-specific adaptation or consider how
solution to past tasks can help solve new ones. On the other
hand, while conventional meta-learning does incorporate
task-specific adaptation and incorporates knowledge transfer from past experiences, it ignores the episodic, sequential
and non-stationary aspects of how tasks are encountered.
In this paper, we develop a novel method for online metalearning overcoming drawbacks of Finn et al. (2019). Like
Finn et al. (2019) we focus on training deep neural network
models, and consider the setting where task instances are
revealed to the learner episodically. We also attempt to
train the model’s initial parameters so that, on any new task,
the model parameters can be rapidly adapted with a small
amount of data by means of gradient descent. Subsequently,
the learner then updates its underlying task-agnostic parameters based on solving the new task.
Linear Memory Scaling. Finn et al. (2019)’s follow-themeta-learner (FTML) leverages the well-known follow the
regularized leader (FTRL) method in online learning. While
learning task-agnostic model parameters (meta-learning
step), FTML recalls all task instances that have heretofore
appeared. This is undesirable and impractical, and as such
leads to linear increase in memory with the number of observed tasks. One option is to update the meta model only
using the current task, but this leads to significant current
task bias. Another possibility is to leverage an online gradient descent (OGD) algorithm, based on linearization of
loss-functions for prior tasks, but the linearization would be
around stale model parameters associated with the previous
tasks. While practical, empirically these options do not lead
to meaningful meta-learning performance.

