Leveraging Non-uniformity in First-order Non-convex Optimization

Jincheng Mei 1 2 * Yue Gao 1 * Bo Dai 2 Csaba Szepesvári 3 1 Dale Schuurmans 2 1

Abstract
Classical global convergence results for first-order
methods rely on uniform smoothness and the
Łojasiewicz inequality. Motivated by properties
of objective functions that arise in machine learning, we propose a non-uniform refinement of
these notions, leading to Non-uniform Smoothness
(NS) and Non-uniform Łojasiewicz inequality
(NŁ). The new definitions inspire new geometryaware first-order methods that are able to converge to global optimality faster than the classical
Ω(1/t2 ) lower bounds. To illustrate the power
of these geometry-aware methods and their corresponding non-uniform analysis, we consider two
important problems in machine learning: policy
gradient optimization in reinforcement learning
(PG), and generalized linear model training in supervised learning (GLM). For PG, we find that
normalizing the gradient ascent method can accelerate convergence to O(e−c·t ) (where c > 0)
while incurring less overhead than existing algorithms. For GLM, we show that geometry-aware
normalized gradient descent can also achieve a
linear convergence rate, which significantly improves the best known results. We additionally
show that the proposed geometry-aware gradient
descent methods escape landscape plateaus faster
than standard gradient descent. Experimental results are used to illustrate and complement the
theoretical findings.

in reinforcement learning (RL) (Agarwal et al., 2020), supervised learning (SL) (Hazan et al., 2015), and deep learning
(Allen-Zhu et al., 2019). While gradient-based algorithms
remain the method of choice in machine learning, the convergence of such algorithms to global minimizers has still
only been established in restrictive settings where one can
assert two strong assumptions about the objective function:
(1) that the objective is smooth, and (2) that the objective
satisfies a gradient dominance over sub-optimality such as
the Łojasiewicz inequality. We will find it beneficial to recall the definitions of these properties. For the remainder of
this paper let Θ = Rd .
Definition 1 (Smoothness). The function f : Θ → R is
β-smooth (β > 0) if it is differentiable and for all θ, θ0 ∈ Θ,
E
D df (θ)
β
, θ0 − θ ≤ · kθ0 − θk22 . (1)
f (θ0 ) − f (θ) −
dθ
2
Definition 2. (Łojasiewicz, 1963; Polyak, 1963; Kurdyka,
1998) The differentiable function f : Θ → R satisfies the
(C, ξ)-Łojasiewicz inequality if for all θ ∈ Θ,

1−ξ
df (θ)
≥ C · f (θ) − inf f (θ)
,
(2)
θ∈Θ
dθ 2
where C > 0 and ξ ∈ [0, 1].

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Alberta 2 Google Research,
Brain Team 3 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Jincheng Mei
<jmei2@ualberta.ca>, Yue Gao <gao12@ualberta.ca>.

In particular, if an objective function f satisfies both assumptions, gradient-based optimization can be shown to converge
to a global minimizer by noting first that uniform smoothness Eq. (1) ensures the gradient updates achieve monotonic
improvement with an appropriate step size (i.e., f (θt+1 ) ≤
2
1
· k∇f (θt )k2 , if θt+1 ← θt − β1 · ∇f (θt )), while
f (θt ) − 2β
the Łojasiewicz inequality Eq. (2) ensures the gradient does
not vanish before a global minimizer is reached. Several
global convergence results have recently been achieved in
the machine learning literature by exploiting assumptions
of this kind. For example, in reinforcement learning it has
recently been shown that policy gradient (PG) methods converge to a globally optimal policy (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Mei et al., 2020b); in supervised learning it has been shown
that gradient descent (GD) methods converge to global minimizers of certain non-convex problems (Hazan et al., 2015);
and in deep learning theory it has been shown that (stochastic) GD can converge to a global minimizer with an overparameterized neural network (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, previous work that relies on the two uniform conditions in Definitions 1 and 2 assumes universal constants

1. Introduction
The optimization of non-convex objective functions is a
topic of key interest in modern-day machine learning. Recent, intriguing results show that simple gradient-based optimization can achieve globally optimal solutions in certain
non-convex problems arising in machine learning, such as

