Streaming and Distributed Algorithms for Robust Column Subset Selection

Shuli Jiang 1 Dongyu Li 1 Irene Mengze Li 1 Arvind V. Mahankali 1 David P. Woodruff 1

Abstract
We give the first single-pass streaming algorithm
for Column Subset Selection with respect to the
entrywise `p -norm with 1 ≤ p < 2. We study
the `p norm loss since it is often considered
more robust to noise than the standard Frobenius norm. Given an input matrix A ∈ Rd×n
(n  d), our algorithm achieves a multiplica1
1
tive k p − 2 poly(log nd)-approximation to the error with respect to the best possible column subset
of size k. Furthermore, the space complexity of
the streaming algorithm is optimal up to a logarithmic factor. Our streaming algorithm also
extends naturally to a 1-round distributed protocol with nearly optimal communication cost. A
key ingredient in our algorithms is a reduction to
column subset selection in the `p,2 -norm, which
corresponds to the p-norm of the vector of Euclidean norms of each of the columns of A. This
enables us to leverage strong coreset constructions for the Euclidean norm, which previously
had not been applied in this context. We also give
the first provable guarantees for greedy column
subset selection in the `1,2 norm, which can be
used as an alternative, practical subroutine in our
algorithms. Finally, we show that our algorithms
give significant practical advantages on real-world
data analysis tasks.

1. Introduction
Column Subset Selection (k-CSS) is a widely studied approach for low-rank approximation and feature selection. In
k-CSS, on an input data matrix A ∈ Rd×n , we seek a small
subset AI of k columns from A such that minV kAI V −Ak
is minimized for some norm k · k. In contrast to general
low-rank approximation, where one finds U ∈ Rd×k and
1
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to:
David
P. Woodruff <dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>, Shuli Jiang
<shulij@andrew.cmu.edu>, Arvind V. Mahankali <amahanka@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

V ∈ Rk×n such that kU V − Ak is minimized (Clarkson &
Woodruff, 2013; Woodruff, 2014c), k-CSS outputs an actual
subset of the columns of A as the left factor U . The main
advantage of k-CSS over general low-rank approximation
is that the resulting factorization is more interpretable. For
instance, the subset AI can represent salient features of A,
while in general low-rank approximation, the left factor U
may not be easy to relate to the original dataset. In addition,
the subset AI preserves sparsity of the original matrix A.
k-CSS has been extensively studied in the Frobenius norm
(Guruswami & Sinop, 2012; Boutsidis et al., 2014; Boutsidis
& Woodruff, 2017; Boutsidis et al., 2008b) and also the
operator norm (Halko et al., 2011; Woodruff, 2014a). A
number of recent works (Song et al., 2017; Chierichetti
et al., 2017; Dan et al., 2019; Ban et al., 2019; Mahankali
& Woodruff, 2021) studied this problem in the `p norm for
1 ≤ p < 2, due to its robustness properties. The `1 norm,
especially, is less sensitive to outliers, and better at handling
missing data and non-Gaussian noise, than the Frobenius
norm (Song et al., 2017). Using the `1 norm loss has been
shown to lead to improved performance in many real-world
applications of low-rank approximation, such as structurefrom-motion (Ke & Kanade, 2005) and image denoising
(Yu et al., 2012).
In this work, we give algorithms for k-CSS in the `p norm,
or k-CSSp , in the streaming and distributed settings for
1 ≤ p < 2. The streaming algorithm can be used on small
devices with memory constraints, when the elements of a
large dataset are arriving one at a time and storing the entire
stream is not possible. The distributed algorithm is useful
when a large dataset is partitioned across multiple devices.
Each device only sees a subset of the entire dataset, and it is
expensive to communicate or transmit data across devices.
1.1. Background: k-CSSp in the Streaming Model
We study the column-update streaming model (See Definition 2.1) where the dataset A is a d × n matrix with n  d,
and the columns of A arrive one by one. In this setting, our
goal is to maintain a good subset of columns of A, while
using space that can be linear in d and k, but sublinear in n.
This model is relevant in settings where memory is limited,
and the algorithm can only make one pass over the input
data, e.g. (Drineas & Kannan, 2003).

