E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks
Victor Garcia Satorras 1 Emiel Hoogeboom 1 Max Welling 1

Abstract
This paper introduces a new model to learn graph
neural networks equivariant to rotations, translations, reflections and permutations called E(n)Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs). In
contrast with existing methods, our work does not
require computationally expensive higher-order
representations in intermediate layers while it
still achieves competitive or better performance.
In addition, whereas existing methods are limited to equivariance on 3 dimensional spaces,
our model is easily scaled to higher-dimensional
spaces. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on dynamical systems modelling, representation learning in graph autoencoders and predicting molecular properties.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has largely replaced hand-crafted
features, many advances are critically dependent on inductive biases in deep neural networks. An effective method to
restrict neural networks to relevant functions is to exploit
the symmetry of problems by enforcing equivariance with
respect to transformations from a certain symmetry group.
Notable examples are translation equivariance in Convolutional Neural Networks and permutation equivariance in
Graph Neural Networks (Bruna et al., 2013; Defferrard et al.,
2016; Kipf & Welling, 2016a).
Many problems exhibit 3D translation and rotation symmetries. Some examples are point clouds (Uy et al., 2019), 3D
molecular structures (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014) or N-body
particle simulations (Kipf et al., 2018). The group corresponding to these symmetries is named the Euclidean group:
SE(3) or when reflections are included E(3). It is often desired that predictions on these tasks are either equivariant or
invariant with respect to E(3) transformations.
1

UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Victor Garcia Satorras
<v.garciasatorras@uva.nl>,
Emiel
Hoogeboom
<e.hoogeboom@uva.nl>, Max Welling <m.welling@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Example of rotation equivariance on a graph with a graph
neural network

Recently, various forms and methods to achieve E(3) or
SE(3) equivariance have been proposed (Thomas et al.,
2018; Fuchs et al., 2020; Finzi et al., 2020; Köhler et al.,
2020). Many of these works achieve innovations in studying types of higher-order representations for intermediate
network layers. However, the transformations for these
higher-order representations require coefficients or approximations that can be expensive to compute. Additionally,
in practice for many types of data the inputs and outputs
are restricted to scalar values (for instance temperature or
energy, referred to as type-0 in literature) and 3d vectors
(for instance velocity or momentum, referred to as type-1 in
literature).
In this work we present a new architecture that is translation,
rotation and reflection equivariant (E(n)), and permutation
equivariant with respect to an input set of points. Our model
is simpler than previous methods in that it does not require
the spherical harmonics as in (Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs
et al., 2020) while it can still achieve competitive or better results. In addition, equivariance in our model is not
limited to the 3-dimensional space and can be scaled to
larger dimensional spaces without a significant increase in
computation.

