The Lipschitz Constant of Self-Attention

Hyunjik Kim 1 George Papamakarios 1 Andriy Mnih 1

Abstract
Lipschitz constants of neural networks have been
explored in various contexts in deep learning,
such as provable adversarial robustness, estimating Wasserstein distance, stabilising training of
GANs, and formulating invertible neural networks. Such works have focused on bounding
the Lipschitz constant of fully connected or convolutional networks, composed of linear maps
and pointwise non-linearities. In this paper, we
investigate the Lipschitz constant of self-attention,
a non-linear neural network module widely used
in sequence modelling. We prove that the standard dot-product self-attention is not Lipschitz
for unbounded input domain, and propose an alternative L2 self-attention that is Lipschitz. We
derive an upper bound on the Lipschitz constant of
L2 self-attention and provide empirical evidence
for its asymptotic tightness. To demonstrate the
practical relevance of our theoretical work, we
formulate invertible self-attention and use it in
a Transformer-based architecture for a characterlevel language modelling task.

1. Introduction
Lipschitz continuity is a strong form of continuity for functions. Loosely speaking, a function is Lipschitz continuous
if changing its input by a certain amount cannot change
its output by more than K times that amount. The constant K is a hard constraint on how rapidly the function’s
output can vary, and the smallest such K is known as
pthe
function’s Lipschitz constant. For example, f1 (x) = |x|
and f2 (x) = exp(x) for x ∈ R are not Lipschitz continuous, because their output can change arbitrarily fast as
x approaches 0 and +∞ respectively. On the other hand,
g1 (x) = tanh(x) and g2 (x) = αx are Lipschitz continuous,
because their rate of change (derivative) is bounded.
In deep learning, we often use Lipschitz continuity as a
1

DeepMind, UK. Correspondence to: Hyunjik Kim <hyunjikk@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

constraint for neural networks, to control how much a network’s output can change relative to its input. Such Lipschitz constraints are useful in several contexts. For example,
Lipschitz constraints can endow models with provable robustness against adversarial pertubations (Cisse et al., 2017;
Tsuzuku et al., 2018; Anil et al., 2019), and guaranteed generalisation bounds (Sokolić et al., 2017). Moreover, the dual
form of the Wasserstein distance is defined as a supremum
over Lipschitz functions with a given Lipschitz constant,
hence Lipschitz-constrained networks are used for estimating Wasserstein distances (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019). Further,
Lipschitz-constrained networks can stabilise training for
GANs, an example being spectral normalisation (Miyato
et al., 2018). Finally, Lipschitz-constrained networks are
also used to construct invertible models and normalising
flows. For example, Lipschitz-constrained networks can be
used as a building block for invertible residual networks and
hence flow-based generative models (Behrmann et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2019). Additionally, Neural ODEs (Chen et al.,
2018; Grathwohl et al., 2019) are typically defined using
vector fields parameterized via Lipschitz networks, so that
the flow generated by the vector field is guaranteed to exist
for all times.
Nonetheless, designing Lipschitz-continuous neural networks and computing (or even upper-bounding) their Lipschitz constant is a hard problem. Previous work mostly
focused on fully-connected and convolutional networks, not
only because they are common in deep learning, but also because they are relatively simple to analyze, as compositions
of linear maps and pointwise non-linearities. Even in this
case however, exact evaluation of the Lipschitz constant of
fully-connected and convolutional networks is NP-hard (Virmaux & Scaman, 2018) and obtaining a tight upper bound
remains a challenging task (Virmaux & Scaman, 2018; Fazlyab et al., 2019; Latorre et al., 2020).
Fully-connected and convolutional networks are not the
only neural networks worthy of interest. Recently, selfattention (Vaswani et al., 2017) has become a popular
alternative to recurrent neural networks. Self-attention
is a key component of the Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017), that has found success as a building block in models
of various data modalities, starting with natural-language
processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020) and extending to computer vision

