Dimensionality Reduction for Sum-of-Distances Metric
Zhili Feng 1 Praneeth Kacham 1 David P. Woodruff 1

Abstract
We give a dimensionality reduction procedure
to approximate the sum of distances of a given
set of n points in Rd to any “shape” that lies
in a k -dimensional subspace. Here, by “shape”
we mean any set of points in Rd . Our algorithm takes an input in the form of an n × d
matrix A, where each row of A denotes a data
point, and outputs a subspace P of dimension
O(k 3 /ε6 ) such that the projections of each of
the n points onto the subspace P and the distances of each of the points to the subspace P
are sufficient to obtain an ε-approximation to
the sum of distances to any arbitrary shape that
lies in a k -dimensional subspace of Rd . These
include important problems such as k -median,
k -subspace approximation, and (j, l) subspace
clustering with j · l ≤ k . Dimensionality reduction reduces the data storage requirement to
(n + d)k 3 /ε6 from nnz(A). Here nnz(A) could
potentially be as large as nd. Our algorithm runs
in time nnz(A)/ε2 + (n + d)poly(k/ε), up to
logarithmic factors. For dense matrices, where
nnz(A) ≈ nd, we give a faster algorithm, that
runs in time nd + (n + d)poly(k/ε) up to logarithmic factors. Our dimensionality reduction
algorithm can also be used to obtain poly(k/ε)
size coresets for k -median and (k, 1)-subspace
approximation problems in polynomial time.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models often require millions of highdimensional data samples in order to train. For example,
an image with moderate resolution can easily have more
than a million pixels. It is crucial that we can decrease the
size of the data to save on computational power. One way
to decrease the size of the data is dimensionality reduction,
where we project our data samples onto a low-dimensional
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Praneeth Kacham <pkacham@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

subspace and perform the task on the low-dimensional
points. Given a set of n points A = {a1 , . . . , an } in Rd ,
the projections of A onto a subspace P of k dimensions
needs only k parameters for each point in the dataset. Thus
the size of the data is proportional to (n + d)k , which can
be much smaller than nd. Therefore if there exists a subspace P of dimension k , where k is much smaller than n
and d, and for which the projections of A onto the subspace P alone are sufficient to perform a certain a task on
the dataset A, then we can achieve a significant reduction
in the size of the data.
One very common task that requires dimensionality reduction is the shape-fitting problem. A problem instance
is defined by a quadruple (A, S, dist, f ), where A =
{a1 , . . . , an } ⊆ Rd is a set of points, dist : Rd ×Rd → R≥0
is a metric which we will also refer to as the distance
function, S is a collection of subsets in Rd which we call
shapes, and a function f : R≥0 →!R≥0 . The task is to
find a shape S ∈ S that minimizes i f (dist(ai , S)). The
most common function f used is f (x) = x2 as it has a
natural Frobenius norm interpretation for many tasks and
has closed-form solutions for natural sets S of shapes. Recently, the function f (x) = x has been considered as it
is more robust to outliers than the function f (x) = x2 ,
meaning that it does not square the distance to an erroneous
point, allowing the objective to fit more of the remaining
(non-outlier) data points.
The most common dimensionality reduction techniques
include Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (JL). PCA projects the
original dataset onto a low-dimensional subspace for which
the data variance is the largest. On the other hand, the JL
transform provides a data-oblivious dimensionality reduction that preserves pairwise distances between points in the
dataset.
Feldman et al. (2013) show that if P is the subspace spanned by the top O(k/ε2 ) singular vectors of
the data matrix A, which is given by PCA, then for
any shape
! S that lies in a 2k -dimensional space, the
quantity
s'2 can be approximated by
i mins∈S 'ai −!
!
2
2
min
'P
a
−
s'
+
s∈S
P
i
2
i
i 'ai − PP ai '2 , where PP ai
denotes the Euclidean projection of ai onto the subspace
P , thereby giving a dimensionality reduction technique for

