Diffusion Earth Mover’s Distance and Distribution Embeddings

Alexander Tong * 1 Guillaume Huguet * 2 3 Amine Natik * 2 3 Kincaid MacDonald 4 Manik Kuchroo 5 1
Ronald R. Coifman 4 Guy Wolf † 2 3 Smita Krishnaswamy † 5 1

Abstract

We propose a new fast method of measuring distances between large numbers of related high
dimensional datasets called the Diffusion Earth
Mover’s Distance (EMD). We model the datasets
as distributions supported on common data graph
that is derived from the affinity matrix computed
on the combined data. In such cases where the
graph is a discretization of an underlying Riemannian closed manifold, we prove that Diffusion
EMD is topologically equivalent to the standard
EMD with a geodesic ground distance. Diffusion
EMD can be computed in Õ(n) time and is more
accurate than similarly fast algorithms such as
tree-based EMDs. We also show Diffusion EMD
is fully differentiable, making it amenable to future uses in gradient-descent frameworks such as
deep neural networks. Finally, we demonstrate
an application of Diffusion EMD to single cell
data collected from 210 COVID-19 patient samples at Yale New Haven Hospital. Here, Diffusion
EMD can derive distances between patients on
the manifold of cells at least two orders of magnitude faster than equally accurate methods. This
distance matrix between patients can be embedded into a higher level patient manifold which
uncovers structure and heterogeneity in patients.
More generally, Diffusion EMD is applicable to
all datasets that are massively collected in parallel
in many medical and biological systems.

*
Equal contribution ; † Equal senior-author contribution. 1 Dept.
of Comp. Sci., Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 2 Dept. of
Math. & Stat., Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
3
Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada 4 Dept. of
Math., Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 5 Department of
Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence
to: Smita Krishnaswamy <smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
With the profusion of modern high dimensional, high
throughput data, the next challenge is the integration and
analysis of collections of related datasets. Examples of
this are particularly prevalent in single cell measurement
modalities where data (such as mass cytometry, or single
cell RNA sequencing data) can be collected in a multitude of
patients, or in thousands of perturbation conditions (Shifrut
et al., 2018). These situations motivate the organization
and embedding of datasets, similar to how we now organize
data points into low dimensional embeddings, e.g., with
PHATE (Moon et al., 2019), tSNE (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008), or diffusion maps (Coifman & Lafon, 2006)).
The advantage of such organization is that we can use the
datasets as rich high dimensional features to characterize
and group the patients or perturbations themselves. In order
to extend embedding techniques to entire datasets, we have
to define a distance between datasets, which for our purposes are essentially high dimensional point clouds. For this
we propose a new form of Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD),
which we call Diffusion EMD1 , where we model the datasets
as distributions supported on a common data affinity graph.
We provide two extremely fast methods for computing Diffusion EMD based on an approximate multiscale kernel
density estimation on a graph.
Optimal transport is uniquely suited to the formulation of
distances between entire datasets (each of which is a collection of data points) as it generalizes the notion of the shortest
path between two points to the shortest set of paths between
distributions. Recent works have applied optimal transport
in the single-cell domain to interpolate lineages (Schiebinger
et al., 2019; Yang & Uhler, 2019; Tong et al., 2020), interpolate patient states (Tong & Krishnaswamy, 2020), integrate
multiple domains (Demetci et al., 2020), or similar to this
work build a manifold of perturbations (Chen et al., 2020).
All of these approaches use the standard primal formulation
of the Wasserstein distance. Using either entropic regularization approximation and the Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi,
2013) to solve the discrete distribution case or a neural
network based approach in the continuous formulation (Ar1
Python implementation is available at https://github.
com/KrishnaswamyLab/DiffusionEMD.

