Can Subnetwork Structure be the Key to Out-of-Distribution Generalization?

Dinghuai Zhang 1 Kartik Ahuja 1 Yilun Xu 2 Yisen Wang 3 Aaron Courville 1

Abstract
Can models with particular structure avoid being biased towards spurious correlation in out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization? Peters et al.
(2016) provides a positive answer for linear cases.
In this paper, we use a functional modular probing method to analyze deep model structures under OOD setting. We demonstrate that even in
biased models (which focus on spurious correlation) there still exist unbiased functional subnetworks. Furthermore, we articulate and demonstrate the functional lottery ticket hypothesis: full
network contains a subnetwork that can achieve
better OOD performance. We then propose Modular Risk Minimization to solve the subnetwork
selection problem. Our algorithm learns the subnetwork structure from a given dataset, and can
be combined with any other OOD regularization
methods. Experiments on various OOD generalization tasks corroborate the effectiveness of our
method.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable progress we have witnessed in
neural-network-based machine learning, the stories of failures continue to accumulate (Geirhos et al., 2020). Many
of these failures are attributed to models exploiting spurious correlations or shortcuts (i.e. factors that are not used
to generate the label). A colloquial example comes from
(Beery et al., 2018) where the authors show how a neural
network trained to distinguish cows from camels exploits
shortcut such as background color for prediction. In a much
more concerning example, (DeGrave et al., 2020) show how
machine learning systems trained to detect COVID-19 exploited the data source (e.g., hospital) to artificially boost
inference performance.
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology 3 Key Lab of Machine Perception (MoE), School of
EECS, Peking University. Correspondence to: Dinghuai Zhang
<dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. OOD performance of models with different structures
when trained with ERM algorithm on F ULL C OLORED MNIST.
The oracle subnetwork and our MRM method significantly surpass
the performance of full network. See details in Section 4.

What causes these failures? Recent works (Peters et al.,
2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019) argue the principle of empirical
risk minimization (ERM) is at fault: if the data is generated
from a fully observed causal bayesian network (CBN), then
ERM would typically use all the features in the Markov
blanket including those which are not the causes of the label.
It may consequently fail to perform well under distribution
shifts. This is known as the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization problem. In an effort to alleviate the problem,
Peters et al. (2016) proposes to first identify the target’s
causal parents, and constrain the model structure by only
updating the parameters for the parents. Nevertheless, their
approach is only applicable for linear problem. Sagawa
et al. (2020) also analyze the problem from a model structure perspective, but focusing on deep neural networks and
showing that overparameterization will hurt OOD performance through data memorization and overfitting. Rather
than focusing model structure, most recent works (Arjovsky
et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2019; Ahuja et al., 2020; Krueger
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020; Koyama & Yamaguchi, 2020;
Creager et al., 2020) mainly target improvements in the
objective function over ERM.
In this work, we set out to study the effect of the model structure in OOD generalization beyond simple considerations
of model capacity. We begin by demonstrating that even
already trained models that exploit spurious correlation can
contain subnetworks that capture invariant features. We then

