More Powerful and General Selective Inference for
Stepwise Feature Selection Using Homotopy Method

Kazuya Sugiyama * 1 Vo Nguyen Le Duy * 1 2 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2

Abstract
Conditional selective inference (SI) has been actively studied as a new statistical inference framework for data-driven hypotheses. The basic idea
of conditional SI is to make inferences conditional
on the selection event characterized by a set of
linear and/or quadratic inequalities. Conditional
SI has been mainly studied in the context of feature selection such as stepwise feature selection
(SFS). The main limitation of the existing conditional SI methods is the loss of power due to
over-conditioning, which is required for computational tractability. In this study, we develop a more
powerful and general conditional SI method for
SFS using the homotopy method which enables
us to overcome this limitation. The homotopybased SI is especially effective for more complicated feature selection algorithms. As an example,
we develop a conditional SI method for forwardbackward SFS with AIC-based stopping criteria,
and show that it is not adversely affected by the increased complexity of the algorithm. We conduct
several experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) is being applied to a greater variety of practical problems, ensuring the reliability of ML is
becoming increasingly important. Among several potential
approaches to reliable ML, conditional selective inference
(SI) is recognized as a promising approach for evaluating the
statistical reliability of data-driven hypotheses selected by
ML algorithms. The basic idea of conditional SI is to make
inference on a data-driven hypothesis conditional on the
selection event that the hypothesis is selected. Conditional
SI has been actively studied especially in the context of
*
1
Equal contribution
Nagoya Institute of Technology,
Japan 2 RIKEN, Japan. Correspondence to: Ichiro Takeuchi
<takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

feature selection. Notably, Lee et al. (2016) and Tibshirani
et al. (2016) proposed conditional SI methods for selected
features using Lasso and stepwise feature selection (SFS),
respectively. Their basic idea is to characterize the selection
event by a polytope, i.e., a set of linear inequalities, in a
sample space. When a selection event can be characterized
by a polytope, practical computational methods developed
by these authors can be used for making inferences of the
selected hypotheses conditional on the selection events.
Unfortunately, however, such polytope-based SI has several
limitations because it can only be used when the characterization of all relevant selection events is represented by a
polytope. In fact, in most of the existing polytope-based
SI studies, extra-conditioning is required in order for the
selection event to be characterized as a polytope. For example, in SI for SFS by Tibshirani et al. (2016), the authors
needed to consider conditioning not only on selected features but also on additional events regarding the history of
the feature selection algorithmic process and the signs of
the features. Such extra-conditioning leads to loss of power
in the inference (Fithian et al., 2014).
In this study, we go beyond polytope-based SI and propose
a novel conditional SI method using the homotopy continuation approach for SFS. We call the proposed method
homotopy-based SI. In contrast to polytope-based SI for
SFS in Tibshirani et al. (2016), the proposed method is more
powerful and more general. The basic idea of homotopybased SI is to use the homotopy continuation approach to
keep track of the hypothesis selection event when the dataset
changes in the direction of the selected test statistic, which
enables efficient identification of the subspace of the sample
space in which the same hypothesis is selected. Furthermore, we show that the proposed homotopy-based SI is
more advantageous for more complicated feature selection
algorithms. As an example, we develop a homotopy-based
conditional SI for forward-backward SFS (FB-SFS) algorithm with AIC-based stopping criteria, and show that it is
not adversely affected by the increased complexity of the
algorithm and that a sufficiently high power is retained.
Related works Traditional statistical inference presumes
that a statistical model and a statistical target for which we

