Efficient Training of Robust Decision Trees Against Adversarial Examples

Daniël Vos 1 Sicco Verwer 1

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art algorithms for training robust decision trees have high runtime costs and
require hours to run. We present GROOT, an efficient algorithm for training robust decision trees
and random forests that runs in a matter of seconds to minutes. Where before the worst-case
Gini impurity was computed iteratively, we find
that we can solve this function analytically to
improve time complexity from O(n) to O(1) in
terms of n samples. Our results on both single
trees and ensembles on 14 structured datasets as
well as on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST demonstrate that GROOT runs several orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art works and also
shows better performance in terms of adversarial
accuracy on structured data.

1. Introduction
Recently it has been shown that neural networks (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014) and similarly linear
models, decision trees and support vector machines (Papernot et al., 2016a) are vulnerable to adversarial examples:
perturbed samples that trick the model into misclassifying
them. Much research has gone into training robust neural networks (Papernot et al., 2016b; Meng & Chen, 2017;
Samangouei et al., 2018; Ilyas et al., 2019). These models
perform well on unstructured data such as images and audio, but decision tree ensembles often outperform them on
structured data. Additionally, when using a single decision
tree, the models are easily interpreted by humans. Recently
the first methods have been proposed to train decision trees
and their ensembles robustly (Kantchelian et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2019; Calzavara et al., 2020; Andriushchenko & Hein,
2019) but the state-of-the-art methods are expensive to run.
In this work we propose GROOT, an efficient algorithm
for training robust decision trees. Like Chen et al. (Chen

et al., 2019), we closely mimic the greedy recursive splitting strategy that traditional decision trees use and we score
splits with the adversarial Gini impurity. We prove that
the adversarial Gini impurity is concave with respect to the
number of modified data points and use its analytical solution to compute the function in constant time. Our results
show that GROOT trains trees 3 to 6 orders of magnitude
faster than the state-of-the-art method TREANT (Calzavara
et al., 2020) and GROOT trains random forests 100-1000
times faster than provably robust boosting (Andriushchenko
& Hein, 2019). Leveraging this speedup we can fit robust
random forests using the adversarial Gini impurity and we
do not have to rely on a heuristic such as Chen et al.
Moreover, GROOT scores competitively on adversarial accuracy which we evaluate on 14 structured datasets as well
as on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST. On the structured data,
both GROOT trees and GROOT forests outperform the stateof-the-art robust tree and forest methods. GROOT trees
obtain a small performance improvement over TREANT.
GROOT forests outperform provably robust boosting. Interestingly, GROOT trees and forests obtain top and similar
ranks. Showing that in contrast to regular accuracy, there
is not much difference between the adversarial accuracy
obtained by robust decision trees and forests. On MNIST
and Fashion-MNIST, provably robust boosting outperforms
GROOT forests on robustness by respectively 0.8% and
5.5% but takes 122 times and 162 times longer to train. We
implement and publish GROOT’s source code in a Scikitlearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) compatible classifier. We take
inspiration from TREANT and allow users to easily configure the perturbation range for each separate feature. Our
main contributions are:
• An efficient score function that allows us to fit trees
orders of magnitude faster than the state of the art.
• An algorithm that achieves competitive performance
to the state of the art in the adversarial setting.
• A flexible implementation that allows users to specify
attacks in terms of axis aligned perturbations.

1
Cyber Security Group, Delft University of Technology,
Delft, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Daniël Vos
<d.a.vos@tudelft.nl>.

2. Related Work

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To the best of our knowledge we summarize all related
works on robust decision tree learning. In Table 1 we com-

