Double-Win Quant: Aggressively Winning Robustness of Quantized Deep
Neural Networks via Random Precision Training and Inference

Yonggan Fu 1 Qixuan Yu 1 Meng Li 2 Vikas Chandra 2 Yingyan Lin 1

Abstract
Quantization is promising in enabling powerful
yet complex deep neural networks (DNNs) to
be deployed into resource constrained platforms.
However, quantized DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks unless being equipped with sophisticated techniques, leading to a dilemma of
struggling between DNNs’ efficiency and robustness. In this work, we demonstrate a new perspective regarding quantization’s role in DNNs’
robustness, advocating that quantization can be
leveraged to largely boost DNNs’ robustness, and
propose a framework dubbed Double-Win Quant
that can boost the robustness of quantized DNNs
over their full precision counterparts by a large
margin. Specifically, we for the first time identify that when an adversarially trained model is
quantized to different precisions in a post-training
manner, the associated adversarial attacks transfer
poorly between different precisions. Leveraging
this intriguing observation, we further develop
Double-Win Quant integrating random precision
inference and training to further reduce and utilize the poor adversarial transferability, enabling
an aggressive “win-win” in terms of DNNs’ robustness and efficiency. Extensive experiments
and ablation studies consistently validate DoubleWin Quant’s effectiveness and advantages over
state-of-the-art (SOTA) adversarial training methods across various attacks/models/datasets. Our
codes are available at: https://github.com/RICEEIC/Double-Win-Quant.

1. Introduction
Recent DNN breakthroughs and the advent of Internet of
Things (IoT) devices have triggered an explosive demand
for DNN-powered intelligent IoT devices (Liu et al., 2018;
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University 2 Facebook Inc. Correspondence to: Yingyan Lin
<yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Wu et al., 2018). However, DNNs’ deployments into IoT
devices still remain challenging. First, powerful DNNs often
come at a prohibitive cost, whereas IoT devices often suffer
from stringent resource constraints. Second, while DNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, many IoT applications
require strict security. Therefore, techniques boosting both
DNNs’ efficiency and robustness are highly desired.
As quantization is one of the most promising techniques
for developing efficient DNNs and generally applicable to
a variety of algorithms, the robustness of quantized DNNs
has gained increasing attentions. It was originally believed
that quantization’s rounding effect may help eliminate small
adversarial perturbations, and early works (Galloway et al.,
2017; Panda et al., 2019) indeed showed that binary networks (Galloway et al., 2017; Panda et al., 2019) or tanhbased quantized DNNs (Rakin et al., 2018) are even more
robust than their full precision counterparts. Later, (Gupta &
Ajanthan, 2020; Lin et al., 2019) found that these methods
actually suffer from the obfuscated gradient problem (Athalye et al., 2018; Papernot et al., 2017), leading to a false
sense of robustness. (Lin et al., 2019) further raised the
community’s awareness about quantized DNNs’ inferior
robustness, and identified that the main cause is the error
amplification effect, i.e., the magnitude of adversarial perturbations is amplified when passing through DNN layers.
Recently, pioneering works (Lin et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2020; Shkolnik et al., 2020) tried to compress this amplification effect for achieving both robust and efficient DNNs.
In this work, we ask an intriguing question: “Can quantization be properly leveraged to boost DNNs’ robustness?” This
is inspired by the recent findings that (1) random smoothing
or transformations on the inputs (Cohen et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2018; Xie et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017) can defend DNNs
against adversarial attacks, and (2) weight perturbations
are a good complement for input perturbations (Wu et al.,
2020), because they can narrow the robust generalization
gap as the weights can globally influence the losses of all
examples. We conjecture that quantization noise can be
leveraged to provide similar effects as perturbations to the
weights and activations. Specifically, we make the following
contributions:
• We provide a new perspective regarding the role of

