Active Slices for Sliced Stein Discrepancy

Wenbo Gong 1 Kaibo Zhang 1 Yingzhen Li 2 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract
Sliced Stein discrepancy (SSD) and its kernelized variants have demonstrated promising successes in goodness-of-fit tests and model learning
in high dimensions. Despite their theoretical elegance, their empirical performance depends crucially on the search of optimal slicing directions
to discriminate between two distributions. Unfortunately, previous gradient-based optimisation
approaches for this task return sub-optimal results:
they are computationally expensive, sensitive to
initialization, and they lack theoretical guarantees for convergence. We address these issues in
two steps. First, we provide theoretical results
stating that the requirement of using optimal slicing directions in the kernelized version of SSD
can be relaxed, validating the resulting discrepancy with finite random slicing directions. Second, given that good slicing directions are crucial
for practical performance, we propose a fast algorithm for finding such slicing directions based on
ideas of active sub-space construction and spectral
decomposition. Experiments on goodness-of-fit
tests and model learning show that our approach
achieves both improved performance and faster
convergence. Especially, we demonstrate a 1480x speed-up in goodness-of-fit tests when comparing with gradient-based alternatives.

1. Introduction
Discrepancy measures between two distributions are critical tools in modern statistical machine learning. Among
them, Stein discrepancy (SD) and its kernelized version,
kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD), have been extensively
used for goodness-of-fit (GOF) testing (Liu et al., 2016;
Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Huggins & Mackey, 2018; Jitkrit1
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Department of Computing, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Wenbo Gong <wg242@cam.ac.uk>, José Miguel HernándezLobato <jmh233@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tum et al., 2017; Gorham & Mackey, 2017) and model learning (Liu & Wang, 2016; Pu et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018;
Grathwohl et al., 2020). Despite their recent success, applications of Stein discrepancies to high-dimensional distribution testing and learning remains an unsolved challenge.
These “curse of dimensionality” issues have been recently
addressed by the newly proposed Sliced Stein discrepancy
(SSD) and its kernelized variants SKSD (Gong et al., 2021),
which have demonstrated promising results in both high
dimensional GOF tests and model learning. They work by
first projecting the score function and the test inputs across
two slice directions r and gr and then comparing the two
distributions using the resulting one dimensional slices. The
performance of SSD and SKSD crucially depends on choosing slicing directions that are highly discriminative. Indeed,
Gong et al. (2021) showed that such discrepancy can still be
valid despite the information loss caused by the projections,
if optimal slices – directions along which the two distributions differ the most – are used. Unfortunately, gradientbased optimization for searching such optimal slices often
suffers from slow convergence and sub-optimal solutions. In
practice, many gradient updates may be required to obtain a
reasonable set of slice directions (Gong et al., 2021).
We aim to tackle the above practical challenges by proposing
an efficient algorithm to find good slice directions with
statistical guarantees. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a computationally efficient variant of
SKSD using a finite number of random slices. This relaxes the restrictive constraint of having to use optimal
slices, with the consequence that convergence during
optimisation to a global optimum is no longer required.
• Given that good slices are still preferred in practice,
we propose surrogate optimization tasks to find such
directions. These are called active slices and have
analytic solutions that can be computed very efficiently.
• Experiments on GOF test benchmarks (including testing on restricted Boltzmann machines) show that our
algorithm outperforms alternative gradient-based approaches while achieving at least a 14x speed-up.
• In the task of learning high dimensional independent
component analysis (ICA) models (Comon, 1994), our
algorithm converges much faster and to significantly
better solutions than other baselines.

