Learning De-identified Representations of Prosody from Raw Audio

Jack Weston 1 Raphaël Lenain 1 Udeepa Meepegama 1 Emil Fristed 1

Abstract
We propose a method for learning de-identified
prosody representations from raw audio using
a contrastive self-supervised signal. Whereas
prior work has relied on conditioning models on
bottlenecks, we introduce a set of inductive biases that exploit the natural structure of prosody
to minimize timbral information and decouple
prosody from speaker representations. Despite
aggressive downsampling of the input and having no access to linguistic information, our model
performs comparably to state-of-the-art speech
representations on DAMMP, a new benchmark
we introduce for spoken language understanding. We use minimum description length probing to show that our representations have selectively learned the subcomponents of non-timbral
prosody, and that the product quantizer naturally disentangles them without using bottlenecks.
We derive an information-theoretic definition of
speech de-identifiability and use it to demonstrate
that our prosody representations are less identifiable than other speech representations.

1. Introduction
To produce and understand spoken language, humans encode and decode audio information at multiple timescales.
Phonetic information is used to decode linguistic content,
which carries part of the meaning in speech. Another source
of meaning, prosody, can be decoded through non-phonetic
acoustic patterns; for example to identify who’s speaking, which primarily relies on the timbre subcomponent
of prosody (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Qian et al., 2020).
Artificial systems mimicking these human processes must
solve the similar problems of representing phonetic information (to obtain a linguistic representation) and representing prosodic information (Baevski et al., 2020; Wan et al.,
2019).
1

Novoic, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jack Weston
<jack@novoic.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The phonetic problem has automatic speech recognition
(ASR) as its obvious use-case. In recent years, speech
representation learning has been increasingly dominated
by self-supervised frameworks using contrastive losses.
These include contrastive predictive coding (CPC) (Oord
et al., 2018), wav2vec (Schneider et al., 2019), vq-wav2vec
(Baevski et al., 2019) and wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020),
which learn representations directly from raw audio. These
models are generally frame- or phone-based and use finetimescale, fixed-length audio frames as input. This promotes encoding of high-frequency phonetic information,
crucial for transcription, but makes them less incentivized
to capture patterns occurring on longer timescales. Other
approaches have used triplet loss and temporal proximity
as a training signal to learn “semantic” (Jansen et al., 2018)
or “non-semantic” (Shor et al., 2020) representations from
spectrograms.
The prosodic problem has been less studied. Its primary
use-case has been building more expressive text-to-speech
(TTS) systems. Prior approaches to learning representations of prosody have relied on subtractive definitions such
as (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018): “Prosody is the variation
in speech signals that remains after accounting for variation due to phonetics, speaker identity, and channel effects
(i.e. the recording environment)”. These approaches typically use autoencoders conditioned on lexical information
and speaker identity (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2018; Battenberg et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). This
encourages the remaining information to be contained in
a bottleneck that encodes prosody. Other work has used a
triple bottleneck to further decompose prosody in its subcomponents (Qian et al., 2020). For non-timbral prosody
(i.e. what remains after removing speaker characteristics),
these subcomponents are pitch, rhythm and tempo, acoustically reflected in the fundamental frequency (F0 , the pitch
contour), intensity or energy (c0 ), and the speech rate respectively. WaveNet makes explicit use of F0 , c0 and phone
durations to synthesize speech (Oord et al., 2016). CHiVE
represents prosody using F0 , c0 and phoneme durations
as features in a conditional variational autoencoder (Wan
et al., 2019). These models share a set of characteristics
that motivate our work: they are subtractive and rely on
conditioning models on bottlenecked information. Having
been developed in the context of TTS, they have inductive

