Reinforcement Learning of Implicit and Explicit Control Flow in Instructions

Ethan A. Brooks 1 Janarthanan Rajendran 1 Richard L. Lewis 2 Satinder Singh 1

Abstract
Learning to flexibly follow task instructions in dynamic environments poses interesting challenges
for reinforcement learning agents. We focus here
on the problem of learning control flow that deviates from a strict step-by-step execution of instructions—that is, control flow that may skip
forward over parts of the instructions or return
backward to previously completed or skipped
steps. Demand for such flexible control arises
in two fundamental ways: explicitly when control
is specified in the instructions themselves (such
as conditional branching and looping) and implicitly when stochastic environment dynamics require re-completion of instructions whose effects
have been perturbed, or opportunistic skipping
of instructions whose effects are already present.
We formulate an attention-based architecture that
meets these challenges by learning, from task
reward only, to flexibly attend to and condition
behavior on an internal encoding of the instructions. We test the architecture’s ability to learn
both explicit and implicit control in two illustrative domains—one inspired by Minecraft and the
other by StarCraft—and show that the architecture
exhibits zero-shot generalization to novel instructions of length greater than those in a training
set, at a performance level unmatched by three
baseline recurrent architectures and one ablation
architecture.

1. Introduction
An important goal in artificial intelligence is developing
flexible and autonomous agents capable of accomplishing
tasks that humans specify in forms that are expressive to the
agent and convenient for the human user. In this work we
focus on the reinforcement learning problem of following
Department of Computer Science, University of Michigan 2
Weinberg Institute for Cognitive Science, Departments of Psychology and Linguistics, University of Michigan. Correspondence to:
Ethan Brooks <ethanbro@umich.edu>.

task instructions that require the agent to learn control flow
either because the instructions themselves include explicit
conditionals such as the if- and while- statements familiar
from programming languages, or because the need arises
implicitly when stochastic events in the environment require
parts of the instructions to be redone or allow them to be
skipped. In a classical programming language interpreter,
the logic of control flow is fixed in advance and determined
completely by the program itself. In contrast, in our interactive reinforcement-learning (RL) setting, while the reward
is determined by the instructions, the control flow arises
dynamically from interactions between the instructions and
the stochastic dynamics of the environment.
Our primary contribution is a novel neural network architecture, the Control Flow Comprehension Architecture - Scan
(CoFCA-S)1 , that successfully learns, from task reward signals alone, how to follow instructions that require subtasks
to be performed in a nonlinear fashion. More specifically,
we introduce two novel elements in our architecture that
facilitate generalisation to novel and longer instructions
during testing relative to during training: 1) an attentional
mechanism that learns to maintain a pointer into the instructions and moves that pointer based on where the pointer
should go next rather than how far the pointer should move,
and 2) a mechanism that processes the instructions relative
to the current pointer, thereby capturing a kind of coarse
translation invariance present in our tasks.
We compare our method to four baselines and one ablation,
and demonstrate better performance on two distinct domains,
one designed to showcase explicit control-flow, and the
other to showcase implicit control-flow. We argue that the
improvements on these baselines are a result of our pointer
architecture, the freedom of pointer movement that it affords,
and the techniques that our architecture employs to transfer
logic learned on shorter instructions to instructions of much
greater length.

2. Related Work

1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

This section reviews prior work on neural architectures for
instruction following. We also present a brief overview of
1

Source code may be accessed from https://github.
com/ethanabrooks/CoFCA-S

