Rate-Distortion Analysis of Minimum Excess Risk in Bayesian Learning

Hassan Hafez-Kolahi 1 Behrad Moniri 2 Shohreh Kasaei 1 Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah 1

Abstract
In parametric Bayesian learning, a prior is assumed on the parameter W which determines
the distribution of samples. In this setting, Minimum Excess Risk (MER) is defined as the difference between the minimum expected loss achievable when learning from data and the minimum
expected loss that could be achieved if W was
observed. In this paper, we build upon and extend the recent results of (Xu & Raginsky, 2020)
to analyze the MER in Bayesian learning and
derive information-theoretic bounds on it. We
formulate the problem as a (constrained) ratedistortion optimization and show how the solution
can be bounded above and below by two other
rate-distortion functions that are easier to study.
The lower bound represents the minimum possible
excess risk achievable by any process using R bits
of information from the parameter W . For the upper bound, the optimization is further constrained
to use R bits from the training set, a setting which
relates MER to information-theoretic bounds on
the generalization gap in frequentist learning. We
derive information-theoretic bounds on the difference between these upper and lower bounds and
show that they can provide order-wise tight rates
for MER under certain conditions. This analysis
gives more insight into the information-theoretic
nature of Bayesian learning as well as providing
novel bounds.

1. Introduction
One of the main problems studied in statistical learning
theory is the excess risks of learning algorithms, which is
the gap between the achieved error and the best possible
error if the distribution was known (LeCam et al., 1973;
Assouad, 1983; Keener, 2010). An interesting question
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran 2 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. Correspondence to:
Shohreh Kasaei <kasaei@sharif.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

in this regard is to study lower bounds on the excess risk
which could be achieved by any algorithm. This concept is
usually studied in the frequentist setting, in which a family
of distributions is assumed and minimax bounds are derived
to study if an algorithm which only has access to n samples
from the distribution, can work well for all the distributions
in the family.
Recently, (Xu & Raginsky, 2020) proposed a framework to
define and study Minimum Excess Risk (MER) in Bayesian
learning. In the Bayesian learning, it is assumed that the
underlying distribution is described by a variable W ∈ W
and a prior PW is considered which describes the probability
of any W before observing data. The joint distribution of
W , the training set Z n = {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 ∈ (X × Y)n ,
and a test sample Z = (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y, is described
as PW ⊗ (PZW )n ⊗ PZW . The goal is to find a function
ĥ : X → Y after observing the training set, in a way that
E[`(Y, ĥ(X))] is small, where ` : Y × Y → R is the loss
function.
In order to quantify the hardness of a problem, (Xu & Raginsky, 2020) define Minimum Excess Risk as the gap between
the expected error of the best algorithm which only has access to the data and the minimum expected error if W was
also observed. They show that for a variety of loss functions, the conditional mutual information I(W ; Y |Z n , X)
appears in the upper bounds on MER. When W ∈ Rp , using
information-theoretic p
results on the rate of I(W ; Z n ), they
achieve bound of O( p/n) on MER as n → ∞, given
that some assumptions on the distribution and loss hold (see
Section 4). They also show that the bound can be improved
to O(p/n) for two specific losses: logarithmic loss and
quadratic loss (for bounded Y). They left the study of lower
bounds on MER as an open problem.
In this work, we adapt a source coding view on learning and
introduce a (variant of) rate-distortion optimization which
captures the notion of MER. Then, we demonstrate how the
constraint on this rate-distortion minimization can naturally
be weakened and strengthened to achieve lower and upper
bounds, respectively. These lower and upper bounds are
easier to study and we derive a variety of results on them.
In particular, we study the lower bound with tools from the
source coding theory, and demonstrate that under some conditions, MER is lower bounded by Ω(p/n). This concludes

