Towards the Unification and Robustness of
Perturbation and Gradient Based Explanations

Sushant Agarwal 1 Shahin Jabbari 2 Chirag Agarwal 2 * Sohini Upadhyay 2 *
Zhiwei Steven Wu 3 Himabindu Lakkaraju 2

Abstract
As machine learning black boxes are increasingly
being deployed in critical domains such as healthcare and criminal justice, there has been a growing
emphasis on developing techniques for explaining
these black boxes in a post hoc manner. In this
work, we analyze two popular post hoc interpretation techniques: SmoothGrad which is a gradient
based method, and a variant of LIME which is a
perturbation based method. More specifically, we
derive explicit closed form expressions for the explanations output by these two methods and show
that they both converge to the same explanation
in expectation, i.e., when the number of perturbed
samples used by these methods is large. We then
leverage this connection to establish other desirable properties, such as robustness, for these techniques. We also derive finite sample complexity
bounds for the number of perturbations required
for these methods to converge to their expected
explanation. Finally, we empirically validate our
theory using extensive experimentation on both
synthetic and real world datasets.1

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, predictive models are increasingly being considered for deployment in high-stakes domains such
as healthcare and criminal justice. However, the successful adoption of predictive models in these settings depends
heavily on how well decision makers (e.g., doctors, judges)
*
Equal contribution 1 David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Sushant
Agarwal <sushant.agarwal@uwaterloo.ca>, Shahin Jabbari <jabbari@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
The full technical version of this paper is available at https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2102.10618.

can understand and consequently trust their functionality.
Only if decision makers have a clear picture of the behavior of these models can they assess when and how much
to rely on these models, detect potential biases in them,
and develop strategies for improving them (Doshi-Velez &
Kim, 2017). However, the increasing complexity as well
as the proprietary nature of predictive models is making it
challenging to understand these complex black boxes, thus
motivating the need for tools and techniques that can explain
them in a faithful and human interpretable manner.
Several techniques have been recently proposed to construct
post hoc explanations of complex predictive models. While
these techniques differ in a variety of ways, they can be
broadly categorized into perturbation vs. gradient based
techniques, based on the approaches they employ to generate
explanations. For instance, LIME and SHAP (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017) are called perturbation based
methods because they leverage perturbations of individual
instances to construct interpretable local approximations
(e.g., linear models), which in turn serve as explanations of
individual predictions of black box models. On the other
hand, SmoothGrad, Integrated Gradients and GradCAM (Simonyan et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Selvaraju
et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017) are referred to as gradient
based methods since they leverage gradients computed at
individual instances to explain predictions of complex models. Recent research has focused on empirically analyzing
the behavior of perturbation and gradient based post hoc
explanations. For instance, several works (Ghorbani et al.,
2019; Slack et al., 2020a; Dombrowski et al., 2019; Adebayo
et al., 2018; Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018) demonstrated
that explanations generated using perturbation based techniques such as LIME and SHAP may not be robust, i.e.,
the resulting explanations may change drastically with very
small changes to the instances. Furthermore, Adebayo et al.
(2018) showed that gradient based methods such as SmoothGrad and GradCAM may not generate interpretations that
are faithful to the underlying models.
While several perturbation and gradient based explanation
techniques have been proposed in literature and the aforementioned works have empirically examined their behavior,

