Implicit Bias of Linear RNNs

Melikasadat Emami 1 Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan 1 2 Parthe Pandit 1 2 Sundeep Rangan 3 Alyson K. Fletcher 1 2

Abstract
Contemporary wisdom based on empirical studies
suggests that standard recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) do not perform well on tasks requiring
long-term memory. However, RNNs’ poor ability
to capture long-term dependencies has not been
fully understood. This paper provides a rigorous
explanation of this property in the special case of
linear RNNs. Although this work is limited to linear RNNs, even these systems have traditionally
been difficult to analyze due to their non-linear
parameterization. Using recently-developed kernel regime analysis, our main result shows that as
the number of hidden units goes to infinity, linear RNNs learned from random initializations are
functionally equivalent to a certain weighted 1Dconvolutional network. Importantly, the weightings in the equivalent model cause an implicit bias
to elements with smaller time lags in the convolution, and hence shorter memory. The degree of
this bias depends on the variance of the transition
matrix at initialization and is related to the classic
exploding and vanishing gradients problem. The
theory is validated with both synthetic and real
data experiments.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, models based on neural networks
have become commonplace in virtually all machine learning
applications. A key feature about this class of models is that,
in principle, they do not require an explicit design of features
but instead rely on an implicit learning of “meaningful”
representations of the data. This makes neural networks
attractive from the point of view of machine perception
where raw signals are inputs to the model. While neural
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA 2 Department
of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New
York University, Brooklyn, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Melikasadat Emami <emami@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

networks have become ubiquitous in practical applications,
several theoretical aspects of them largely remain a mystery.
Of significant importance is the lack of understanding of the
potential implicit biases that these representations bring to
the predictions of the model.
This paper aims to understand the implicit bias behaviour of
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). Several machine learning tasks require dealing with sequential data with possibly
varying lengths of input sequences. Example tasks include
automatic speech recognition, language translation, and image captioning, among others. A well-known shortcoming
of standard RNNs trained using gradient descent is their
poor performance at tasks requiring long-term dependence
(Bengio et al., 1994). Traditional RNNs suffer from the
well-known vanishing / exploding gradient problem where
gradients from input time samples at long delays either decay or explode making the learning of long-term effects
difficult. In practice, there have been a large number of
enhancements to RNNs to overcome these issues – most
notably LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and
GRUs (Cho et al., 2014). However, while these methods
have had tremendous practical success, the ability of different RNN architectures to capture or not capture long-term
dependencies has been difficult to rigorously analyze.
As a simple starting point, this paper seeks to precisely understand the training and memory of linear RNNs. Even
such linear models have been difficult to analyze completely
due to their non-linear parameterization. Our main result
shows rigorously that these models have an implicit bias
toward short-term memory, confirming the qualitative empirically observed behavior of these networks. To our knowledge, this paper is the first that provides a such a characterization of an implicit bias in RNNs.
Our results are based on the key observation that linear
RNNs are functionally equivalent to a 1D-convolutional
model which is feed-forward in nature. Further, due to the
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regime based analysis (Jacot
et al., 2018), we are able to show that RNNs trained using
gradient descent are implicitly biased towards learning tasks
with short-term contexts. Our result holds in a certain wide
limit regime where the number of hidden units in RNN goes
to infinity. The contributions are as follows:
• We explicitly compute the NTK for a linear RNN. This

