Dichotomous Optimistic Search to Quantify Human Perception

Julien Audiffren 1

Abstract
In this paper we address a variant of the continuous multi-armed bandits problem, called the
threshold estimation problem, which is at the
heart of many psychometric experiments. Here,
the objective is to estimate the sensitivity threshold for an unknown psychometric function Ψ,
which is assumed to be non decreasing and continuous. Our algorithm, Dichotomous Optimistic
Search (DOS), efficiently solves this task by taking inspiration from hierarchical multi-armed bandits and Black-box optimization. Compared to
previous approaches, DOS is model free and
only makes minimal assumption on Ψ smoothness, while having strong theoretical guarantees
that compares favorably to recent methods from
both Psychophysics and Global Optimization. We
also empirically evaluate DOS and show that it
significantly outperforms these methods, both in
experiments that mimics the conduct of a psychometric experiment, and in tests with large pulls
budgets that illustrate the faster convergence rate.

1. Introduction
Psychophysics investigates the connection between physical
stimuli and the subjective responses (such as sensations,
or perceptions) they produce. This field of research has
widespread applications, including the study of attention
(Scheuerman et al., 2017), and the evaluation of treatments
for pain relief (Nir et al., 2011). One of the key aspect
of Psychophysics is the evaluation of human perception,
which is generally assessed by performing psychometric
experiments. They unfold as follows : the experimenter
presents to an individual, called the observer, a sequence
of stimuli of varying intensities (for instance, the volume
of a specific sound, see e.g. (Hirahara, 2004)), and try to
measure how often the different intensities are perceived by
1
Departement of Neuroscience, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Julien Audiffren
<julien.audiffren@unifr.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the observer. In particular, many experiments are interested
in measuring the sensitivity threshold, where the stimulus is
just noticeable (Kontsevich & Tyler, 1999).
Human perception is generally modeled as follows. For
any given stimulus intensity s, the stimulus is perceived by
the observer with (unknown) probability µs , and the relation between s and µs for a given observer is called the
psychometric function, noted Ψ, and is defined such that
Ψ(s) = µs for any stimulus intensity s. By definition, Ψ
is assumed to be non-decreasing (the stronger the stimulus, the easier it is to perceive it) and continuous (Leek,
2001). Given a target perception probability µ∗ , the objective of these psychometric experiments is to estimate the
sensitivity threshold s∗ such that Ψ(s∗ ) ≈ µ∗ . To achieve
this, the experimenter must both choose a sequence of stimuli to present to the observer (which must be as short as
possible, to limit the fatigue of the observer (Wichmann &
Hill, 2001a)) and estimate s∗ given the observer responses.
In this work, this task will be referred to as the threshold
estimation problem.
One of the most commonly used technique for solving this
problem is the constant stimuli method (Wichmann & Hill,
2001a), where the observer is presented with a fixed sequence of stimuli, spanning the range of sensation from
imperceptible to consistently perceptible. After collecting
the observer responses, the parameters of Ψ are estimated
using the maximum likelihood method – where the shape of
Ψ is assumed to be known, e.g. a Gaussian cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.). Finally, s∗ is estimated as Ψ−1 (µ∗ ).
However, this approach suffers from many limitations. First,
the parametric models have been shown to be frequently
inconsistent with the observations, or to require many small
empirical corrections to fit the data with an acceptable accuracy (Wichmann & Hill, 2001b). Second, the fixed sequence
does not account for individual specificity, a key problem as
it has been shown that the sensitivity threshold can vary by
a factor of ten between individuals (Benson et al., 1989).
Consequently, there has been an increased interest in using adaptive algorithms (Leek, 2001), where an agent A)
aims at estimating directly the sensitivity threshold without
estimating Ψ, therefore reducing the difficulty of the problem and B) adapts the sequence of stimulus intensity based
on the observer responses. One popular such method in

