Byzantine-Resilient High-Dimensional SGD with Local Iterations on
Heterogeneous Data
Deepesh Data 1 Suhas Diggavi 1

Abstract
We study stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
local iterations in the presence of Byzantine
clients, motivated by the federated learning. The
clients, instead of communicating with the server
in every iteration, maintain their local models,
which they update by taking several SGD iterations based on their own datasets and then communicate the net update with the server, thereby
achieving communication-efficiency. Furthermore, only a subset of clients communicates with
the server at synchronization times. The Byzantine clients may collude and send arbitrary vectors
to the server to disrupt the learning process. To
combat the adversary, we employ an efficient highdimensional robust mean estimation algorithm at
the server to filter-out corrupt vectors; and to analyze the outlier-filtering procedure, we develop
a novel matrix concentration result that may be
of independent interest. We provide convergence
analyses for both strongly-convex and non-convex
smooth objectives in the heterogeneous data setting. We believe that ours is the first Byzantineresilient local SGD algorithm and analysis with
non-trivial guarantees. We corroborate our theoretical results with preliminary experiments for
neural network training.

1. Introduction
In the federated learning (FL) paradigm (Konecný, 2017;
Konecný et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Mohri et al.,
2019), several clients (e.g., mobiles devices, organizations,
etc.) collaboratively learn a machine learning model, where
the training process is facilitated by the data held by the participating clients (without data centralization) and is coordinated by a central server (e.g., the service provider). Due to
its many advantages over the traditional centralized learning
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence
to: Deepesh Data <deepesh.data@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Dean et al., 2012) (e.g., training a machine learning model
without collecting the clients’ data, which, in addition to
reducing the communication load on the network, provides
a basic level of privacy to clients’ data), FL has emerged as
an active area of research recently; see (Kairouz et al., 2019)
for a detailed survey. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
has become a de facto standard in optimization for training machine learning models at such a large scale (Bottou,
2010; Kairouz et al., 2019; McMahan et al., 2017), where
clients iteratively communicate the gradient updates with
the central server, which aggregates the gradients, updates
the learning model, and sends the aggregated gradient back
to the clients. The promise of FL comes with its own set of
challenges (Kairouz et al., 2019): (i) optimizing with heterogeneous data at different clients – the local datasets at clients
may be “non-i.i.d.”, i.e., can be thought of as being generated from different underlying distributions; (ii) slow and
unreliable network connections between server and clients,
so communication in every iteration may not be feasible;
(iii) availability of only a subset of clients for training at a
given time (maybe due to low connectivity, as clients may
be in different geographic locations); and (iv) robustness
against malicious/Byzantine clients who may send incorrect
gradient updates to the server to disrupt the training process.
In this paper, we propose and analyze an SGD algorithm
that simultaneously addresses all these challenges. First we
setup the problem, put our work in context with the related
work, and then summarize our contributions.
We consider an empirical risk minimization problem, where
data is stored at R clients, each having a different dataset
(with no probabilistic assumption on data generation); client
r 2 [R] has dataset Dr . Let Fr : Rd ! R denote the
local loss function associated with the dataset Dr , which
is defined as Fr (x) , Ei2U [nr ] [Fr,i (x)], where nr = |Dr |,
i is uniformly distributed over [nr ] , {1, 2, . . . , nr }, and
Fr,i (x) is the loss associated with the i’th data point at
client r with respect to (w.r.t.) x. Our goal is to solve the
following minimization problem:
R
⇣
⌘
1 X
arg min F (x) ,
Ei2U [nr ] [Fr,i (x)] , (1)
x2C
R r=1
where C ✓ Rd denotes the parameter space that is either
equal to Rd or a compact and convex set.

