Online A-Optimal Design and Active Linear Regression

Xavier Fontaine 1 Pierre Perrault 2 Michal Valko 3 Vianney Perchet 4 5

Abstract
We consider in this paper the problem of optimal experiment design where a decision maker
can choose which points to sample to obtain an
estimate β̂ of the hidden parameter β ? of an underlying linear model. The key challenge of this
work lies in the heteroscedasticity assumption that
we make, meaning that each covariate has a different and unknown variance. The goal of the
decision maker is then to figure out on the fly
the optimal way to allocate the total budget of T
samples between covariates, as sampling several
times a specific one will reduce the variance of
the estimated model around it (but at the cost of
a possible higher variance elsewhere). By trying
to minimize the `2 -loss E[kβ̂ − β ? k2 ] the decision maker is actually minimizing the trace of the
covariance matrix of the problem, which corresponds then to online A-optimal design. Combining techniques from bandit and convex optimization we propose a new active sampling algorithm
and we compare it with existing ones. We provide
theoretical guarantees of this algorithm in different settings, including a O(T −2 ) regret bound in
the case where the covariates form a basis of the
feature space, generalizing and improving existing results. Numerical experiments validate our
theoretical findings.

1. Introduction and related work
A classical problem in statistics consists in estimating an
unknown quantity, for example the mean of a random variable, parameters of a model, poll results or the efficiency of
a medical treatment. In order to do that, statisticians usually
build estimators which are random variables based on the
data, supposed to approximate the quantity to estimate. A
1
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay, Palaiseau, France
Idemia, Courbevoie, France 3 Google DeepMind, Paris,
France 4 CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France 5 Criteo AI
Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Xavier Fontaine
<xavier.fontaine@polytechnique.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

way to construct an estimator is to make experiments and
to gather data on the estimand. In the polling context an
experiment consists for example in interviewing people in
order to know their voting intentions. However if one wants
to obtain a “good” estimator, typically an unbiased estimator with low variance, the choice of which experiment to
run has to be done carefully. Interviewing similar people
might indeed lead to a poor prediction. In this work we are
interested in the problem of optimal design of experiments,
which consists in choosing adequately the experiments to
run in order to obtain an estimator with small variance. We
focus here on the case of heteroscedastic linear models with
the goal of actively constructing the design matrix. Linear
models, though possibly sometimes too simple, have been
indeed widely studied and used in practice due to their interpretability and can be a first good approximation model
for a complex problem.
The original motivation of this problem comes from use
cases where obtaining the label of a sample is costly, hence
choosing carefully which points to sample in a regression
task is crucial. Consider for example the problem of controlling the wear of manufacturing machines in a factory (Antos
et al., 2010), which requires a long and manual process. The
wear can be modeled as a linear function of some features of
the machine (age, number of times it has been used, average
temperature, ...) so that two machines with the same parameters will have similar wears. Since the inspection process
is manual and complicated, results are noisy and this noise
depends on the machine: a new machine, slightly worn, will
often be in a good state, while the state of heavily worn machines can vary a lot. Thus evaluating the linear model for
the wear requires additional examinations of some machines
and less inspection of others. Another motivating example
comes from econometrics, typically in income forecasting.
It is usually assumed that the annual income is influenced
by the individual’s education level, age, gender, occupation,
etc. through a linear model. Polling is also an issue in this
context: what kind of individual to poll to gain as much
information as possible about an explanatory variable?
The field of optimal experiment design (Pukelsheim, 2006)
aims precisely at choosing which experiment to perform in
order to minimize an objective function within a budget constraint. In experiment design, the distance of the produced
hypothesis to the true one is measured by the covariance

