XOR-CD: Linearly Convergent Constrained Structure Generation
Fan Ding 1 Jianzhu Ma 2 Jinbo Xu 3 Yexiang Xue 1

Abstract
We propose XOR-Contrastive Divergence learning (XOR-CD), a provable approach for constrained structure generation, which remains difficult for state-of-the-art neural network and constraint reasoning approaches. XOR-CD harnesses
XOR-Sampling to generate samples from the
model distribution in CD learning and is guaranteed to generate valid structures. In addition,
XOR-CD has a linear convergence rate towards
the global maximum of the likelihood function
within a vanishing constant in learning exponential family models. Constraint satisfaction enabled by XOR-CD also boosts its learning performance. Our real-world experiments on datadriven experimental design, dispatching route generation, and sequence-based protein homology
detection demonstrate the superior performance
of XOR-CD compared to baseline approaches in
generating valid structures as well as capturing
the inductive bias in the training set.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling has received tremendous success in
recent years. Notable examples include image synthesis
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al., 2015; Isola et al.,
2017; Brock et al., 2018), music composition (Briot et al.,
2017; Engel et al., 2017; Prenger et al., 2019), molecule
synthesis, drug discovery (Liu et al., 2018; Kusner et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2018) and more.
Nevertheless, learning generative models over a constrained
space still remains a major research challenge. Take the
example of protein homology detection, an important biological application considered in this paper, to align two
protein sequences, where each amino acid in one sequence
can be aligned either to another amino acid in the other
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, USA 2 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Toyota Technological Institute
at Chicago, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Fan Ding
<ding274@purdue.edu>, Yexiang Xue <yexiang@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Origin

!2 !1
L S
R P L
- A
S L
E Q

Match (M)

S

L
M

R

P

S

I2

Insertion at !2 (I2) L

M

A

I1

Insertion at !1 (I1)

L
Q

E

M
M

Figure 1. An illustration of sequence-based protein homology detection problem. (Left) The problem is to predict the alignment
two amino acids sequences S1 and S2 , where one amino acid
from one sequence can be aligned to either one amino acid from
the other sequence (match), or to a gap (insertion, marked by ).
(Right) Biological constraint: such an alignment must form a path
from the top-left to the bottom-right corner in the alignment matrix,
where a diagonal transition represents a match, a horizontal or a
vertical transition represents an insertion.

sequence or a gap. Biological constraints require such an
alignment forms a continuous path from the top-left corner to the bottom-right corner in the alignment matrix (see
Figure 1). Given two protein sequences, the learning problem is to predict which alignment is more likely based on
samples from the training set. Previous constrained satisfaction approaches (Rychlewski et al., 2000) identify an
alignment satisfying all constraints, yet are optimal only
regarding a rigid expert-defined objective, which may fail
to include essential biological factors. Learning-based approaches (Söding, 2005; Ma et al., 2014) harness highly
flexible neural models for alignment prediction. However,
the predictions often violate constraints (i.e., they do not
form paths). Similar challenges are present in many realworld problems: it is difficult to generate structures which
simultaneously (i) satisfy constraints, and (ii) effectively
capture the inductive bias present in the training set.
We present XOR-CD, a constrained generative model based
on contrastive divergence and XOR-Sampling, which converges to the global optimum of the likelihood function of
an exponential family model within a vanishing constant in
linear number of steps. Rather than using Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) to sample from the current model
distribution as in the classical case of contrastive divergence,
XOR-CD generates samples using XOR-Sampling, a recent

