On the Proof of Global Convergence of Gradient Descent for
Deep ReLU Networks with Linear Widths

Quynh Nguyen 1

Abstract

We give a simple proof for the global convergence of gradient descent in training deep ReLU
networks with the standard square loss, and show
some of its improvements over the state-of-the-art.
In particular, while prior works require all the hidden layers to be wide with width at least Ω(N 8 )
(N being the number of training samples), we
require a single wide layer of linear, quadratic or
cubic width depending on the type of initialization.
Unlike many recent proofs based on the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK), our proof need not track
the evolution of the entire NTK matrix, or more
generally, any quantities related to the changes of
activation patterns during training. Instead, we
only need to track the evolution of the output at
the last hidden layer, which can be done much
more easily thanks to the Lipschitz property of
ReLU. Some highlights of our setting: (i) all the
layers are trained with standard gradient descent,
(ii) the network has standard parameterization as
opposed to the NTK one, and (iii) the network has
a single wide layer as opposed to having all wide
hidden layers as in most of NTK-related results.

1. Introduction
Understanding why gradient descent methods can often find
a global optimum in minimizing the non-convex loss surface
of neural nets is one of the key problems in deep learning
theory. Recently, this problem has been approached from
the perspective of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot
et al., 2018). Consider an L-layer network with layer widths
{n0 , . . . , nL } . Let X ∈ RN ×n0 and Y ∈ RN ×nL be the
1

MPI-MIS, Germany. Correspondence to: Quynh Nguyen
<qnguyen@mis.mpg.de>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

training data, then the output at layer l is given by


l = 0,
X
Fl = σ(Fl−1 Wl ) l ∈ [L − 1],


FL−1 WL
l = L,

(1)

where Wl ∈ Rnl−1 ×nl , and σ(x) = max(0, x) applied
componentwise. The training loss is defined as
Φ(θ) =

1
2
kFL (θ) − Y kF ,
2

where θ = (Wl )L
l=1 . The NTK matrix is K(θ) =
ih
iT
h
∂ vec(FL )
∂ vec(FL )
. Our starting observation is that
∂ vec(θ)
∂ vec(θ)
2

k∇Φ(θ)k2 ≥ 2λmin (K(θ)) Φ(θ).
This resembles the Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) inequality
(Polyak, 1963) except that we do not have a constant on
the RHS. Nevertheless, it suggests that if λmin (K(θ)) is
bounded away from zero, both at initialization and during
training, then GD may still converge to a global optimum.
To show this property at initialization, one can resort to
standard concentration tools, which we discuss later. To
show it holds throughout training, one popular way in the
literature is to bound the traveling distance of GD from the
initialization and the local Lipschitz constant of K(θ), and
then invoke Weyl’s eigenvalue inequality. As K involves
the derivatives of σ at various activation neurons, it turns
out that bounding the local Lipschitz constant of the NTK
matrix can be done conveniently for sufficiently smooth
activations (Du et al., 2019a). However, when σ 0 is not
Lipschitz continuous (e.g. for ReLU), the entire analysis
may become much more involved. In particular, most of
the existing proofs for ReLU nets require to study various
quantities related to the changes of the activation patterns
during training, see e.g. (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Zou & Gu,
2019). In this paper, we discuss a simple alternative proof,
where such analysis is not needed. In fact, starting from the
following decomposition of the empirical NTK matrix
K=


T
L 
X
∂ vec(FL ) ∂ vec(FL )
l=1

∂ vec(Wl )

∂ vec(Wl )

(2)

