PEBBLE: Feedback-Efficient Interactive Reinforcement Learning
via Relabeling Experience and Unsupervised Pre-training
Kimin Lee * 1 Laura Smith * 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
Conveying complex objectives to reinforcement
learning (RL) agents can often be difficult, involving meticulous design of reward functions
that are sufficiently informative yet easy enough
to provide. Human-in-the-loop RL methods allow practitioners to instead interactively teach
agents through tailored feedback; however, such
approaches have been challenging to scale since
human feedback is very expensive. In this work,
we aim to make this process more sample- and
feedback-efficient. We present an off-policy, interactive RL algorithm that capitalizes on the
strengths of both feedback and off-policy learning. Specifically, we learn a reward model by
actively querying a teacher’s preferences between
two clips of behavior and use it to train an agent.
To enable off-policy learning, we relabel all the
agent’s past experience when its reward model
changes. We additionally show that pre-training
our agents with unsupervised exploration substantially increases the mileage of its queries. We
demonstrate that our approach is capable of learning tasks of higher complexity than previously
considered by human-in-the-loop methods, including a variety of locomotion and robotic manipulation skills. We also show that our method
is able to utilize real-time human feedback to effectively prevent reward exploitation and learn
new behaviors that are difficult to specify with
standard reward functions.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful method whereby agents learn complex behaviors on
their own through trial and error (Kohl & Stone, 2004;
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Kimin Lee <kiminlee@berkeley.edu>, Laura Smith
<smithlaura@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Kober & Peters, 2011; Kober et al., 2013; Silver et al.,
2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Kalashnikov et al., 2018;
Vinyals et al., 2019). Scaling RL to many applications,
however, is yet precluded by a number of challenges. One
such challenge lies in providing a suitable reward function.
For example, while it may be desirable to provide sparse
rewards out of ease, they are often insufficient to train successful RL agents. Thus, to provide adequately dense signal,
real-world problems may require extensive instrumentation,
such as accelerometers to detect door opening (Yahya et al.,
2017), thermal cameras to detect pouring (Schenck & Fox,
2017) or motion capture for object tracking (Kormushev
et al., 2010; Akkaya et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020).
Despite these costly measures, it may still be difficult to construct a suitable reward function due to reward exploitation.
That is, RL algorithms often discover ways to achieve high
returns by unexpected, unintended means. In general, there
is nuance in how we might want agents to behave, such
as obeying social norms, that are difficult to account for
and communicate effectively through an engineered reward
function (Amodei et al., 2016; Shah et al., 2019; Turner
et al., 2020). A popular way to avoid reward engineering is
through imitation learning, during which a learner distills
information about its objectives or tries to directly follow an
expert (Schaal, 1997; Ng et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Argall et al., 2009). While imitation learning is a powerful
tool, suitable demonstrations are often prohibitively expensive to obtain in practice (Calinon et al., 2009; Pastor et al.,
2011; Akgun et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2018).
In contrast, humans often learn fairly autonomously, relying on occasional external feedback from a teacher. Part of
what makes a teacher effective is their ability to interactively
guide students according to their progress, providing corrective or increasingly advanced instructions as needed. Such
an interactive learning process is also alluring for artificial
agents since the agent’s behavior can naturally be tailored
to one’s preference (avoiding reward exploitation) without
requiring extensive engineering. This approach is only feasible if the feedback is both practical for a human to provide
and sufficiently high-bandwidth. As such, human-in-theloop (HiL) RL (Knox & Stone, 2009; Christiano et al., 2017;
MacGlashan et al., 2017) has not yet been widely adopted.

