Lower-Bounded Proper Losses for Weakly Supervised Classification

Shuhei M. Yoshida 1 2 Takashi Takenouchi 2 3 Masashi Sugiyama 2 4

Abstract
This paper discusses the problem of weakly supervised classification, in which instances are
given weak labels that are produced by some labelcorruption process. The goal is to derive conditions under which loss functions for weak-label
learning are proper and lower-bounded—two essential requirements for the losses used in classprobability estimation. To this end, we derive a
representation theorem for proper losses in supervised learning, which dualizes the Savage representation. We use this theorem to characterize
proper weak-label losses and find a condition for
them to be lower-bounded. From these theoretical
findings, we derive a novel regularization scheme
called generalized logit squeezing, which makes
any proper weak-label loss bounded from below,
without losing properness. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach, as compared to improper or
unbounded losses. The results highlight the importance of properness and lower-boundedness.

1. Introduction
Recent machine learning techniques have achieved stateof-the-art performance on many prediction tasks, but they
usually require massive training data with clean annotations. One approach to reduce the costs of data preparation
is so-called weakly supervised learning: each instance is
annotated with a weak label that is cheaper to obtain but
less informative than a true label. For classification, many
types of weak supervision have been proposed. For example, in learning with noisy labels (Angluin & Laird, 1988;
Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017), one observes
1
Biometrics Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan 3 National Graduate
Institute for Policy Studies, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan 4 Department
of Complexity Science and Engineering, The University of Tokyo,
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. Correspondence to: Shuhei M. Yoshida
<s m yoshida@nec.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

an instance with a label that may be corrupted. Positiveunlabeled (PU) learning of binary classification uses positive
and unlabeled data, but not labeled negative data (Elkan &
Noto, 2008; du Plessis et al., 2015). Another example is
learning from partial labels, which are collections of candidate labels among which only one is true (Cour et al., 2011).
Many of these approaches are understood as learning from
weak labels that are produced by label-corruption processes,
and some authors have taken unified approaches to tackle
these problems (van Rooyen & Williamson, 2018; Zhang
et al., 2019).
A fundamental theoretical question is under what conditions learning from weak labels is possible. To address
this question, analysis of loss functions plays a central role.
Among loss functions, proper losses are a particularly important class of losses that can correctly estimate class posterior probabilities (Winkler & Murphy, 1968; Buja et al.,
2005; Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). Two major classes of
proper weak-label losses have been proposed in the literature. One class derives from unbiased risk estimation, or
backward loss correction (Patrini et al., 2017), in which
a label-corruption process is inverted to estimate an expected risk with respect to the distribution of true labels.
This approach has been taken, for example, in partial-label
learning (Cid-sueiro, 2012), noisy-label learning (Natarajan
et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017), PU learning (du Plessis
et al., 2015), and complementary-label learning (Ishida et al.,
2019). For a general label-corruption process, a recent work
showed how to construct a proper weak-label loss from a
loss for supervised learning (van Rooyen & Williamson,
2018). The other class of losses follows from forward
loss correction (Patrini et al., 2017), in which proper loss
functions are used for estimating the posterior distribution
of weak labels. This approach has been applied to noisylabel learning (Patrini et al., 2017) and complementary-label
learning (Yu et al., 2018). Moreover, Zhang et al. (2019) applied a forward-corrected loss to more general problems of
learning from weak labels, although their discussion focused
on the negative log-likelihood loss.
In addition to properness, lower-boundedness is another important requirement for loss functions so that learning can
succeed. Losses that are not bounded from below are problematic, as they cause the objective to diverge to negative
infinity, especially when using complex models like deep

