Density Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Zengyi Qin 1 Yuxiao Chen 2 Chuchu Fan 1

Abstract
We study constrained reinforcement learning
(CRL) from a novel perspective by setting constraints directly on state density functions, rather
than the value functions considered by previous
works. State density has a clear physical and mathematical interpretation, and is able to express a
wide variety of constraints such as resource limits
and safety requirements. Density constraints can
also avoid the time-consuming process of designing and tuning cost functions required by value
function-based constraints to encode system specifications. We leverage the duality between density
functions and Q functions to develop an effective algorithm to solve the density constrained RL
problem optimally and the constrains are guaranteed to be satisfied. We prove that the proposed
algorithm converges to a near-optimal solution
with a bounded error even when the policy update
is imperfect. We use a set of comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the advantages of our approach over state-of-the-art CRL methods, with a
wide range of density constrained tasks as well as
standard CRL benchmarks such as Safety-Gym.

1. Introduction
Constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) (Altman, 1999;
Achiam et al., 2017; Dalal et al., 2018; Paternain et al., 2019;
Tessler et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020;
Stooke et al., 2020) aims to find the optimal policy that
maximizes the cumulative reward signal while respecting
certain constraints such as safety requirements and resource
limits. Existing CRL approaches typically involve constructing suitable cost functions and value functions to take into
account the constraints. Then a crucial step is to choose
appropriate parameters such as thresholds for the cost and
value functions to encode the constraints. However, one
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 California Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Chuchu Fan
<chuchu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Road network
Charging station
Goal

Figure 1. Autonomous electric vehicle routing in Manhattan: Control the electric vehicles to reach the goals and always keep the
remaining energy above a threshold. Vehicles can be charged at
the charging stations. The vehicle density at each charging station
is constrained by an upper bound due to resource limits. The roads
and charging stations are from the real-world data (Blahoudek
et al., 2020).

significant gap between the use of such methods and solving
CRL problems is the correct construction of the cost and
value functions, which is typically not solved systematically
but relies on engineering intuitions (Paternain et al., 2019).
Simple cost functions may not exhibit satisfactory performance, while sophisticated cost functions may not have
clear physical meanings. When cost functions lack clear
physical interpretations, it is difficult to formally guarantee
the satisfaction of the performance specifications, even if
the constraints on the cost functions are fulfilled. Moreover, different environments generally need different cost
functions, which makes the tuning process time-consuming.
In this work, we study CRL from a novel perspective by imposing constraints on state density functions, which avoids
the use of cost or value function-based constraints in previous CRL literature. Density is a measurement of state
concentration in the state space, and is directly related to
the state distribution. A variety of real-world constraints are
naturally expressed as density constraints in the state space.
For example, safety constraints is a special case of density

