Debiasing a First-order Heuristic for Approximate Bi-level Optimization

Valerii Likhosherstov * 1 Xingyou Song * 2 Krzysztof Choromanski 2 3 Jared Davis 4 5 Adrian Weller 1 6

Abstract
Approximate bi-level optimization (ABLO) consists of (outer-level) optimization problems,
involving numerical (inner-level) optimization
loops. While ABLO has many applications across
deep learning, it suffers from time and memory
complexity proportional to the length r of its inner optimization loop. To address this complexity,
an earlier first-order method (FOM) was proposed
as a heuristic that omits second derivative terms,
yielding significant speed gains and requiring
only constant memory. Despite FOM’s popularity,
there is a lack of theoretical understanding of its
convergence properties. We contribute by theoretically characterizing FOM’s gradient bias under
mild assumptions. We further demonstrate a rich
family of examples where FOM-based SGD does
not converge to a stationary point of the ABLO objective. We address this concern by proposing an
unbiased FOM (UFOM) enjoying constant memory complexity as a function of r. We characterize the introduced time-variance tradeoff, demonstrate convergence bounds, and find an optimal
UFOM for a given ABLO problem. Finally, we
propose an efficient adaptive UFOM scheme.

1

Introduction

Bi-level optimization (BLO) is a popular technique, which
defines an outer-level objective function using the result
of another (inner-level) optimization. Approximate BLO
(ABLO), where the inner-level optimization is approximated
by an iterative solver, has multiple applications in various
subtopics of deep learning: hyperparameter optimization
(Franceschi et al., 2018; Lorraine et al., 2019; Shaban et al.,
2018; Maclaurin et al., 2015), neural architecture search
(Liu et al., 2019), adversarial robustness (Chen et al., 2018;
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 Google Research, Brain Team 3 Columbia University 4 Deepmind 5 Stanford
University 6 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Valerii
Likhosherstov <vl304@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Zügner & Günnemann, 2019) and model-agnostic metalearning (Finn et al., 2017; Shaban et al., 2018).
In deep learning applications of ABLO, the outer-level
optimization is conducted via stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), where gradients are obtained by auto-differentiation
(Griewank & Walther, 2008) through the r steps of the inner
gradient descent (GD). This leads to storing r intermediate
inner steps, which requires a prohibitive amount of memory.
To address this, several methods for ABLO have been proposed. Among them is truncated back-propagation (Shaban
et al., 2018) which stores a fixed amount of intermediate
steps. Another is implicit differentiation (Pedregosa, 2016;
Gould et al., 2016; Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Lorraine et al.,
2019), which takes advantage of the Implicit Function Theorem, but requires multiple restrictions on the problem (Rajeswaran et al., 2019). Designing the optimizer’s iteration as
reversible dynamics (Maclaurin et al., 2015) allows a constant reduction in memory complexity, as only the bits lost
in fixed-precision arithmetic operations are saved in memory. Forward differentiation (Franceschi et al., 2017) can be
employed when outer-level gradients require a small number
of parameters. Checkpointing (Griewank, 1992; Hascoet
& Araya-Polo, 2006) is
√a generic solution for memory reduction by a factor of r. Unbiased stochastic truncation
(Beatson & Adams, 2019) can save time during stochastic
optimization, but its maximum memory usage can still grow
to O(r). Evolution Strategies, or ES (Maheswaranathan
et al., 2019), provides unbiased gradient estimates in O(1)
memory, but its variance depends linearly on the number
of parameters, which can be prohibitively large in deeplearning applications.
One practical and simple heuristic is the first-order method
(FOM), which omits second-order computations, and does
not store inner-loop rollout states in memory. FOM is
widely used in the context of neural architecture search
(Liu et al., 2019), adversarial robustness (Chen et al., 2018;
Zügner & Günnemann, 2019), and meta-learning (Finn
et al., 2017). FOM is a limiting case of truncated backpropagation, where no states are cached in memory. We
argue however, that there is a high cost to FOM’s computational simplicity: FOM suffers from biased ABLO gradients
and can fail to converge to a stationary point of the ABLO
objective. Consequently, it would be highly desirable to

