I-BERT: Integer-only BERT Quantization

Sehoon Kim * 1 Amir Gholami * 1 Zhewei Yao * 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1 Kurt Keutzer 1

Abstract
Transformer based models, like BERT and
RoBERTa, have achieved state-of-the-art results
in many Natural Language Processing tasks. However, their memory footprint, inference latency,
and power consumption are prohibitive for efficient inference at the edge, and even at the data
center. While quantization can be a viable solution for this, previous work on quantizing Transformer based models use floating-point arithmetic
during inference, which cannot efficiently utilize
integer-only logical units such as the recent Turing Tensor Cores, or traditional integer-only ARM
processors. In this work, we propose I-BERT, a
novel quantization scheme for Transformer based
models that quantizes the entire inference with
integer-only arithmetic. Based on lightweight
integer-only approximation methods for nonlinear operations, e.g., GELU, Softmax, and Layer
Normalization, I-BERT performs an end-to-end
integer-only BERT inference without any floating point calculation. We evaluate our approach
on GLUE downstream tasks using RoBERTaBase/Large. We show that for both cases, I-BERT
achieves similar (and slightly higher) accuracy as
compared to the full-precision baseline. Furthermore, our preliminary implementation of I-BERT
shows a speedup of 2.4 − 4.0× for INT8 inference on a T4 GPU system as compared to FP32
inference. The framework has been developed in
PyTorch and has been open-sourced (Kim, 2021).

1. Introduction
The recent Transformer based Neural Network (NN) models (Vaswani et al., 2017), pre-trained from large unlabeled
data (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Sehoon Kim <sehoonkim@berkeley.edu>,
Amir Gholami <amirgh@berkeley.edu>,
Zhewei Yao
<zheweiy@berkeley.edu>, Michael W. Mahoney <mahoneymw@berkeley.edu>, Kurt Keutzer <keutzer@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2019), and the GPT family (Brown et al., 2020; Radford
et al., 2018; 2019)), have achieved a significant accuracy
improvement when fine-tuned on a wide range of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks such as sentence classification (Wang et al., 2018) and question answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). Despite the state-of-the-art results
in various NLP tasks, pre-trained Transformer models are
generally orders of magnitude larger than prior models. For
example, the BERT-Large model (Devlin et al., 2018) contains 340M parameters. Much larger Transformer models
have been introduced in the past few years, with even more
parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019; Rosset, 2019; Shoeybi
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019). Efficient deployment of
these models has become a major challenge, even in data
centers, due to limited resources (energy, memory footprint,
and compute) and the need for real-time inference. Obviously, these challenges are greater for edge devices, where
the compute and energy resources are more constrained.
One promising method to tackle this challenge is quantization (Dong et al., 2019; Jacob et al., 2018; Krishnamoorthi,
2018; Wu et al., 2018; 2016; Zhang et al., 2018), a procedure which compresses NN models into smaller size by
representing parameters and/or activations with low bit precision, e.g., 8-bit integer (INT8) instead of 32-bit floating
point (FP32). Quantization reduces memory footprint by
storing parameters/activations in low precision. With the recent integer-only quantization methods, one can also benefit
from faster inference speed by using low precision integer
multiplication and accumulation, instead of floating point
arithmetic. However, previous quantization schemes for
Transformer based models use simulated quantization (aka
fake quantization), where all or part of operations in the
inference (e.g., GELU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016), Softmax, and Layer Normalization (Ba et al., 2016)) are carried
out with floating point arithmetic (Bhandare et al., 2019;
Shen et al., 2020; Zafrir et al., 2019). This approach has
multiple drawbacks for deployment in real edge application scenarios. Most importantly, the resulting NN models
cannot be deployed on neural accelerators or popular edge
processors that do not support floating point arithmetic. For
instance, the recent server class of Turing Tensor Cores
have added high throughput integer logic that are faster
than single/half-precision. Similarly, some of the edge pro-

