Robust Inference for High-Dimensional Linear Models
via Residual Randomization
Y. Samuel Wang * 1 Si Kai Lee * 1 Panos Toulis 1 Mladen Kolar 1

Abstract
We propose a residual randomization procedure
designed for robust Lasso-based inference in the
high-dimensional setting. Compared to earlier
work that focuses on sub-Gaussian errors, the proposed procedure is designed to work robustly in
settings that also include heavy-tailed covariates
and errors. Moreover, our procedure can be valid
under clustered errors, which is important in practice, but has been largely overlooked by earlier
work. Through extensive simulations, we illustrate our method’s wider range of applicability as
suggested by theory. In particular, we show that
our method outperforms state-of-art methods in
challenging, yet more realistic, settings where the
distribution of covariates is heavy-tailed or the
sample size is small, while it remains competitive
in standard, “well behaved” settings previously
studied in the literature.

1. Introduction
The Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and its variants are typically
used to estimate the coefﬁcients of a linear model in the
high-dimensional setting where the number of covariates,
p, is larger than the number of samples, n. The Lasso has
been shown to possess many desirable theoretical properties and has proven fruitful in applications across nearly
all scientiﬁc domains (Bühlmann & Van De Geer, 2011).
This widespread use has recently generated much interest in
procedures for performing inference using Lasso estimates.
However, for parameters which are zero or nearly zero,
the Lasso point estimates may have an irregular distribution, and naı̈vely constructing conﬁdence intervals typically
results in invalid inference. To overcome these difﬁculties, various procedures have been proposed. Wasserman
& Roeder (2009) and Meinshausen et al. (2009) both used
*
Equal contribution 1 Booth School of Business, University of
Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Y. Samuel Wang
<swang24@uchicago.edu>, Si Kai Lee <sikai@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sample splitting procedures to form valid p-values. Zhang
& Zhang (2014), Van de Geer et al. (2014), and Javanmard
& Montanari (2014) proposed the desparsiﬁed and debiased
Lasso, which adds a one step correction to the Lasso estimate. The resulting estimate is not sparse, but under certain
conditions, it has asymptotically negligible bias. The debiased/desparsiﬁed estimate is asymptotically normal and can
be used for inference.
An alternative approach for inference in high-dimensional
linear models is the bootstrap. Chatterjee & Lahiri (2011)
proposed a residual bootstrap procedure for the adaptive
Lasso (Zou, 2006). One crucial requirement with this approach is the “beta-min” condition, which requires the nonzero parameters to be large enough in absolute value (i.e.,
much larger than n−1/2 ). This condition can be overly
restrictive in cases where the primary aim is to test null
hypotheses on the signiﬁcance of regression coefﬁcients of
the form H0 : βj = 0. To circumvent this problem, Dezeure
et al. (2017) and Zhang & Cheng (2017) both proposed bootstrap procedures based on the desparsiﬁed Lasso (Van de
Geer et al., 2014), which are capable of performing simultaneous inference over a set of parameters in the linear model;
i.e., H0 : βj = 0 for all j ∈ J ⊆ [p] = {1, . . . , p}. Zhang
& Cheng (2017) proposed bootstrapping the linearized part
of the desparsiﬁed Lasso with a Gaussian multiplier bootstrap, while Dezeure et al. (2017) proposed using either
a wild bootstrap or a residual bootstrap procedure for the
entire estimator.
The above procedures are typically obtained under strong
regularity conditions on covariates and require i.i.d. subGaussian errors. Therefore, they may perform poorly in
more realistic settings where n is relatively small, the covariates and errors are non-Gaussian and/or heavy-tailed, or
have complex structures, such as heterogeneity or clustering.
In contrast, randomization methods (Fisher et al., 1935;
Pitman, 1937; Kempthorne, 1952) are non-parametric and
typically exact in ﬁnite samples, which makes them robust (Lehmann & Romano, 2006, Chapter 15). Randomization procedures leverage structure in the data for testing and
inference —e.g., permutation tests exploit exchangeability
through permuting the data—and rely less on analytical
assumptions or asymptotic arguments.

