On Reward-Free RL with Kernel and Neural Function Approximations:
Single-Agent MDP and Markov Game

Shuang Qiu 1 Jieping Ye 1 Zhaoran Wang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3

Abstract
To achieve sample efficiency in reinforcement
learning (RL), it necessitates to efficiently explore
the underlying environment. Under the offline setting, addressing the exploration challenge lies in
collecting an offline dataset with sufficient coverage. Motivated by such a challenge, we study
the reward-free RL problem, where an agent aims
to thoroughly explore the environment without
any pre-specified reward function. Then, given
any extrinsic reward, the agent computes the optimal policy via offline RL with data collected in
the exploration stage. Moreover, we tackle this
problem under the context of function approximation, leveraging powerful function approximators.
Specifically, we propose to explore via an optimistic variant of the value-iteration algorithm incorporating kernel and neural function approximations, where we adopt the associated exploration
bonus as the exploration reward. Moreover, we design exploration and planning algorithms for both
single-agent MDPs and zero-sum Markov games
2
e
)
and prove that our methods can achieve O(1/ε
sample complexity for generating a ε-suboptimal
policy or ε-approximate Nash equilibrium when
given an arbitrary extrinsic reward. To the best of
our knowledge, we establish the first provably efficient reward-free RL algorithm with kernel and
neural function approximators.

1. Introduction
While reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximations has achieved great empirical success (Mnih et al.,
2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019), its
application is mostly enabled by massive interactions with
the unknown environment, especially when the state space
1

University of Michigan 2 Northwestern University 3 Princeton
University. Correspondence to: Shuang Qiu <qiush@umich.edu>,
Jieping Ye <jpye@umich.edu>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>, Zhuoran Yang <zy6@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

is large and function approximators such as neural networks
are employed. To achieve sample efficiency, any RL algorithm needs to accurately learn the transition model either
explicitly or implicitly, which brings the need of efficient
exploration.
Under the setting of offline RL, the agent aims to learn the
optimal policy only from an offline dataset collected a priori,
without any interactions with the environment. Thus, the
collected offline dataset should have sufficient coverage of
the trajectory generated by the optimal policy. However,
in real-world RL applications, the reward function is often
designed by the learner based on the domain knowledge.
The learner might have a set of reward functions to choose
from or use an adaptive algorithm for reward design (Laud,
2004; Grzes, 2017). In such a scenario, it is often desirable
to collect an offline dataset that covers all the possible optimal trajectories associated with a reward function. With
such a benign offline dataset, for any arbitrary reward function, the RL agent has sufficient information to estimate the
corresponding policy.
To study such a problem in a principled manner, we focus
on the framework of reward-free RL, which consists of an
exploration phase and a planning phase. Specifically, in the
exploration phase, the agent interacts with the environment
without accessing any pre-specified reward and collects
empirical trajectories for the subsequent planning stage.
During the planning phase, using the offline data collected
in the exploration phase, the agent computes the optimal
policy given an extrinsic reward function, without further
interactions with the environment.
Recently, many works focus on designing provably sampleefficient reward-free RL algorithms. For the singleagent tabular case, Jin et al. (2020a); Kaufmann et al.
(2020); Ménard et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2020) achieve
e
O(poly(H, |S|, |A|)/ε2 ) sample complexity for obtaining
ε-suboptimal policy, where |S|, |A| are the sizes of state and
action space, respectively. In view of the large action and
state spaces, the works Zanette et al. (2020b); Wang et al.
(2020a) attempt to theoretically analyze reward-free RL by
applying the linear function approximation for the singleagent Markov decision process (MDP), which achieve
e
O(H 6 d3 /ε2 ) sample complexity (Wang et al., 2020a) with

