Robust Reinforcement Learning using Least Squares Policy Iteration
with Provable Performance Guarantees
Kishan Panaganti 1 Dileep Kalathil 1

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of model-free
reinforcement learning for Robust Markov Decision Process (RMDP) with large state spaces. The
goal of the RMDP framework is to find a policy
that is robust against the parameter uncertainties
due to the mismatch between the simulator model
and real-world settings. We first propose the Robust Least Squares Policy Evaluation algorithm,
which is a multi-step online model-free learning
algorithm for policy evaluation. We prove the
convergence of this algorithm using stochastic approximation techniques. We then propose Robust
Least Squares Policy Iteration (RLSPI) algorithm
for learning the optimal robust policy. We also
give a general weighted Euclidean norm bound on
the error (closeness to optimality) of the resulting
policy. Finally, we demonstrate the performance
of our RLSPI algorithm on some standard benchmark problems.

1. Introduction
Model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms typically learn a policy by training on a simulator. In the RL
literature, it is nominally assumed that the testing environment is identical to the training environment (simulator
model). However, in reality, the parameters of the simulator
model can be different from the real-world setting. This can
be due to the approximation errors incurred while modeling,
due to the changes in the real-world parameters over time,
and can even be due to possible adversarial disturbances
in the real-world. For example, in many robotics applications, the standard simulator parameter settings (mass,
friction, wind conditions, sensor noise, action delays) can
be different from that of the actual robot in the real-world.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, United States. Correspondence to: Kishan Panaganti <kpb@tamu.edu>, Dileep Kalathil
<dileep.kalathil@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

This mismatch between the training and testing environment
parameters can significantly degrade the real-world performance of the model-free learning algorithms trained on a
simulator model.
The RMDP framework (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005) addresses the planning problem of computing the
optimal policy that is robust against parameter uncertainties
that cause the mismatch between the training and testing
environment parameters. The RMDP problem has been analyzed extensively in the tabular case (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim
& El Ghaoui, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013; Xu & Mannor, 2010; Yu & Xu, 2015) and under the linear function
approximation (Tamar et al., 2014). Algorithms for learning
the optimal robust policy with provable guarantees have
been proposed, both in the model-free (Roy et al., 2017)
and model-based (Lim et al., 2013) reinforcement learning
settings. However, the theoretical guarantees from these
works are limited to the tabular RMDP settings. Learning
policies for problems with large state spaces is computationally challenging. RL algorithms typically overcome this
issue by using function approximation architectures, such
as linear basis functions (Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003), reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) (Yang & Wang, 2020)
and deep neural networks (Lillicrap et al., 2016). Recently,
robust reinforcement learning problem has been addressed
using deep RL methods (Pinto et al., 2017; Mankowitz et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Derman et al., 2018; Vinitsky et al.,
2020). However, these works are empirical in nature and do
not provide any theoretical guarantees for the learned policies. The problem of learning optimal robust policies with
provable performance guarantees for RMDPs with large
state spaces has not been well studied in the literature.
In this paper, we address the problem of learning a policy
that is provably robust against the parameter uncertainties
for RMDPs with large state spaces. In particular, we propose an online model-free reinforcement learning algorithm
with linear function approximation for learning the optimal robust policy, and provide theoretical guarantees on
the performance of the learned policy. Our choice of linear function approximation is motivated by its analytical
tractability while providing the scaling to large state spaces.
Indeed, linear function approximation based approaches
have been successful in providing algorithms with provable

