Policy Analysis using Synthetic Controls in Continuous-Time

Alexis Bellot 1 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Counterfactual estimation using synthetic controls
is one of the most successful recent methodological developments in causal inference. Despite its
popularity, the current description only considers
time series aligned across units and synthetic controls expressed as linear combinations of observed
control units. We propose a continuous-time alternative that models the latent counterfactual path
explicitly using the formalism of controlled differential equations. This model is directly applicable
to the general setting of irregularly-aligned multivariate time series and may be optimized in rich
function spaces – thereby improving on some limitations of existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual estimation poses the question of what would
have been the outcome if a different treatment, policy or
intervention1 had been applied. To answer this question
one often seeks a control group of comparable units e.g.,
individuals, patients, or states, to approximate a target unit’s
outcome trajectory had a different treatment been applied.
We focus on the case where a single target unit adopts the
treatment of interest at a particular point in time, and then remains exposed to this treatment at all times afterwards. Both
pre-treatment and post-treatment outcomes are assumed to
be available. We ask whether we can infer the counterfactual
trajectory over time had the unit not been exposed to the
treatment using a population of control units never exposed
to the treatment.
The synthetic control method (Abadie et al., 2010; Abadie
& Gardeazabal, 2003) is one of the most important recent
innovations in causal inference to solve this problem. It
recognizes that a weighted combination of control units
(instead of the standard procedure of seeking a single control
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, UK 2 Alan Turing Institute, UK 3 University of California Los Angeles, USA.
Correspondence to: Alexis Bellot <alexis.b11@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
We use treatment, policy and intervention interchangeably.

or average in a neighbourhood of controls) often provides a
more informative comparison for treatment effect estimation
and then formalizes the selection of the comparison units
using a data driven procedure.
Synthetic controls have become widely popular in the fields
of policy analysis due to their simplicity and transparency.
They have been used to assess the effect of tax hikes on
the consumption of cigarettes (Abadie et al., 2010; Abadie,
2019), of drug programs on drug use and crime (Robbins
et al., 2017), of immigration policies (Borjas, 2017; Bohn
et al., 2014), of minimum wages (Allegretto et al., 2017),
of terrorism on economic growth (Abadie & Gardeazabal,
2003), of large political changes and events (Hope, 2016),
and also frequently in the biomedical sciences for estimating
public health interventions (Pieters et al., 2016; Bouttell
et al., 2018).
1.1. The synthetic control method
The typical setting considers n units Yi
=
(Yi,t1 , . . . , Yi,tm ) ∈ Rm , i = 1, . . . , n, each observed on
the same grid of time points t1 , . . . , tm . By convention,
and without loss of generality, one unit (i = 1) receives the
treatment or intervention at time T ∈ (t0 , tm ) while the rest
0
act as the control group. Let Yi,t
be the potential outcome
for unit i at time t in a hypothetical world where the
1
intervention did not occur, and analogously let Yi,t
be the
corresponding potential outcome assuming the intervention
did occur. Both are functions evaluated at time t.
The observed outcome for unit i at time t, denoted by Yi,t ,
therefore satisfies:
0
1
0
Y1,t = Y1,t
+ (Y1,t
− Y1,t
)D1,t ,
0
Yi,t = Yi,t
,

i = 2, . . . , n,

(1)

where D1,t is a binary indicator of whether unit 1 is treated
at time t, taken to be 0 at all times before treatment at time
T and 1 at all time after time T . τ1 (t) = Y11 (t) − Y10 (t) is
the causal effect of intervention on unit 1 at time t.
Synthetic control methods suppose that there exist weights
0
w2 , . . . , wn such that Y1,t
can be written asPa weighted
n
0
average of observed control outcomes: Y1,t
= i=2 wi Yi,t ,
for t ∈ [t0 , T ) before treatment assignment. And then
use this approximation to compute the causal effect of the

