Stochastic Iterative Graph Matching

Linfeng Liu 1 Michael C. Hughes 1 Soha Hassoun 1 2 Li-Ping Liu 1

Abstract
Recent works apply Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) to graph matching tasks and show promising results. Considering that model outputs are
complex matchings, we devise several techniques
to improve the learning of GNNs and obtain a
new model, Stochastic Iterative Graph MAtching (SIGMA). Our model predicts a distribution
of matchings, instead of a single matching, for
a graph pair so the model can explore several
probable matchings. We further introduce a novel
multi-step matching procedure, which learns how
to refine a graph pair’s matching results incrementally. The model also includes dummy nodes so
that the model does not have to find matchings for
nodes without correspondence. We fit this model
to data via scalable stochastic optimization. We
conduct extensive experiments across synthetic
graph datasets as well as biochemistry and computer vision applications. Across all tasks, our
results show that SIGMA can produce significantly improved graph matching results compared
to state-of-the-art models. Ablation studies verify
that each of our components (stochastic training,
iterative matching, and dummy nodes) offers noticeable improvement.

1. Introduction
Graph matching (Livi and Rizzi, 2013; Yan et al., 2016; Sun
et al., 2020) aims to find node correspondence among two
or more graphs. It has a wide range of applications such as
computer vision (Sun et al., 2020), computational biology
(Saraph and Milenković, 2014), and biochemistry (Kotera
et al., 2004). Given that many practical graphs cannot be
perfectly matched, graph matching often maximizes some
matching objective, such as the total number of matched
edges (Yan et al., 2020).

Learning-based graph matching (Caetano et al., 2009; Zanfir
and Sminchisescu, 2018; Yu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019a;
Fey et al., 2018) aims to learn a model that can take a pair
of graphs and directly “predict” a matching between them.
Such models extract information for matching from graph
features and carry learned knowledge to new graph matching
problems. Unlike labels in typical classification problems,
the space of possible matchings is combinatorial, which
poses difficulties for learning such models.
Recently there has been remarkable progress in optimizing
distributions of discrete structures (Maddison et al., 2016;
Paulus et al., 2020). This class of methods approximate
discrete random variables with continuous ones and then
use the reparameterization technique (Kingma and Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014) to optimize the distributions. In
particular, Linderman et al. (2018) and Mena et al. (2018)
use this method to learn distributions of permutations and
achieve good performances in tasks such as solving jigsaw
puzzles. However, learning distributions of matchings is an
area left to explore (Paulus et al., 2020).
In this work we apply the stochastic softmax trick (Paulus
et al., 2020) to the distribution of matchings and then efficiently learn this distribution through reparameterization.
We then use a learning model to parameterize such a distribution to address the graph matching problem, so that
the learned model can be applied to any new input graphs.
The model is learned to maximize the expected reward under the matching distribution. Comparing to models that
directly predict only a single matching, this new model that
produces a distribution over matchings is able to explore a
wider range of solutions. Furthermore, the stochasticity of
the predictive distribution increases the robustness of the
learned model, because it is trained to predict a population
of good solutions.

Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, MA,
USA 2 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts
University, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Linfeng Liu <linfeng.liu@tufts.edu>.

An optimal matching for a graph pair often cannot be discovered in one shot, and some refinement often improves
the quality of the solution. This is particularly true for a
learning model because of the generalization error: it is
even hard to guarantee that the predicted matching is a local
minimum on a new graph pair. Similar observations are also
reported in amortized inference (Marino et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To address this issue, we also design a learnable architecture that can iteratively refine matchings. In addition to

1

