Submodular Maximization Subject to a Knapsack Constraint:
Combinatorial Algorithms with Near-Optimal Adaptive Complexity

Georgios Amanatidis 1 Federico Fusco 2 Philip Lazos 2 Stefano Leonardi 2
Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela 2 Rebecca Reiffenhäuser 2

Abstract
The growing need to deal with massive instances
motivates the design of algorithms balancing the
quality of the solution with applicability. For the
latter, an important measure is the adaptive complexity, capturing the number of sequential rounds
of parallel computation needed. In this work we
obtain the first constant factor approximation algorithm for non-monotone submodular maximization subject to a knapsack constraint with nearoptimal O(log n) adaptive complexity. Low adaptivity by itself, however, is not enough: one needs
to account for the total number of function evaluations (or value queries) as well. Our algorithm
asks Õ(n2 ) value queries, but can be modified
to run with only Õ(n) instead, while retaining a
low adaptive complexity of O(log2 n). Besides
the above improvement in adaptivity, this is also
the first combinatorial approach with sublinear
adaptive complexity for the problem and yields
algorithms comparable to the state-of-the-art even
for the special cases of cardinality constraints or
monotone objectives. Finally, we showcase our
algorithms’ applicability on real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Submodular optimization is a very popular topic that is
relevant to various research areas as it captures the natural notion of diminishing returns. Its numerous applications include viral marketing (Hartline et al., 2008; Kempe
et al., 2015), data summarization (Tschiatschek et al., 2014;
Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016; Badanidiyuru et al., 2020), feature selection (Das & Kempe, 2008; 2018; Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2020), and clustering (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013).
Prominent examples from combinatorial optimization are
1
University of Essex, United Kingdom. 2 Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Federico Fusco <fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cut functions in graphs and coverage functions.
Submodularity is often implicitly associated with monotonicity, and many results rely on that assumption. However,
non-monotone submodular functions do naturally arise in
applications, either directly or from combining monotone
submodular objectives and modular penalization or regularization terms (Hartline et al., 2008; Tschiatschek et al.,
2014; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016; Breuer et al., 2020; Amanatidis et al., 2020). Additional constraints, like cardinality,
matroid, knapsack, covering, and packing constraints, are
prevalent in applications and have been extensively studied.
In this list, knapsack constraints are among the most natural,
as they capture limitations on budget, time, or size of the elements. Like matroid constraints, they generalize cardinality
constraints, yet they are not captured by the former.
The main computational bottleneck in submodular optimization comes from the necessity to repeatedly evaluate the
objective function for various candidate sets. These socalled value queries are often notoriously heavy to compute,
e.g., for exemplar-based clustering (Dueck & Frey, 2007),
log-determinant of submatrices (Kazemi et al., 2018), and
accuracy of ML models (Das & Kempe, 2008; Khanna et al.,
2017). With real-world instances of these problems growing
to enormous sizes, simply reducing the number of queries
is not always sufficient and parallelisation has become an
increasingly central paradigm. However, classic results in
the area, often based on the greedy method, are inherently
sequential: the intuitive approach of building a solution
element-by-element contradicts the requirement of running
independent computations on many machines in parallel.
The degree to which an algorithm can be parallelized is measured by the notion of adaptive complexity, or adaptivity,
introduced in Balkanski et al. (2018). It is defined as the
number of sequential rounds of parallel computation needed
to terminate. In each of these rounds, polynomially many
value queries may be asked, but they can only depend on
the answers to queries issued in past rounds.
Contribution. We design the first combinatorial randomized algorithms for maximizing a (possibly) non-monotone
submodular function subject to a knapsack constraint that
combine constant approximation, low adaptive complexity,

