Representation Matters: Offline Pretraining for Sequential Decision Making

Mengjiao Yang 1 Ofir Nachum 1

Abstract
The recent success of supervised learning methods on ever larger offline datasets has spurred
interest in the reinforcement learning (RL) field
to investigate whether the same paradigms can
be translated to RL algorithms. This research
area, known as offline RL, has largely focused
on offline policy optimization, aiming to find a
return-maximizing policy exclusively from offline
data. In this paper, we consider a slightly different
approach to incorporating offline data into sequential decision-making. We aim to answer the question, what unsupervised objectives applied to offline datasets are able to learn state representations
which elevate performance on downstream tasks,
whether those downstream tasks be online RL,
imitation learning from expert demonstrations,
or even offline policy optimization based on the
same offline dataset? Through a variety of experiments utilizing standard offline RL datasets, we
find that the use of pretraining with unsupervised
learning objectives can dramatically improve the
performance of policy learning algorithms that
otherwise yield mediocre performance on their
own. Extensive ablations further provide insights
into what components of these unsupervised objectives – e.g., reward prediction, continuous or
discrete representations, pretraining or finetuning
– are most important and in which settings1 .

1. Introduction
Within the reinforcement learning (RL) research field, offline RL has recently gained a significant amount of interest (Levine et al., 2020; Lange et al., 2012). Offline RL
considers the problem of performing reinforcement learning
– i.e., learning a policy to solve a sequential decision-making
1

Google Research, Google Brain.
Mengjiao Yang <sherryy@google.com>.

Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/google-research/googleresearch/tree/master/rl repr.

Figure 1. A summary of the advantages of representation learning
via contrastive self-prediction, across a variety of settings: imitation learning, offline RL, and partially observable online RL.
Each subplot shows the aggregated mean reward and standard
error during training, with aggregation over offline datasets of
different behavior (e.g., expert, medium, etc.), with five seeds per
dataset (see Section 3). Representation learning yields significant
performance gains in all domains and tasks.

task – exclusively from a static, offline dataset of experience. The recent interest in offline RL is partly motivated
by the success of data-driven methods in the supervised
learning literature. Indeed, the last decade has witnessed
ever more impressive models learned from ever larger static
datasets (Halevy et al., 2009; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Brown
et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Solving offline RL
is therefore seen as a stepping stone towards developing
scalable, data-driven methods for policy learning (Fu et al.,
2020). Accordingly, much of the recent offline RL research
focuses on proposing new policy optimization algorithms
amenable to learning from offline datasets (e.g., Fujimoto
et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2019); Agarwal et al. (2020); Kumar
et al. (2020); Yu et al. (2020); Matsushima et al. (2020)).
In this paper, we consider a slightly different approach to incorporating offline data into sequential decision-making. We
are inspired by recent successes in semi-supervised learning (Mikolov et al., 2013; Devlin et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2020), in which large and potentially unlabelled offline
datasets are used to learn representations of the data – i.e., a
mapping of input to a fixed-length vector embedding – and
these representations are then used to accelerate learning
on a downstream supervised learning task. We therefore
consider whether the same paradigm can apply to RL. Can
offline experience datasets be used to learn representations
of the data that accelerate learning on a downstream task?

