Self-Improved Retrosynthetic Planning

Junsu Kim 1 Sungsoo Ahn 2 Hankook Lee 1 Jinwoo Shin 1

Abstract
Retrosynthetic planning is a fundamental problem
in chemistry for finding a pathway of reactions
to synthesize a target molecule. Recently, search
algorithms have shown promising results for solving this problem by using deep neural networks
(DNNs) to expand their candidate solutions, i.e.,
adding new reactions to reaction pathways. However, the existing works on this line are suboptimal; the retrosynthetic planning problem requires
the reaction pathways to be (a) represented by realworld reactions and (b) executable using “building block” molecules, yet the DNNs expand reaction pathways without fully incorporating such requirements. Motivated by this, we propose an endto-end framework for directly training the DNNs
towards generating reaction pathways with the
desirable properties. Our main idea is based on
a self-improving procedure that trains the model
to imitate successful trajectories found by itself.
We also propose a novel reaction augmentation
scheme based on a forward reaction model. Our
experiments demonstrate that our scheme significantly improves the success rate of solving the
retrosynthetic problem from 86.84% to 96.32%
while maintaining the performance of DNN for
predicting valid reactions.

1. Introduction
To synthesize a novel molecule, chemists require executing
a pathway of reactions starting from a set of known or
commercially available building block molecules. Hence,
discovering such a reaction pathway for a target molecule
is crucial in important applications such as drug discovery
(Hughes et al., 2011) and material design (Yan et al., 2018).
To tackle this problem, retrosynthetic planning (Corey,
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI). Correspondence to: Junsu Kim
<junsu.kim@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) Chemical reaction

(b) Retrosynthetic planning
Figure 1. Illustration of (a) synthesis (forward) and retrosynthesis (backward) with respect to a chemical reaction and
(b) outcome of retrosynthetic planning given the target
molecule 2-(2,6-difluorophenyl)-5-(4-morpholin-4-ylanilino)-1,3oxazole-4-carbonitrile. Given a target molecule, a retrosynthetic
planning algorithm aims at finding a reaction pathway ending up
in the building block molecules.

1991) finds a series of chemically valid reactions starting
from the target molecule until reaching the building block
molecules in a backward and recursive manner. The main
challenge of retrosynthetic planning is twofold: (a) finding
an accurate single-step retrosynthetic model that predicts
a single reaction of a given product and (b) designing an
efficient search algorithm for a reaction pathway starting
from the set of building block molecule.
Especially, recent works have proposed deep neural networks (DNNs) as attractive models for single-step retrosynthesis. Using the existing real-world reaction datasets
(Lowe, 2012), they train (in a supervised manner) and evaluate DNNs to predict a reactant-set from a given product. To
be specific, existing works use DNNs to predict the reactantset based on applying a known reaction template to the
product (Segler & Waller, 2017; Dai et al., 2019), generating each reactant from scratch (Liu et al., 2017; Karpov

