Selfish Sparse RNN Training

Shiwei Liu 1 Decebal Constantin Mocanu 1 2 Yulong Pei 1 Mykola Pechenizkiy 1

Abstract

Sparse neural networks have been widely applied
to reduce the computational demands of training and deploying over-parameterized deep neural networks. For inference acceleration, methods that discover a sparse network from a pretrained dense network (dense-to-sparse training)
work effectively. Recently, dynamic sparse training (DST) has been proposed to train sparse neural networks without pre-training a dense model
(sparse-to-sparse training), so that the training
process can also be accelerated. However, previous sparse-to-sparse methods mainly focus on
Multilayer Perceptron Networks (MLPs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), failing to
match the performance of dense-to-sparse methods in the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
setting. In this paper, we propose an approach
to train intrinsically sparse RNNs with a fixed
parameter count in one single run, without compromising performance. During training, we allow RNN layers to have a non-uniform redistribution across cell gates for better regularization.
Further, we propose SNT-ASGD, a novel variant of the averaged stochastic gradient optimizer,
which significantly improves the performance of
all sparse training methods for RNNs. Using
these strategies, we achieve state-of-the-art sparse
training results, better than the dense-to-sparse
methods, with various types of RNNs on Penn
TreeBank and Wikitext-2 datasets. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/
Shiweiliuiiiiiii/Selfish-RNN.

1
Department of Computer Science, Eindhoven University of
Technology, the Netherlands
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics, and Computer
Science at University of Twente, the Netherlands
. Correspondence to: Shiwei Liu <s.liu3@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Elman, 1990), with a
variant of long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), have been highly successful in various
fields, including language modeling (Mikolov et al., 2010),
machine translation (Kalchbrenner & Blunsom, 2013), question answering (Hirschman et al., 1999; Wang & Jiang,
2017), etc. As a standard task to evaluate models’ ability to capture long-range context, language modeling has
witnessed great progress in RNNs. Mikolov et al. (2010)
demonstrated that RNNs perform much better than backoff
models for language modeling. After that, various novel
RNN architectures such as Recurrent Highway Networks
(RHNs) (Zilly et al., 2017), Pointer Sentinel Mixture Models (Merity et al., 2017), Neural Cache Model (Grave et al.,
2017), Mixture of Softmaxes (AWD-LSTM-MoS) (Yang
et al., 2018), Ordered Neurons LSTM (ON-LSTM) (Shen
et al., 2019), and effective regularization like Variational
Dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), Weight Tying (Inan
et al., 2017), DropConnect (Merity et al., 2018) have been
proposed to improve the performance of RNNs on language
modeling.
At the same time, as the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) improves, the resources required to train and
deploy these deep models are becoming prohibitively large.
To tackle this problem, various dense-to-sparse methods
have been developed, including but not limited to pruning
(LeCun et al., 1990; Han et al., 2015; Molchanov et al.,
2016), variational dropout (Kingma et al., 2015; Molchanov
et al., 2017), distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), L1 regularization (Wen et al., 2018), and low-rank decomposition (Jaderberg et al., 2014). Given a pre-trained model, these methods
work effectively to accelerate the inference process.
Recently, some dynamic sparse training (DST) approaches
(Mocanu et al., 2018; Mostafa & Wang, 2019; Dettmers &
Zettlemoyer, 2019; Evci et al., 2020) have been proposed
to bring efficiency to the training phase as well. However,
previous approaches are mainly for CNNs and MLPs. The
long-term dependencies and repetitive usage of recurrent
cells make RNNs more difficult to be sparsified (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018; Evci et al., 2020). More importantly, the
state-of-the-art performance achieved by RNNs on language
modeling is mainly associated with the optimizer, averaged

