GraphDF: A Discrete Flow Model for Molecular Graph Generation

Youzhi Luo 1 Keqiang Yan 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of molecular graph generation using deep models. While graphs are discrete, most existing methods use continuous latent variables, resulting in inaccurate modeling of
discrete graph structures. In this work, we propose GraphDF, a novel discrete latent variable
model for molecular graph generation based on
normalizing flow methods. GraphDF uses invertible modulo shift transforms to map discrete latent variables to graph nodes and edges. We show
that the use of discrete latent variables reduces
computational costs and eliminates the negative
effect of dequantization. Comprehensive experimental results show that GraphDF outperforms
prior methods on random generation, property
optimization, and constrained optimization tasks.

data to continuous data by adding real-valued noise. However, such dequantization processing prevents models from
capturing the original discrete distribution of discrete graph
structures, thus increasing the difficulty of model training.
This becomes a key limitation that makes it hard to capture
the true distribution of graph structures and generate diverse
molecules.
In this work, we propose GraphDF, a generative model
using discrete latent variables for molecular graph generation. GraphDF generates molecular graphs by sequentially
sampling discrete latent variables and mapping them to
new nodes and edges via invertible modulo shift transforms.
Compared with previous methods, our proposed discrete
transform eliminates the cost of computing Jacobian matrix
and overcomes the limitations resulted from dequantization.
Experimental results show that GraphDF can outperform
previous state-of-the-art methods over various molecule generation tasks. The implementation of GraphDF has been
integrated into the DIG (Liu et al., 2021) framework.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in drug discovery (Stokes et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020) and chemistry is to design novel
molecules with specific properties. This task remains to
be challenging because the space of molecules is naturally
discrete and very large, with estimated size on the order
of 1033 (Polishchuk et al., 2013). Recent advances in deep
generative models have lead to significant progress in this
field. Notably, many recent studies represent molecular
structures as graphs and propose to generate novel molecular
graphs with advanced deep generative models. From a
conceptual and computational perspective, these methods
first map molecular graphs to vectors in the continuous latent
space. When generating, the generative models project a
randomly picked continuous vector in the latent space back
to the molecular graph space.

2. Background and Related Work

To make use of generative models with continuous latent
variables, existing methods (Madhawa et al., 2019; Shi*
et al., 2020; Zang & Wang, 2020) convert discrete graph

• Learning a constrained optimization model pθ (·|M ),
so as to maximize EM 0 |M ∼pθ [S(M 0 )] while satisfying
SIM(M, M 0 ) > δ, where M is a given molecule, M 0 is
the optimized molecule, and δ is a similarity threshold.

1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas
A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji
<sji@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2.1. Molecule Generation
Let M = {Mi }m
i=1 be a set of molecules, S(M ) ∈ R be a
function computing a specific property score of the molecule
M , and SIM(M, M 0 ) ∈ [0, 1] be a function measuring the
similarity between two molecules M and M 0 . The three
molecule generation tasks can be defined as below.
• Learning a generation model pθ (·) from M, where pθ (M )
is the probability of sampling the molecule M from the
model.
• Learning a property optimization model pθ (·) with respect
to S by maximizing EM ∼pθ [S(M )].

Early attempts for molecule generation (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Kusner et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2018) represented
molecules as SMILES strings (Weininger, 1988) and developed sequence generation models. These models may not

