BASE Layers: Simplifying Training of Large, Sparse Models

Mike Lewis 1 Shruti Bhosale 1 Tim Dettmers 1 2 Naman Goyal 1 Luke Zettlemoyer 1 2

Abstract
We introduce a new balanced assignment of experts (BASE) layer for large language models that
greatly simplifies existing high capacity sparse
layers. Sparse layers can dramatically improve
the efficiency of training and inference by routing
each token to specialized expert modules that contain only a small fraction of the model parameters.
However, it can be difficult to learn balanced routing functions that make full use of the available
experts; existing approaches typically use routing
heuristics or auxiliary expert-balancing loss functions. In contrast, we formulate token-to-expert
allocation as a linear assignment problem, allowing an optimal assignment in which each expert
receives an equal number of tokens. This optimal assignment scheme improves efficiency by
guaranteeing balanced compute loads, and also
simplifies training by not requiring any new hyperparameters or auxiliary losses. Code is publicly
released.1

1. Introduction
Sparse expert models enable sparse computation by spreading model capacity across a set of experts, while ensuring
that only a small subset of the experts are used for each
input (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus
et al., 2021). Sparse models can often realize the strong performance gains that come with training very large models,
while also alleviating much of the associated computational,
financial and environmental costs (Strubell et al., 2019).
However, such models are notoriously difficult to train; the
experts must be carefully balanced so that they can specialize to different parts of the input space. In this paper,
we present a simple, efficient, and performant method for
expert-based sparsity in language models, built around the
use of a linear assignment algorithm to explicitly balance
1

Facebook AI Research 2 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Mike Lewis <mikelewis@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/

Worker 1

Worker 2

Re-route to original worker

Dogs

bark

Cats

purr

Mix in expert output:
hi +σ(wa . hi )fa (hi )

+

+

+

+

i

i

Expert Computation
f(hi )

Expert1 Expert1

Expert2 Expert2

Balanced assignment of
token i to expert ai

Dogs

Cats

bark

purr

Hidden states hi

Dogs

bark

Cats

purr

Figure 1. Overview of a BASE layer. Each worker contains a
separate expert module. During training, we compute a balanced
assignment of tokens such that each worker sends an equal number
of tokens to each expert. By softly mixing in the expert module,
experts can learn to specialize for particular types of tokens.

the assignment of tokens to experts during training.
The mostly widely used Sparse Expert models are mixtures
of experts (MoE) models (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin
et al., 2020) that learn a gating function to route each token to a few experts, which creates a challenging, discrete
latent variable learning problem. In practice, carefully tuning and the introduction of extra loss functions with new
hyperparameters is required to avoid imbalanced or degenerate experts. Recently, the Switch transformer (Fedus et al.,
2021) simplified the framework by routing tokens to only a
single expert, improving stability and efficiency overall but
again using custom auxiliary losses that require tuning, and
requiring capacity factors to prevent too many tokens being
assigned to a single expert. We show that it is possible to
go even further. We also assign a single expert per token
but are the first to algorithmically balance the assignment
with no extra model modifications, providing more formal
guarantees of balanced compute while simplifying both the
implementation and optimization.
We introduce a simple and effective solution for routing tokens to experts during training, which we use to estimate a
new Balanced Assignment of Sparse Experts (BASE) layer.
To ensure balanced routing in the BASE layer, we formulate
a linear assignment problem that maximizes token-expert
affinities while ensuring that each expert receives an equal

