GBHT: Gradient Boosting Histogram Transform for Density Estimation

Jingyi Cui 1 * Hanyuan Hang 2 * Yisen Wang 1 Zhouchen Lin 1 3

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a density estimation
algorithm called Gradient Boosting Histogram
Transform (GBHT), where we adopt the Negative
Log Likelihood as the loss function to make the
boosting procedure available for the unsupervised
tasks. From a learning theory viewpoint, we first
prove fast convergence rates for GBHT with the
smoothness assumption that the underlying density function lies in the space C 0,α . Then when
the target density function lies in spaces C 1,α ,
we present an upper bound for GBHT which is
smaller than the lower bound of its corresponding
base learner, in the sense of convergence rates.
To the best of our knowledge, we make the first
attempt to theoretically explain why boosting can
enhance the performance of its base learners for
density estimation problems. In experiments, we
not only conduct performance comparisons with
the widely used KDE, but also apply GBHT to
anomaly detection to showcase a further application of GBHT.

1. Introduction
Regarded as one of the most important tasks in unsupervised learning, density estimation aims at inferring the true
distribution of targeted unknown variables through limited
samples. While basic statistical analysis can be directly
carried out on density functions (Scott, 2015), density estimation is further regarded as an imperative cornerstone to
more sophisticated tasks, such as anomaly detection (Nachman & Shih, 2020; Zhang et al., 2018; Amarbayasgalan
et al., 2018) and clustering (Chen et al., 2020; Parmar et al.,
2019; Ghaffari et al., 2019; Jang & Jiang, 2019).
On the other hand, as one of the most successful algorithms
*
Equal contribution 1 Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of EECS, Peking University, China 2 Department of Applied
Mathematics, University of Twente, The Netherlands 3 Pazhou
Lab, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yisen Wang
<yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

over two decades (Bühlmann & Yu, 2003), boosting attracts
more and more attention in researches on machine learning (Mathiasen et al., 2019; Cortes et al., 2019; Parnell
et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020; Suggala
et al., 2020). However, when boosting method shows its
power and strength in the field of supervised learning, few
studies focus on unsupervised learning, especially on the
density estimation problem. Furthermore, previous attempts
(Ridgeway, 2002; Rosset & Segal, 2003) focus more on
methodology study instead of statistical theories. To the
best of our knowledge, there remains little understood of
the theoretical advantage of boosting over its base learners
from the statistical learning point of view.
Under such background, by combing the boosting framework (Rosset & Segal, 2003) with the random histogram
transforms (López-Rubio, 2013; Blaser & Fryzlewicz,
2016), this paper aims to establish a new boosting algorithm
called Gradient Boosting Histogram Transform (GBHT) for
density estimation, which not only has satisfactory performance but also has solid theoretical foundations. To be
specific, we adopt the Negative Log Likelihood loss, which
makes the boosting method, typically used in supervised
learning tasks, available for density estimation which is an
unsupervised problem. Moreover, through complete learning theory analysis, we for the first time provide theoretical
supports to the benefit of the boosting procedure in the density estimation problem. GBHT starts with generating a
random histogram transform consisting of random rotations,
stretchings, and translations. (The histogram transforms
are i.i.d. generated at each iteration). Then the input space
is partitioned into non-overlapping cells corresponding to
the unit bin in the transformed space. On those cells, we
obtain base learners where piecewise constant functions are
applied. Then the iterative process is started with adding a
sequence of random histogram transforms for minimizing
empirical negative log-likelihood loss by a natural adaption
of gradient descent boosting algorithm. Finally, after the iterative process, we inversely transform the partitioned space
to the original and obtain the GBHT density estimator.
The contributions of this paper come from the model, theoretical, and experimental perspectives:
• While majority studies of boosting focus on supervised
learning, we exploit boosting to improve the accuracy

