Bootstrapping Fitted Q-Evaluation for Off-Policy Inference

Botao Hao 1 Xiang Ji 2 Yaqi Duan 2 Hao Lu 2 Csaba Szepesvári 1 3 Mengdi Wang 1 2

Abstract
Bootstrapping provides a flexible and effective
approach for assessing the quality of batch reinforcement learning, yet its theoretical properties
are poorly understood. In this paper, we study
the use of bootstrapping in off-policy evaluation
(OPE), and in particular, we focus on the fitted
Q-evaluation (FQE) that is known to be minimaxoptimal in the tabular and linear-model cases. We
propose a bootstrapping FQE method for inferring
the distribution of the policy evaluation error and
show that this method is asymptotically efficient
and distributionally consistent for off-policy statistical inference. To overcome the computation
limit of bootstrapping, we further adapt a subsampling procedure that improves the runtime by an
order of magnitude. We numerically evaluate the
bootrapping method in classical RL environments
for confidence interval estimation, estimating the
variance of off-policy evaluator, and estimating
the correlation between multiple off-policy evaluators.

et al., 2013; Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Le et al., 2019).
In practice, FQE has demonstrated robust and satisfying
performances on many classical RL tasks under different
metrics (Voloshin et al., 2019). A more recent study by
Paine et al. (2020) demonstrated surprising scalability and
effectiveness of FQE with deep neural nets in a range of
complex continuous-state RL tasks. On the theoretical side,
FQE was proved to be a minimax-optimal policy evaluator
in the tabular and linear-model cases (Yin & Wang, 2020;
Duan & Wang, 2020).
The aforementioned research mostly focuses on point estimation for OPE. In practical batch RL applications, a point
estimate is far from enough. Statistical inference for OPE is
of great interests. For instance, one often hopes to construct
tight confidence interval around policy value, estimate the
variance of off-policy evaluator, or evaluate multiple policies using the same data and estimate their correlations.
Bootstrapping (Efron, 1982), is a conceptually simple and
generalizable approach to infer the error distribution based
on batch data. Therefore, in this work, we study the use
of bootstrapping for off-policy inference. We will provide
theoretical justifications as well as numerical experiments.
Our main results are summarized below:

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) often serves as the starting
point of batch reinforcement learning (RL). The objective of
OPE is to estimate the value of a target policy based on batch
episodes of state-transition trajectories that were generated
using a different and possibly unknown behavior policy. In
this paper, we investigate statistical inference for OPE. In
particular, we analyze the popular fitted Q-evaluation (FQE)
method, which is a basic model-free approach that fits unknown value function from data using function approximation and backward dynamic programming (Fonteneau
1
Deepmind 2 Princeton University 3 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Botao Hao <haobotao000@gmail.com>, Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• First we analyze the asymptotic distribution of FQE
with linear function approximation and show that the
policy evaluation error asymptotically follows a normal distribution (Theorem 4.2). The asymptotic variance matches the Cramér–Rao lower bound for OPE
(Theorem 4.5) and implies that this estimator is asymptotically efficient.
• We propose a bootstrapping FQE method for estimating the distribution of off-policy evaluation error. We
prove that bootstrapping FQE is asymptotically consistent in estimating the distribution of the original
FQE (Theorem 5.1) and establish the consistency of
bootstrap confidence interval as well as bootstrap variance estimation. Further, we propose a subsampled
bootstrap procedure to improve the computational efficiency of bootstrapping FQE.

