The Emergence of Individuality

Jiechuan Jiang 1 Zongqing Lu 1

Abstract
Individuality is essential in human society. It induces the division of labor and thus improves the
efficiency and productivity. Similarly, it should
also be a key to multi-agent cooperation. Inspired
by that individuality is of being an individual separate from others, we propose a simple yet efficient
method for the emergence of individuality (EOI)
in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
EOI learns a probabilistic classifier that predicts
a probability distribution over agents given their
observation and gives each agent an intrinsic reward of being correctly predicted by the classifier.
The intrinsic reward encourages the agents to visit
their own familiar observations, and learning the
classifier by such observations makes the intrinsic reward signals stronger and in turn makes the
agents more identifiable. To further enhance the
intrinsic reward and promote the emergence of
individuality, two regularizers are proposed to increase the discriminability of the classifier. We
implement EOI on top of popular MARL algorithms. Empirically, we show that EOI outperforms existing methods in a variety of multi-agent
cooperative scenarios.

1. Introduction
Humans develop into distinct individuals due to both genes
and environments (Freund et al., 2013). Individuality induces the division of labor (Gordon, 1996), which improves
the productivity and efficiency of human society. Analogically, the emergence of individuality should also be essential
for multi-agent cooperation.
Although multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
been applied to multi-agent cooperation, it is widely observed that agents usually learn similar behaviors, especially
when the agents are homogeneous with shared global reward and co-trained (McKee et al., 2020). For example, in
1

Peking University. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu
<zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

multi-camera multi-object tracking (Liu et al., 2017), where
camera agents learn to cooperatively track multiple objects,
the camera agents all tend to track the easy object. However,
such similar behaviors can easily make the learned policies
fall into local optimum. If the agents can respectively track
different objects, they are more likely to solve the task optimally. Many studies formulate such a problem as task
allocation or role assignment (Sander et al., 2002; Dastani
et al., 2003; Sims et al., 2008). However, they require that
the agent roles are rule-based and the tasks are pre-defined,
and thus are not general methods. Some studies intentionally pursue difference in agent policies by diversity (Lee
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020a) or by emergent roles (Wang
et al., 2020a), however, the induced difference is not appropriately linked to the success of task. On the contrary, the
emergence of individuality along with learning cooperation
can automatically drive agents to behave differently and
take a variety of roles, if needed, to successfully complete
tasks.
Biologically, the emergence of individuality is attributed
to innate characteristics and experiences. However, as in
practice RL agents are mostly homogeneous, we mainly
focus on enabling agents to develop individuality through
interactions with the environment during policy learning.
Intuitively, in multi-agent environments where agents respectively explore and interact with the environment, individuality should emerge from what they experience. In
this paper, we propose a novel method for the emergence
of individuality (EOI) in MARL. EOI learns a probabilistic
classifier that predicts a probability distribution over agents
given their observation and gives each agent an intrinsic
reward of being correctly predicted probability by the classifier. Encouraged by the intrinsic reward, agents tend to visit
their own familiar observations. Learning the probabilistic
classifier by such observations makes the intrinsic reward
signals stronger and in turn makes the agents more identifiable. In this closed loop with positive feedback, agent
individuality emerges gradually. However, at early learning
stage, the observations visited by different agents cannot
be easily distinguished by the classifier, meaning the intrinsic reward signals are not strong enough to induce agent
characteristics. Therefore, we propose two regularizers for
learning the classifier to increase the discriminability, enhance the feedback, and thus promote the emergence of

