Understanding and Mitigating Accuracy Disparity in Regression
Jianfeng Chi 1 Yuan Tian 1 Geoffrey J. Gordon 2 Han Zhao 3

Abstract
With the widespread deployment of large-scale
prediction systems in high-stakes domains, e.g.,
face recognition, criminal justice, etc., disparity
in prediction accuracy between different demographic subgroups has called for fundamental understanding on the source of such disparity and
algorithmic intervention to mitigate it. In this paper, we study the accuracy disparity problem in
regression. To begin with, we first propose an
error decomposition theorem, which decomposes
the accuracy disparity into the distance between
marginal label distributions and the distance between conditional representations, to help explain
why such accuracy disparity appears in practice.
Motivated by this error decomposition and the
general idea of distribution alignment with statistical distances, we then propose an algorithm to reduce this disparity, and analyze its game-theoretic
optima of the proposed objective functions. To
corroborate our theoretical findings, we also conduct experiments on five benchmark datasets. The
experimental results suggest that our proposed algorithms can effectively mitigate accuracy disparity while maintaining the predictive power of the
regression models.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in machine learning has led to its
widespread use in many high-stakes domains, such as criminal justice, healthcare, student loan approval, and hiring.
Meanwhile, it has also been widely observed that accuracy
disparity could occur inadvertently under various scenarios in practice (Barocas and Selbst, 2016). For example,
errors are inclined to occur for individuals of certain underrepresented demographic groups (Kim, 2016). In other
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Jianfeng Chi
<jc6ub@virginia.com>, Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cases, Buolamwini and Gebru (2018) showed that notable
accuracy disparity exists across different racial and gender
demographic subgroups on several real-world image classification systems. Moreover, Bagdasaryan et al. (2019) found
out that a differentially private model even exacerbates such
accuracy disparity. Such accuracy disparity across demographic subgroups not only raises concerns in high-stake
applications but also can be utilized by malicious parties to
cause information leakage (Yaghini et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2020).
Despite the ample needs of accuracy parity, most prior work
limits its scope to studying the problem in binary classification settings (Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017b;
Zhao and Gordon, 2019; Jiang et al., 2019). Compared
to the accuracy disparity problem in classification settings,
accuracy disparity1 in regression is a more challenging but
less studied problem, due to the fact that many existing algorithmic techniques designed for classification cannot be
extended in a straightforward way when the target variable
is continuous (Zhao et al., 2019). In a seminal work, Chen
et al. (2018) analyzed the impact of data collection on accuracy disparity in general learning models. They provided
a descriptive analysis of such parity gaps and advocated
for collecting more training examples and introducing more
predictive variables. While such a suggestion is feasible in
applications where data collection and labeling is cheap, it
is not applicable in domains where it is time-consuming,
expensive, or even infeasible to collect more data, e.g., in
autonomous driving, education, etc.
Our Contributions In this paper, we provide a prescriptive analysis of accuracy disparity and aim at providing algorithmic interventions to reduce the disparity gap between
different demographic subgroups in the regression setting.
To start with, we first formally characterize why accuracy
disparity appears in regression problems by depicting the
feasible region of the underlying group-wise errors. Next,
we derive an error decomposition theorem that decomposes
the accuracy disparity into the distance between marginal
label distributions and the distance between conditional rep1
Technically, accuracy disparity refers to (squared) error difference in our paper. We would like to use accuracy disparity
throughout our paper since it is a more commonly used term in
fairness problems.

