Sample Complexity of Robust Linear Classification on Separated Data

Robi Bhattacharjee 1 Somesh Jha 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
We consider the sample complexity of learning
with adversarial robustness. Most prior theoretical
results for this problem have considered a setting
where different classes in the data are close together or overlapping. We consider, in contrast,
the well-separated case where there exists a classifier with perfect accuracy and robustness, and
show that the sample complexity narrates an entirely different story. Specifically, for linear classifiers, we show a large class of well-separated
distributions where the expected robust loss of any
algorithm is at least Ω( nd ), whereas the max margin algorithm has expected standard loss O( n1 ).
This shows a gap in the standard and robust losses
that cannot be obtained via prior techniques. Additionally, we present an algorithm that, given
an instance where the robustness radius is much
smaller than the gap between the classes, gives a
solution with expected robust loss is O( n1 ). This
shows that for very well-separated data, convergence rates of O( n1 ) are achievable, which is not
the case otherwise. Our results apply to robustness measured in any `p norm with p > 1 (including p = ∞).

1. Introduction
Motivated by the use of machine learning in safety-critical
settings, adversarially robust classification has been of much
recent interest. Formally, the problem is as follows. A
learner is given training data drawn from an underlying
distribution D, a hypothesis class H, a robustness metric d,
and a radius r. The learner’s goal is to find a classifier h ∈ H
which has the lowest robust loss at radius r. The robust loss
of a classifier is the expected fraction of examples where
either f (x) 6= y or where there exists an x0 at distance
d(x, x0 ) ≤ r such that f (x) 6= f (x0 ). Robust classification
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, San Diego
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Robi
Bhattacharjee <rcbhatta@eng.ucsd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

thus aims to find a classifier that maximizes accuracy on
examples that are distance r or more from the decision
boundary, where distances are measured according to the
metric d.
In this work, we ask: how many samples are needed to learn
a classifier with low robust loss when H is the class of linear
classifiers, and d is an `p -metric? Prior work has provided
both upper (Yin et al., 2019; Dan et al., 2020) as well as
lower bounds (Schmidt et al., 2018; Dan et al., 2020) on
the sample complexity of the problem. However, almost
all look at settings where the data distribution itself is not
separated – data from different classes overlap or are close
together in space. In this case, the classifier that minimizes
robust loss is quite different from the one that minimizes
error, which often leads to strong sample complexity gaps.
Many real tasks where robust solutions are desired however
tend to involve well-separated data (Yang et al., 2020), and
hence it is instructive to look at what happens in these cases.
With this motivation, we consider in this work robust classification of data that is linearly r-separable. Specifically,
there exists a linear classifier which has zero robust loss
at robustness radius r. This case is thus the analog of the
realizable case for robust classification, and we consider
both upper and lower bounds in this setting.
For lower bounds, prior work (Cullina et al., 2018) shows
that both standard and robust linear classification have VCdimension O(d), and consequently have similar bounds on
the expected loss in the worst case. However, these results
do not apply to this setting since we are specifically considering well-separated data, which greatly restricts the set of
possible worst-case distributions. For our lower bound, we
provide a family of distributions that are linearly r-separable
and where the maximum margin classifier, given n independent samples, has error O(1/n). In contrast, any algorithm
for finding the minimum robust loss classifier has robust
loss at least Ω(d/n), where d is the data dimension. These
bounds hold for all `p -norms provided p > 1, including
p = 2 and p = ∞. Unlike prior work, our bounds do not
rely on the difference in loss between the solutions with optimal robust loss and error, and hence cannot be obtained by
prior techniques. Instead, we introduce a new geometric construction that exploits the fact that learning a classifier with
low robust loss when data is linearly r-separated requires

