Model Performance Scaling with Multiple Data Sources

Tatsunori Hashimoto 1

Abstract
Real-world machine learning systems are often
trained using a mix of data sources with varying
cost and quality. Understanding how the size and
composition of a training dataset affect model performance is critical for advancing our understanding of generalization, as well as designing more
effective data collection policies. We show that
there is a simple scaling law that predicts the loss
incurred by a model even under varying dataset
composition. Our work expands recent observations of scaling laws for log-linear generalization
error in the i.i.d setting and uses this to cast model
performance prediction as a learning problem. Using the theory of optimal experimental design, we
derive a simple rational function approximation
to generalization error that can be fitted using
a few model training runs. Our approach can
achieve highly accurate (r2 ≈ .9) predictions of
model performance under substantial extrapolation in two different standard supervised learning
tasks and is accurate (r2 ≈ .83) on more challenging machine translation and question answering
tasks where many baselines achieve worse-thanrandom performance.

1. Introduction
The success of large scale machine learning systems depends critically on the quantity and quality of data used
during training, and we cannot expect these systems to succeed if there is not enough training data or if that data does
not cover all the phenomena contained in the test distribution (Ben-David et al., 2010). Knowing this, the designer
of a machine learning system might create multiple sources
of data, with each one targeting a different feature or domain that the model ought to do well on (Crammer et al.,
2007; Wang et al., 2019a). This data-driven design strategy
1
Work done while author was at Microsoft Semantic
Machines. Correspondence to: Tatsunori Hashimoto <vhashimotot@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

provides powerful tools to improve and evaluate model behavior, but also poses an additional challenge: what is the
right way to combine these various data sources? What is
the optimal data collection policy for a given budget?
Our goal is to answer these questions by quantifying the
relationship between data sources and model performance.
How well will our model do if we were to train it on n
samples using a data mixture (q1 . . . qk ) (where qi is the
fraction of the dataset coming from data source i). A precise
model for predicting model performance will allow us to
both identify the optimal data collection policy and quantify
cost-performance tradeoffs.
The starting point of our work is the recent observation
across speech, vision and text (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan
et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2020) that the empirical performance of a model is remarkably predictable, and follows
the log-linear formula
log(error) ≈ −α log(n) + C.

(1)

In this work, we expand this observation to the multi-datasource setting and conjecture that the slope of the log-linear
relationship (α) does not vary with data composition and
that the data composition only affects the intercept (C). We
prove this holds in a range of parametric and nonparametric
models.
The simple dependence of log-error on data size allows
us to reduce the problem of estimating model error into
a learning problem. Our approach is straightforward.
First, we hypothesize that model error follows V (n, q) :=
exp(−α log(n) + log(C(q))) for a simple parametric functional form C(q). Next, we fit this functional form to observed pairs of (n, q, error) that we obtain by subsampling
the dataset and re-training a model. We show that there
is a natural and simple choice of C(q) as a rational function that we derive from optimal experimental design for
linear regression, M-estimation, and nonparametric smoothing. The simple and parametric dependence of V (n, q) on
n allows us to use our resulting estimates to predict model
performance under substantial extrapolation in data size.
As a concrete example of how this may be useful, consider the Amazon sentiment prediction task (Mansour et al.,
2009), where we have the ability to collect review data from
multiple product categories. A practitioner may wish to un-

