On the Convergence of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with Stochastic Gradients

Difan Zou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), built based on
the Hamilton’s equation, has been witnessed great
success in sampling from high-dimensional posterior distributions. However, it also suffers from
computational inefficiency, especially for large
training datasets. One common idea to overcome
this computational bottleneck is using stochastic gradients, which only queries a mini-batch of
training data in each iteration. However, unlike
the extensive studies on the convergence analysis of HMC using full gradients, few works focus on establishing the convergence guarantees
of stochastic gradient HMC algorithms. In this
paper, we propose a general framework for proving the convergence rate of HMC with stochastic
gradient estimators, for sampling from strongly
log-concave and log-smooth target distributions.
We show that the convergence to the target distribution in 2-Wasserstein distance can be guaranteed as long as the stochastic gradient estimator
is unbiased and its variance is upper bounded
along the algorithm trajectory. We further apply
the proposed framework to analyze the convergence rates of HMC with four standard stochastic
gradient estimators: mini-batch stochastic gradient (SG), stochastic variance reduced gradient
(SVRG), stochastic average gradient (SAGA), and
control variate gradient (CVG). Theoretical results explain the inefficiency of mini-batch SG,
and suggest that SVRG and SAGA perform better in the tasks with high-precision requirements,
while CVG performs better for large dataset. Experiment results verify our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) methods have been
witnessed great success in many machine learning applica1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Correspondence to:
Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tions such as Bayesian inference, reinforcement learning,
and computer vision. In the past decades, many MCMC
algorithms, such as random walk Metropolis (Mengersen
et al., 1996), ball walk (Lovász & Simonovits, 1990), hit
and run (Smith, 1984), Langevin dynamics (LD) based algorithms (Langevin, 1908; Parisi, 1981), and Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987), have been invented and studied. Among them HMC has been recognized
as the most effective MCMC algorithm due to its rapid mixing rate and small discretization error. In practice, HMC has
been deployed as the default sampler in many open packages
such as Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017) and Tensorflow (Abadi
et al., 2016). In specific, HMC simulates the trajectory of a
particle in the Hamiltonian system, which is described by
the following Hamilton’s equation
dq(t)
∂H(q(t), p(t))
=
dt
∂p
dp(t)
∂H(q(t), p(t))
=−
,
dt
∂q

(1.1)

where q and p are position and momentum variables, and
H(q, p) is the so-called Hamiltonian function, which is
typically defined as the sum of the potential energy f (q)
and the kinetic energy kpk22 /2. In each step, HMC solves
(1.1) using the sample generated in the last step as the initial position q(0) and an independently generated Gaussian
random vector as the initial momentum p(0), then outputs
the solution at a certain time τ , i.e., q(τ ), as the next sample. It is well known that if the Hamilton’s equation can be
exactly solved and the potential energy function f (x) admits certain good properties, the sample sequence generated
by HMC asymptotically converges to the target distribution π ∝ exp(−f (x)) (Lee et al., 2018; Chen & Vempala,
2019). However, it is generally intractable to exactly solve
(1.1), and numerical integrators are needed to solve it approximately. One of the most popular HMC algorithms
adopts the leapfrog integrator for solving (1.1) following
by a Metropolis-Hasting (MH) correction step (Neal et al.,
2011). Aside from the algorithmic development, the convergence rate of HMC has also been extensively studied in
recent literature (Bou-Rabee et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018;
Mangoubi & Smith, 2017; Durmus et al., 2017; Mangoubi
& Vishnoi, 2018; Chen & Vempala, 2019; Chen et al., 2019),
which demonstrate its superior performance compared with
other MCMC methods.

