Autoregressive Denoising Diffusion Models for Multivariate Probabilistic Time
Series Forecasting
Kashif Rasul 1 Calvin Seward 1 Ingmar Schuster 1 Roland Vollgraf 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose TimeGrad, an autoregressive model for multivariate probabilistic time
series forecasting which samples from the data
distribution at each time step by estimating its gradient. To this end, we use diffusion probabilistic
models, a class of latent variable models closely
connected to score matching and energy-based
methods. Our model learns gradients by optimizing a variational bound on the data likelihood and
at inference time converts white noise into a sample of the distribution of interest through a Markov
chain using Langevin sampling. We demonstrate
experimentally that the proposed autoregressive
denoising diffusion model is the new state-of-theart multivariate probabilistic forecasting method
on real-world data sets with thousands of correlated dimensions. We hope that this method is a
useful tool for practitioners and lays the foundation for future research in this area.

1. Introduction
Classical time series forecasting methods such as those
in (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018) typically provide
univariate point forecasts and are trained individually on
each time series in a data set which does not scale with
millions of series. Deep learning based time series models
(Benidis et al., 2020) are popular alternatives due to their
end-to-end training of a global model, ease of incorporating exogenous covariates, and automatic feature extraction
abilities. The task of modeling uncertainties is of vital importance for downstream problems that use these forecasts
for (business) decision making. More often the individual
time series for a problem data set are statistically dependent
on each other. Ideally, deep learning models need to incorporate this inductive bias in the form of multivariate (Tsay,
2014) probabilistic methods to provide accurate forecasts.
1

Zalando Research, Mühlenstraße 25, 10243 Berlin, Germany.
Correspondence to: Kashif Rasul <kashif.rasul@zalando.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To model the full predictive distribution, methods typically
resort to tractable distribution classes or some type of lowrank approximations, regardless of the true data distribution.
To model the distribution in a general fashion, one needs
probabilistic methods with tractable likelihoods. Till now
several deep learning methods have been proposed for this
purpose such as autoregressive (van den Oord et al., 2016c)
or generative ones based on normalizing flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021) which can learn flexible models of high
dimensional multivariate time series. Even if the full likelihood is not tractable, one can often optimize a tractable
lower bound to the likelihood. But still, these methods require a certain structure in the functional approximators, for
example on the determinant of the Jacobian (Dinh et al.,
2017) for normalizing flows. Energy-based models (EBM)
(Hinton, 2002; LeCun et al., 2006) on the other hand have
a much less restrictive functional form. They approximate
the unnormalized log-probability so that density estimation
reduces to a non-linear regression problem. EBMs have
been shown to perform well in learning high dimensional
data distributions at the cost of being difficult to train (Song
& Kingma, 2021).
In this work, we propose autoregressive EBMs to solve the
multivariate probabilistic time series forecasting problem
via a model we call TimeGrad and show that not only are
we able to train such a model with all the inductive biases
of probabilistic time series forecasting, but this model performs exceptionally well when compared to other modern
methods. This autoregressive-EBM combination retains the
power of autoregressive models, such as good performance
in extrapolation into the future, with the flexibility of EBMs
as a general purpose high-dimensional distribution model,
while remaining computationally tractable.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we first
set up the notation and detail the EBM of (Ho et al., 2020)
which forms the basis of our distribution model. Section 3
introduces the multivariate probabilistic time series problem
and we detail the TimeGrad model. The experiments with
extensive results are detailed in Section 4. We cover related
work in Section 5 and conclude with some discussion in
Section 6.

