DORO: Distributional and Outlier Robust Optimization

Runtian Zhai * 1 Chen Dan * 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks involve subpopulation shift where the testing data distribution is
a subpopulation of the training distribution. For
such settings, a line of recent work has proposed
the use of a variant of empirical risk minimization(ERM) known as distributionally robust optimization (DRO). In this work, we apply DRO
to real, large-scale tasks with subpopulation shift,
and observe that DRO performs relatively poorly,
and moreover has severe instability. We identify one direct cause of this phenomenon: sensitivity of DRO to outliers in the datasets. To
resolve this issue, we propose the framework of
DORO, for Distributional and Outlier Robust Optimization. At the core of this approach is a refined risk function which prevents DRO from
overfitting to potential outliers. We instantiate
DORO for the Cressie-Read family of Rényi divergence, and delve into two specific instances
of this family: CVaR and χ2 -DRO. We theoretically prove the effectiveness of the proposed
method, and empirically show that DORO improves the performance and stability of DRO with
experiments on large modern datasets, thereby
positively addressing the open question raised by
(Hashimoto et al., 2018). Codes are available at
https://github.com/RuntianZ/doro.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning tasks require models to perform
well under distributional shift, where the training and the
testing data distributions are different. One type of distributional shift that arouses great research interest is subpopulation shift, where the testing distribution is a specific or
the worst-case subpopulation of the training distribution.
A wide range of tasks can be modeled as subpopulation
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Runtian Zhai <rzhai@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

shift problems, such as learning for algorithmic fairness
(Dwork et al., 2012; Barocas & Selbst, 2016) where we
want to test model’s performance on key demographic subpopulations, and learning with class imbalance (Japkowicz,
2000; Galar et al., 2011) where we train a classifier on an
imbalanced dataset with some minority classes having much
fewer samples than the others, and we want to maximize
the classifier’s accuracy on the minority classes instead of
its overall average accuracy.
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Namkoong &
Duchi, 2016; Duchi & Namkoong, 2018) refers to a family of learning algorithms that minimize the model’s loss
over the worst-case distribution in a neighborhood of the
observed training distribution. Generally speaking, DRO
trains the model on the worst-off subpopulation, and when
the subpopulation membership is unknown, it focuses on
the worst-off training instances, that is, the tail performance
of the model. Previous work has shown effectiveness of
DRO in subpopulation shift settings, such as algorithmic
fairness (Hashimoto et al., 2018) and class imbalance (Xu
et al., 2020).
However, in our empirical investigations, when we apply
DRO to real tasks on modern datasets, we observe that DRO
suffers from poor performance and severe instability during
training. The issue that DRO is sensitive to outliers has
been raised by several previous papers (Hashimoto et al.,
2018; Hu et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2020) . In this paper, we
study the cause of these problems with DRO, and develop
approaches to address them.
In particular, we identify and study one key factor that we
find directly leads to DRO’s sub-optimal behavior: DRO’s
sensitivity to outliers that widely exist in modern datasets.
In general, DRO maximizes a model’s tail performance by
putting more weights on the “harder” instances, i.e. those
which incur higher losses during training. On the one hand,
this allows DRO to focus its attention on worst-off subpopulations. But on the other hand, since outliers are intuitively “hard” instances that incur higher losses than inliers,
DRO is prone to assign large weights to outliers, resulting
in both a drop in performance, and training instability. To
provide empirical insights into how outliers affect DRO, in
Section 3 we conducted experiments examining how the performance of DRO changes as we removed or added outliers

