Recomposing the Reinforcement Learning Building Blocks with
Hypernetworks

Elad Sarafian* 1 Shai Keynan* 1 Sarit Kraus 1

Abstract

Equal contribution: authors’ order was randomly selected
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, RamatGan, Israel. Correspondence to: Elad Sarafian, Shai Keynan
<elad.sarafian@gmail.com, shai.keynan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Linear
layer

Block 1024

Res Block

Primary net

*

1

Block 512

Head

ReLU

Linear

ReLU

Linear
+

Dynamic
weights

Head

Head

weights

base
variable

Output
layer

The rapid development of deep neural-networks as generalpurpose function approximators has propelled the recent
Reinforcement Learning (RL) renaissance (Zai and Brown,
2020). RL algorithms have progressed in robustness, e.g.
from (Lillicrap et al., 2016) to (Fujimoto et al., 2018); exploration (Haarnoja et al., 2018); gradient sampling (Schulman
et al., 2017; 2015a); and off-policy learning (Fujimoto et al.,

Linear
Res Block

Block 256

Block

ReLU

1. Introduction

Res Block

Hidden
layer

The Reinforcement Learning (RL) building
blocks, i.e. Q-functions and policy networks, usually take elements from the cartesian product of
two domains as input. In particular, the input of
the Q-function is both the state and the action,
and in multi-task problems (Meta-RL) the policy
can take a state and a context. Standard architectures tend to ignore these variables’ underlying
interpretations and simply concatenate their features into a single vector. In this work, we argue
that this choice may lead to poor gradient estimation in actor-critic algorithms and high variance
learning steps in Meta-RL algorithms. To consider the interaction between the input variables,
we suggest using a Hypernetwork architecture
where a primary network determines the weights
of a conditional dynamic network. We show that
this approach improves the gradient approximation and reduces the learning step variance, which
both accelerates learning and improves the final
performance. We demonstrate a consistent improvement across different locomotion tasks and
different algorithms both in RL (TD3 and SAC)
and in Meta-RL (MAML and PEARL).

meta variable

gain

bias

Output

Dynamic net

Figure 1. The Hypernetwork architecture

2019; Kumar et al., 2019). Many actor-critic algorithms
have focused on improving the critic learning routines by
modifying the target value (Hasselt et al., 2016), which
enables more accurate and robust Q-function approximations. While this greatly improves the policy optimization
efficiency, the performance is still bound by the networks’
ability to represent Q-functions and policies. Such a constraint calls for studying and designing neural models suited
for the representation of these RL building blocks.
A critical insight in designing neural models for RL is the
reciprocity between the state and the action, which both
serve as the input for the Q-function. At the start, each
input can be processed individually according to its source
domain. For example, when s is a vector of images, it
is common to employ CNN models (Kaiser et al., 2019),
and when s or a are natural language words, each input
can be processed separately with embedding vectors (He
et al., 2016). The common practice in incorporating the
state and action learnable features into a single network
is to concatenate the two vectors and follow with MLP to
yield the Q-value (Schulman et al., 2017). In this work, we
argue that for actor-critic RL algorithms (Grondman et al.,
2012), such an off-the-shelf method could be significantly
improved with Hypernetworks.
In actor-critic methods, for each state, sampled from the

