A Regret Minimization Approach to Iterative Learning Control

Naman Agarwal 1 Elad Hazan 1 2 Anirudha Majumdar 1 2 Karan Singh 3

Abstract
We consider the setting of iterative learning control, or model-based policy learning in the presence of uncertain, time-varying dynamics. In
this setting, we propose a new performance metric, planning regret, which replaces the standard
stochastic uncertainty assumptions with worst
case regret. Based on recent advances in nonstochastic control, we design a new iterative algorithm for minimizing planning regret that is
more robust to model mismatch and uncertainty.
We provide theoretical and empirical evidence
that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing
methods on several benchmarks.

of factors. The primary challenge we focus on in this paper is the existence of unmodeled deviations from nominal
dynamics, and external disturbances acting on the system.
Such disturbances may either be random or potentially even
adversarial. In this paper we adopt a regret minimization approach coupled with a recent paradigm called non-stochastic
control to tackle this problem in generality. Specifically, consider a time-varying dynamical system given by the equation
xt+1 = ft (xt , ut ) + wt ,

(1.1)

where xt is the state, ut is the control input, and wt is an
arbitrary disturbance at time t. Given a horizon T , the
performance of a control algorithm A may be judged via
the aggregate cost it suffers on a cost function sequence
A
c1 , . . . cT along its state-action trajectory (xA
1 , u1 , . . . ):

1. Introduction

T

Consider a robotic system learning to perform a novel task,
e.g., a quadrotor learning to fly to a specified goal, a manipulator learning to grasp a new object, or a fixed-wing
airplane learning to perform a new maneuver. We are particularly interested in settings where (i) the task requires one
to plan over a given time horizon, (ii) we have access to an
inaccurate model of the world (e.g., due to unpredictable
external disturbances such as wind gusts or misspecification
of physical parameters such as masses, inertias, and friction coefficients), and (iii) the robot is allowed to iteratively
refine its control policy via multiple executions (i.e., rollouts) on the real world. Motivated by applications where
real-world rollouts are expensive and time-consuming, our
goal in this paper is to learn to perform the given task as
rapidly as possible. More precisely, given a cost function
that specifies the task, our goal is to learn a low-cost control
policy using a small number of rollouts.
The problem described above is challenging due to a number
*
1
Equal contribution
Google AI Princeton, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
3
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence
to: Naman Agarwal <namanagarwal@google.com>, Elad
Hazan <ehazan@cs.princeton.edu>, Anirudha Majumdar
<ani.majumdar@princeton.edu>, Karan Singh <karansingh@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

J(A|w1:T ) =


1X
A
ct xA
t , ut .
T t=1

For deterministic systems, an optimal open-loop control
sequence u1 . . . uT can be chosen to minimize the cost sequence. The presence of unanticipated disturbances often
necessitates the superposition of a closed-loop correction
policy π to obtain meaningful performance. Such closedloop policies can modify the open-loop control sequence
u1 . . . uT to u0t = π(u1:t , x1:t ) which is a function of the
observed history till time t, and facilitate adaptation to realized disturbances. To capture this, we define a comparative
performance metric, which we call Planning Regret. In an
episodic setting, for every episode i, an algorithm A adaptively selects control inputs while the rollout is performed
under the influence of an arbitrary disturbance sequence
i
w1:T
. Planning regret is the difference between the total
cost of the algorithm’s actions and that of the retrospectively
optimal open-loop plan coupled with episode-specific optimal closed-loop policies (from a policy class Π). Regret,
therefore, is the relative cost of not knowing the to-be realized disturbances in advance. Formally for a total of N
rollouts, each of horizon T , it is defined as:
Planning Regret
N
X
i=1

i
J(A|w1:T
)− min
?
u1:T

N
X
i=1

t
min J(u?1:T , πi? |wi,1:T
)

πi? ∈Π

