CURI: A Benchmark for Productive Concept Learning under Uncertainty

Ramakrishna Vedantam 1 Arthur Szlam 1 Maximilian Nickel 1 Ari Morcos 1 Brenden Lake 1 2

Abstract
Humans can learn and reason under substantial
uncertainty in a space of inﬁnitely many compositional, productive concepts. For example, if a
scene with two blue spheres qualiﬁes as “daxy,”
one can reason that the underlying concept may
require scenes to have “only blue spheres” or
“only spheres” or “only two objects.” In contrast,
standard benchmarks for compositional reasoning do not explicitly capture a notion of reasoning under uncertainty or evaluate compositional
concept acquisition. We introduce a new benchmark, Compositional Reasoning Under Uncertainty (CURI) that instantiates a series of fewshot, meta-learning tasks in a productive concept
space to evaluate different aspects of systematic
generalization under uncertainty, including splits
that test abstract understandings of disentangling,
productive generalization, learning boolean operations, variable binding, etc. Importantly, we also
contribute a model-independent “compositionality gap” to evaluate the difﬁculty of generalizing
out-of-distribution along each of these axes, allowing objective comparison of the difﬁculty of
each compositional split. Evaluations across a
range of modeling choices and splits reveal substantial room for improvement on the proposed
benchmark.

1. Introduction
Human concept learning is more ﬂexible than today’s AI systems. Human conceptual knowledge is productive: people
can understand and generate novel concepts via compositions of existing concepts (“an apartment dog”) (Murphy,
2002), unlike standard machine classiﬁers that are limited
to a ﬁxed set of classes (“dog”, “cat”, etc.). Further, humans
can induce goal-based, “ad hoc” categories such as “things
1
Facebook AI Research (FAIR), USA 2 New York University
(NYU), USA. Correspondence to: Ramakrishna Vedantam <ramav@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to take from one’s apartment in a ﬁre” (children, dogs, keepsakes, etc.) (Barsalou, 1983). Thus, unlike AI systems,
humans reason seamlessly in large, essentially “unbounded”
concept spaces.

While popular compositional reasoning benchmarks such as
CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017) for visual question answering and Ravens Progressive Matrices (PGM) (Barrett et al.,
2018) appear to have large, unbounded concept spaces, the
tasks they instantiate miss a key feature of human concept
learning, namely our ability to deal with uncertainty. For
example, consider the set of images labelled “A” (green border) in Figure 1b. Given this set, the underlying concept is
ambiguous, and could either be “All objects are blue and the
x-coordinate of all objects is greater than the y-coordinate”
or “All objects are blue and there exists an object whose
x-coordinate is greater than the y-coordinate”. As humans,
we are able to conceive of these alternatives and make predictions that place more weight on the former, more speciﬁc
concept (Figure 1b, bottom) (Tenenbaum & Grifﬁths, 2001;
Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007; Goodman et al., 2008; Piantadosi
et al., 2016). In contrast, neither CLEVR nor PGM requires
reasoning about alternative, equally-consistent concepts and
their relative generality when making predictions.
[Ari:
PGM
does kind o
We address this gap in the literature by proposing the Comrequire
rea
positional Reasoning Under Uncertainty (CURI) benchmark
soning
abou
to study how modern machine learning systems can learn
alternative con
concepts spanning a large, productively deﬁned space (Figcepts becaus
ure 1a) while dealing with the entailed uncertainty. In purof the multipl
suit of this goal, we instantiate a meta-learning task where a
choice
setup
model must reason in a compositional space about alternabut deﬁnitel
tive concepts, and make predictions taking such uncertainty
doesn’t involv
into account. A signature of productivity in human thought
any sense o
is our ability to handle novel combinations of known, atomic
using a prior.
components. Thus, in CURI we instantiate a variety of difthink we shoul
ferent train-test splits that involve novel combinations of
emphasize th
intrinsic properties (e.g. color, shape) with boolean oplatter or modif
erators, counting, disentangling (Higgins et al., 2018) of
to make clea
extrinsic (e.g. object location) and intrinsic (e.g. object mathat that’s th
terial) object properties, and a novel test of variable binding
distinction.]
in the context of compositional learning.
Compositional Reasoning Under Uncertainty (CURI)
Task. Concretely, the CURI task tests few-shot learning
of relational concepts in a large compositional conceptual

