Selecting Data Augmentation for Simulating Interventions

Maximilian Ilse 1 Jakub M. Tomczak 2 Patrick Forré 1

Abstract
Machine learning models trained with purely observational data and the principle of empirical risk
minimization (Vapnik, 1992) can fail to generalize
to unseen domains. In this paper, we focus on the
case where the problem arises through spurious
correlation between the observed domains and
the actual task labels. We find that many domain
generalization methods do not explicitly take this
spurious correlation into account. Instead, especially in more application-oriented research areas
like medical imaging or robotics, data augmentation techniques that are based on heuristics are
used to learn domain invariant features. To bridge
the gap between theory and practice, we develop
a causal perspective on the problem of domain
generalization. We argue that causal concepts
can be used to explain the success of data augmentation by describing how they can weaken
the spurious correlation between the observed domains and the task labels. We demonstrate that
data augmentation can serve as a tool for simulating interventional data. We use these theoretical
insights to derive a simple algorithm that is able
to select data augmentation techniques that will
lead to better domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Despite recent advancements in machine learning fueled
by deep learning, studies like Azulay & Weiss (2019)
have shown that deep learning methods may not generalize to inputs from outside of their training distribution. In
safety-critical fields like medical imaging, robotics and, selfdriving cars, however, it is essential that machine learning
models are robust to changes in the environment. Without
the ability to generalize, machine learning models cannot
be safely deployed in the real world.
*

Equal contribution 1 Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam 2 Computational Intelligence Group, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Maximilian Ilse
<m.ilse@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the field of domain generalization, one tries to find a representation that generalizes across different environments,
called domains, each with a different shift of the input. This
problem is especially challenging when changes in the domain are spuriously associated with changes in the actual
task labels. This can, for instance, happen when the data
gathering process is biased. An example is given by Arjovsky et al. (2019): If we consider a dataset of images
of cows and camels in their natural habitat, then there is a
strong correlation between the type of animal and the landscape in the image, e.g., a camel standing in a desert. If we
now train a machine learning model to predict the animal
in a given image, the model is prone to exploit the spurious
correlation between the type of animal and the type of landscape. As a result, the model can fail to recognize a camel
standing in a green pasture or a cow standing in a desert.
In recent years, a large corpus of methods designed to learn
representations that will generalize across domains has been
formulated. While the proposed methods are able to achieve
good results on a variety of domain generalization benchmarks, the majority of them lack a theoretical foundation.
In the worst-case scenario, these methods enforce the wrong
type of invariance, as proven in Appendix A.6.1 . Interestingly, we find that especially in more applied fields, like
medical imaging and robotics, researchers have found a practical way of dealing with the spurious correlation between
domains and the actual task. Data augmentation in combination with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik,
1992) is used to enforce invariance of the machine learning
model with respect to changes in the domain. Hereby, prior
knowledge is used to guide the selection of appropriate data
augmentation. In Appendix A.7.1, we give a detailed summary of two successful applications of data augmentation
in the context of domain generalization.
However, the success of data augmentation is often described in vague terms like ’artificially expanding labeled training datasets’ (Li, 2020) and ’reduce overfitting’
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012). In this paper, we present a causal
perspective on data augmentation in the context of domain
generalization and contribute to the field in the following
manner:
• First, we introduce the concept of interventionaugmentation equivariance that formalizes the rela-

