DriftSurf: Stable-State / Reactive-State Learning under Concept Drift

Ashraf Tahmasbi * 1 Ellango Jothimurugesan * 2 Srikanta Tirthapura 1 3 Phillip B. Gibbons 2

Abstract
When learning from streaming data, a change in
the data distribution, also known as concept drift,
can render a previously-learned model inaccurate
and require training a new model. We present an
adaptive learning algorithm that extends previous
drift-detection-based methods by incorporating
drift detection into a broader stable-state/reactivestate process. The advantage of our approach is
that we can use aggressive drift detection in the
stable state to achieve a high detection rate, but
mitigate the false positive rate of standalone drift
detection via a reactive state that reacts quickly to
true drifts while eliminating most false positives.
The algorithm is generic in its base learner and
can be applied across a variety of supervised learning problems. Our theoretical analysis shows that
the risk of the algorithm is (i) statistically better
than standalone drift detection and (ii) competitive to an algorithm with oracle knowledge of
when (abrupt) drifts occur. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets with concept drifts confrm
our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Learning from streaming data is an ongoing process in
which a model is continuously updated as new training
data arrive. We focus on the problem of concept drift, which
refers to an unexpected change in the distribution of data
over time. The objective is high prediction accuracy at
each time step on test data from the current distribution. To
achieve this goal, a learning algorithm should adapt quickly
whenever drift occurs by focusing on the most recent data
points that represent the new concept, while also, in the absence of drift, optimizing over all the past data points from
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA. 2 Computer
Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. 3 Apple Inc, Cupertino, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ashraf Tahmasbi <tahmasbi@iastate.edu>, Ellango
Jothimurugesan <ejothimu@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the current distribution (for statistical accuracy). The latter
has greater importance in the setting we consider where
data points may be stored and revisited to achieve accuracy
greater than what can be obtained in a single pass. Moreover, computational effciency of the learning algorithm is
critical to keep pace with the continuous arrival of new data.
In a survey from Gama et al. (Gama et al., 2014), concept
drift between time steps t0 and t1 is defned as a change in
the joint distribution of examples: pt0 (X, y) 6= pt1 (X, y).
Gama et al. categorize drifts in several ways, distinguishing
between real drift that is a change in p(y|X) and virtual drift
(also known as covariate drift) that is a change only in p(X)
but not p(y|X). Drift is also categorized as either abrupt
when the change happens across one time step, or gradual
if there is a transition period between the two concepts.
A learning algorithm that reacts (well) to concept drift is
referred to as an adaptive algorithm. In contrast, an oblivious algorithm, which optimizes the empirical risk over all
data points observed so far under the assumption that the
data are i.i.d., performs poorly in the presence of drift. One
major class of adaptive algorithms is drift detection, which
includes DDM (Gama et al., 2004), EDDM (Baena-García
et al., 2006), ADWIN (Bifet & Gavaldà, 2007), PERM
(Harel et al., 2014), FHDDM (Pesaranghader & Viktor,
2016), and MDDM (Pesaranghader et al., 2018). Drift detection tests commonly work by tracking the prediction
accuracy of a model over time, and signal that a drift has
occurred whenever the accuracy degrades by more than a
signifcant threshold. After a drift is signaled, the previouslylearned model can be discarded and replaced with a model
trained solely on the data going forward.
There are several key challenges with using drift detection.
Different tests are preferred depending on whether a drift
is abrupt or gradual, and most drift detection tests have a
user-defned parameter that governs a trade-off between the
detection accuracy and speed (Gama et al., 2014); choosing
the right test and the right parameters is hard when the types
of drift that will occur are not known in advance. There is
also a signifcant cost in prediction accuracy when a false
positive results in the discarding of a long-trained model
and data that are still relevant. Furthermore, even when drift
is accurately detected, not all drifts require restarting with a
new model. Drift detection can trigger following a virtual

