Measuring Robustness in Deep Learning Based Compressive Sensing

Mohammad Zalbagi Darestani 1 Akshay S. Chaudhari 2 Reinhard Heckel 1 3

Abstract
Deep neural networks give state-of-the-art accuracy for reconstructing images from few and noisy
measurements, a problem arising for example in
accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
However, recent works have raised concerns that
deep-learning-based image reconstruction methods are sensitive to perturbations and are less robust than traditional methods: Neural networks
(i) may be sensitive to small, yet adversariallyselected perturbations, (ii) may perform poorly
under distribution shifts, and (iii) may fail to recover small but important features in an image. In
order to understand the sensitivity to such perturbations, in this work, we measure the robustness
of different approaches for image reconstruction
including trained and un-trained neural networks
as well as traditional sparsity-based methods. We
find, contrary to prior works, that both trained
and un-trained methods are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations. Moreover, both trained and
un-trained methods tuned for a particular dataset
suffer very similarly from distribution shifts. Finally, we demonstrate that an image reconstruction method that achieves higher reconstruction
quality, also performs better in terms of accurately
recovering fine details. Our results indicate that
the state-of-the-art deep-learning-based image reconstruction methods provide improved performance than traditional methods without compromising robustness.

1. Introduction
Neural networks outperform traditional (e.g., sparsitybased) methods in a variety of image reconstruction tasks
across common metrics of image quality. For instance, con1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University 2 Department of Radiology and Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University 3 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: Mohammad Zalbagi Darestani <mz35@rice.edu>,
Akshay S. Chaudhari <akshaysc@stanford.edu>, Reinhard Heckel
<rh43@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sider the compressive sensing problem arising in magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), where the goal is to reconstruct
a diagnostic quality image using linear under-sampled measurements for accelerating the MRI scans. A large body
of literature shows that neural networks can enable higher
reconstruction quality and faster reconstruction computations for MRI compared to clinically utilized traditional
sparsity-based reconstruction methods (Hammernik et al.,
2018; Zbontar et al., 2018; Knoll et al., 2020; Sriram et al.,
2020a; Wang et al., 2019; Schlemper et al., 2017; Putzky
& Welling, 2019; Arora et al., 2020; Zalbagi Darestani &
Heckel, 2020).
However, recent works have raised robustness concerns
about neural-network-based image recovery (Cohen et al.,
2018; Huang et al., 2018; Antun et al., 2020; Gottschling
et al., 2020; Genzel et al., 2020). Specifically, Antun et al.
(2020) demonstrated that small, adversarially-selected perturbations in the under-sampled measurements may result in
significant reconstruction artifacts. Based on those findings,
Antun et al. (2020) and Gottschling et al. (2020) concluded
that despite providing worse reconstruction quality than neural networks, traditional sparsity-based compressive sensing
methods tend to be more robust to adversarial perturbations.
Moreover, the results from the fastMRI challenge, a competition for improving the performance of image reconstruction
systems for accelerated MRI, have shown that while all
top performing deep networks yield high scores according
to various image quality metrics, there is also a potential
to miss small, clinically relevant pathologies (Knoll et al.,
2020, Fig. 3), which may lead to false-negative diagnoses.
These findings, however, do not address the question
whether the identified robustness concerns are specific to
training a network for image reconstruction, or whether untrained neural networks and traditional un-trained sparsitybased reconstruction methods are similarly sensitive to perturbations.
In addition, it is unknown whether neural networks for image reconstruction are sensitive to various distribution shifts,
which can commonly arise in clinical practice. Natural
distribution shifts have shown to degrade performance in
learning-based systems, for example for classification problems (Recht et al., 2019; Taori et al., 2020; Miller et al.,
2021; Yadav & Bottou, 2019) and for question answering
models in natural language processing (Miller et al., 2020)).

