Randomized Dimensionality Reduction for Facility Location and
Single-Linkage Clustering

Shyam Narayanan * 1 Sandeep Silwal * 1 Piotr Indyk 1 Or Zamir 2

Abstract
Random dimensionality reduction is a versatile tool for speeding up algorithms for highdimensional problems. We study its application
to two clustering problems: the facility location
problem, and the single-linkage hierarchical clustering problem, which is equivalent to computing the minimum spanning tree. We show that
if we project the input pointset X onto a random
d = O(dX )-dimensional subspace (where dX is
the doubling dimension of X), then the optimum
facility location cost in the projected space approximates the original cost up to a constant factor.
We show an analogous statement for minimum
spanning tree, but with the dimension d having
an extra log log n term and the approximation factor being arbitrarily close to 1. Furthermore, we
extend these results to approximating solutions
instead of just their costs. Lastly, we provide
experimental results to validate the quality of solutions and the speedup due to the dimensionality
reduction. Unlike several previous papers studying this approach in the context of k-means and
k-medians, our dimension bound does not depend
on the number of clusters but only on the intrinsic
dimensionality of X.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental problem with many applications
in machine learning, statistics, and data analysis. Although
many formulations of clustering are NP-hard in the worst
case, many heuristics and approximation algorithms exist
and are widely deployed in practice. Unfortunately, many of
*

Equal contribution 1 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Institute of Advanced Study,
Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Shyam Narayanan
<shyamsn@mit.edu>, Sandeep Silwal <silwal@mit.edu>, Piotr
Indyk <indyk@mit.edu>, Or Zamir <orzamir@ias.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

those algorithms suffer from large running times, especially
if the input data sets are high-dimensional.
In order to improve the performance of clustering algorithms
in high-dimensional spaces, a popular approach is to project
the input point set into a lower-dimensional space and perform the clustering in the projected space. Reducing the
dimension (say, from m to d  m) has multiple practical and theoretical advantages, including (i) lower storage
space, which is linear in d as opposed to m; (ii) lower running time of the clustering procedure - the running times
are often dominated by distance computations, which take
time linear in the dimension; and (iii) versatility: one can
use any algorithm or its implementation to cluster the data
in the reduced dimension. Because of its numerous benefits,
dimensionality reduction as a tool for improving algorithm
performance has been studied extensively, leading to many
theoretical tradeoffs between the projected dimension and
the solution quality. A classic result in this area is the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma (1984) which (roughly)
states that a random projection of a dataset X ⊆ Rm of
size n onto a dimension of size O(log n) approximately
preserves all pairwise distances. This tool has been subsequently applied to many clustering and other problems (see
(Naor, 2018) and references therein).
Although the JL lemma is known to be tight (Larsen &
Nelson, 2017) in general, better tradeoffs are possible for
specific clustering problems. Over the last few years, several
works (Boutsidis et al., 2010; Cohen et al., 2015; Becchetti
et al., 2019; Makarychev et al., 2019) have shown that combining random dimensionality reduction with k-means leads
to better guarantees than implied by the JL lemma. In particular, a recent paper by Makarychev, Makarychev, and
Razenshteyn (2019) shows that to preserve the k-means cost
up to an arbitrary accuracy, it suffices to project the input
set X onto a dimension of size O(log k), as opposed to
O(log n) guaranteed by the JL lemma. Since k can be much
smaller than n, the improvement to the dimension bound
can be substantial. However, when k is comparable to n,
the improvement is limited. This issue is particularly salient
for clustering problems with a variable number of clusters,
where no a priori bound on the number of clusters exists.
In this paper we study randomized dimensionality reduction

