Voice2Series: Reprogramming Acoustic Models for Time Series Classification

Chao-Han Huck Yang 1 Yun-Yun Tsai 2 Pin-Yu Chen 3

Abstract
Learning to classify time series with limited data
is a practical yet challenging problem. Current
methods are primarily based on hand-designed
feature extraction rules or domain-specific data
augmentation. Motivated by the advances in
deep speech processing models and the fact
that voice data are univariate temporal signals,
in this paper we propose Voice2Series (V2S),
a novel end-to-end approach that reprograms
acoustic models for time series classification,
through input transformation learning and output
label mapping. Leveraging the representation
learning power of a large-scale pre-trained speech
processing model, on 30 different time series
tasks we show that V2S either outperforms or is
tied with state-of-the-art methods on 20 tasks, and
improves their average accuracy by 1.84%. We
further provide a theoretical justification of V2S
by proving its population risk is upper bounded
by the source risk and a Wasserstein distance
accounting for feature alignment via reprogramming. Our results offer new and effective means
to time series classification. Our code is available
at https://github.com/huckiyang/
Voice2Series-Reprogramming.

1. Introduction
Machine learning for time series data has rich applications
in a variety of domains, ranging from medical diagnosis (e.g., physiological signals such as electrocardiogram
(ECG) (Kampouraki et al., 2008)), finance/weather forecasting, to industrial measurements (e.g., sensors and Internet of
Things (IoT)). It is worth noting that one common practical
challenge that prevents time series learning tasks from using
modern large-scale deep learning models is data scarcity.

target

reprogrammed

Reprogram Layer

xt

(a)

source output

Pretrained AM

x t’

(b)

target output

Label Mapping

ys

(c)

yt

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the proposed Voice2Series
(V2S) framework: (a) trainable reprogram layer; (b) pre-trained
acoustic model (AM); (c) source-target label mapping function.

While many efforts (Fawaz et al., 2018; Ye & Dai, 2018; Kashiparekh et al., 2019) have been made to advance transfer
learning and model adaptation for time series classification, a principled approach is lacking and its performance
may not be comparable to conventional statistical learning
benchmarks (Langkvist et al., 2014).
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel approach, named
voice to series (V2S), for time series classification by reprogramming a pre-trained acoustic model (AM), such as a
spoken-terms recognition model. Unlike general time series
tasks, modern AMs are trained on massive human voice
datasets and are considered as a mature technology widely
deployed in intelligent electronic devices. The rationale of
V2S lies in the fact that voice data can be viewed as univariate temporal signals, and therefore a well-trained AM is
likely to be reprogrammed as a powerful feature extractor
for solving time series classification tasks. Figure 1 shows
a schematic illustration of the proposed V2S framework,
including (a) a trainable reprogram layer, (b) a pre-trained
AM, and (c) a specified label mapping function between
source (human voice) and target (time series) labels.

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Columbia University 3 IBM Research.
Correspondence to:
Chao-Han
Huck Yang <huckiyang@gatech.edu>, Pin-Yu Chen <pinyu.chen@ibm.com>.

Model reprogramming was firstly introduced in (Elsayed
et al., 2019). The authors show that one can learn a universal
input transformation function to reprogram a pre-trained
ImageNet model (without changing the model weights) for
solving MNIST/CIFAR-10 image classification and simple
vision-based counting tasks with high accuracy. It can be
viewed as an efficient approach for transfer learning with
limited data, and it has achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA)
results on biomedical image classification tasks (Tsai et al.,
2020). However, despite the empirical success, little is
known on how and why reprogramming can be successful.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Different from existing works, this paper aims to address
the following three fundamental questions: (i) Can acous-

1

