Training Adversarially Robust Sparse Networks via Bayesian
Connectivity Sampling

Ozan Özdenizci 1 2 Robert Legenstein 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been shown to be
susceptible to adversarial attacks. This lack of
adversarial robustness is even more pronounced
when models are compressed in order to meet
hardware limitations. Hence, if adversarial robustness is an issue, training of sparsely connected
networks necessitates considering adversarially
robust sparse learning. Motivated by the efficient
and stable computational function of the brain in
the presence of a highly dynamic synaptic connectivity structure, we propose an intrinsically sparse
rewiring approach to train neural networks with
state-of-the-art robust learning objectives under
high sparsity. Importantly, in contrast to previously proposed pruning techniques, our approach
satisfies global connectivity constraints throughout robust optimization, i.e., it does not require
dense pre-training followed by pruning. Based
on a Bayesian posterior sampling principle, a network rewiring process simultaneously learns the
sparse connectivity structure and the robustnessaccuracy trade-off based on the adversarial learning objective. Although our networks are sparsely
connected throughout the whole training process,
our experimental benchmark evaluations show
that their performance is superior to recently proposed robustness-aware network pruning methods
which start from densely connected networks.

1. Introduction
Despite their widely-acknowledged success and deployment
in various application fields, deep neural networks (DNNs)
are known to be highly susceptible to intentionally crafted
adversarial examples that cause incorrect decision making.
1

Graz University of Technology, Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, Graz, Austria 2 Silicon Austria Labs, TU Graz - SAL
Dependable Embedded Systems Lab, Graz, Austria. Correspondence to: Ozan Özdenizci <ozan.ozdenizci@igi.tugraz.at>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Seminal work by (Szegedy et al., 2013) showed that such
adversarial examples can be created via perturbations that
are hardly perceptible to humans, which exposed important
weaknesses of standard deep learning algorithms. Numerous studies explored adversarial defense methods to such
threats. Notably successful approaches rely on harnessing
adversarial examples during model training (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018), and its immediate extensions with robust training losses using regularization
schemes to diminish the generalization gap based on an
inherent robustness-accuracy trade-off (Tsipras et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).
Recent work further suggests better robustness with increasing network width and complexity (Madry et al., 2018;
Nakkiran, 2019; Wu et al., 2020). Deployment of such large
models, however, is challenging in resource-constrained
settings. Thus, under consideration of memory and computational demand concerns, this highlights a need to consider
achieving model compactness and sparsity simultaneously
with adversarial robustness in DNNs.
There has been a growing interest in tackling the problem of
achieving robustness against adversarial attacks with very
sparsely connected neural networks (cf. Section 2). Success
was so far demonstrated by robustness-aware pruning of
adversarially trained dense networks (Sehwag et al., 2019;
2020). Importantly these studies only considered naive “endto-end sparse learning” baseline comparisons with a random
and static sparse network initialization. Subsequently, these
intrinsically sparse models were found to yield inferior robustness than compressed models obtained with robustnessaware pruning methods. However pruning an adversarially
trained DNN does not allow robust training under strict sparsity constraints. To date, no effective method existed for
robust end-to-end sparse training to meet such limitations,
where the challenge is to enable sparse network connections
to rearrange during training such that a well-performing
robust and sparse model can be configured.
In this paper we present a method for end-to-end sparse
training of neural networks with robust adversarial training objectives. Our approach is motivated by the dynamic
synaptic connectivity structure in the brain, which maintains
its stable computational function in the presence of an under-

