Relative Positional Encoding for Transformers with Linear Complexity

Antoine Liutkus * 1 Ondřej Cı́fka * 2 Shih-Lun Wu 3 4 5 Umut Şimşekli 6 Yi-Hsuan Yang 3 5 Gaël Richard 2

Abstract
Recent advances in Transformer models allow
for unprecedented sequence lengths, due to linear
space and time complexity. In the meantime, relative positional encoding (RPE) was proposed as
beneficial for classical Transformers and consists
in exploiting lags instead of absolute positions
for inference. Still, RPE is not available for the
recent linear-variants of the Transformer, because
it requires the explicit computation of the attention matrix, which is precisely what is avoided by
such methods. In this paper, we bridge this gap
and present Stochastic Positional Encoding as a
way to generate PE that can be used as a replacement to the classical additive (sinusoidal) PE and
provably behaves like RPE. The main theoretical
contribution is to make a connection between positional encoding and cross-covariance structures of
correlated Gaussian processes. We illustrate the
performance of our approach on the Long-Range
Arena benchmark and on music generation.

1. Introduction
1.1. Linear Complexity Transformers
The Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a new
kind of neural network that quickly became state-of-theart in many application domains, including the processing
of natural language (He et al., 2020), images (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020), audio (Huang et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2020)
or bioinformatics (AlQuraishi, 2019) to mention just a few.
The core, novel component of the Transformer is the attention layer. It computes M output values ym from N
input values vn , all being vectors of an arbitrary dimen*
Equal contribution 1 Inria, Zenith Team, UMR LIRMM, Univ.
Montpellier, France 2 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, France 3 Research Center for IT Innovation, Academia
Sinica, Taiwan 4 National Taiwan University, Taiwan 5 Taiwan AI
Labs, Taiwan 6 INRIA – Département d’Informatique de l’École
Normale Supérieure – PSL Research University, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Liutkus Antoine <antoine.liutkus@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of attention patterns observed in the Performers trained for pop piano music generation (section 3.2) at inference time, for sequence length M = N = 3 072 while training
sequences have length 2 048. (left) Absolute PE. (middle) Sinusoidal SPE. (right) Convolutional SPE. Note that SPE never
requires computing these full attention patterns.

sion. Following classical non-parametric regression principles (Nadaraya, 1964; Watson, 1964), it consists in a simple
weighted sum:
P
n amn vn
ym = P
,
(1)
n amn
where each attention coefficient amn ∈ R+ – gathered in
the M × N matrix A – indicates how important the value
vn is in the computation of the output ym .
One of the main contributions of the Transformer is an original method to compute these coefficients. D-dimensional
feature vectors kn and qm are attached to all items of the
input and output sequences and are called keys and queries,
respectively. Gathering them in the N × D and M × D
matrices K and Q, we get softmax dot-product attention as:

.√ 
A = exp QK>
D ≡ [amn = K(qm , kn )]mn , (2)
where the function exp is applied element-wise. The righthand side in (2) is a generalization introduced by Tsai et al.
(2019) and Choromanski et al. (2020), where K is a kernel
function. Parameters pertain to how keys kn , values vn and
queries qm are obtained from the raw sequences, usually by
time-distributed fully connected layers.
The original Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017)
explicitly computes the attention matrix A, leading to a
O(M N ) complexity that prevents it from scaling to very
long sequence lengths. Although this is not necessarily a
problem when sequence lengths are barely on the order of
a few hundreds, as in some language processing tasks, it is

