Towards Understanding and Mitigating Social Biases in Language Models

Paul Pu Liang 1 Chiyu Wu 1 Louis-Philippe Morency 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1

Abstract
Warning: this paper contains model outputs that
may be offensive or upsetting.
As machine learning methods are deployed in realworld settings such as healthcare, legal systems,
and social science, it is crucial to recognize how
they shape social biases and stereotypes in these
sensitive decision-making processes. Among such
real-world deployments are large-scale pretrained
language models (LMs) that can be potentially
dangerous in manifesting undesirable representational biases - harmful biases resulting from
stereotyping that propagate negative generalizations involving gender, race, religion, and other
social constructs. As a step towards improving
the fairness of LMs, we carefully define several
sources of representational biases before proposing new benchmarks and metrics to measure them.
With these tools, we propose steps towards mitigating social biases during text generation. Our
empirical results and human evaluation demonstrate effectiveness in mitigating bias while retaining crucial contextual information for highfidelity text generation, thereby pushing forward
the performance-fairness Pareto frontier.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tools for processing large datasets are increasingly deployed in real-world scenarios such as healthcare (Velupillai et al., 2018), legal systems (Dale, 2019),
and computational social science (Bamman et al., 2016).
However, recent work has shown that discriminative models including pretrained word and sentence embeddings
reflect and propagate social biases present in training corpora (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Caliskan et al., 2017; Lauscher
and Glavaš, 2019; Swinger et al., 2019). Further usages of
such approaches can amplify biases and unfairly discriminate against users, particularly those from disadvantaged
social groups (Barocas and Selbst, 2016; Sun et al., 2019;
1

Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Paul Pu Liang
<pliang@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Zhao et al., 2017). More recently, language models (LMs)
are increasingly used in real-world applications such as text
generation (Radford et al., 2019), dialog systems (Zhang
et al., 2020), recommendation systems (Shakespeare et al.,
2020), and search engines (Baeza-Yates, 2016; Otterbacher
et al., 2018). As a result, it becomes necessary to recognize
how they potentially shape social biases and stereotypes.
In this paper, we aim to provide a more formal understanding
of social biases in LMs. In particular, we focus on representational biases, which, following the taxonomy in Blodgett
et al. (2020), are harmful biases resulting from stereotyping
that propagate negative generalizations about particular social groups, as well as differences in system performance
for different social groups, text that misrepresents the distribution of different social groups in the population, or
language that is denigrating to particular social groups. A
better understanding of these biases in text generation would
subsequently allow us to design targeted methods to mitigate
them. We begin by summarizing three inherent difficulties
in defining and measuring biases during text generation:
P1 Granularity: In prior work studying biases in embeddings, social biases are measured using a set of association
tests between predefined social constructs (e.g., gender and
racial terms) and social professions (e.g., occupations, academic fields). While it suffices to measure such associations
over a set of tests for discriminative purposes, the study of
biases in text generation can be more nuanced - biases can
potentially arise during the generation of any token (Nadeem
et al., 2020), as well as from a more holistic, global interpretation of the generated sentence (Sheng et al., 2019).
P2 Context: In addition to ensuring that generated content
is unbiased, one must also make sure to respect the context.
Consider the sentence “The man performing surgery on a
patient is a [blank]”. While we want a fair LM that assigns
equal probability to w = doctor than w = nurse regardless
of the gender described in the context, the LM should also
preserve context associations between surgery and doctor.
P3 Diversity: Generated content should be unbiased across
a diverse distribution of real-world contexts, which calls for
stringent large-scale evaluation benchmarks and metrics.
Our first contribution is therefore to disentangle two sources
of representational biases that may arise during language

