Link Prediction with Persistent Homology: An Interactive View

Zuoyu Yan 1 Tengfei Ma 2 Liangcai Gao 1 Zhi Tang 1 Chao Chen 3

Abstract
Link prediction is an important learning task for
graph-structured data. In this paper, we propose
a novel topological approach to characterize interactions between two nodes. Our topological
feature, based on the extended persistent homology, encodes rich structural information regarding
the multi-hop paths connecting nodes. Based on
this feature, we propose a graph neural network
method that outperforms state-of-the-arts on different benchmarks. As another contribution, we
propose a novel algorithm to more efficiently compute the extended persistence diagrams for graphs.
This algorithm can be generally applied to accelerate many other topological methods for graph
learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is very common in our life. Learning
from graphs is important in various scientific and industrial
domains (Zhang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). In this paper, we focus on the link prediction task, i.e., to learn to
predict whether an edge exists between two target nodes,
conditioned on their attributes and local connectivity (LibenNowell & Kleinberg, 2007; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018; Lü
& Zhou, 2011). Link prediction is an important step in
knowledge discovery in various applications, e.g., recommendation systems (Koren et al., 2009; Adamic & Adar,
2003), knowledge graph completion (Teru et al., 2020),
protein-protein interactions (Coulomb et al., 2005), and
gene prediction (Nagarajan et al., 2015).
Classic link prediction methods (Barabási & Albert, 1999;
Zhou et al., 2009; Brin & Page, 2012) use hand-crafted
connectivity features and enforce strong assumptions of the
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 T. J. Watson Research Center,
IBM, New York, USA 3 Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Chao Chen <chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu>, Liangcai Gao
<glc@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

distributions of links, e.g., nodes with similar connectivity
features tend to be connected. Better performance has been
achieved by comparing the similarity of nodes in the embedding space (Perozzi et al., 2014), which encodes more global
connectivity information. In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art link prediction
performance as they exploit graph connectivity information and node attributes in a completely data driven manner.
However, even for GNNs, graph connectivity information
such as node degrees is beneficial; it provides contextual
information for the graph convolutional operations (Kipf &
Welling, 2016; Qiu et al., 2018; Ye et al., 2020).
For link prediction, an effective strategy is the direct modeling of the interaction between two target nodes. The
path distance of nearby nodes from the target nodes has
been shown useful (Zhang & Chen, 2018). However, these
distance-based methods mainly focus on the “closeness” between target nodes, but do not explicitly model the “richness
of connections” between them. In Figure 1, we show examples with the same distance encoding. But the connections
in the right example are much richer than in the left example. It is conceivable that nodes with a wealth of multi-hop
connections have a better chance to share an edge.

Figure 1. Two example graphs. In both cases, black nodes have
the same distance from the red target nodes (either (2,1) or (1,2)).
But the richness of the connections is very different. On the left,
there are only three connections between the target nodes. On the
right, there are many more connections between the targets.

To exploit the richness of connections between nodes, we
propose a novel method based on the theory of persistent
homology (Edelsbrunner et al., 2000; Edelsbrunner & Harer,
2010), which encodes high-order structural information of
the graph via algebraic topology. The theory captures topological structures of arbitrary shape and scale, e.g., connected components and loops, and encodes them in a robustto-noise manner. To predict whether two given nodes u and
v are connected, our method explicitly counts the number of
loops within their vicinity. This count essentially measures
the complexity of connections between u and v, which can

