Dynamic Balancing for Model Selection in Bandits and RL

Ashok Cutkosky * 1 Christoph Dann * 2 Abhimanyu Das * 3 Claudio Gentile * 2 Aldo Pacchiano * 4
Manish Purohit * 3

Abstract
We propose a framework for model selection by
combining base algorithms in stochastic bandits
and reinforcement learning. We require a candidate regret bound for each base algorithm that
may or may not hold. We select base algorithms
to play in each round using a “balancing condition”
on the candidate regret bounds. Our approach simultaneously recovers previous worst-case regret
bounds, while also obtaining much smaller regret in natural scenarios when some base learners
significantly exceed their candidate bounds. Our
framework is relevant in many settings, including linear bandits and MDPs with nested function
classes, linear bandits with unknown misspecification, and tuning confidence parameters of algorithms such as LinUCB. Moreover, unlike recent
efforts in model selection for linear stochastic
bandits, our approach can be extended to consider
adversarial rather than stochastic contexts.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits are a sequential learning framework
whereby a learning agent repeatedly interacts with an unknown environment across a sequence of T rounds. During
each round, the learner picks an action from a set of available
actions (possibly after observing some context information
for that round), and the environment generates a feedback
signal in the form of a reward value, associated with the
chosen action for that context. Given a class of policies, the
goal of the learning agent is to accumulate a total reward
during the T rounds which is not much smaller than that of
the best policy in hindsight within the class.
This problem has been extensively studied under diverse as*
Equal contribution 1 Boston University, Boston, Massachussetts, USA 2 Google Research, New York, NY, USA 3 Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA 4 University of California,
Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>, Christoph Dann <cdann@cdann.net>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sumptions about the class of policies, the source generating
reward signals, the shape of the action space, etc. (e.g. see
Auer et al., 2002; Langford & Zhang, 2008; Beygelzimer
et al., 2011; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020; Agarwal et al.,
2014). Many of these algorithms have different behaviors
in different environments; for instance, one algorithm might
do much better if the average reward is a linear function
of the context, while another might do better when reward
and context are independent. This plethora of prior algorithms necessitates “meta-decisions”: If the environment is
not known in advance, which algorithm should be used for
the task at hand? This is especially important for industrial
deployment, where the complexity and diversity of the available solutions typically require being able to select among
several alternatives, like selecting the best within a pool of
bandit algorithms, or even alternative configurations of the
same algorithm (as in, e.g., hyper-parameter optimization).
We model the above meta-decision by assuming we have
access to a pool of M base bandit algorithms, and our goal
is to design a bandit meta-algorithm, whose actions are the
base algorithms themselves, such the total regret experienced by the meta-algorithm is comparable to that of the
best base algorithm in hindsight for the environment at hand.
In each round t, the meta-algorithm needs to choose one
of the base algorithms, and plays the action suggested by
that algorithm. Since we do not know in advance which
base algorithm will perform best, we need to address this
problem in an online fashion. We call this problem online
model selection for bandit algorithms. In this paper, we
focus on this problem for stochastic environments.
The bandit model selection problem has received a lot of recent attention, as witnessed by a flurry of recent works (e.g.,
Foster et al., 2019; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2020; Pacchiano
et al., 2020b; Arora et al., 2021; Ghosh et al., 2021; Chatterji
et al., 2020; Bibaut et al., 2020; Foster et al., 2020a; Lee
et al., 2021). A pioneering prior work in this domain has
considered the adversarial setting (Agarwal et al., 2017)
and utilizes an adversarial meta algorithm based on mirror
descent. However their algorithm (CORRAL) needs some
technical stability conditions for the base learners, thus requiring each base algorithm to be individually modified.
Recently, Pacchiano et al. (2020b) extended CORRAL for
the stochastic setting, while dispensing with the stability

