Crystallization Learning with the Delaunay Triangulation

Jiaqi Gu 1 Guosheng Yin 1
and E(2i ) < ∞. Nonparametric regression is a collection
of methods for estimating the conditional expectation function µ(·) without rigid assumptions on its shape. Recent
decades have witnessed extensive research in the field of
nonparametric regression, including nearest-neighbor regression (Nadaraya, 1964; Watson, 1964; Cover & Hart,
1967; Benedetti, 1977; Stone, 1977; Altman, 1992), kernel
regression (Priestley & Chao, 1972; Hardle & Gasser, 1984;
Hein, 2009) and local linear regression (Cleveland, 1979;
Cleveland & Devlin, 1988; Fan & Gijbels, 2018). Although
the consistency of these methods has been established under
mild conditions, their finite-sample performances are sensitive to the local geometric structure of observed feature
points. As these methods only consider the distances from
the target point z to observed feature points x1 , . . . , xn in
computing the neighbor data points or assigning weights,
it is possible that the directions from z to its neighbors are
not uniformly distributed, especially when z is close to the
boundary of the convex hull of feature points or jump points
of the feature data density. As a result, the (weighted) mean
of neighbor data points may be far from the target point z,
leading to large bias in estimating the conditional expectation µ(z).

Abstract
Based on the Delaunay triangulation, we propose
the crystallization learning to estimate the conditional expectation function in the framework
of nonparametric regression. By conducting the
crystallization search for the Delaunay simplices
closest to the target point in a hierarchical way, the
crystallization learning estimates the conditional
expectation of the response by fitting a local linear model to the data points of the constructed
Delaunay simplices. Instead of conducting the
Delaunay triangulation for the entire feature space
which would encounter enormous computational
difficulty, our approach focuses only on the neighborhood of the target point and thus greatly expedites the estimation for high-dimensional cases.
Because the volumes of Delaunay simplices are
adaptive to the density of feature data points, our
method selects neighbor data points uniformly in
all directions and thus is more robust to the local geometric structure of the data than existing
nonparametric regression methods. We develop
the asymptotic properties of the crystallization
learning and conduct numerical experiments on
both synthetic and real data to demonstrate the
advantages of our method in estimation of the
conditional expectation function and prediction
of the response.

1. Introduction
Consider a regression model,
yi = µ(xi ) + i ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

(1)

where xi is a d-dimensional feature point in the Euclidean
space R d (n > d), yi is the observed response, µ(·) =
E(Y |·) is the conditional expectation function of the response Y , and 1 , . . . , n ∈ R are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random errors with E(i ) = 0
1

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to: Jiaqi Gu
<u3005743@hku.hk>, Guosheng Yin <gyin@hku.hk>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

By incorporating the Delaunay triangulation (Delaunay,
1934) into the framework of nonparametric regression, we
propose the crystallization learning which mimics the crystallization process in thermodynamics and circumvents the
curse-of-dimensionality issue in the Delaunay triangulation.
Based on the DELAUNAYSPARSE algorithm (Chang et al.,
2020) which locally constructs the Delaunay simplex S(z)
containing the target point z, we develop the crystallization
search for the Delaunay simplices closest to S(z) and estimate µ(z) by fitting a local linear model to the data points
of the obtained Delaunay simplices. Via experiments on
synthetic and real data, our method is shown to outperform
the existing ones in estimating the conditional expectation
function and predicting the response.

2. Methodology
2.1. Delaunay Interpolation
Let X be a set of n feature points x1 , . . . , xn in the Euclidean
space R d (n > d). A d-dimensional triangulation of X,
T (X), is a mesh of d-simplices {S1 , . . . , Sm } satisfying:

