Online Graph Dictionary Learning

Cédric Vincent-Cuaz 1 Titouan Vayer 2 Rémi Flamary 3 Marco Corneli 1 4 Nicolas Courty 5

Abstract
Dictionary learning is a key tool for representation
learning, that explains the data as linear combination of few basic elements. Yet, this analysis
is not amenable in the context of graph learning, as graphs usually belong to different metric
spaces. We fill this gap by proposing a new online Graph Dictionary Learning approach, which
uses the Gromov Wasserstein divergence for the
data fitting term. In our work, graphs are encoded
through their nodes’ pairwise relations and modeled as convex combination of graph atoms, i.e.
dictionary elements, estimated thanks to an online
stochastic algorithm, which operates on a dataset
of unregistered graphs with potentially different
number of nodes. Our approach naturally extends
to labeled graphs, and is completed by a novel
upper bound that can be used as a fast approximation of Gromov Wasserstein in the embedding
space. We provide numerical evidences showing
the interest of our approach for unsupervised embedding of graph datasets and for online graph
subspace estimation and tracking.

1. Introduction
The question of how to build machine learning algorithms
able to go beyond vectorial data and to learn from structured
data such as graphs has been of great interest in the last
decades. Notable applications can be found in molecule
compounds (Kriege et al., 2018), brain connectivity (Ktena
et al., 2017), social networks (Yanardag & Vishwanathan,
2015), time series (Cuturi & Blondel, 2018), trees (Day,
1985) or images (Harchaoui & Bach, 2007; Bronstein et al.,
2017). Designing good representations for these data is
1
Univ.Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, LJAD, Maasai, Nice, France
ENS de Lyon, LIP UMR 5668, Lyon, France
3
Ecole Polytechnique, CMAP, UMR 7641, Palaiseau, France
4
Univ.Côte d’Azur, Center of Modeling, Simulation & Interaction,
Nice, France
5
Univ.Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA, Vannes, France. Correspondence to: Cédric Vincent-Cuaz <cedric.vincent-cuaz@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

challenging, as their nature is by essence non-vectorial, and
requires dedicated modelling of their representing structures.
Given sufficient data and labels, end-to-end approaches with
neural networks have shown great promises in the last years
(Wu et al., 2020). In this work, we focus on the unsupervised representation learning problem, where the entirety
of the data might not be known beforehand, and is rather
produced continuously by different sensors, and available
through streams. In this setting, tackling the non-stationarity
of the underlying generating process is challenging (Ditzler
et al., 2015). Good examples can be found, for instance, in
the context of dynamic functional connectivity (Heitmann
& Breakspear, 2018) or network science (Masuda & Lambiotte, 2020). As opposed to recent approaches focusing on
dynamically varying graphs in online or continuous learning
(Yang et al., 2018; Vlaski et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020),
we rather suppose in this work that distinct graphs are made
progressively available (Zambon et al., 2017; Grattarola
et al., 2019). This setting is particularly challenging as
the structure, the attributes or the number of nodes of each
graph observed at a time step can differ from the previous
ones. We propose to tackle this problem by learning a linear
representation of graphs with online dictionary learning.

Dictionary Learning (DL) Dictionary Learning (Mairal
et al., 2009; Schmitz et al., 2018) is a field of unsupervised
learning that aims at estimating a linear representation of
the data, i.e. to learn a linear subspace defined by the span
of a family of vectors, called atoms, which constitute a dictionary. These atoms are inferred from the input data by
minimizing a reconstruction error. These representations
have been notably used in statistical frameworks such as
data clustering (Ng et al., 2002), recommendation systems
(Bobadilla et al., 2013) or dimensionality reduction (Candès
et al., 2011). While DL methods mainly focus on vectorial
data, it is of prime interest to investigate flexible and interpretable factorization models applicable to structured data.
We also consider the dynamic or time varying version of
the problem, where the data generating process may exhibit
non-stationarity over time, yielding a problem of subspace
change or tracking (see e.g. (Narayanamurthy & Vaswani,
2018)), where one wants to monitor changes in the subspace
best describing the data. In this work, we rely on optimal
transport as a fidelity term to compare these structured data.

