Federated Composite Optimization
Honglin Yuan 1 2 Manzil Zaheer 3 Sashank Reddi 3

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning
paradigm that scales on-device learning collaboratively and privately. Standard FL algorithms
such as F EDAVG are primarily geared towards
smooth unconstrained settings. In this paper,
we study the Federated Composite Optimization
(FCO) problem, in which the loss function contains a non-smooth regularizer. Such problems
arise naturally in FL applications that involve sparsity, low-rank, monotonicity, or more general constraints. We first show that straightforward extensions of primal algorithms such as F EDAVG are
not well-suited for FCO since they suffer from
the “curse of primal averaging,” resulting in poor
convergence. As a solution, we propose a new
primal-dual algorithm, Federated Dual Averaging
(F ED D UAL AVG), which by employing a novel
server dual averaging procedure circumvents the
curse of primal averaging. Our theoretical analysis and empirical experiments demonstrate that
F ED D UAL AVG outperforms the other baselines.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL, Konečnỳ et al. 2015; McMahan
et al. 2017) is a novel distributed learning paradigm in which
a large number of clients collaboratively train a shared
model without disclosing their private local data. The two
most distinct features of FL, when compared to classic
distributed learning settings, are (1) heterogeneity in data
amongst the clients and (2) very high cost to communicate
with a client. Due to these aspects, classic distributed optimization algorithms have been rendered ineffective in FL
settings (Kairouz et al., 2019). Several algorithms specifically catered towards FL settings have been proposed to
address these issues. The most prominent amongst them is
Federated Averaging (F EDAVG) algorithm, which by em1
Stanford University 2 Based on work performed at Google
Research 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Honglin Yuan
<yuanhl@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Results on sparse (`1 -regularized) logistic regression for a federated fMRI dataset based on (Haxby, 2001).
centralized corresponds to training on the centralized dataset
gathered from all the training clients. local corresponds to
training on the local data from only one training client without
communication. F EDAVG (@) corresponds to running F EDAVG algorithms with subgradient in lieu of SGD to handle the non-smooth
`1 -regularizer. F ED M I D is another straightforward extension of
F EDAVG running local proximal gradient method (see Section 3.1
for details). We show that using our proposed algorithm F ED D UAL AVG, one can 1) achieve performance comparable to the
centralized baseline without the need to gather client data,
and 2) significantly outperforms the local baseline on the isolated data and the F EDAVG baseline. See Section 5.3 for details.

ploying local SGD updates, significantly reduces the communication overhead under moderate client heterogeneity.
Several follow-up works have focused on improving the
F EDAVG in various ways (e.g., Li et al. 2020a; Karimireddy
et al. 2020; Reddi et al. 2020; Yuan & Ma 2020).
Existing FL research primarily focuses on the unconstrained
smooth objectives; however, many FL applications involve
non-smooth objectives. Such problems arise naturally in
the context of regularization (e.g., sparsity, low-rank, monotonicity, or additional constraints on the model). For instance, consider the problem of cross-silo biomedical FL,
where medical organizations collaboratively aim to learn
a global model on their patients’ data without sharing. In
such applications, sparsity constraints are of paramount importance due to the nature of the problem as it involves
only a few data samples (e.g., patients) but with very high
dimensions (e.g., fMRI scans). For the purpose of illustration, in Fig. 1, we present results on a federated sparse
(`1 -regularized) logistic regression task for an fMRI dataset

