Reinforcement Learning for Cost-Aware Markov Decision Processes

Wesley A. Suttle 1 Kaiqing Zhang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3 David N. Kraemer 1 Ji Liu 4

Abstract
Ratio maximization has applications in areas as
diverse as finance, reward shaping for reinforcement learning (RL), and the development of safe
artificial intelligence, yet there has been very little
exploration of RL algorithms for ratio maximization. This paper addresses this deficiency by introducing two new, model-free RL algorithms for
solving cost-aware Markov decision processes,
where the goal is to maximize the ratio of longrun average reward to long-run average cost. The
first algorithm is a two-timescale scheme based
on relative value iteration (RVI) Q-learning and
the second is an actor-critic scheme. The paper
proves almost sure convergence of the former to
the globally optimal solution in the tabular case
and almost sure convergence of the latter under
linear function approximation for the critic. Unlike previous methods, the two algorithms provably converge for general reward and cost functions under suitable conditions. The paper also
provides empirical results demonstrating promising performance and lending strong support to the
theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been
advocated in the literature for solving Markov decision processes (MDPs) and related sequential decision-making problems. The classic objective functions, including expected
discounted reward, total reward, and long-run average reward, form the basis for most RL algorithms and are fre1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA. 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Coordinated Science
Laboratory, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois, USA. 3 Department of Operations Research and Financial
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Ji Liu <ji.liu@stonybrook.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

quently used in practice. Nevertheless, alternative objectives
have seen increasing interest, as researchers seek to extend
RL techniques to larger classes of problems and incorporate
a priori knowledge to accelerate learning. In particular, a
great deal of effort has gone into extending RL techniques
to constrained MDPs (Altman, 1999), where safety and risk
considerations impose limits on agent behavior, and various schemes have been proposed for reward shaping, such
as including entropy regularization to improve exploration
(Geist et al., 2019; Grill et al., 2019; Vieillard et al., 2020)
and general methods for incorporating domain knowledge
(Mataric, 1994; Ng et al., 1999).
One area where little progress has been made, however, is in
the application of RL techniques to ratio maximization. In
finance, a wide range of portfolio optimization problems are
explicitly formulated via ratio maximization, for example
when maximizing the Sharpe, Calmar, Sortino, and Omega
ratios (Sharpe, 1966; Young, 1991; Sortino & Price, 1994;
Keating & Shadwick, 2002) of a financial portfolio. The
subfield of reward shaping in RL studies methods for incorporating domain knowledge and expert guidance into the
rewards an agent receives. Such techniques can be used to
accelerate learning and improve solution quality (Mataric,
1994; Ng et al., 1999). Though currently unexploited in
the reward shaping literature, the ability to simultaneously
specify both rewards and costs has clear potential as a powerful tool for the reward shaping toolkit. Finally, safe RL, a
subfield of safe AI, has seen a dramatic surge of interest in
recent years (Garcı́a et al., 2015; Berkenkamp et al., 2017;
Cheng et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020), driven
by safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles
(Kiran et al., 2021); incorporating ratio maximization techniques would complement and enhance existing methods
for safe RL, and potentially have a significant impact on the
development of safe AI.
Contribution. Our primary contribution is to propose two
tractable new algorithms with theoretical guarantees and
lay sound theoretical foundations for future study of this
previously under-studied type of problem. Our experiments
validate and supplement our theoretical contributions.
First, motivated by the lack of RL methods for solving ratio
maximization problems, we develop two new, model-free
reinforcement learning algorithms for provably solving cost-

