Accelerated Algorithms for Smooth Convex-Concave Minimax Problems
with O(1/k 2 ) Rate on Squared Gradient Norm

TaeHo Yoon 1 Ernest K. Ryu 1

Abstract

value for quantifying suboptimality. Moreover, the notion is
meaningful for differentiable non-convex-concave minimax
games. Interestingly, very few prior works have analyzed
convergence rates on the gradient norm for minimax problems, and the optimal convergence rate or corresponding
algorithms were hitherto unknown.

In this work, we study the computational complexity of reducing the squared gradient magnitude
for smooth minimax optimization problems. First,
we present algorithms with accelerated O(1/k 2 )
last-iterate rates, faster than the existing O(1/k)
or slower rates for extragradient, Popov, and gradient descent with anchoring. The acceleration
mechanism combines extragradient steps with anchoring and is distinct from Nesterov’s acceleration. We then establish optimality of the O(1/k 2 )
rate through a matching lower bound.

Contributions. In this work, we introduce the extra anchored gradient (EAG) algorithms for smooth convexconcave minimax problems and establish an accelerated
k∇L(zk )k2 ≤ O(R2 /k 2 ) rate, where R is the Lipschitz
constant of ∇L. The rate improves upon the O(R2 /k) rates
of prior algorithms and is the first O(R2 /k 2 ) rate in this
setup. We then provide a matching Ω(R2 /k 2 ) complexity lower bound for gradient-based algorithms and thereby
establish optimality of EAG.

1. Introduction
Minimax optimization problems, or minimax games, of the
form
minimize
maximize
L(x, y)
n
m
x∈R

y∈R

(1)

have recently gained significant interest in the optimization
and machine learning communities due to their application
in adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al.,
2018) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
Prior works on minimax optimization often consider compact domains X, Y for x, y and use the duality gap
Errgap (x, y) := sup L(x, ỹ) − inf L(x̃, y)

Beyond establishing the optimal complexity, our results
provide the following observations. First, different suboptimality measures lead to materially different acceleration
mechanisms, since reducing the duality gap is done optimally by the extragradient algorithm (Nemirovski, 2004;
Nemirovsky, 1992). Also, since our optimal accelerated
convergence rate is on the non-ergodic last iterate, neither
averaging nor keeping track of the best iterate is necessary
for optimally reducing the gradient magnitude in the deterministic setup.
1.1. Preliminaries and notation

1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu
<ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.

We say a saddle function L : Rn × Rm → R is convexconcave if L(x, y) is convex in x ∈ Rn for all fixed
y ∈ Rm and L(x, y) is concave in y ∈ Rm for all
fixed x ∈ Rn . We say (x? , y? ) is a saddle point of L
if L(x? , y) ≤ L(x? , y? ) ≤ L(x, y? ) for all x ∈ Rn and
y ∈ Rm . Solutions to the minimax problem (1) are defined
to be saddle points of L. For notational conciseness, write
z = (x, y). When L is differentiable, define the saddle
operator of L at z = (x, y) by


∇x L(x, y)
GL (z) =
.
(2)
−∇y L(x, y)

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(When clear from the context, we drop the subscript L.)
The saddle operator is monotone (Rockafellar, 1970), i.e.,

ỹ∈Y

x̃∈X

to quantify suboptimality of algorithms’ iterates in solving
(1). However, while it is a natural analog of minimization
error for minimax problems, the duality gap can be difficult
to measure directly in practice, and it is unclear how to
generalize the notion to non-convex-concave problems.
In contrast, the squared gradient magnitude k∇L(x, y)k2 ,
when L is differentiable, is a more directly observable

