Environment Inference for Invariant Learning

Elliot Creager 1 2 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
Learning models that gracefully handle distribution shifts is central to research on domain generalization, robust optimization, and fairness. A
promising formulation is domain-invariant learning, which identifies the key issue of learning
which features are domain-specific versus domaininvariant. An important assumption in this area
is that the training examples are partitioned into
“domains” or “environments”. Our focus is on
the more common setting where such partitions
are not provided. We propose EIIL, a general
framework for domain-invariant learning that incorporates Environment Inference to directly infer partitions that are maximally informative for
downstream Invariant Learning. We show that
EIIL outperforms invariant learning methods on
the CMNIST benchmark without using environment labels, and significantly outperforms ERM
on worst-group performance in the Waterbirds
and CivilComments datasets. Finally, we establish connections between EIIL and algorithmic
fairness, which enables EIIL to improve accuracy
and calibration in a fair prediction problem.

(a) Inferred environment 1
(mostly) landbirds on land, and
waterbirds on water

(b) Inferred environment 2
(mostly) landbirds on water,
and waterbirds on land

Figure 1. In the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa et al., 2020), the two
target labels (landbirds and waterbirds) are correlated with their
respective typical background habitats (land and water). This
spurious correlation causes sub-par performance on the smallest
subgroups (e.g. waterbirds on land). Environment Inference for
Invariant Learning (EIIL) organizes the training data into two
environments that are maximally informative for use by a downstream invariant learner, enabling the use of invariant learning in
situations where environment labels are not readily available. By
grouping examples where class and background disagree into the
same environment, EIIL encourages learning an invariance w.r.t.
background features, which improves worst-group test accuracy
by 18% relative to standard supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Machine learning achieves super-human performance on
many tasks when the test data is drawn from the same distribution as the training data. However, when the two distributions differ, model performance can severely degrade, even
to below-chance predictions (Geirhos et al., 2020). Tiny
perturbations can derail classifiers, as shown by adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al., 2014) and common image corruptions (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). Even new test sets
collected from the same data acquisition pipeline induce distribution shifts that significantly harm performance (Recht
et al., 2019; Engstrom et al., 2020). Many approaches have
been proposed to overcome the brittleness of supervised

learning—e.g. Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)—in
the face of distribution shifts. Robust optimization aims to
achieve good performance on any distribution close to the
training distribution (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Duchi et al.,
2021; Madry et al., 2018). Invariant learning on the other
hand tries to go one step further, to generalize to distributions potentially far away from the training distribution.

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Elliot Creager <creager@cs.toronto.edu>.

However, common invariant learning methods typically
come at a serious disadvantage: they require datasets to
be partitioned into multiple domains or environments.1 Environment assignments should implicitly define variation
the algorithm should become invariant or robust to, but often such environment labels are unavailable at training time,
either because they are difficult to obtain or due to privacy

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
We use “domains”, “environments” and “groups”/“subgroups”
interchangeably.

1

