PixelTransformer: Sample Conditioned Signal Generation

Shubham Tulsiani 1 Abhinav Gupta 1 2
https://shubhtuls.github.io/PixelTransformer/

Abstract
We propose a generative model that can infer a
distribution for the underlying spatial signal conditioned on sparse samples e.g. plausible images
given a few observed pixels. In contrast to sequential autoregressive generative models, our model
allows conditioning on arbitrary samples and can
answer distributional queries for any location. We
empirically validate our approach across three image datasets and show that we learn to generate
diverse and meaningful samples, with the distribution variance reducing given more observed
pixels. We also show that our approach is applicable beyond images and can allow generating
other types of spatial outputs e.g. polynomials,
3D shapes, and videos.

1. Introduction
Imagine an artist with an empty canvas. She starts with a
dab of sky blue paint at the top, and a splash of fresh green
at the bottom. What is the painting going to depict? Perhaps
an idyllic meadow, or trees in garden under a clear sky? But
probably not a living room. It is quite remarkable that given
only such sparse information about arbitrary locations, we
can make guesses about the image in the artist’s mind.
The field of generative modeling of images, with the goal
of learning the distribution of possible images, focuses on
developing similar capabilities in machines. Most recent
approaches can be classified as belonging to one of the two
modeling frameworks. First, and more commonly used, is
the latent variable modeling framework (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Here, the goal is to represent
the possible images using a distribution over a bottleneck
latent variable, samples from which can be decoded to obtain images. However, computing the exact probabilities
for images is often intractable and it is not straightforward
1

Facebook AI Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Shubham Tulsiani <shubhtuls@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to condition inference on sparse observations e.g. pixel
values. As an alternative, a second class of autoregressive approaches directly model the joint distribution over
pixels. This can be easily cast as product of conditional
distribution (van den Oord et al., 2016b;c) which makes
it tractable to compute. Conditional distributions are estimated by learning to predict new pixels from previously
sampled/generated pixels. However, these approaches use
fixed sequencing (mostly predicting pixels from top-left to
bottom-right) and therefore the learned model can only take
a fixed ordering between query and sampled pixels. This
implies that these models cannot predict whole images from
a few random splashes – similar to what we humans can do
given a description of the artist’s painting above.
In this work, our goal is to build computational generative models that can achieve this – given information about
some random pixels and their associated color values, we
aim to predict a distribution over images consistent with
the evidence. To this end, we show that it suffices to learn
a function that estimates the distribution of possible values at any query location conditioned on an arbitrary set
of observed samples. We present an approach to learn this
function in a self-supervised manner, and show that it can
allow answering queries that previous sequential autoregressive models cannot e.g. mean image given observed pixels,
or computing image distribution given random observations.
We also show that our proposed framework is generally
applicable beyond images and can be learned to generate
generic dense spatial signals given corresponding samples.

2. Formulation
Given the values of some (arbitrary) pixels, we aim to infer what images are likely conditioned on this observation.
More formally, for any pixel denoted by random variable x,
let vx denote the value for that pixel and let S0 ≡ {vxk }K
k=1
correspond to a set of such sampled values. We are then interested in modeling p(I|S0 ) i.e. the conditional distribution
over images I given a set of sample pixel values S0 .
From Image to Pixel Value Distribution. We first note
that an image is simply a collection of values of pixels
in a discrete grid. Assuming an image has N pixels with
locations denoted as {gn }N
n=1 , our goal is therefore to model

