Supervised Tree-Wasserstein Distance

Yuki Takezawa 1 2 Ryoma Sato 1 2 Makoto Yamada 1 2

Abstract
To measure the similarity of documents, the
Wasserstein distance is a powerful tool, but it
requires a high computational cost. Recently,
for fast computation of the Wasserstein distance,
methods for approximating the Wasserstein distance using a tree metric have been proposed.
These tree-based methods allow fast comparisons
of a large number of documents; however, they are
unsupervised and do not learn task-specific distances. In this work, we propose the Supervised
Tree-Wasserstein (STW) distance, a fast, supervised metric learning method based on the tree
metric. Specifically, we rewrite the Wasserstein
distance on the tree metric by the parent–child relationships of a tree, and formulate it as a continuous optimization problem using a contrastive loss.
Experimentally, we show that the STW distance
can be computed fast, and improves the accuracy
of document classification tasks. Furthermore, the
STW distance is formulated by matrix multiplications, runs on a GPU, and is suitable for batch
processing. Therefore, we show that the STW
distance is extremely efficient when comparing a
large number of documents.

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein distance is a powerful tool for measuring
distances between distributions. It has recently been applied
in many fields, such as feature matching (Sarlin et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2020), generative models (Kolouri et al., 2019b),
similarity metrics (Kusner et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2016;
Yurochkin et al., 2019), and so on.
The Wasserstein distance can be computed by solving the
optimal transport problem. For similarity metrics of documents, Kusner et al. (2015) proposed the Word Mover’s Distance (WMD). Given the word embedding vectors (Mikolov
et al., 2013) and a normalized bag-of-words, the WMD is
1

Kyoto University 2 RIKEN AIP. Correspondence to: Yuki
Takezawa <yuki-takezawa@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the cost of the optimal transport between two documents in
the word embedding space. WMD has been used for document classification tasks and has achieved high k-nearest
neighbors (kNN) accuracy.
To solve the optimal transport problem, linear programming
can be used. However, using linear programming requires
cubic time with respect to the number of data points (Pele
& Werman, 2009). Cuturi (2013) proposed to add entropic
regularization to the optimal transport problem, which can
be solved by using a matrix scaling algorithm in quadratic
time. To further reduce the computational cost of the optimal transport problem, there are two main strategies. (1)
The first approach is to relax the constraint of the optimal
transport problem. Specifically, Kusner et al. (2015) relaxed
the constraints of the optimal transport problem and transport the mass of each coordinate to the nearest coordinate,
called the Relaxed WMD (RWMD). Atasu & Mittelholzer
(2019) attached additional constraints to RWMD and proposed a more accurate approximation of WMD. (2) The
second approach is to construct a tree metric and compute
the Wasserstein distance on the tree metric (tree-Wasserstein
distance). Indyk & Thaper (2003) proposed a method to
embed the coordinates into the tree metric, called Quadtree.
Recently, Le et al. (2019) proposed a method to sample tree
metrics and achieved a high accuracy in document classification tasks. Backurs et al. (2020) proposed a more accurate
method than Quadtree. These tree-based methods aim to
approximate the Wasserstein distance on the Euclidean metric with the tree-Wasserstein distance. The tree-Wasserstein
distance can be computed in linear time with respect to the
number of nodes in the tree and can quickly compare a large
number of documents.
In general, the similarity between documents must be designed in a task-specific manner. However, the methods
mentioned above are unsupervised and do not learn taskspecific distances. Huang et al. (2016) proposed supervised
metric learning based on WMD, called Supervised WMD
(S-WMD). S-WMD learns a task-specific distance by leveraging the label information of documents, and improves
the kNN accuracy. However, it requires quadratic time to
compute S-WMD and there is no supervised metric learning
for the tree-Wasserstein distance. Moreover, for the treeWasserstein distance, it is challenging to construct the tree
metric by leveraging the label information of documents.

