Directional Graph Networks

Dominique Beaini * 1 Saro Passaro * 2 Vincent Létourneau 1 3 William L. Hamilton 3 4 Gabriele Corso 2
Pietro Liò 2

Abstract
The lack of anisotropic kernels in graph neural
networks (GNNs) strongly limits their expressiveness, contributing to well-known issues such as
over-smoothing. To overcome this limitation, we
propose the first globally consistent anisotropic
kernels for GNNs, allowing for graph convolutions that are defined according to topologicalyderived directional flows. First, by defining a
vector field in the graph, we develop a method of
applying directional derivatives and smoothing by
projecting node-specific messages into the field.
Then, we propose the use of the Laplacian eigenvectors as such vector field. We show that the
method generalizes CNNs on an n-dimensional
grid and is provably more discriminative than standard GNNs regarding the Weisfeiler-Lehman 1WL test. We evaluate our method on different
standard benchmarks and see a relative error reduction of 8% on the CIFAR10 graph dataset and
11% to 32% on the molecular ZINC dataset, and
a relative increase in precision of 1.6% on the
MolPCBA dataset. An important outcome of this
work is that it enables graph networks to embed
directions in an unsupervised way, thus allowing
a better representation of the anisotropic features
in different physical or biological problems.

1. Introduction
One of the most important distinctions between convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and graph neural networks
(GNNs) is that CNNs allow for any convolutional kernel,
while most GNN methods are limited to symmetric ker*

Equal contribution 1 InVivo AI, Montreal, Canada 2 department
of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 MILA, Montreal, Canada
4
McGill University, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Dominique Beaini <dominique@invivoai.com>, Saro Passaro
<sp976@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

nels (also called isotropic kernels) (Kipf & Welling, 2016;
Gilmer et al., 2017). There are some implementations of
asymmetric kernels using gated mechanisms (Bresson &
Laurent, 2017; Veličković et al., 2017), motif attention
(Peng et al., 2019), edge features (Gilmer et al., 2017),
port numbering (Sato et al., 2019) or the 3D structure of
molecules (Klicpera et al., 2019).
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are currently
no methods that allow asymmetric graph kernels that are
dependent on the full graph structure or directional flows.
They either depend on local structures or local features. This
is in opposition to images, which exhibit canonical directions: the horizontal and vertical axes. The absence of an
analogous concept in graphs makes it difficult to define directional message passing and to produce an analogue of the
directional frequency filters (or Gabor filters) widely present
in image processing (Olah et al., 2020). In fact, there is numerous evidence that directional filtering is fundamental
image processing (Kang et al., 2017; Antoine & Murenzi,
1996; Yue Lu & Minh N. Do, 2005).
We propose a novel idea for GNNs: use vector fields in the
graph to define directions for the propagation of information.
An overview of this framework is presented in figure 1.
Using this approach, the usual message-passing structure of
a GNN is projected onto globally-defined directions so that
the contribution of each neighbouring node nv is weighted
by its alignment with the vector fields at the receiving node
nu . This enables our method to propagate information via
directional derivatives or smoothing of the features.
In order to define globally consistent directional fields over
general graphs, we propose to use the gradients of the lowfrequency eigenvectors φk of the graph Laplacian, since
they are known to capture key information about the global
structure of graphs (Chavel, 1984; Chung et al., 1997;
Grebenkov & Nguyen, 2013). In particular, these eigenvectors can be used to define optimal partitions of the nodes
in a graph, to give a natural ordering (Levy, 2006), and to
find the dominant directions of the graph diffusion process
(Chung & Yau, 2000; Saerens et al., 2004). Further, we show
that they generalize the horizontal and vertical directional
flows in a grid (see figure 2), allowing them to guide the aggregation and mimic the asymmetric and directional kernels

