Geometry of the Loss Landscape in Overparameterized Neural Networks:
Symmetries and Invariances

Berfin Şimşek 1 2 François Ged 1 Arthur Jacot 1 Francesco Spadaro 1
Clément Hongler 1 * Wulfram Gerstner 2 * Johanni Brea 2 *

Abstract

We study how permutation symmetries in overparameterized multi-layer neural networks generate ‘symmetry-induced’ critical points. Assuming a network with L layers of minimal
∗
widths r1∗ , . . . , rL−1
reaches a zero-loss mini∗
∗
mum at r1 ! · · · rL−1 ! isolated points that are permutations of one another, we show that adding
one extra neuron to each layer is sufficient to
connect all these previously discrete minima into
a single manifold. For a two-layer overparameterized network of width r∗ + h =: m we explicitly describe the manifold of global minima:
it consists of T (r∗ , m) affine subspaces of dimension at least h that are connected to one another. For a network of width m, we identify the
number G(r, m) of affine subspaces containing
only symmetry-induced critical points that are related to the critical points of a smaller network
of width r < r∗ . Via a combinatorial analysis,
we derive closed-form formulas for T and G and
show that the number of symmetry-induced critical subspaces dominates the number of affine
subspaces forming the global minima manifold
in the mildly overparameterized regime (small h)
and vice versa in the vastly overparameterized
regime (h  r∗ ). Our results provide new insights into the minimization of the non-convex
loss function of overparameterized neural networks.

*

Shared senior authorship 1 Chair of Statistical Field Theory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Berfin Şimşek <berfin.simsek@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Neural network landscapes were traditionally thought of
as highly non-convex landscapes, where non-global critical
points may harm gradient-descent by slowing it down (due
to saddles) or making it stop in local minima. Earlier works
have argued in favor of a proliferation of saddles in highdimensional neural network landscapes through an analogy
with random error functions (Dauphin et al., 2014). On the
other hand, practical neural network landscapes are found
to exhibit surprising properties, such as the connectivity of
global minima (Draxler et al., 2018; Garipov et al., 2018)
and the convergence to a global minimum in the so-called
overparameterized regime (Jacot et al., 2018), thereby ruling out proliferating saddles as a problem in this regime.
Yet, in mildly overparameterized networks, gradient descent may find a global minimum only for a small fraction of random initializations (Sagun et al., 2014; Chizat &
Bach, 2018; Frankle & Carbin, 2018).
In this work, we study the width-dependent scaling of the
number of symmetry-induced critical points and the connectivity of global minima by exploiting the permutation
symmetry and further invariances of the network parameterization. The permutation symmetry introduces an invariance to a permutation in parameterization that is characteristic for many machine learning models beyond neural networks, such as mixture models, multiple kernel learning, or
matrix factorization.
Further invariances in a neural network of width m induce
equal loss manifolds such that all points in the manifold are
equivalent to a single point in a narrower network of width
r < m. The mapping approach from a point in parameter
space of the narrower network to a parameter manifold of
the full network is particularly useful for the study of critical points as critical points of the narrow network turn into
symmetry-induced critical subspaces of the full one. In particular, a global minimum of the narrow network turns into
a collection of global minima subspaces that are connected
to one another.

