Multi-layered Network Exploration via Random Walks:
From Offline Optimization to Online Learning

Xutong Liu 1 Jinhang Zuo 2 Xiaowei Chen 3 Wei Chen 4 John C.S. Lui 1

Abstract
Multi-layered network exploration (MuLaNE)
problem is an important problem abstracted from
many applications. In MuLaNE, there are multiple network layers where each node has an importance weight and each layer is explored by a random walk. The MuLaNE task is to allocate total
random walk budget B into each network layer so
that the total weights of the unique nodes visited
by random walks are maximized. We systematically study this problem from offline optimization
to online learning. For the offline optimization setting where the network structure and node weights
are known, we provide greedy based constantratio approximation algorithms for overlapping
networks, and greedy or dynamic-programming
based optimal solutions for non-overlapping networks. For the online learning setting, neither the
network structure nor the node weights are known
initially. We adapt the combinatorial multi-armed
bandit framework and design algorithms to learn
random walk related parameters and node weights
while optimizing the budget allocation in multiple
rounds, and prove that they achieve logarithmic
regret bounds. Finally, we conduct experiments
on a real-world social network dataset to validate
our theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Network exploration is a fundamental paradigm of searching/exploring in order to discover information and resources
available at nodes in a network, and random walk is often
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
Bytedance, Mountain View, CA, USA 4 Microsoft Research,
Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Xutong Liu <liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>, John
C.S. Lui <cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

used as an effective tool for network exploration (Lv et al.,
2002; Gleich, 2015; Wilder et al., 2018). In this paper, we
study the multi-layered network exploration via random
walks problem, which can model many real-world applications, including resource searching in peer-to-peer (P2P)
networks and web surfing in online social networks (OSNs).
In P2P networks, a user wants to find resources that are
scattered on nodes (i.e. peers) in different P2P networks
via some platform-specified strategies. A commonly used
search strategy is based on multiple random walks (Lv et al.,
2002). Since different resources have different importance,
the search quality of different random walkers varies. Moreover, the resource-search process typically has a life span,
i.e., a total time-limit or hop-limit for random walks. So the
user’s goal is to decide how to allocate limited budgets to different random walkers to find as many important resources
as possible. Another application is the web surfing, where
users want to find information in different OSNs, by looking
at posts via others’ home-pages (Lerman & Jones, 2006).
Once the user arrives at one of his friends’ home-pages
in a particular OSN, he could find some information and
continues to browse the home-pages of his friends’ friends,
which can be regarded as a random walk process. Since the
user only has a finite duration in web surfing, the similar
question is how to allocate his time in exploring different
OSNs so to get the maximum amount of useful information.
We abstract the above application scenarios as the MultiLayered Network Exploration (MuLaNE) problem. In MuLaNE, we model the overall network to be explored (e.g.,
combining different OSNs) as a multi-layered network G
that consists of m layers L1 , ..., Lm . Each layer Li (e.g., a
single OSN) is represented by a weighted directed graph
Gi (Vi , Ei , wi ), where Vi is the set of nodes to be explored
(e.g., users’ home-pages with importance weight σu for
u ∈ Vi ), Ei ⊆ Vi × Vi is the set of directed edges (e.g.,
social links), and wi is the edge weight function on edges
Ei . Each layer Li is associated with an explorer (or random
walker) Wi and a fixed starting distribution αi on nodes Vi .
Explorer Wi starts on a node in Gi following the distribution
αi , and then walks on network Gi following outgoing edges
with probability proportional to edge weights. We assume
that each random walk step will cost one unit of the bud-

