Personalized Federated Learning using Hypernetworks

Aviv Shamsian∗ 1 Aviv Navon∗ 1 Ethan Fetaya 1 Gal Chechik 1 2

Abstract
Personalized federated learning is tasked with
training machine learning models for multiple
clients, each with its own data distribution. The
goal is to train personalized models collaboratively while accounting for data disparities across
clients and reducing communication costs.
We propose a novel approach to this problem
using hypernetworks, termed pFedHN for personalized Federated HyperNetworks. In this approach, a central hypernetwork model is trained
to generate a set of models, one model for each
client. This architecture provides effective parameter sharing across clients while maintaining the
capacity to generate unique and diverse personal
models. Furthermore, since hypernetwork parameters are never transmitted, this approach decouples the communication cost from the trainable
model size. We test pFedHN empirically in several personalized federated learning challenges
and find that it outperforms previous methods.
Finally, since hypernetworks share information
across clients, we show that pFedHN can generalize better to new clients whose distributions differ
from any client observed during training.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is the task of learning a model over
multiple disjoint local datasets (McMahan et al., 2017a;
Yang et al., 2019). It is particularly beneficial when local
data cannot be shared due to privacy, storage, or communication constraints. For example, IoT applications may
create data at edge devices that are too large to share and
medical applications may be forbidden from sharing data
due to privacy (Wu et al., 2020). In federated learning, all
clients collectively train a shared model without sharing data
*

Equal contribution 1 Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel 2 Nvidia, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Aviv
Shamsian <aviv.shamsian@live.biu.ac.il>, Aviv Navon
<aviv.navon@biu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

while minimizing communication. Unfortunately, learning
a single global model may fail when the data distribution
varies across clients. For example, user data may originate
from different devices or geographical locales and is potentially heterogeneous. In the extreme, each client may be
required to solve another task. To handle such heterogeneity across clients, Personalized Federated Learning (PFL)
(Smith et al., 2017) allows each client to use a personalized
model instead of a shared global model. The key challenge
in PFL is to benefit from joint training while allowing each
client to keep its unique model and at the same time limit
the communication cost. While several approaches were
recently proposed for this challenge, these problems are far
from being resolved.
In this work, we describe a new approach named pFedHN
for personalized Federated HyperNetwork, which aims to
resolve these challenges using hypernetworks (Ha et al.,
2017). A hypernetwork is a model that produces parameters
for another neural networks. Our approach learns to smartly
share parameters across clients by using a single joint hypernetwork to generate separate network parameters for every
client. Each client has a unique embedding vector, passed as
input to the hypernetwork to produce its personalized model
weights. The vast majority of trainable parameters belong
to the hypernetwork and are shared across clients. Despite
that, using a hypernetwork achieves great flexibility and
diversity across client models. Intuitively, since a hypernetwork provides a mapping from the embedding input space
to the space of client network parameters, its image can be
viewed as a low-dimensional manifold in that space. Thus,
we can think of the hypernetwork as the coordinate map
of this manifold. Each unique client model is restricted to
lay on this manifold and is parametrized by the embedding
vector.
Another benefit of using hypernetworks is that the hypernetwork parameters, which generally are of a much larger
size than the clients’ network parameters that it produces,
are never transmitted. Instead, each client only needs to
receive its own network parameters to make predictions and
compute gradients. Furthermore, the hypernetwork only
needs to receive gradients or update directions to optimize
its parameters. The communication cost does not depend on
the size of the hypernetwork, and as a result, we can train
a large hypernetwork with the same communication costs

