Zeroth-Order Non-Convex Learning via Hierarchical Dual Averaging

Amélie Héliou 1 Matthieu Martin 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 1 Thibaud Rahier 1

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical version of dual averaging for zeroth-order online non-convex optimization – i.e., learning processes where, at each stage,
the optimizer is facing an unknown non-convex
loss function and only receives the incurred loss
as feedback. The proposed class of policies relies on the construction of an online model that
aggregates loss information as it arrives, and it
consists of two principal components: (a) a regularizer adapted to the Fisher information metric
(as opposed to the metric norm of the ambient
space); and (b) a principled exploration of the
problem’s state space based on an adapted hierarchical schedule. This construction enables
sharper control of the model’s bias and variance,
and allows us to derive tight bounds for both the
learner’s static and dynamic regret – i.e., the regret incurred against the best dynamic policy in
hindsight over the horizon of play.

1. Introduction
Zeroth-order – or derivative-free – optimization concerns
the problem of optimizing a given function without access
to its gradient, stochastic or otherwise. Its study dates back
at least to Rosenbrock (1960), and it has recently attracted
significant interest in machine learning and artificial intelligence due to the prohibitive cost of automatic differentiation
in very large neural nets and language models.
A popular approach to zeroth-order optimization involves
sampling the function to be optimized at several nearby
points, using the observed values to reconstruct the gradient
of the function, and then employing a standard, first-order
method (Conn et al., 2009). This approach allows the optimizer to approximate the gradient of the function to arbitrary
precision (at least, if enough queries are made). However, it
Authors appear in alphabetical order. 1 Criteo AI Lab 2 Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Panayotis Mertikopoulos <panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

also requires that the problem’s objective remain stationary
during the query process.
Motivated by applications to online ad auctions and recommender systems, our paper concerns the case where this
stationarity assumption breaks down – the zeroth-order online optimization (ZOO) setting. Specifically, we consider
an adversarial ZOO problem that unfolds as follows:
1. At each stage t = 1, 2, . . . , the optimizer selects an
action xt from a compact convex subset K of Rd .
2. Simultaneously, an adversary selects a reward function
ut : K → R, often assumed to take values in [0, 1].
3. The optimizer receives ut (xt ) as a reward, and the process repeats.
The learner’s performance P
after T stages is measured here
T
by their regret, viz. RT = t=1 [ut (x) − ut (xt )], and the
learner’s goal is to minimize the growth rate of RT .
Since each individual ut may be encountered once – and
only once – it is no longer possible to perform multiple
queries per function. On that account, the simultaneous
perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA) estimator of
Spall (1992) has been studied extensively as a viable alternative to multiple-point query methods for online optimization.
In particular, using a variant of the SPSA scheme, Flaxman
et al. (2005) showed that it is possible to achieve O(T 3/4 )
regret if the payoff functions encountered are concave. The
corresponding lower bound is Ω(T 1/2 ), and it was only recently achieved by the kernel-based method of Bubeck &
Eldan (2016) and Bubeck et al. (2017).
When venturing beyond problems with a convex structure, the situation is significantly more complicated. The
most widely studied case is the “Lipschitz bandit” – or,
sometimes, “Hölder bandit” – framework where each ut
is a random realization of a parametric model of the form
ut (x) = û(x; ξt ) with Lipschitz continuous mean u(x) =
Eξ [û(x; ξ)], cf. Agrawal (1995). In this case, the lower
d+1
bound for the regret is Ω(T d+2 ), and several algorithms
have been proposed to achieve it, typically by combining
an intelligent discretization of the problem’s search region
with a deterministic UCB-type policy (Bubeck et al., 2011;
Kleinberg et al., 2008; Slivkins, 2019).
On the other hand, in an adversarial setting, an informed

