On-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning for the Average-Reward Criterion

Yiming Zhang 1 Keith W. Ross 2 1

Abstract
We develop theory and algorithms for averagereward on-policy Reinforcement Learning (RL).
We first consider bounding the difference of the
long-term average reward for two policies. We
show that previous work based on the discounted
return (Schulman et al., 2015; Achiam et al., 2017)
results in a non-meaningful bound in the averagereward setting. By addressing the average-reward
criterion directly, we then derive a novel bound
which depends on the average divergence between
the two policies and Kemeny’s constant. Based
on this bound, we develop an iterative procedure
which produces a sequence of monotonically improved policies for the average reward criterion.
This iterative procedure can then be combined
with classic DRL (Deep Reinforcement Learning) methods, resulting in practical DRL algorithms that target the long-run average reward criterion. In particular, we demonstrate that AverageReward TRPO (ATRPO), which adapts the onpolicy TRPO algorithm to the average-reward
criterion, significantly outperforms TRPO in the
most challenging MuJuCo environments.

1. Introduction
The goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is to build agents
that can learn high-performing behaviors through trial-anderror interactions with the environment. Broadly speaking, modern RL tackles two kinds of problems: episodic
tasks and continuing tasks. In episodic tasks, the agentenvironment interaction can be broken into separate distinct
episodes, and the performance of the agent is simply the
sum of the rewards accrued within an episode. Examples
of episodic tasks include training an agent to learn to play
Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2018), where the episode terminates
when the game ends. In continuing tasks, such as robotic
locomotion (Peters & Schaal, 2008; Schulman et al., 2015;
1

New York University 2 New York University Shanghai. Correspondence to: Yiming Zhang <yiming.zhang@cs.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Haarnoja et al., 2018) or in a queuing scenario (Tadepalli
& Ok, 1994; Sutton & Barto, 2018), there is no natural separation of episodes and the agent-environment interaction
continues indefinitely. The performance of an agent in a
continuing task is more difficult to quantify since the total
sum of rewards is typically infinite.
One way of making the long-term reward objective meaningful for continuing tasks is to apply discounting so that
the infinite-horizon return is guaranteed to be finite for any
bounded reward function. However the discounted objective biases the optimal policy to choose actions that lead to
high near-term performance rather than to high long-term
performance. Such an objective is not appropriate when the
goal is to optimize long-term behavior, i.e., when the natural
objective underlying the task at hand is non-discounted. In
particular, we note that for the vast majority of benchmarks
for reinforcement learning such as Atari games (Mnih et al.,
2013) and MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), a non-discounted
performance measure is used to evaluate the trained policies.
Although in many circumstances, non-discounted criteria
are more natural, most of the successful DRL algorithms
today have been designed to optimize a discounted criterion during training. One possible work-around for this
mismatch is to simply train with a discount factor that is
very close to one. Indeed, from the Blackwell optimality
theory of MDPs (Blackwell, 1962), we know that if the discount factor is very close to one, then an optimal policy for
the infinite-horizon discounted criterion is also optimal for
the long-run average-reward criterion. However, although
Blackwell’s result suggests we can simply use a large discount factor to optimize non-discounted criteria, problems
with large discount factors are in general more difficult to
solve (Petrik & Scherrer, 2008; Jiang et al., 2015; 2016;
Lehnert et al., 2018). Researchers have also observed that
state-of-the-art DRL algorithms typically break down when
the discount factor gets too close to one (Schulman et al.,
2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2020).
In this paper we seek to develop algorithms for finding
high-performing policies for average-reward DRL problems.
Instead of trying to simply use standard discounted DRL
algorithms with large discount factors, we instead attack the
problem head-on, seeking to directly optimize the averagereward criterion. While the average reward setting has been

