A Unified Generative Adversarial Network Training
via Self-Labeling and Self-Attention

Tomoki Watanabe 1 Paolo Favaro 2

Abstract
We propose a novel GAN training scheme that can
handle any level of labeling in a unified manner.
Our scheme introduces a form of artificial labeling that can incorporate manually defined labels,
when available, and induce an alignment between
them. To define the artificial labels, we exploit the
assumption that neural network generators can be
trained more easily to map nearby latent vectors
to data with semantic similarities, than across separate categories. We use generated data samples
and their corresponding artificial conditioning labels to train a classifier. The classifier is then used
to self-label real data. To boost the accuracy of
the self-labeling, we also use the exponential moving average of the classifier. However, because
the classifier might still make mistakes, especially
at the beginning of the training, we also refine
the labels through self-attention, by using the labeling of real data samples only when the classifier outputs a high classification probability score.
We evaluate our approach on CIFAR-10, STL-10
and SVHN, and show that both self-labeling and
self-attention consistently improve the quality of
generated data. More surprisingly, we find that
the proposed scheme can even outperform classconditional GANs.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019) provide an
attractive approach to constructing generative models that
output samples of a target distribution. In their most basic
form, these models consist of two neural networks, a generator and a discriminator. The first network is trained to
This work has been done while the first author was visiting
the University of Bern. 1 Toshiba Corporation, Kawasaki, Japan
2
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Tomoki Watanabe <tomoki8.watanabe@toshiba.co.jp>, Paolo
Favaro <paolo.favaro@inf.unibe.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

generate samples from some latent representation (typically
a sample from a Gaussian distribution), while the second
network is trained to distinguish real samples xr from the
generated samples xf (see network D in Figure 1 (a)). The
most effective GANs seem to benefit greatly from class
conditioning. The class information is provided as input to
the generator and either injected into the discriminator as
an input (Mirza & Osindero, 2014) or through intermediate layers (Reed et al., 2016) or via a projection (Miyato
& Koyama, 2018) or an auxiliary loss (Odena et al., 2017;
Kavalerov et al., 2019) (see e.g., Figure 1 (b)). The family
of these generators is generically called conditional GANs
(cGAN).
In particular, in AC-GAN (Odena et al., 2017) (see Figure 1 (b)) one uses a discriminator with two outputs, one
for the classification of input images into real or fake and
the other for classification into multiple categories (see the
label y in the green box in Figure 1 (b)). We hypothesize
that providing the class information helps the training of the
generator, because the neural network architecture of the
generator tends to map similar latent vectors to data samples
that are semantically related. Thus, we expect a gradientbased training to converge more easily to a good set of
network parameters with class conditioning than without it.
This suggests that one might be able to train a generator in a
conditional manner even when manually defined labels are
not available. Based on this assumption, we train a generator
conditioned on an artificial set of labels and simultaneously
learn its inverse mapping through a classifier, which we call
teacher. The teacher is trained only on synthetic data (networks G-inference and C-training in Figure 1 (d)), and then
it is applied to real data samples to obtain their corresponding artificial labels (network C-inference in Figure 1 (d)),
a process that we call self-labeling. Because the accuracy
of a trained classifier is limited, using all the artificially
labeled real data would not help the generator especially
at the beginning of the training, when all predicted labels
may be highly inaccurate. Hence, we introduce a way to
select data, where the label consistency is high. To do so
we introduce a self-attention mechanism that is based on
selecting samples xr whose estimated label probability is
above a given threshold ( blue box in Figure 1 (d)). The
selected samples and their corresponding synthetic labels

