Bayesian Quadrature on Riemannian Data Manifolds

Christian Fröhlich 1 Alexandra Gessner * 1 2 Philipp Hennig 1 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Georgios Arvanitidis * 2

Abstract
Riemannian manifolds provide a principled way
to model nonlinear geometric structure inherent
in data. A Riemannian metric on said manifolds
determines geometry-aware shortest paths and
provides the means to define statistical models accordingly. However, these operations are typically
computationally demanding. To ease this computational burden, we advocate probabilistic numerical methods for Riemannian statistics. In particular, we focus on Bayesian quadrature (BQ) to
numerically compute integrals over normal laws
on Riemannian manifolds learned from data. In
this task, each function evaluation relies on the
solution of an expensive initial value problem. We
show that by leveraging both prior knowledge and
an active exploration scheme, BQ significantly
reduces the number of required evaluations and
thus outperforms Monte Carlo methods on a wide
range of integration problems. As a concrete application, we highlight the merits of adopting Riemannian geometry with our proposed framework
on a nonlinear dataset from molecular dynamics.

1. Introduction
The tacit assumption of a Euclidean geometry, implying that
distances can be measured along straight lines, is inadequate
when data follows a nonlinear trend, which is known as the
manifold hypothesis. As a result, probability distributions
based on a flat geometry may poorly model the data and
fail to capture its underlying structure. Generalized distributions that account for curvature of the data space have been
put forward to alleviate this issue. In particular, Pennec
(2006) proposed an extension of the normal distribution on
Riemannian manifolds such as the sphere.
The key strategy to use such distributions on general data
*

1
Equal supervision
University of Tübingen, Ger2
many Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Christian Fröhlich
<christian.froehlich@student.uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A LAND on a protein trajectory manifold of the enzyme
adenylate kinase. Each datum represents a conformation of the
protein, i.e., a spatial arrangement of its atoms. The conformation
corresponding to the LAND mean ( ) is visualized.

manifolds is by replacing straight lines with continuous
shortest paths, known as geodesics, which respect the nonlinear structure of the data. This is achieved by introducing a Riemannian metric in the data space that specifies
how distance and volume are distorted locally. To this end,
Arvanitidis et al. (2016) proposed a maximum likelihood
estimation scheme based on a data-induced metric to learn
the parameters of a Locally Adaptive Normal Distribution
(LAND), illustrated in Fig. 1. However, it relies on a computationally expensive optimization task that entails the
repeated numerical integration of the unnormalized density
on the manifold, for which no closed-form solution exists.
Hence we are interested in techniques to improve the efficiency of the numerical integration scheme.
Probabilistic numerics (Hennig et al., 2015; Cockayne et al.,
2019) frames computations that are subject to noise and
approximation error as active inference. A probabilistic
numerical routine treats the computer as a data source, acquiring evaluations according to a policy to decrease its
uncertainty about the result. Amongst probabilistic numerical methods, we focus on Bayesian quadrature (BQ) to
compute intractable integrals on data manifolds. Bayesian
quadrature (O’Hagan, 1991; Briol et al., 2019) treats numerical integration as an inference problem by constructing
posterior measures over integrals given observations, i.e.,
evaluations of the integrand. Besides providing sound un-

