Parameterless Transductive Feature Re-representation for Few-Shot Learning

Wentao Cui 1 Yuhong Guo 1 2

Abstract
Recent literature in few-shot learning (FSL) has
shown that transductive methods often outperform
their inductive counterparts. However, most transductive solutions, particularly the meta-learning
based ones, require inserting trainable parameters on top of some inductive baselines to facilitate transduction. In this paper, we propose a parameterless transductive feature re-representation
framework that differs from all existing solutions
from the following perspectives. (1) It is widely
compatible with existing FSL methods, including
meta-learning and fine tuning based models. (2)
The framework is simple and introduces no extra
training parameters when applied to any architecture. We conduct experiments on three benchmark
datasets by applying the framework to both representative meta-learning baselines and state-ofthe-art FSL methods. Our framework consistently
improves performances in all experiments and
refreshes the state-of-the-art FSL results.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has gained huge success across wide applications in recent years, including computer vision, natural language processing and reinforcement learning (LeCun et al.,
2015). Sophisticated deep neural network architectures with
carefully tuned hyperparameters can surpass human level
performance (Silver et al., 2017). However, such success is
typically conditioned on one key resource: sufficient annotated training data, which is hardly available in real world.
Data annotation is often either time consuming or expensive
in many real world domains. Therefore, a machine learning
model has to train with limited annotated data, where only a
few labeled instances for each category are available. Such
practical problem is termed as few-shot learning (FSL) and
has attracted enormous attention in the past few years.
1

School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Canada
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii.
Correspondence to:
Wentao Cui <wentaocui@cmail.carleton.ca>, Yuhong Guo
<yuhong.guo@carleton.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

FSL solutions are generally developed in two branches:
meta-learning based methods and fine tuning based methods. In both branches, transductive settings have been reported to outperform their inductive counterparts (Kim et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2019; Dhillon et al., 2020;
Boudiaf et al., 2020). In general, transductive algorithms
can (1) perform information (feature and/or label) propagation between query and support sets (Kim et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2019), (2) incorporate query
instances’ loss terms into the training objectives (Dhillon
et al., 2020; Boudiaf et al., 2020; Antoniou & Storkey, 2019),
and (3) utilize query instances’ pseudo labels for support
set augmentation (Liu et al., 2020; Ziko et al., 2020). Although transductive FSL has exactly the same amount of
training/test data as their inductive counterparts (Boudiaf
et al., 2020), information of unlabelled instances can be
quite beneficial when data annotation is scarce. For example,
two recent works (Dhillon et al., 2020; Boudiaf et al., 2020)
experimentally demonstrate that simply adding transductive
inference terms in the training objective can significantly
boost performance. This design requires re-training and is
applicable to fine tuning based frameworks. A more widely
explored approach is to fuse features of unlabelled instances
into other receiving instances (including both unlabelled
and labelled), as in (Kim et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2019). The intuition lies in one intrinsic nature
of FSL: few-shot labelled instances can hardly represent
the belonging classes. We term this issue as sample bias.
Reducing sample bias by exploiting the unlabelled instances
can significantly improve the model performance.
While transductive setting is beneficial, the aforementioned
models generally lack one or both of two critical properties:
(1) wide applicability and (2) lightweight model design. For
example, graph neural network (GNN) based models form a
unique type of solutions for FSL and have achieved impressive performances (Liu et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2020). While being powerful, the GNN acts as a key
part of the classifier and introduces many extra parameters.
The specific architecture design also makes its generalization to other applications not easy (Hou et al., 2019). In
(Hou et al., 2019), although no heavyweight classifier is
adopted as in GNN based models, a meta-learner is trained
to generate kernels to achieve feature propagation between
labelled and unlabelled instances. Transductive setting, par-

