Signatured Deep Fictitious Play for Mean Field Games with Common Noise

Ming Min * 1 Ruimeng Hu * 1 2

Abstract
Existing deep learning methods for solving meanfield games (MFGs) with common noise fix the
sampling common noise paths and then solve the
corresponding MFGs. This leads to a nested-loop
structure with millions of simulations of common
noise paths in order to produce accurate solutions,
which results in prohibitive computational cost
and limits the applications to a large extent. In
this paper, based on the rough path theory, we propose a novel single-loop algorithm, named signatured deep fictitious play, by which we can work
with the unfixed common noise setup to avoid
the nested-loop structure and reduce the computational complexity significantly. The proposed
algorithm can accurately capture the effect of common uncertainty changes on mean-field equilibria
without further training of neural networks, as previously needed in the existing machine learning
algorithms. The efficiency is supported by three
applications, including linear-quadratic MFGs,
mean-field portfolio game, and mean-field game
of optimal consumption and investment. Overall,
we provide a new point of view from the rough
path theory to solve MFGs with common noise
with significantly improved efficiency and an extensive range of applications. In addition, we
report the first deep learning work to deal with
extended MFGs (a mean-field interaction via both
the states and controls) with common noise.

1. Introduction
Stochastic differential games study the strategic interaction
of rational decision-makers in an uncertain dynamical system, and have been widely applied to many areas, including
social science, system science, and computer science. For
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-3110,
USA 2 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA 93106-3080, USA. Correspondence to: Ruimeng Hu
<rhu@ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

realistic models, the problem usually lacks tractability and
needs numerical methods. With a large number of players
resulting in high-dimensional problems, conventional algorithms soon lose efficiency and one may resort to recently
developed machine learning tools (Hu, 2021; Han & Hu,
2020; Han et al., 2020). On the other hand, one could utilize
its limiting mean-field version, mean-field games (MFGs),
to approximate the n-player game for large n (e.g., Han et al.
(2021)). Introduced independently in Huang et al. (2006);
Lasry & Lions (2007), MFGs study the decision making
problem of a continuum of agents, aiming to provide asymptotic analysis of the finite player model in which players
interact through their empirical distribution. In an MFG,
each agent is infinitesimal, whose decision can not affect
the population law. Therefore, the problem can be solved by
focusing on the optimal decision of a representative agent
in response to the average behavior of the entire population
and a fixed-point problem (cf. equation (2.5)). The MFG
model has inspired tremendous applications, not only in
finance and economics, such as system risk (Carmona et al.,
2015), high-frequency trading (Lachapelle et al., 2016) and
crowd trading (Cardaliaguet & Lehalle, 2018), but also to
population dynamics (Achdou et al., 2017; Djehiche et al.,
2017; Achdou & Lasry, 2019) and sanitary vaccination (Hubert & Turinici, 2018; Elie et al., 2020a), to list a few. For a
systematical introduction of MFGs, see Caines et al. (2017);
Carmona & Delarue (2018a;b).
In MFGs, the random shocks to the dynamical system can
be from two sources: idiosyncratic to the individual players
and common to all players, i.e., decision-makers face correlated randomness. While MFGs were initially introduced
with only idiosyncratic noise as seen in most of the literature, games with common noise, referred to as MFGs with
common noise, have attracted significant attention recently
(Lacker & Webster, 2015; Carmona et al., 2016; Ahuja,
2016; Graber, 2016). The inclusion of common noise is
natural in many contexts, such as multi-agent trading in a
common stock market, or systemic risk induced through
inter-bank lending/borrowing. In reality, players make decisions in a common environment (e.g., trade in the same
stock market). Therefore, their states are subject to correlated random shocks, which can be modeled by individual
noises and a common noise. In this modeling, observing
the state dynamics will be sufficient, and one does not need

