Just Train Twice: Improving Group Robustness
without Training Group Information
Evan Zheran Liu * 1 Behzad Haghgoo * 1 Annie S. Chen * 1 Aditi Raghunathan 1 Pang Wei Koh 1
Shiori Sagawa 1 Percy Liang 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
Standard training via empirical risk minimization
(ERM) can produce models that achieve low error on average but high error on certain groups,
especially in the presence of spurious correlations
between the input and label. Prior approaches
that achieve low worst-group error, like group
distributionally robust optimization (group DRO)
require expensive group annotations for each training point, whereas approaches that do not use such
group annotations achieve worse worst-group performance. In this paper, we propose a simple
two-stage approach, J TT, that minimizes the loss
over a reweighted dataset (second stage) where we
upweight training examples that are misclassified
at the end of a few steps of standard training (first
stage). Intuitively, this upweights points from
groups on which standard ERM models perform
poorly, leading to improved worst-group performance. On four image classification and natural
language processing tasks with spurious correlations, we show that J TT closes 73% of the gap
in worst-group accuracy between standard ERM
and group DRO, while only requiring group annotations on a small validation set in order to tune
hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
The standard approach of empirical risk minimization
(ERM)—training machine learning models to minimize average training loss—can produce models that achieve low
test error on average but still incur high error on certain
groups of examples (Hovy & Søgaard, 2015; Blodgett et al.,
2016; Tatman, 2017; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Duchi et al.,
2019). These kinds of performance disparities across groups
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Evan Zheran Liu <evanliu@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

can be especially pronounced in the presence of spurious
correlations. For example, in the task of classifying whether
an online comment is toxic, the training data is often biased
so that mentions of particular demographic identities (e.g.,
certain races or religions) are positively correlated with toxicity. Models trained via ERM then associate demographic
mentions with toxicity and thus perform poorly on groups
of examples in which the correlation does not hold, such as
non-toxic comments mentioning a particular demographic
(Borkan et al., 2019). Similar performance disparities due
to spurious correlations have been reported in many other
applications, including other language tasks, facial recognition, and medical imaging (Gururangan et al., 2018; McCoy
et al., 2019; Badgeley et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020a;
Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020).
Following prior work, we formalize this setting by considering a set of pre-defined groups (e.g., corresponding
to different demographics) and seeking models that have
low worst-group error (Sagawa et al., 2020a). Previous approaches to this problem typically require annotations of
the group membership of each training example (Sagawa
et al., 2020a; Goel et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). While
these approaches have been successful at improving worstgroup performance, the training group annotations that they
require are often expensive to obtain; for example, in the toxicity classification task mentioned above, this would require
annotating each comment with the demographic identities
that are mentioned.
In this paper, we propose a simple algorithm, J TT (Just
Train Twice), for improving the worst-group error without
training group annotations, instead only requiring group
annotations on a much smaller validation set to tune hyperparameters. J TT is composed of two stages: we first identify
training examples that are misclassified by a standard ERM
model, and we then train the final model by upweighting the
examples identified in the first stage. Intuitively, this procedure exploits the observation that sufficiently-regularized
ERM models tend to incur high worst-group training error. This makes selecting misclassified examples an effective heuristic for identifying examples from the worstperforming group, and upweighting such examples can yield

