Adversarial Dueling Bandits

Aadirupa Saha 1 Tomer Koren 2 Yishay Mansour 2

Abstract
We introduce the problem of regret minimization
in Adversarial Dueling Bandits. As in classic
Dueling Bandits, the learner has to repeatedly
choose a pair of items and observe only a relative binary ‘win-loss’ feedback for this pair, but
here this feedback is generated from an arbitrary
preference matrix, possibly chosen adversarially.
Our main result is an algorithm whose T -round
regret compared to the Borda-winner from a set
of K items is Õ(K 1/3 T 2/3 ), as well as a matching Ω(K 1/3 T 2/3 ) lower bound. We also prove a
similar high probability regret bound. We further
consider a simpler fixed-gap adversarial setup,
which bridges between two extreme preference
feedback models for dueling bandits: stationary
preferences and an arbitrary sequence of preferences. For the fixed-gap adversarial setup we give
an Õ((K/∆2 ) log T ) regret algorithm, where ∆
is the gap in Borda scores between the best item
and all other items, and show a lower bound of
Ω(K/∆2 ) indicating that our dependence on the
main problem parameters K and ∆ is tight (up to
logarithmic factors). Finally, we corroborate the
theoretical results with empirical evaluations.

1. Introduction
Dueling Bandits is an online decision making framework
similar to the well known (stochastic) multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem (Auer et al., 2002a; Slivkins, 2019), that
has gained widespread attention in the machine learning
community over the past decade (Yue et al., 2012; Zoghi
et al., 2014b; 2015a). In Dueling Bandits, a learner repeatedly selects a pair of items to be compared to each other in
a “duel,” and consequently observe a binary stochastic preference feedback, which can be interpreted as the winning
item in this duel. The goal of the learner is to minimize the
1

Microsoft Research, New York City 2 Blavatnik School
of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, and Google
Research Tel Aviv.
Correspondence to: Aadirupa Saha
<aadirupa.saha@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

regret with respect to the best item in hindsight, according
to a certain score function.
Numerous real-world applications are naturally modelled as
dueling bandit problems, including movie recommendations,
tournament ranking, search engine optimization, retail management, etc. (see also Busa-Fekete & Hüllermeier, 2014;
Yue & Joachims, 2009). Indeed, in many of these scenarios, users with whom the algorithm interacts with find it
more natural to provide binary feedback by comparing two
alternatives rather than giving an absolute score for a single
alternative. Over the years, several algorithms have been
proposed for addressing dueling bandit problems (Ailon
et al., 2014; Zoghi et al., 2014a; Komiyama et al., 2015;
Zoghi et al., 2014b) and there has been some work on extending the pairwise preference to more general subset-wise
preferences (Sui et al., 2017; Brost et al., 2016; Saha &
Gopalan, 2018; 2019; Ren et al., 2018).
While almost all of the existing literature on dueling bandits focus on stochastic stationary preferences, in reality
preferences might vary significantly and unpredictably over
time. For example, in video recommendation systems, user
preferences may evolve according to daily and hourly viewing trends; in web-search optimization, relevance of various
websites may vary rather unpredictably. In other words,
many of the real-world applications of dueling bandits actually deviate from the stochastic feedback model, and would
more faithfully be modelled in a robust worse-case (adversarial) model that alleviates the strong stochastic assumption
and allows for an arbitrary sequence of preferences over
time. For similar reasons, the MAB problem, and more
generally, online learning, are frequently studied in a nonstochastic adversarial setup (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2018;
Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006; Seldin & Slivkins, 2014; Seldin & Lugosi, 2017; Neu,
2015; Bubeck & Slivkins, 2012).
Surprisingly, however, a non-stochastic version of dueling
bandits has not been well studied (with the only exception
being Gajane et al., 2015, discussed below). The first challenge in eschewing stationarity in dueling bandits lies in
the performance benchmark compared to which regret is
defined. Indeed, most works on stochastic dueling bandits
rely on the existence of a Condorcet winner: an item being preferred (and often by a gap) when compared with

