Model Distillation for Revenue Optimization:
Interpretable Personalized Pricing

Max Biggs 1 Wei Sun 2 Markus Ettl 2

Abstract
Data-driven pricing strategies are becoming increasingly common, where customers are offered
a personalized price based on features that are
predictive of their valuation of a product. It is desirable for this pricing policy to be simple and interpretable, so it can be verified, checked for fairness, and easily implemented. However, efforts to
incorporate machine learning into a pricing framework often lead to complex pricing policies which
are not interpretable, resulting in slow adoption
in practice. We present a customized, prescriptive tree-based algorithm that distills knowledge
from a complex black-box machine learning algorithm, segments customers with similar valuations
and prescribes prices in such a way that maximizes revenue while maintaining interpretability.
We quantify the regret of a resulting policy and
demonstrate its efficacy in applications with both
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
To remain competitive, many firms are seeking to implement
data-driven pricing policies. This has become possible due
to the large amounts of relevant data firms are collecting,
and through recent advances in machine learning. This data
rich environment has also enhanced personalized pricing,
where customers are offered a personalized price based on
features that are predictive of their valuation of a product. A
common example of personalized pricing is targeted offers
through loyalty programs. While personalized pricing may
potentially lead to higher revenue, currently only a quarter of
retail companies are supportive of ML adoption, the lowest
acceptance rate across surveyed industries.1 One of the
1
Darden School of Business, University of Virginia, Virginia,
USA. 2 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Max Biggs <biggsm@darden.virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://advisory.kpmg.us/content/dam/advisory/en/pdfs/2020/
retail-living-in-an-ai-world.pdf

main concerns is that the most accurate prediction models
are often non-parametric functions which are considered
as a black-box. Their opaqueness makes it difficult for
firms to understand and trust the underlying mechanics of
how the prices are being formed, which may potentially
lead to fairness and legal issues. Another challenge with a
personalized pricing policy is that it might be very complex,
making it difficult and cumbersome for a firm to implement
and to verify the prices are sensible.
In the recent years, there has been a surge of interest in making machine learning models more interpretable (Letham
et al., 2015; Ustun & Rudin, 2016; Lakkaraju et al., 2016;
Bertsimas et al., 2019a). A popular approach to gain interpretability is knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015),
where a simple model (the student) is trained on a transformed dataset, representing the distilled knowledge extracted by a complex model (the teacher). The distillation
process often shows to bring the student closer to matching
the predictive power of the teacher. Among many potential
candidate models as the student (e.g., linear models and generalized additive models), decision tree stands out due to its
ability to capture interactions between features, scalability
to large datasets, and perhaps most importantly, providing
“human-friendly” explanations to aid interpretability (Frosst
& Hinton, 2017; Bastani et al., 2017; 2018; Miller, 2019).
However, the bulk of existing work on interpretability focuses on predictive models. There has been significantly
less work on interpreting policies from these models when
embedded in an operational decision-making context, which
is the topic of this paper. It is crucial to note that it is not
straightforward to adapt predictive models effectively to
a prescriptive setting. Consider the problem of extracting
interpretable pricing rules under a revenue-maximizing objective; a potential method of adapting the student-teacher
framework is to first train a black-box teacher model that
predicts demand (i.e., a response function that relates sales
to price and other relevant features) and use this model to
determine the best price with respect to the given features.
Next, one can then approximate these prices by training an
interpretable student model, e.g., regress on the prices with
a decision tree. In the appendix 2 , we provide a simple ex2

https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.01903

