Principal Component Hierarchy for Sparse Quadratic Programs

Robbie Vreugdenhil 1 Viet Anh Nguyen 2 3 Armin Eftekhari 4 Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani 1

Abstract
We propose a novel approximation hierarchy
for cardinality-constrained, convex quadratic programs that exploits the rank-dominating eigenvectors of the quadratic matrix. Each level of
approximation admits a min-max characterization
whose objective function can be optimized over
the binary variables analytically, while preserving convexity in the continuous variables. Exploiting this property, we propose two scalable
optimization algorithms, coined as the “best response” and the “dual program”, that can efficiently screen the potential indices of the nonzero
elements of the original program. We show that
the proposed methods are competitive with the
existing screening methods in the current sparse
regression literature, and it is particularly fast on
instances with high number of measurements in
experiments with both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Sparsity is a powerful inductive bias that improves the interpretability and performance of many regression models (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Hastie et al., 2009; Bertsimas et al.,
2017). Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in
sparsity-based methods and algorithms for sparse recovery,
mostly in the setting of sparse linear regression (Atamturk
& Gomez, 2020; Bertsimas & van Parys, 2017; Hazimeh
et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2017).
In this paper we study the more general problem of sparse
linearly-constrained quadratic programming with a regularization term. Sparsity is imposed in this context by controlling the `0 norm of the estimator (Miller, 2002). More

specifically, we consider the problem
J? ,

min hc, xi + hx, Qxi + η −1 kxk22
s.t. x ∈ Rn
Ax ≤ b, kxk0 ≤ s,

where Q ∈ Sn+ , c ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rm×n , b ∈ Rm , and the
integer s ≤ n specifies the target sparsity level. The ridge
regularization term η −1 kxk22 (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970) in
the objective function reduces the mean squared error when
the data is affected by noise and/or uncertainty (Ghaoui &
Lebret, 1997; Mazumder et al., 2020).
Problem (P) arises in a wide range of applications, including sparse linear regression, model predictive control (Aguilera et al., 2014), portfolio optimization (Bertsimas & CoryWright, 2020), binary quadratic programming and principal
component analysis (Bertsimas et al., 2020b).
Motivation for our approach. Throughout, suppose
that
(P) admits the eigendecomposition Q =
Pn Q in problem
>
λ
v
v
,
where
λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λn ≥ 0 are the eigenvali
i
i
i=1
ues of Q. Our approach to solve (P) is centered around the
following key observation:
Observation. For many real-world applications, the
matrix Q is nearly low-rank.
The concept of nearly low-rank is contextual. In this paper,
we say that Q is nearly low-rank if a low-rank matrix can
approximate Q to a reasonable accuracy, where the accuracy
is measured by a matrix norm.
It is instructive to demonstrate the nearly low-rank property
of Q in the context of linear regression. Given N training
n
samples {(ξi , ωi )}N
i=1 ⊂ R ×R, the sparse ridge regression
problem
N

1

Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of
Technology 2 Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University 3 VinAI Research, Vietnam 4 Department
of Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, Umea University. Correspondence to: Robbie Vreugdenhil <robbievreugdenhil@gmail.com>.

min

x:kxk0 ≤s

1 X
kξi − x> ωi k22 + η −1 kxk22
N i=1

(1)

coincides with (P) for the choice of
N

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(P)

Q=

1 X
ωi ωi> ,
N i=1

N

c=

1 X
ξi ωi .
N i=1

(2)

