BANG: Bridging Autoregressive and Non-autoregressive Generation with
Large Scale Pretraining

Weizhen Qi 1 2 Yeyun Gong * 3 Jian Jiao * 4 Yu Yan * 4 Weizhu Chen * 4 Dayiheng Liu * 2 5 Kewen Tang 4
Houqiang Li 1 Jiusheng Chen 4 Ruofei Zhang 4 Ming Zhou 3 Nan Duan 3

Abstract
In this paper, we propose BANG, a new pretraining model to Bridge the gap between
Autoregressive (AR) and Non-autoregressive
(NAR) Generation. AR and NAR generation can
be uniformly regarded as to what extent previous tokens can be attended, and BANG bridges
AR and NAR generation by designing a novel
model structure for large-scale pretraining. The
pretrained BANG model can simultaneously support AR, NAR and semi-NAR generation to meet
different requirements. Experiments on question
generation (SQuAD 1.1), summarization (XSum)
and dialogue generation (PersonaChat) show that
BANG improves NAR and semi-NAR performance significantly as well as attaining comparable performance with strong AR pretrained models. Compared with the semi-NAR strong baselines, BANG achieves absolute improvements of
14.01 and 5.24 in the overall scores of SQuAD
1.1 and XSum, respectively. In addition, BANG
achieves absolute improvements of 10.73, 6.39
and 5.90 in the overall scores of SQuAD, XSUM
and PersonaChat respectively compared with the
strong NAR baselines.

1. Introduction
Various pretraining methods (Song et al., 2019; Lewis et al.,
2019; Qi et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019a)
have been successfully applied in natural language generation. Most of the pretraining works are based on Transformer and designed with autoregressive (AR) language
model. Transformer based pretraining models show consis*
Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China 2 During Internship at MSRA 3 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 4 Microsoft, Redmond, USA 5 Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Yeyun Gong
<yegong@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tent improvements with larger model size and larger pretraining corpus. Although the autoregressive generation method
achieves high-quality results in many tasks, its latency is a
well-known limitation for online real-time usage.
Non-autoregressive (NAR) models (Gu et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Ghazvininejad et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2019a) are proposed to reduce generation latency. Different from AR models which generate tokens
sequentially, NAR models generate tokens in parallel. Compared to AR models, NAR models generally come with a
much lower inference latency, but a decrease in accuracy. In
order to balance latency and accuracy, semi-NAR generation
models (Stern et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2019;
Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) are proposed. However, most of
the NAR and semi-NAR models focus on translation tasks
rather than general natural langauge generation tasks, which
are proved to significantly benefit from pretraining (Qi et al.,
2020; Lewis et al., 2019). Some works (Guo et al., 2020b;
Su et al., 2021) initialize their NAR models with pretrained
natural language understanding model BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018) for better performance. To the best of our knowledge,
this paper proposes the first large-scale pretraining model
designed for NAR and semi-NAR generation.
In this paper, we propose a new model named BANG 1 to
bridge the gap between AR and NAR via pretraining a generative model. Specifically, we consider pretraining model
using AR, semi-NAR and NAR objectives with different
attention mechanisms, which decide what extent previous
tokens can be attended to. Precisely, BANG is pretrained to
predict each token with arbitrary length of previous golden
tokens replaced with special token [MASK]s. For example,
with complete previous golden tokens, BANG predicts the
next token in the AR manner. With all previous tokens replaced by [MASK], BANG predicts the next token in the
NAR manner.
For AR models, the training strategy of teacher-forcing is
commonly used, which uses the golden tokens as previous
context to predict the next token. For NAR models, [MASK]
initialization (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) or other methods
1

https://github.com/microsoft/BANG

