Fused Acoustic and Text Encoding for
Multimodal Bilingual Pretraining and Speech Translation

Renjie Zheng * 1 Junkun Chen * 2 Mingbo Ma 1 Liang Huang 1 2

Abstract
Recently, representation learning for text and
speech has successfully improved many language
related tasks. However, all existing methods suffer from two limitations: (a) they only learn from
one input modality, while a unified representation
for both speech and text is needed by tasks such
as end-to-end speech translation, and as a result,
(b) they can not exploit various large-scale text
and speech data and their performance is limited
by the scarcity of parallel speech translation data.
To address these problems, we propose a Fused
Acoustic and Text Masked Language Model (FATMLM) which jointly learns a unified representation for both acoustic and text input from various types of corpora including parallel data for
speech recognition and machine translation, and
even pure speech and text data. Within this crossmodal representation learning framework, we further present an end-to-end model for Fused Acoustic and Text Speech Translation (FAT-ST). Experiments on three translation directions show that by
fine-tuning from FAT-MLM, our proposed speech
translation models substantially improve translation quality by up to +5.9 BLEU.

1. Introduction
In recent years, task-agnostic text representation learning (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2019) has attracted much attention in the NLP community
due to its strong performance to many downstream tasks.
More recently, unsupervised speech representation learning
(Baevski et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020a)
also successfully improved many speech related tasks, such
*
Equal contribution 1 Baidu Research, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. Part of J.C.’s contributions were made during his internship at Baidu Research.
Correspondence to: Renjie Zheng <renjiezheng@baidu.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Speech

Scarce

Translation

Abundant

Transcription

Abundant

Figure 1. The quality of end-to-end speech translation models has
been limited by the scarcity of speech translation datasets. However, there is an abundance of datasets for speech, text, speech
recognition, and machine translation data that can be leveraged.

as speech recognition and speech translation.
However all these existing methods can only handle one
modality, either text or speech, while joint acoustic and text
representation is desired for many end-to-end spoken language processing tasks, such as spoken question answering
(Chuang et al., 2019) and end-to-end speech-to-text translation (Liu et al., 2020b). For example, end-to-end speech
translation (ST) is desired due to its advantages over the
pipeline paradigm, such as low latency, alleviation of error propagation, and fewer parameters (Weiss et al., 2017;
Bérard et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019; Sperber et al., 2017;
Zheng et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). However, its translation quality is limited by the scarcity of large-scale parallel
speech translation data while there exists sufficient data for
speech recognition and text machine translation (Fig. 1). It
would be helpful if source speech and bilingual text can be
encoded into a unified representation via abundant speech
recognition and text machine translation data. Liu et al.
(2020b) show that jointly training a multi-modal ST encoder
can largely improve the translation quality. However, their
proposed representation learning method is constrained to
the sequence-to-sequence framework and there is no experiment showing whether their proposed method can benefit
from extra speech recognition and machine translation data.
Inspired by recent cross-lingual language model pre-training
work (Lample & Conneau, 2019) which shows the potential

