SPECTRE: Defending Against Backdoor Attacks Using Robust Statistics

Jonathan Hayase 1 Weihao Kong 1 Raghav Somani 1 Sewoong Oh 1

Modern machine learning increasingly requires
training on a large collection of data from multiple sources, not all of which can be trusted. A
particularly concerning scenario is when a small
fraction of poisoned data changes the behavior of
the trained model when triggered by an attackerspecified watermark. Such a compromised model
will be deployed unnoticed as the model is accurate otherwise. There have been promising attempts to use the intermediate representations of
such a model to separate corrupted examples from
clean ones. However, these defenses work only
when a certain spectral signature of the poisoned
examples is large enough for detection. There is
a wide range of attacks that cannot be protected
against by the existing defenses. We propose a
novel defense algorithm using robust covariance
estimation to amplify the spectral signature of
corrupted data. This defense provides a clean
model, completely removing the backdoor, even
in regimes where previous methods have no hope
of detecting the poisoned examples.2

1. Introduction
Large scale machine learning, such as federated learning
(Kairouz et al., 2019), requires training data collected from
multiple sources. As not all sources can be trusted and sanity
checking the data is expensive, this opens an opportunity
for an adversary to inject poisoned data into the training
set. A particularly concerning scenario is the backdoor
attack; the attacker attempts to embed a hidden backdoor
in the trained model such that its prediction is maliciously
changed when activated by samples with an attacker-defined
trigger. As the model behavior on clean data is unchanged,
such backdoored models may be deployed unnoticed.
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, United States. Correspondence
to: Jonathan Hayase <jhayase@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
2
Code and pre-trained models are available at https://
github.com/SewoongLab/spectre-defense.

Starting with the seminal work of (Gu et al., 2017), there
has been an active line of work on designing backdoor attacks that use more stealth triggers (Chen et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020) or that can
pass a human inspection (Turner et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2020). Empirical evidence in these works suggest that a
small fraction of poisoned data is sufficient to successfully
create backdoors in trained neural networks. For example,
CIFAR-10 data has 5,000 training examples for each of
the ten classes. When the pixel attack (Gu et al., 2017) is
launched with only 125 poisoned samples injected during
training, the pixel attack succeeds in planting a backdoor
in the trained model, achieving an attack accuracy of 63%
(shown in Fig. 1 in blue triangles).
1.00
accuracy on poisoned test examples

Abstract

no defense
PCA defense
Algorithm 1

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
16

32
64
128
256
512
number of poisoned training examples

1024

Figure 1: Under the pixel attack, the PCA defense fails to
produce a clean model when the number of poisoned examples is between 64 and 256 (red circle). In fact, it removes
clean data samples resulting in a model with higher accuracy
on the poisoned test examples than when no defense was
applied (blue triangle). SPECTRE produces clean models
with the backdoor completely removed in all regimes (green
square).
Recently, Tran et al. (2018) proposed, what we call, the
PCA defense using the representations at the intermediate
layers of neural networks trained on corrupted datasets. It
is based on the observation that poisoned examples have
special spectral signatures that can be used to filter them out.
Concretely, given the intermediate representations {hi }ni=1
of the training data, each sample is assigned an outlier score
τi = |hhi , vh i|, which is its magnitude in the top PCA
direction vh of the representations. Those with high scores

