ConvexVST: A Convex Optimization Approach to Variance-stabilizing
Transformation
Mengfan Wang 1 Boyu Lyu 1 Guoqiang Yu 1

Abstract
The variance-stabilizing transformation (VST)
problem is to transform heteroscedastic data to homoscedastic data so that they are more tractable
for subsequent analysis. However, most of the
existing approaches focus on finding an analytical solution for a certain parametric distribution,
which severely limits the applications, because
simple distributions cannot faithfully describe the
real data while more complicated distributions
cannot be analytically solved. In this paper, we
converted the VST problem into a convex optimization problem, which can always be efficiently
solved, identified the specific structure of the convex problem, which further improved the efficiency of the proposed algorithm, and showed that
any finite discrete distributions and the discretized
version of any continuous distributions from real
data can be variance-stabilized in an easy and
nonparametric way. We demonstrated the new
approach on bioimaging data and achieved superior performance compared to peer algorithms
in terms of not only the variance homoscedasticity but also the impact on subsequent analysis
such as denoising. Source codes are available at
https://github.com/yu-lab-vt/ConvexVST.

1. Introduction
The variance-stabilizing transformation (VST) problem is to
find a transformation function, which can transform a family
of heteroscedastic random variables (r.v.) to homoscedastic
r.v. In mathematical terms, it is to find a function f for
a family of r.v. Xθ indexed by the parameter θ so that
V ar[f (Xθ )] or M SE[f (Xθ )] are functionally independent
with θ.
As a fundamental preprocessing step for data analysis, the
1
Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Guoqiang Yu
<yug@vt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

VST problem has been the subject of extensive theoretical
and experimental studies because of its broad applications.
In numerous papers, VST, making the resulting distribution
more homoscedastic, not only eases but also improves the
subsequent analysis from the basic logistic regression (Yan
& Su, 2009) to advanced neural networks (Zhang et al.,
2019a). Without VST, people have to either model the different variances for different observations, which is often
difficult and sometimes impossible, or assume wrongly a
single variance for all observations. Indeed, VST has been
applied to a wide variety of different fields, such as image
denoising (Azzari & Foi, 2016), machine learning (Zhang
et al., 2019a), microarray data calibration (Huber et al.,
2002), traffic control (Guo et al., 2012), managerial accounting (Ittner & Larcker, 2001), and clinical trials (Enright
et al., 2003).
The most original and classical variance stabilizer (Tippett,
1935)
Z z
1
p
f (z) =
dE[Xθ ]
(1)
V ar[Xθ ]
was proposed to transform an arbitrary family of basic probability distributions and provide good asymptotic properties.
After that, most of the contributions focused on finding a
closed-form expression for a particular distribution,
p for example, the Anscombe transformation f : z → 2 z + 3/8,
which can stabilize the variance of Poisson distribution approaching 1 when z increasing (Anscombe, 1948).
These theoretical researches did not stabilize variance very
well in real applications. We reasoned that the less satisfactory performance is due to the following two facts. Firstly,
simple parametric transformation functions cannot match
well with the real data, while more complicated models are
hard to be analytically solved. Secondly, almost all works
aimed at achieving the stabilization in the asymptotic sense,
which can only guarantee good performance when the variance is small compared to its mean. Thus, some researchers
turned to develop data-driven algorithms and tried to find
numerical solutions by optimization approach. We mention the AVAS (Tibshirani, 1988) as the most classical one,
which is further improved in recent years by (Foi, 2009).
Both of them refine the VST functions by calculating an
integral formula like Equation 1 iteratively, hoping for better

