Differentiable Spatial Planning using Transformers

Devendra Singh Chaplot 1 2 Deepak Pathak 2 Jitendra Malik 1 3
Project webpage: https://devendrachaplot.github.io/projects/spatial-planning-transformers

Abstract
We consider the problem of spatial path planning.
In contrast to the classical solutions which optimize a new plan from scratch and assume access to the full map with ground truth obstacle
locations, we learn a planner from the data in a
differentiable manner that allows us to leverage
statistical regularities from past data. We propose Spatial Planning Transformers (SPT), which
given an obstacle map learns to generate actions
by planning over long-range spatial dependencies,
unlike prior data-driven planners that propagate information locally via convolutional structure in an
iterative manner. In the setting where the ground
truth map is not known to the agent, we leverage pre-trained SPTs in an end-to-end framework
that has the structure of mapper and planner built
into it which allows seamless generalization to
out-of-distribution maps and goals. SPTs outperform prior state-of-the-art differentiable planners
across all the setups for both manipulation and
navigation tasks, leading to an absolute improvement of 7-19%.

1. Introduction
The problem of path planning has been a bedrock of robotics.
Given an obstacle map of an environment and a goal location, the task is to output the shortest path to the goal location starting from any position in the map. We consider path
planning with spatial maps. Building a top-down spatial
map is common practice in robotic navigation as it provides
a natural representation of physical space (Durrant-Whyte
& Bailey, 2006). Robotic manipulation can also be naturally
phrased via spatial map using the formalism of configuration
spaces (Lozano-Perez, 1990), as shown in Fig 1. This problem has been studied in robotics for several decades, and
1
Facebook AI Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 UC
Berkeley. Correspondence to: Devendra Singh Chaplot <dchaplot@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Spatial Path Planning: The raw observations (top left)
and obstacles can be represented spatially via top-down map in navigation (left) and via configuration space in manipulation (right).

classic planning algorithms include Dijkstra et al. (1959),
PRM (Kavraki et al., 1996), RRT (LaValle & Kuffner Jr,
2001), RRT* (Karaman & Frazzoli, 2011), etc.
Our objective is to develop methods that can learn to plan
from data. However, a natural question is why do we need
learning for a problem which has stable classical solutions?
There are two key reasons. First, classical methods do not
capture statistical regularities present in the natural world,
(for e.g., walls are mostly parallel or perpendicular to each
other), because they optimize a plan from scratch for each
new setup. This also makes analytical planning methods to
be often slow at inference time which is an issue in dynamic
scenarios where a more reactive policy might be required
for fast adaptation from failures. A learned planner represented via a neural network can not only capture regularities
but is also efficient at inference as the plan is just a result
of forward-pass through the network. Second, a critical
assumption of classical algorithms is that a global groundtruth obstacle space must be known to the agent ahead of
time. This is in stark contrast to biological agents where
cognitive maps are not pixel-accurate ground truth location
of agents, but built through actions in the environment, e.g.,
rats build an implicit map of the environment incrementally
through trajectories enabling them to take shortcuts (Tolman, 1948). A learned solution could not only provide the
ability to deal with partial, noisy maps and but also help
build maps on the fly while acting in the environment by
backpropagating through the generated long-range plans.

