Value-at-Risk Optimization with Gaussian Processes

Quoc Phong Nguyen 1 Zhongxiang Dai 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 Patrick Jaillet 2

Abstract
Value-at-risk (VA R) is an established measure
to assess risks in critical real-world applications
with random environmental factors. This paper
presents a novel VA R upper confidence bound
(V-UCB) algorithm for maximizing the VA R of
a black-box objective function with the first noregret guarantee. To realize this, we first derive
a confidence bound of VA R and then prove the
existence of values of the environmental random
variable (to be selected to achieve no regret) such
that the confidence bound of VA R lies within that
of the objective function evaluated at such values.
Our V-UCB algorithm empirically demonstrates
state-of-the-art performance in optimizing synthetic benchmark functions, a portfolio optimization problem, and a simulated robot task.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of maximizing an expensive-tocompute black-box objective function f that depends on
an optimization variable x and an environmental random
variable Z. Due to the randomness in Z, the function evaluation f (x, Z) of f at x is a random variable. Though for such
an objective function f , Bayesian optimization (BO) can be
naturally applied to maximize its expectation EZ [f (x, Z)]
over Z (Toscano-Palmerin & Frazier, 2018), this maximization objective overlooks the risks of potentially undesirable
function evaluations. These risks can arise from either (a)
the realization of an unknown distribution of Z or (b) the
realization of the random Z given that the distribution of
f (x, Z) can be estimated well or that of Z is known. The
issue (a) has been tackled by distributionally robust BO
(Kirschner et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020) which maximizes EZ [f (x, Z)] under the worst-case realization of the
distribution of Z. To resolve the issue (b), the risk from the
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore, Republic of Singapore 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Quoc Phong Nguyen
<qphong@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

uncertainty in Z can be controlled via the mean-variance
optimization framework (Iwazaki et al., 2020), value-at-risk
(VA R), or conditional value-at-risk (CVA R) (Cakmak et al.,
2020; Torossian et al., 2020). The work of Bogunovic et al.
(2018) has considered adversarially robust BO, where z is
controlled by an adversary deterministically.1 In this case,
the objective is to find x that maximizes the function under
the worst-case realization of z, i.e., argmaxx minz f (x, z).
In this paper, we focus on case (b) where the distribution of
Z is known (or well-estimated). For example, in agriculture,
although farmers cannot control the temperature of an outdoor farm, its distribution can be estimated from historical
data and controlled in an indoor environment for optimizing
the plant yield. Given the distribution of Z, the objective is
to control the risk that the function evaluation f (x, z), for a
z sampled from Z, is small. One popular framework is to
control the trade-off between the mean (viewed as reward)
and the variance (viewed as risk) of the function evaluation
with respect to Z (Iwazaki et al., 2020). However, quantifying the risk using variance implies indifference between
positive and negative deviations from the mean, while people often have asymmetric risk attitudes (Goh et al., 2012).
In our problem of maximizing the objective function, it is
reasonable to assume that people are risk-averse towards
only the negative deviations from the mean, i.e., the risk of
getting low function evaluations. Thus, it is more appropriate to adopt risk measures with this asymmetric property,
such as value-at-risk (VA R) which is a widely adopted risk
measure in real-world applications (e.g., in banking (Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, 2006)). Intuitively,
the risk that the random f (x, Z) is less than VA R at level
α ∈ (0, 1) does not exceed α. Hence, by specifying a small
value of α as 0.1, this risk is controlled to be at most 10%.
Therefore, to maximize f while controlling the risk of undesirable function evaluations, we aim to maximize VA R of
the random function f (x, Z) over x.
The recent work of Cakmak et al. (2020) has used BO to
maximize VA R and has achieved state-of-the-art empirical
performances. They have assumed that we are able to select
both x and z to query during BO, which is motivated by
1

We use upper-case letter Z to denote the environmental random variable and lower-case letter z to denote its realization or a
(non-random) variable.

