Lower Bounds on Cross-Entropy Loss in the Presence of Test-time Adversaries

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji * 1 Daniel Cullina * 2 Vikash Sehwag 3 Prateek Mittal 3

Abstract
Understanding the fundamental limits of robust
supervised learning has emerged as a problem of
immense interest, from both practical and theoretical standpoints. In particular, it is critical to
determine classifier-agnostic bounds on the training loss to establish when learning is possible. In
this paper, we determine optimal lower bounds on
the cross-entropy loss in the presence of test-time
adversaries, along with the corresponding optimal classification outputs. Our formulation of the
bound as a solution to an optimization problem
is general enough to encompass any loss function depending on soft classifier outputs. We also
propose and provide a proof of correctness for a
bespoke algorithm to compute this lower bound
efficiently, allowing us to determine lower bounds
for multiple practical datasets of interest. We use
our lower bounds as a diagnostic tool to determine the effectiveness of current robust training
methods and find a gap from optimality at larger
budgets. Finally, we investigate the possibility
of using of optimal classification outputs as soft
labels to empirically improve robust training.

1. Introduction
The robustness of machine learning systems, particularly
classifiers in the supervised setting, to adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Bhagoji et al., 2018; Madry et al.,
2018) has become an important line of research owing to
the critical role they play in society. While there is a tremendous amount of work on attacks and defenses (Papernot
et al., 2016), a focus of recent research (Bhagoji et al., 2019;
Dohmatob, 2019; Schmidt et al., 2018; Cullina et al., 2018;
Mahloujifar et al., 2019; Diochnos et al., 2018) has been
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Pennsylvania State University 3 Department of Electrical
Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Arjun
Nitin Bhagoji <abhagoji@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

on establishing fundamental bounds on learning in the presence of test-time adversaries in various settings. One line of
research (Bhagoji et al., 2019; Dohmatob, 2019; Pydi & Jog,
2020) into the limits of learning in the presence of test-time
attackers has established classifier-agnostic lower bounds
on adversarial robustness, i.e. the minimum 0 − 1 loss
that would be incurred by any classifier, when adversarial
perturbations are added to the underlying data distribution.
However, practical approaches to training classifiers such as
neural networks usually use surrogate loss functions such as
the cross-entropy loss that depend on the output confidence,
and it is critical to establish bounds on these.
Thus, in this paper, we extend work on the informationtheoretic limits of learning in the presence of test-time adversaries to any loss function that uses the output probabilities of a classifier, such as the cross-entropy loss. The key
question this paper answers is:
What is the minimum possible cross-entropy loss that will
be incurred by any classifier given a data distribution and
adversary specification?
Answering this question enables us to quantitatively diagnose the effectiveness of practical defenses against adversarial examples (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019),
and can inform the design of better learning algorithms. In
particular, we can determine if current robust optimization
techniques are able to recover these bounds as well as find
regimes in which robust classification is not possible. A
further goal is to investigate the findings from Bhagoji et al.
(2019) which indicated a large gap between the theoretically
determined lower bound for the 0 − 1 loss and what was
achievable in practice from robust training. We seek to determine if the gap arises solely from the use of a surrogate
loss during training or if there is a more fundamental barrier
to robustness.
To determine classifier-agnostic lower bounds on the crossentropy loss, we focus on the interaction between data points
when they are perturbed. We represent points from each
class as the vertices of a graph, with edges existing between two vertices if the neighborhoods in which they can
be perturbed overlap. We refer to this structure as a conflict graph (first implicitly defined by Bhagoji et al. (2019)).
Data points connected by edges are then challenging to classify, even for the optimal classifier. The problem is then

