Differentially Private Bayesian Inference for Generalized Linear Models

Tejas Kulkarni 1 Joonas Jälkö 1 Antti Koskela 2 Samuel Kaski 1 3 Antti Honkela 2

Abstract
Generalized linear models (GLMs) such as logistic regression are among the most widely used
arms in data analyst’s repertoire and often used
on sensitive datasets. A large body of prior works
that investigate GLMs under differential privacy
(DP) constraints provide only private point estimates of the regression coefficients, and are not
able to quantify parameter uncertainty.
In this work, with logistic and Poisson regression as running examples, we introduce a generic
noise-aware DP Bayesian inference method for
a GLM at hand, given a noisy sum of summary
statistics. Quantifying uncertainty allows us to
determine which of the regression coefficients
are statistically significantly different from zero.
We provide a tight privacy analysis and experimentally demonstrate that the posteriors obtained
from our model, while adhering to strong privacy
guarantees, are close to the non-private posteriors.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) provides a
strong framework for protecting the privacy of data subjects against privacy violations via models trained on their
personal data. DP protection requires injecting noise to
the learning process. Bayesian inference is a natural complement to DP, because it seeks to quantify the impact of
noise to inference result in terms of quantifying the uncertainty of the result. In our work we seek to develop a
Bayesian method to perform inference under DP and quantify the uncertainty caused by the injected noise for the
widely used class of regression models, generalised linear
models (GLMs). This method allows statistical inference
1
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 2 Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer
Science, University of Helsinki, Finland 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Tejas Kulkarni <tejasvijaykulkarni@gmail.com>, Antti
Honkela <antti.honkela@helsinki.fi>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

on the regression coefficients, such as determining which
coefficients can be confidently inferred to be different from
zero.
Using Bayesian inference to counter the noise injected to
ensure DP was first proposed by Williams and McSherry
(2010). The process is fairly straightforward for models
where the joint distribution Pr[D, θ, Z] over the data D,
all parameters θ and possible latent variables Z of interest
is specified as part of the model. This was demonstrated by
Bernstein and Sheldon (2018), who presented an efficient
inference method for exponential family models of this
form.
The problem becomes significantly more difficult for discriminative models such as regression models, where the
model does not specify a distribution over the input data
X but only target outputs Y and parameters Pr[Y , θ | X].
This is because we also consider input X as private information, and thus we cannot observe it directly. On the other
hand, the model does not specify a natural prior for X either.
In order to solve this issue, we need to augment the model
to include a prior for X. This was first demonstrated by
Bernstein and Sheldon (2019), who developed a method for
linear regression by placing a Gaussian prior on X. The
method relies on the ability to express the model via a sufficient statistic of fixed size, and hence only applies to linear
regression.
In our work we extend this sufficient statistics based noiseaware DP Bayesian inference framework for a much broader
class of regression models, GLMs. These include many of
the most widely used statistical models, such as logistic
regression and Poisson regression. As GLMs typically have
no sufficient statistics, this is achieved by approximating the
joint distribution of the inputs and outputs under the GLM
using a finite number of moments as approximate sufficient
statistics and fitting the model parameters to match these
moments.
Related work. Linear models have received a huge amount
of attention under DP since its proposal. The techniques
for point estimates for regression parameters fall to five
main categories, a) objective perturbation (Chaudhuri et al.,
2011; Kifer and Machanavajjhala, 2011; Zhang et al., 2012;
Iyengar et al., 2019), b) output perturbation (Wu et al.,

