Annealed Flow Transport Monte Carlo
Michael Arbel * 1 Alexander G. D. G. Matthews * 2 Arnaud Doucet 2

Abstract
Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) and its
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) extensions are
state-of-the-art methods for estimating normalizing constants of probability distributions. We
propose here a novel Monte Carlo algorithm, Annealed Flow Transport (AFT), that builds upon
AIS and SMC and combines them with normalizing flows (NFs) for improved performance. This
method transports a set of particles using not
only importance sampling (IS), Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) and resampling steps - as
in SMC, but also relies on NFs which are learned
sequentially to push particles towards the successive annealed targets. We provide limit theorems for the resulting Monte Carlo estimates of
the normalizing constant and expectations with
respect to the target distribution. Additionally,
we show that a continuous-time scaling limit of
the population version of AFT is given by a
Feynman–Kac measure which simplifies to the
law of a controlled diffusion for expressive NFs.
We demonstrate experimentally the benefits and
limitations of our methodology on a variety of
applications.

1. Introduction
Let π be a target density on X ⊆ Rd w.r.t. the Lebesgue
measure known up to a normalizing constant Z. We
want to estimate Z and approximate expectations with respect to π. This has applications in Bayesian statistics
but also variational inference (VI) (Mnih and Rezende,
2016) and compression (Li and Chen, 2019; Huang et al.,
2020) among others. AIS (Neal, 2001) and its SMC extensions (Del Moral et al., 2006) are state-of-the art Monte
Carlo methods addressing this problem which rely on a
*
Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience
Unit, University College London 2 DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Michael Arbel <michael.n.arbel@gmail.com>, Alexander G.
D. G. Matthews <alexmatthews@google.com>, Arnaud Doucet
<arnauddoucet@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

βk
sequence of annealed targets πk ∝ π01−βk πK
bridging
smoothly an easy-to-sample distribution π0 to πK := π
for 0 = β0 < β1 < · · · < βK = 1 and MCMC kernels of
invariant distributions πk (Zhou et al., 2016; Llorente et al.,
2020). In their simplest instance, SMC samplers propagate
N particles approximating πk at time k. These particles are
reweighted according to weights proportional to πk+1 /πk
at time k + 1 to build an IS approximation of πk+1 , then
one resamples N times from this approximation and finally
mutate the resampled particles according to MCMC steps
of invariant distribution πk+1 . This procedure can provide
high-variance estimators if the discrepancy between πk and
πk+1 is significant as the resulting IS weights then have
a large variance and/or if the MCMC kernels mix poorly.
This can be reduced by increasing K and the number of
MCMC steps at each temperature but comes at an increasing computational cost.

An alternative approach is to build a transport map T :
X → X to ensure that if X ∼ π0 then the distribution
of X 0 = T (X) denoted T# π0 is approximately equal to
π. In (El Moselhy and Marzouk, 2012), this map is parameterized using a polynomial chaos expansion and learned
by minimizing a regularized Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between T# π0 and π; see also (Marzouk et al.,
2016). Taghvaei et al. (2020) and Olmez et al. (2020) obtain transport maps by solving a Poisson equation. However, they do not correct for the discrepancy between T# π0
and π using IS. Doing so would incur a O(d3 ) cost when
computing the Jacobian. Normalizing Flows (NFs) are an
alternative flexible class of diffeomorphisms with easy-tocompute Jacobians (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015). These
can be used to parameterize T and are also typically learned
by minimizing KL(T# π0 ||π) or a regularized version of it.
This approach has been investigated in many recent work;
see e.g. (Gao et al., 2020; Nicoli et al., 2020; Noé et al.,
2019; Wirnsberger et al., 2020). Although it is attractive, it
is also well-known that optimizing this ‘mode-seeking’ KL
can lead to an approximation of the target T# π0 which has
thinner tails than the target π and ignore some of its modes;
see e.g. (Domke and Sheldon, 2018).
In this paper, our contributions are as follows.
• We propose Annealed Flow Transport (AFT), a methodology that takes advantages of the strengths of both

