Single Pass Entrywise-Transformed Low Rank Approximation

Yifei Jiang 1 Yi Li 2 Yiming Sun 2 Jiaxin Wang 3 David P. Woodruff 4

Abstract
In applications such as natural language processing or computer vision, one is given a large n × d
matrix A = (ai,j ) and would like to compute a
matrix decomposition, e.g., a low rank approximation, of a function f (A) = (f (ai,j )) applied
entrywise to A. A very important special case is
the likelihood function f (A) = log (|aij | + 1).
A natural way to do this would be to simply apply
f to each entry of A, and then compute the matrix decomposition, but this requires storing all
of A as well as multiple passes over its entries.
Recent work of Liang et al. shows how to find a
rank-k factorization to f (A) for an n × n matrix
A using only n·poly(−1 k log n) words of memory, with overall error 10kf (A) − [f (A)]k k2F +
poly(/k)kf (A)k21,2 , where [f (A)]k is the best
rank-k approximation to f (A) and kf (A)k21,2
is the square of the sum of Euclidean lengths
of rows of f (A). Their algorithm uses three
passes over the entries of A. The authors pose
the open question of obtaining an algorithm with
n·poly(−1 k log n) words of memory using only
a single pass over the entries of A. In this paper
we resolve this open question, obtaining the first
single-pass algorithm for this problem and for the
same class of functions f studied by Liang et
al. Moreover, our error is kf (A) − [f (A)]k k2F +
poly(/k)kf (A)k2F , where kf (A)k2F is the sum
of squares of Euclidean lengths of rows of f (A).
Thus our error is significantly smaller, as it removes the factor of 10 and also kf (A)k2F ≤
kf (A)k21,2 . We also give an algorithm for regression, pointing out an error in previous work, and
empirically validate our results.

1. Introduction
There are numerous applications with matrices that are too
large to fit in main memory, such as matrices arising in machine learning, image clustering, natural language processing, network analysis, and recommendation systems. This
makes it difficult to process such matrices, and one common way of doing so is to stream through the entries of
the matrix one at a time and maintain a short summary or
sketch that allows for further processing. In some of these
applications, such as network analysis or distributed recommendation systems, matters are further complicated because one would like to take the difference or sum of two
or more matrices over time.
A common goal in such applications is to compute a low
rank approximation to a large matrix A ∈ Rn×d . If the
rank of the low rank approximation is k, then one can approximate A as U · V , where U ∈ Rn×k and V ∈ Rk×d .
This results in a parameter reduction, as U and V only have
(n + d)k parameters in total, as compared to the nd parameters required of A. Since k  min(n, d), this parameter
reduction is significant. Not only does it result in much
smaller storage, when multiplying A by a vector x, it also
now only takes O((n + d)k) time instead of O(nd) time,
since one can first compute V · x and then U · (V · x).

Tianjin University, China 2 School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Wuhan University of Technology, China 4 Department of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Li <yili@ntu.edu.sg>, David P. Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.

A challenge in the above applications is that often wants
to compute a low rank approximation not to A, but to an
entrywise transformation to A by a function f . Namely,
if A = (ai,j ), then we define f (A) = f (ai,j ) where we
apply the function f to each entry of A. Common functions f include f (x) = logc2 (|x| + 1) or f (x) = |x|α
for 0 ≤ α ≤ 2. Indeed, for word embeddings in natural language processing (NLP), an essential subroutine is
to perform a low rank approximation of a matrix after applying the log-likelihood function to each entry, which corresponds to f (x) = log2 (|x| + 1). Note that in NLP the
input matrices are often word co-occurrence count matrices, which can be created e.g., from the entire Wikipedia
database. Thus, such matrices are huge, with millions of
rows and columns, and hard to store in memory. This necessitates models such as the streaming model for processing such data.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

We can indeed capture the above scenarios formally with
the streaming model of computation. In this model, there is

1

