Learning Randomly Perturbed Structured Predictors
for Direct Loss Minimization
Hedda Cohen Indelman 1 Tamir Hazan 1

Abstract
Direct loss minimization is a popular approach for
learning predictors over structured label spaces.
This approach is computationally appealing as it
replaces integration with optimization and allows
to propagate gradients in a deep net using lossperturbed prediction. Recently, this technique was
extended to generative models, by introducing
a randomized predictor that samples a structure
from a randomly perturbed score function. In this
work, we interpolate between these techniques by
learning the variance of randomized structured
predictors as well as their mean, in order to balance between the learned score function and the
randomized noise. We demonstrate empirically
the effectiveness of learning this balance in structured discrete spaces.

1. Introduction
Learning and inference in high-dimensional structured models drives much of the research in machine learning applications, from computer vision, natural language processing, to computational chemistry. Examples include scene
understanding (Kendall et al., 2017) machine translation
(Wiseman and Rush, 2016) and molecular synthesis (Jin
et al., 2020). The learning process optimizes a score for
each of the exponentially many structures in order to best
fit the mapping between input and output in the training
data. While it is often computationally infeasible to evaluate
the loss of all exponentially many structures simultaneously
through sampling, it is often feasible to predict the highest
scoring structure efficiently in many structured settings.
Direct loss minimization is an appealing approach in discriminative learning that allows to learn a structured model
by predicting the highest scoring structure (Hazan et al.,
2010; Keshet et al., 2011; Song et al., 2016). It allows to improve the loss of the structured predictor by considering the
1

Technion. Correspondence to: Hedda Cohen Indelman <cohen.hedda@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

gradients of two predicted structures: over the original loss
function and over a perturbed loss function. This approach
implicitly uses the data distribution to smooth the loss function between a training structure and a predicted structure,
thus propagating gradients through the maximal argument
of the predicted structure. Unfortunately, our access to the
data distribution is limited and we cannot reliably represent the intricate relation between a training instance and
its exponentially many structures. Recently, this framework
was extended to generative learning, where a random perturbation that follows the Gumbel distribution law allows
to sample from all possible structures (Lorberbom et al.,
2018). However, one cannot apply this generative learning approach effectively to discriminative learning, since
the random noise that is added in the generation process
interferes in predicting the best scoring structure.
In this work we combine these two approaches: we explicitly add random perturbation to each of the structures, in
order to reliably represent the intricate relation between the
a training instance and its exponentially many structures. To
balance between the learned score function and the added
random perturbation, we treat the score function as the mean
of the random perturbation, and learn its variance. This way
we are able to control the ratio between the signal (the score)
and the noise (the random perturbation) in discriminative
learning.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1. We show that the uniqueness assumption of the predicted structure is a key element in the gradient step of
direct loss minimization, thus mathematically defining
its general position assumption.
2. We prove that random perturbation ensures unique
maximizers with probability one.
3. We identify that random perturbation might also serve
as noise that masks the score function signal. Hence,
we introduce a method for learning both the mean
and the variance of randomized predictors in the highdimensional structured label setting.
4. We show empirically the benefit of our approach in
two structured prediction problems.

