Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning In Continuous State Spaces:
A Perspective Beyond Linearity

Dhruv Malik 1 Aldo Pacchiano 2 Vishwak Srinivasan 1 Yuanzhi Li 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is empirically successful in complex nonlinear Markov decision
processes (MDPs) with continuous state spaces.
By contrast, the majority of theoretical RL literature requires the MDP to satisfy some form of
linear structure, in order to guarantee sample efficient RL. Such efforts typically assume the transition dynamics or value function of the MDP are
described by linear functions of the state features.
To resolve this discrepancy between theory and
practice, we introduce the Effective Planning Window (EPW) condition, a structural condition on
MDPs that makes no linearity assumptions. We
demonstrate that the EPW condition permits sample efficient RL, by providing an algorithm which
provably solves MDPs satisfying this condition.
Our algorithm requires minimal assumptions on
the policy class, which can include multi-layer
neural networks with nonlinear activation functions. Notably, the EPW condition is directly motivated by popular gaming benchmarks, and we
show that many classic Atari games satisfy this
condition. We additionally show the necessity
of conditions like EPW, by demonstrating that
simple MDPs with slight nonlinearities cannot be
solved sample efficiently.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, reinforcement learning (RL) has
emerged as the dominant paradigm for sequential decision
making in modern machine learning. During this time period, video games have served as popular means to benchmark the incremental improvement in state of the art RL.
The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE), comprising a
suite of classic Atari games, is an archetypical example of
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Dhruv
Malik <dhruvm@andrew.cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

such a benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013). Agents trained
by RL efficiently learn to surpass human level performance
in such games (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Badia et al., 2020).
Motivated by these empirical accomplishments, there has
been a major thrust to theoretically characterize the conditions which permit sample efficient RL. A significant line of
work has greatly advanced our understanding of the tabular
RL setting, where the number of states is finite and relatively small (Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019; Pananjady &
Wainwright, 2021). Sample efficiency bounds in this setting
scale with cardinality of the state space. However, in practice this cardinality is often large or infinite. For instance,
many gaming applications of RL, ranging in complexity
from Atari to Dota, all have continuous state spaces (Berner
et al., 2019). These scenarios are handled in the function
approximation setting (Du et al., 2019c; 2020a). Here, each
state is associated with a known feature, and one desires a
sample efficiency bound that scales with the dimensionality
of the features (instead of the cardinality of the state space).
To understand when continuous space RL is sample efficient,
theoreticians make certain assumptions on the features or the
underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP). A prominent
assumption, which has appeared in various forms, is that the
problem satisfies some sort of linear structure. For instance,
in the well studied linear MDP, the transitions and rewards
are described by linear functions of the features (Yang &
Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020; Yang & Wang, 2020; Wang
et al., 2021). In particular, the transition probabilities at
a state-action pair are defined by linear functions of the
feature corresponding to that state-action pair. A weaker, but
frequently occurring, form of this assumption is that value
function of any policy is nearly linear (Du et al., 2020a;
Lattimore et al., 2020), or that the optimal value function is
linear (Du et al., 2019c). Such linear structure is amenable
to theoretical analysis, since it permits analysts to leverage
the vast literature on supervised and online learning.
To obtain a holistic understanding of RL, examining such
linear structure is certainly important. Nevertheless, it is
unclear whether the aforementioned linearity conditions
actually hold in practical scenarios. We illustrate this via a
very simple example. Consider an MDP where there is a set
of n states with the property that taking any action at one of

