Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning with Imagined Subgoals

Elliot Chane-Sane 1 Cordelia Schmid 1 Ivan Laptev 1

Abstract
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning endows
an agent with a large variety of skills, but it often
struggles to solve tasks that require more temporally extended reasoning. In this work, we propose to incorporate imagined subgoals into policy
learning to facilitate learning of complex tasks.
Imagined subgoals are predicted by a separate
high-level policy, which is trained simultaneously
with the policy and its critic. This high-level policy predicts intermediate states halfway to the goal
using the value function as a reachability metric.
We don’t require the policy to reach these subgoals explicitly. Instead, we use them to define
a prior policy, and incorporate this prior into a
KL-constrained policy iteration scheme to speed
up and regularize learning. Imagined subgoals are
used during policy learning, but not during test
time, where we only apply the learned policy. We
evaluate our approach on complex robotic navigation and manipulation tasks and show that it
outperforms existing methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
An intelligent agent aims at solving tasks of varying horizons in an environment. It must be able to identify how the
different tasks intertwine with each other and leverage behaviors learned by solving simpler tasks to efficiently master
more complex tasks. For instance, once a legged robot has
learned how to walk in every direction in a simulated maze
environment, it could use these behaviors to efficiently learn
to navigate in this environment. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015;
Andrychowicz et al., 2017) defines each task by the desired
goal and, in principle, could learn a wide range of skills.
In practice, however, reinforcement learning struggles to
perform temporally extended reasoning.

Figure 1. Illustration of the KL-regularized policy learning using
imagined subgoals. (Left): The policy fails to reach a distant goal,
yet it can reach a closer subgoal. Our approach automatically
generates imagined subgoals for a task and uses such subgoals
to direct the policy search during training. (Right): At test time,
the resulting flat policy can reach arbitrarily distant goals without
relying on subgoals.

Hierarchical methods have proven effective for learning
temporal abstraction in long-horizon problems (Dayan &
Hinton, 1993; Wiering & Schmidhuber, 1997; Sutton et al.,
1999; Dietterich, 2000). In the goal-conditioned setting, a
high-level controller typically finds an appropriate sequence
of subgoals that can be more easily followed by a low-level
policy (Nachum et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2019). When
chosen appropriately, these subgoals effectively decompose
a complex task into easier tasks. However, hierarchical
methods are often unstable to train (Nachum et al., 2018)
and rely on appropriate temporal design choices.

1
Inria, École normale suprieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to: Elliot Chane-Sane
<elliot.chane-sane@inria.fr>.

In this work, we propose to use subgoals to improve the
goal-conditioned policy. Instead of reaching the subgoals
explicitly, our method builds on the following intuition. If
the current policy can readily reach a subgoal, it could provide guidance for reaching more distant goals, as illustrated
in Figure 1. We apply this idea to all possible state and goal
pairs of the environment. This self-supervised approach
progressively extends the horizon of the agent throughout
training. At the end of training, the resulting flat policy does
not require access to subgoals and can reach distant goals in
its environment.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Our method does not require a full sequence of subgoals,
but predicts subgoals that are halfway to the goal, such

