Private Adaptive Gradient Methods for Convex Optimization

Hilal Asi * 1 2 John Duchi 2 3 Alireza Fallah 4 1 Omid Javidbakht 5 Kunal Talwar 5

Abstract
We study adaptive methods for differentially private convex optimization, proposing and analyzing differentially private variants of a Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm with adaptive
stepsizes, as well as the AdaGrad algorithm. We
provide upper bounds on the regret of both algorithms and show that the bounds are (worst-case)
optimal. As a consequence of our development,
we show that our private versions of AdaGrad outperform adaptive SGD, which in turn outperforms
traditional SGD in scenarios with non-isotropic
gradients where (non-private) Adagrad provably
outperforms SGD. The major challenge is that
the isotropic noise typically added for privacy
dominates the signal in gradient geometry for
high-dimensional problems; approaches to this
that effectively optimize over lower-dimensional
subspaces simply ignore the actual problems that
varying gradient geometries introduce. In contrast, we study non-isotropic clipping and noise
addition, developing a principled theoretical approach; the consequent procedures also enjoy significantly stronger empirical performance than
prior approaches.

1. Introduction
While the success of stochastic gradient methods for solving
empirical risk minimization has motivated their adoption
across much of machine learning, increasing privacy risks
in data-intensive tasks have made applying them more challenging (Dwork et al., 2006b): gradients can leak users’
data, intermediate models can compromise individuals, and
even final trained models may be non-private without substantial care. This motivates a growing line of work devel*

The authors are in alphabetical order. 1 Work done while interning at Apple 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University 3 Department of Statistics, Stanford University 4 Department
of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, MIT 5 Apple. Correspondence to: Hilal Asi <asi@stanford.edu>, Alireza Fallah
<afallah@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

oping private variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
where algorithms guarantee differential privacy by perturbing individual gradients with random noise (Duchi et al.,
2013; Smith & Thakurta, 2013a; Abadi et al., 2016; Duchi
et al., 2018; Bassily et al., 2019; Feldman et al., 2020). Yet
these noise addition procedures typically fail to reflect the
geometry underlying the optimization problem, which in
non-private cases is essential: for high-dimensional problems with sparse parameters, mirror descent and its variants (Beck & Teboulle, 2003; Nemirovski et al., 2009)
are essential, while in the large-scale stochastic settings
prevalent in deep learning, AdaGrad and other adaptive
variants (Duchi et al., 2011) provide stronger theoretical
and practical performance. Even more, methods that do
not adapt (or do not leverage geometry) can be provably
sub-optimal, in that there exist problems where their convergence is much slower than adaptive variants that reflect
appropriate geometry (Levy & Duchi, 2019).
To address these challenges, we introduce PAGAN (Private
AdaGrad with Adaptive Noise), a new differentially private variant of stochastic gradient descent and AdaGrad.
Our main contributions center on a few ideas. Standard
methods for privatizing adaptive algorithms that add isometric (typically Gaussian) noise to gradients necessarily
reflect the worst-case behavior of functions to be optimized
and eliminate the geometric structure one might leverage
for improved convergence. By carefully adapting noise
to the actual gradients at hand, we can both achieve convergence rates that reflect the observed magnitude of the
gradients—similar to the approach of Bartlett et al. (2007)
in the non-private case—which can yield marked improvements over the typical guarantees that depend on worst-case
magnitudes. (Think, for example, of a standard normal variable: its second moment is 1, while its maximum value is
unbounded.) Moreover, we propose a new private adaptive
optimization algorithm that analogizes AdaGrad, showing
that under certain natural distributional assumptions for the
problems—similar to those that separate AdaGrad from
non-adaptive methods (Levy & Duchi, 2019)—our private
versions of adaptive methods significantly outperform the
standard non-adaptive private algorithms. Additionally, we
prove several lower bounds that both highlight the importance of geometry in the problems and demonstrate the
tightness of the bounds our algorithms achieve.

