Nondeterminism and Instability in Neural Network Optimization

Cecilia Summers 1 Michael J. Dinneen 1

Abstract
Nondeterminism in neural network optimization
produces uncertainty in performance, making
small improvements difficult to discern from runto-run variability. While uncertainty can be reduced by training multiple model copies, doing
so is time-consuming, costly, and harms reproducibility. In this work, we establish an experimental protocol for understanding the effect of
optimization nondeterminism on model diversity,
allowing us to isolate the effects of a variety of
sources of nondeterminism. Surprisingly, we find
that all sources of nondeterminism have similar
effects on measures of model diversity. To explain
this intriguing fact, we identify the instability of
model training, taken as an end-to-end procedure,
as the key determinant. We show that even onebit changes in initial parameters result in models
converging to vastly different values. Last, we
propose two approaches for reducing the effects
of instability on run-to-run variability.

1. Introduction
Consider this common scenario: you have a baseline “current best” model, and are trying to improve it. One of
your experiments has produced a model whose metrics are
slightly better than the baseline. Yet you have your reservations — how do you know the improvement is “real” and
not due to run-to-run variability?
Similarly, consider hyperparameter optimization, in which
many possible values exist for a set of hyperparameters,
with minor differences in performance between them. How
do you pick the best hyperparameters, and how can you be
sure that you’ve actually picked wisely?
In both scenarios, the standard practice is to train multiple
independent copies of your model to understand its variability. While this helps address the problem, it is extremely
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand. Correspondence to: Cecilia Summers
<cecilia.summers.07@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

wasteful, using more computing power, increasing the time
required for effective research, and making reproducibility
difficult, all while still leaving some uncertainty.
Ultimately, the source of this problem is nondeterminism in
model optimization — randomized components of model
training that cause each run to produce different models with
their own performance characteristics. Nondeterminism itself occurs due to many factors: while the most salient
source is the random initialization of parameters, other
sources exist, including random shuffling of training data,
stochasticity in data augmentation, explicit random operations (e.g. dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)), asynchronous
training (Recht et al., 2011), and even nondeterminism in
low-level libraries such as cuDNN (Chetlur et al., 2014).
Despite the clear impact nondeterminism has on the efficacy of modeling, relatively little attention has been paid
towards understanding its mechanisms. In this work, we
establish an experimental protocol for analyzing the impact of nondeterminism in model training, allowing us to
quantify the independent effect of each source of nondeterminism. In doing so, we make a surprising discovery:
each source has nearly the same effect on the variability
of final model performance. Further, we find each source
produces models of similar diversity, as measured by correlations between model predictions, functional changes in
model performance while ensembling, and state-of-the-art
methods of model similarity (Kornblith et al., 2019). To emphasize one particularly interesting result: nondeterminism
in low-level libraries like cuDNN can matter just as much
with respect to model diversity and variability as varying
the entire network initialization.
We explain this mystery by demonstrating that it can be
attributed to instability in optimizing neural networks —
when training with SGD-like approaches, we show that
small changes to initial parameters result in large changes
to final parameter values. In fact, the instabilities in the optimization process are extreme: changing the initialization
of a single weight by the smallest possible amount within
machine precision (∼6 · 10−11 ) produces nearly as much
variability as all other sources combined. Therefore, any
source of nondeterminism with any effect at all on model
weights inherits at least this level of variability.
Last, we present promising results in reducing the effects of

