Feature Clustering for Support Identification in Extreme Regions

Hamid Jalalzai 1 2 Rémi Leluc 1

Abstract
Understanding the complex structure of multivariate extremes is a major challenge in various fields
from portfolio monitoring and environmental risk
management to insurance. In the framework of
multivariate Extreme Value Theory, a common
characterization of extremes’ dependence structure is the angular measure. It is a suitable measure to work in extreme regions as it provides
meaningful insights concerning the subregions
where extremes tend to concentrate their mass.
The present paper develops a novel optimizationbased approach to assess the dependence structure of extremes. The support identification of
extremes scheme rewrites as estimating clusters
of features which best capture the support of extremes. The dimension reduction technique we
provide is applied to statistical learning tasks such
as feature clustering and anomaly detection. Numerical experiments provide strong empirical evidence of the relevance of our approach.

1. Introduction
In a wide variety of applications ranging from structural
engineering to finance, extreme events can occur with a
far from negligible probability (Embrechts et al., 1999;
2013). In the multivariate setting, such events are usually
modeled through threshold exceedance. A random vector
X = (X 1 , . . . , X p ) ∈ Rp , (p > 1) is said to be extreme if
kXk > t for any given norm k · k and some large threshold t > 0. The latter is generally chosen so that a small
but non negligible proportion of data falls in the extreme
regions {x ∈ Rp , kxk > t}. In machine learning tasks,
it is relevant to apply different treatments to extreme and
normal data. Devoting attention to extreme regions can lead
to better understanding of the distributional law of X and
practical performance of classical algorithms, as shown by
1

Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
INRIA, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France. Correspondence to: Hamid Jalalzai <hamid.jalalzai@inria.fr>, Rémi Leluc
<remi.leluc@telecom-paris.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

several recent studies: in anomaly detection (Roberts, 1999;
Clifton et al., 2011; Goix et al., 2016; Thomas et al., 2017),
classification (Vignotto & Engelke, 2018; Jalalzai et al.,
2018; 2020) or feature clustering (Chautru, 2015; Chiapino
et al., 2019; Janßen et al., 2020) when dedicated to the most
extreme regions of the sample space.
Scaling up multivariate Extreme Value Theory (EVT) is a
key issue when addressing high-dimensional learning tasks.
Indeed, most multivariate extreme value models have been
designed to handle moderate dimensional problems, e.g.,
where dimension p ≤ 10. For larger dimensions, simplifying modeling choices are required, stipulating for instance
that only some predefined subgroups of components may
be concomitant extremes, or, on the contrary, that all must
be (Stephenson, 2009; Sabourin & Naveau, 2014).This calls
for dimensionality reduction devices adapted to multivariate
extreme values.
Identifying the features X j ’s (and the resulting subspaces)
contributing to X being extreme is a major challenge in
EVT. The distributional structure of extremes highlights the
components of a multivariate random variable that may be
simultaneously large while the others remain small. This is
a valuable piece of information for multi-factor risk assessment or detection of anomalies among other –not abnormal–
extreme data. Two phenomena are likely to happen: (i) only
a small number of features may be concomitantly large, so
that only a small number of subspaces have non-zero mass,
(ii) each of these groups -clusters of features- contains a
limited number of coordinates (compared to the original dimensionality), so that the corresponding subspace with non
zero mass have small dimension compared to p. The purpose of this paper is to introduce a data-driven methodology
for identifying such subspaces, to reduce the dimensionality
of the problem and thus to learn a sparse representation of
extreme behaviors.
This paper provides a novel optimization approach to find
subspaces from multivariate extreme features. Given n ≥ 1
i.i.d copies X1 , . . . , Xn of a heavy-tailed random variable
X = (X 1 , . . . , X p ) ∈ Rp , the goal is to identify clusters
of features K ⊂ J1, pK such that the variables {X j : j ∈
K} may be large while the other variables X j for j ∈
/K
simultaneously remain small. Figure 1 depicts an example
of normalized extremes with the associated feature clusters.

