Learning While Playing in Mean-Field Games: Convergence and Optimality

Qiaomin Xie 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Andreea Minca 1

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning in mean-field
games. To achieve the Nash equilibrium, which
consists of a policy and a mean-field state, existing algorithms require obtaining the optimal
policy while fixing any mean-field state. In practice, however, the policy and the mean-field state
evolve simultaneously, as each agent is learning
while playing. To bridge such a gap, we propose
a fictitious play algorithm, which alternatively updates the policy (learning) and the mean-field state
(playing) by one step of policy optimization and
gradient descent, respectively. Despite the nonstationarity induced by such an alternating scheme,
we prove that the proposed algorithm converges
to the Nash equilibrium with an explicit convergence rate. To the best of our knowledge, it is
the first provably efficient algorithm that achieves
learning while playing.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Shoham et al.,
2007; Busoniu et al., 2008; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017;
2018; Zhang et al., 2019) aims to tackle sequential decisionmaking problems in multi-agent systems by integrating
the classical reinforcement learning framework with gametheoretical thinking (Başar & Olsder, 1998). Powered by
deep learning, MARL recently has achieved striking empirical successes in games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2019),
robotics (Yang & Gu, 2004; Busoniu et al., 2006; Leottau
et al., 2018), transportation (Kuyer et al., 2008; Mannion
et al., 2016), and social science (Leibo et al., 2017; Jaques
et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2018; McKee et al., 2020).
Despite the empirical successes, MARL is known to suffer
1
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering,
Cornell University 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University 3 Department of Industrial
Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University.
Correspondence to: Qiaomin Xie <qiaomin.xie@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

from the scalability issue. Specifically, in a multi-agent
system, each agent interacts with the environment and the
other agents, with the goal of maximizing its own expected
total return. Consequently, for each agent, its reward and
state transition also depend on the states and actions of
all the other agents. As the number of agents increases,
the size of the joint state-action space grows exponentially,
leading to severe computational and statistical challenges
for reinforcement learning algorithms. Such challenges are
sometimes referred to as the “curse of many agents” (Sonu
et al., 2017).
To circumvent these challenges, a popular approach is
through mean-field approximation, which imposes symmetry among the agents and specifies that, for each agent, the
joint effect of all the other agents is summarized by a population quantity, which is oftentimes given by the empirical
distribution L of the local states and actions of all the other
agents, or by a functional of this empirical distribution. Under symmetry, the reward function and local state transition
function are the same for each agent, and they are both functions of the local state-action and the population quantity.
Under the mean-field approximation, a multi-agent system
is modeled as a mean-field game (MFG) (Huang et al., 2003;
Lasry & Lions, 2006a;b; 2007; Huang et al., 2007; Guéant
et al., 2011; Carmona & Delarue, 2018), which is readily
scalable to an arbitrary number of agents.
In this work, we aim to find the Nash equilibrium (Nash,
1950) of MFG with an infinite number of agents via reinforcement learning. An MFG consists of a population of
symmetric agents, each of which has an infinitesimal effect
over the whole population. By symmetry, it suffices to find
a symmetric Nash equilibrium, where each agent adopts the
same policy. Therefore, we can focus on a single agent,
known as the representative agent, and view MFG as a game
between the representative agent’s local policy π and the
mean-field state L, where L aggregates the collective effect
of the population. Specifically, the representative agent aims
to find the optimal policy π when the mean-field state is
fixed to L, which reduces to solving a Markov decision process (MDP) induced by L. Simultaneously, the mean-field
state L evolves according to the transition kernel when all
the agents adopt policy π. The Nash equilibrium of this twoplayer game, (π ∗ , L∗ ), corresponds to a symmetric Nash
equilibrium π ∗ of the original MFG.

