Coded-InvNet for Resilient Prediction Serving Systems

Tuan Dinh 1 Kangwook Lee 2

Abstract
Inspired by a new coded computation algorithm for invertible functions, we propose CodedInvNet, a new approach to design resilient prediction serving systems that can gracefully handle
stragglers or node failures. Coded-InvNet leverages recent ﬁndings in the deep learning literature such as invertible neural networks, Manifold
Mixup, and domain translation algorithms, identifying interesting research directions that span
across machine learning and systems. Our experimental results show that Coded-InvNet can
outperform existing approaches, especially when
the compute resource overhead is as low as 10%.
For instance, without knowing which of ten workers is going to fail, our algorithm can design a
backup task to correctly recover the missing prediction with an accuracy of 85.9%, signiﬁcantly
outperforming the previous SOTA by 32.5%.

1. Introduction
Prediction serving systems (PSSs) are systems that host
pre-trained machine learning models for inference queries
such as search, translation, and ranking ones. PSSs usually
consist of a large number of parallel/distributed compute
workers to process a large batch of input queries in parallel. As the system scales, maintaining low response time
(latency) becomes more challenging. This is because the
slowdown or failure of a single node can slow down the
entire query processing time (Dean & Barroso, 2013; Narra
et al., 2019). Multiple approaches for latency reduction
have been proposed, including detect-and-relaunch (Zaharia
et al., 2008), query replication (Suresh et al., 2015), and
approximate inference (Han et al., 2017).
Coded computation, by introducing backup tasks in a coded
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA.
Correspondence to: Tuan Dinh <tuan.dinh@wisc.edu>, Kangwook Lee <kangwook.lee@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

form, improves system resilience with lower overhead compared to other methods (Lee et al., 2017). Recently, (Kosaian et al., 2019) showed that a coded computation-based
technique, called Parity Models (ParMs), can signiﬁcantly
reduce the latency of PSSs. ParM consists of a tuple of encoder/parity model/decoder: the encoder aggregates multiple queries into a coded query, the parity model computes an
inference task on it, and the decoder uses the encoded query
together with available task results to reconstruct missing
task results. However, experimental results of ParM were
limited to small-scale PSSs (2–4 workers), and it is not clear
whether the proposed method is applicable to large-scale
PSSs. Also, small-scale regimes correspond to high resource
overhead regimes, as one backup worker is required for every two to four workers. We empirically show that ParM
does not scale well. For instance, when there is only one
backup worker for ten main workers, ParM achieves approximately 19% accuracy on the CIFAR10 image classiﬁcation
when one of the main workers is not available.
We propose Coded-InvNet, a new coded computation-based
framework to design scalable resilient prediction serving
systems. Inspired by an efﬁcient coded computation scheme
for invertible functions, Coded-InvNet designs the inference function with a computationally-heavy but invertible
module followed by a computationally-light module. To
design the invertible module, we take advantage of recent
developments in invertible neural networks (Behrmann et al.,
2018; Song et al., 2019; Jacobsen et al., 2018). Then, by
making use of GAN-based paired domain translation algorithms (Isola et al., 2017), Coded-InvNet trains a lightweight encoding function so that one can efﬁciently generate
encoded queries from input queries without incurring high
encoding overhead. To further improve the classiﬁcation accuracy in the event of failures, Coded-InvNet also leverages
mixup algorithms (Zhang et al., 2017; Verma et al., 2018).
We evaluate the efﬁcacy of Coded-InvNet in image classiﬁcation and multitask learning setting. Experimental results
show that Coded-InvNet can scale much beyond the scales
at which existing algorithms operate. More speciﬁcally,
Coded-InvNet achieves higher reconstruction accuracy compared to ParM, and the accuracy gap increases remarkably as
the system scales. For instance, Coded-InvNet can achieve
reconstruction accuracy of 85.9% with 10 workers, while
that of ParM is 53.4%. We also evaluate end-to-end laten-

