SketchEmbedNet: Learning Novel Concepts by Imitating Drawings

Alexander Wang * 1 2 Mengye Ren * 1 2 Richard S. Zemel 1 2 3

Abstract
Sketch drawings capture the salient information
of visual concepts. Previous work has shown that
neural networks are capable of producing sketches
of natural objects drawn from a small number of
classes. While earlier approaches focus on generation quality or retrieval, we explore properties of
image representations learned by training a model
to produce sketches of images. We show that this
generative, class-agnostic model produces informative embeddings of images from novel examples, classes, and even novel datasets in a few-shot
setting. Additionally, we find that these learned
representations exhibit interesting structure and
compositionality.

1. Introduction
Drawings are frequently used to facilitate the communication of new ideas. If someone asked what an apple is, or
looks like, a natural approach would be to provide a simple,
pencil and paper drawing; perhaps a circle with divots on
the top and bottom and a small rectangle for a stem. These
sketches constitute an intuitive and succinct way to communicate concepts through a prototypical, visual representation.
This phenomenon is also preserved in logographic writing
systems such as Chinese hanzi and Egyptian hieroglyphs
where each character is essentially a sketch of the object it
represents. Frequently, humans are able to communicate
complex ideas in a few simple strokes.
Inspired by this idea that sketches capture salient aspects of
concepts, we hypothesize that it is possible to learn informative representations by expressing them as sketches. In
this paper we target the image domain and seek to develop
representations of images from which sketch drawings can
be generated. Recent research has explored a wide variety
*
1
Equal contribution
University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada 2 Vector Institute 3 CIFAR. Correspondence to:
Alexander
Wang
<alexw@cs.toronto.edu>,
Mengye
Ren
<mren@cs.toronto.edu>,
Richard
S.
Zemel
<zemel@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of sketch generation models, ranging from generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Isola et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019),
to autoregressive (Gregor et al., 2015; Ha & Eck, 2018;
Chen et al., 2017), transformer (Ribeiro et al., 2020; Aksan
et al., 2020), hierarchical Bayesian (Lake et al., 2015) and
neuro-symbolic (Tian et al., 2020) models. These methods
may generate in pixel-space or in a sequential setting such
as a motor program detailing pen movements over a drawing
canvas. Many of them face shortcomings with respect to
representation learning on images: hierarchical Bayesian
models scale poorly, others only generate a single or a few
classes at a time, and many require sequential inputs, which
limit their use outside of creative applications.
We develop SketchEmbedNet, a class-agnostic encoderdecoder model that produces a “SketchEmbedding” of an
input image as an encoding which is then decoded as a sequential motor program. By knowing “how to sketch an
image,” it learns an informative representation that leads
to strong performance on classification tasks despite being
learned without class labels. Additionally, training on a
broad collection of classes enables strong generalization
and produces a class-agnostic embedding function. We
demonstrate these claims by showing that our approach
generalizes to novel examples, classes, and datasets, most
notably in a challenging unsupervised few-shot classification setting on the Omniglot (Lake et al., 2015) and miniImageNet (Vinyals et al., 2016) benchmarks.
While pixel-based methods produce good visual results, they
may lack clear component-level awareness, or understanding of the spatial relationships between them in an image;
we have seen this collapse of repeated components in GAN
literature (Goodfellow, 2017). By incorporating specific
pen movements and the contiguous definition of visual components as points through time, SketchEmbeddings encode
a unique visual understanding not present in pixel-based
methods. We study the presence of componential and spatial understanding in our experiments and also present a
surprising phenomenon of conceptual composition where
concepts can be added and subtracted through embeddings.

2. Related Work
Sketch-based visual understanding. Recent research
motivates the use of sketches to understand and classify

