Classifying high-dimensional Gaussian mixtures:
Where kernel methods fail and neural networks succeed
Maria Refinetti 1 2 Sebastian Goldt 3 Florent Krzakala 2 Lenka Zdeborová 4

Abstract
A recent series of theoretical works showed that
the dynamics of neural networks with a certain
initialisation are well-captured by kernel methods.
Concurrent empirical work demonstrated that kernel methods can come close to the performance
of neural networks on some image classification
tasks.These results raise the question of whether
neural networks only learn successfully if kernels
also learn successfully, despite neural nets being
more expressive. Here, we show theoretically that
two-layer neural networks (2LNN) with only a
few neurons can beat the performance of kernel
learning on a simple Gaussian mixture classification task. We study the high-dimensional limit,
i.e. when the number of samples is linearly proportional to the dimension, and show that while small
2LNN achieve near-optimal performance on this
task, lazy training approaches such as random features and kernel methods do not.Our analysis is
based on the derivation of a closed set of equations
that track the learning dynamics of the 2LNN and
thus allow to extract the asymptotic performance
of the network as a function of signal-to-noise
ratio and other hyperparameters. We finally illustrate how over-parametrising the neural network
leads to faster convergence, but does not improve
its final performance.

1. Introduction
Explaining the success of deep neural networks in many areas of machine learning remains a key challenge for learning
theory. A series of recent theoretical works made progress
towards this goal by proving trainability of two-layer neural networks (2LNN) with gradient-based methods (Jacot
1
Laboratoire de Physique de l’École Normale Supérieure, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris-Diderot,
Sorbonne Paris Cité 2 IdePHICS Lab, EPFL 3 International School
of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy 4 SPOC Lab, EPFL.
Correspondence to: <maria.refinetti@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2018; Li & Liang, 2018;
Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Cao & Gu, 2019; Du et al., 2019).
These results are based on the observation that strongly overparameterised 2LNN can achieve good performance even if
their first-layer weights remain almost constant throughout
training. This is the case if the initial weights are chosen with a particular scaling, which was dubbed the “lazy
regime” by Chizat et al. (2019). Going a step further, simply
fixing the first-layer weights of a 2LNN at their initial values
yields the well-known random features model of Rahimi
& Recht (2008; 2009), and can be seen as an approximation of kernel learning (Scholkopf & Smola, 2018). This
behaviour is to be contrasted with the “feature learning
regime”, where the weights of the first layer move significantly during training. Recent empirical studies showed that
on some benchmark data sets in computer vision, kernels
derived from neural networks achieve comparable performance to neural networks (Matthews et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2018; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2019; Shankar et al., 2020).
These results raise the question of whether neural networks
only learn successfully if random features can also learn
successfully, and have led to a renewed interest in the exact conditions under which neural networks trained with
gradient descent achieve a better performance than random
features (Bach, 2017; Yehudai & Shamir, 2019; Wei et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2020; Daniely & Malach, 2020; Geiger
et al., 2020; Paccolat et al., 2021; Suzuki & Akiyama, 2020).
Chizat & Bach (2020) studied the implicit bias of wide
two-layer networks trained on data with a low-dimensional
structure. They derived strong generalisation bounds, which,
when both layers of the network are trained, are independent
of ambient dimensions, indicating that the network is able
to adapt to the low dimensional structure. In contrast, when
only the output layer of the network is trained, the network
does not possess such an adaptivity, leading to worse performance. Ghorbani et al. (2019; 2020) analysed in detail how
data structure breaks the curse of dimensionality in wide
two-layer neural networks, but not in learning with random
features, leading to better performance of the former.

