Learning from Noisy Labels with No Change to the Training Process

Mingyuan Zhang 1 Jane Lee 2 Shivani Agarwal 1

Abstract
There has been much interest in recent years
in developing learning algorithms that can learn
accurate classifiers from data with noisy labels.
A widely-studied noise model is that of classconditional noise (CCN), wherein a label y is
flipped to a label ye with some associated noise
probability that depends on both y and ye. In
the multiclass setting, all previously proposed algorithms under the CCN model involve changing the training process, by introducing a ‘noisecorrection’ to the surrogate loss to be minimized
over the noisy training examples. In this paper,
we show that this is really unnecessary: one can
simply perform class probability estimation (CPE)
on the noisy examples, e.g. using a standard (multiclass) logistic regression algorithm, and then
apply noise-correction only in the final prediction
step. This means that the training algorithm itself
does not need any change, and one can simply
use standard off-the-shelf implementations with
no modification to the code for training. Our
approach can handle general multiclass loss matrices, including the usual 0-1 loss but also other
losses such as those used for ordinal regression
problems. We also provide a quantitative regret
transfer bound, which bounds the target regret on
the true distribution in terms of the CPE regret on
the noisy distribution; in doing so, we extend the
notion of strong properness introduced for binary
losses by Agarwal (2014) to the multiclass case.
Our bound suggests that the sample complexity of
learning under CCN increases as the noise matrix
approaches singularity. We also provide fixes and
potential improvements for noise estimation methods that involve computing anchor points. Our
experiments confirm our theoretical findings.
1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 Twitter, San Francisco, CA, USA (Work done while at the University of Pennsylvania). Correspondence to: Mingyuan Zhang, Shivani Agarwal
<{myz,ashivani}@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In many applications of machine learning, one receives
noisy labels during training. This can happen for a variety
of reasons, including human labeling errors, sensor measurement errors, distributed label collection via crowdsourcing,
automatic label collection via internet crawling, and many
others. Consequently, there has been much interest in recent years in developing learning algorithms that can learn
accurate classifiers from data with noisy labels (Frénay &
Verleysen, 2014; Song et al., 2020).
We focus here on the setting of label-dependent noise, where
the (random) noise in a label depends on the label but not on
the instance (the more general setting of label- and instancedependent noise is also of interest (Menon et al., 2018;
Cheng et al., 2020), but we do not focus on that here). An
early example of label-dependent noise for binary classification that has been widely studied in the PAC learning
literature is the random classification noise (RCN) model,
in which a binary label y is flipped to the opposite label with
a fixed probability γ ∈ [0, 21 ) (Angluin & Laird, 1987; Bylander, 1994; Aslam & Decatur, 1996; Kearns, 1998; Blum
& Mitchell, 1998; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1999). More recently,
Natarajan et al. (2013) generalized the RCN model and
proposed the class-conditional random label noise (CCN)
model for binary classification, in which flip probabilities
for positive and negative labels can be different. This was
then extended to the more general multiclass case, wherein
a label y is flipped to a label ye with some noise probability
that depends on y and ye (van Rooyen & Williamson, 2017;
Patrini et al., 2017; Ghosh et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018).
The primary challenge in learning from noisy labels is to design algorithms which, despite being given data with noisy
labels as input, can learn accurate classifiers for the true,
clean distribution. In particular, it is desirable to design algorithms which, when trained using a sufficiently rich function
class, are statistically consistent for the clean distribution
(i.e. that converge to a Bayes optimal classifier for the clean
distribution). For the general multiclass CCN model, two
such algorithms have been proposed: the unbiased estimator method of van Rooyen & Williamson (2017) (which
builds on a method of Natarajan et al. (2013) for binary
labels), and the forward method of Patrini et al. (2017) (the
‘backward’ method of Patrini et al. (2017) is the same as

