Weisfeiler and Lehman Go Topological: Message Passing Simplicial Networks

Cristian Bodnar * 1 Fabrizio Frasca * 2 3 Yu Guang Wang * 4 5 6
Nina Otter 7 Guido Montúfar * 4 7 Pietro Liò 1 Michael M. Bronstein 2 3
v0

Abstract
The pairwise interaction paradigm of graph machine learning has predominantly governed the
modelling of relational systems. However, graphs
alone cannot capture the multi-level interactions
present in many complex systems and the expressive power of such schemes was proven to be limited. To overcome these limitations, we propose
Message Passing Simplicial Networks (MPSNs),
a class of models that perform message passing on
simplicial complexes (SCs). To theoretically analyse the expressivity of our model we introduce a
Simplicial Weisfeiler-Lehman (SWL) colouring
procedure for distinguishing non-isomorphic SCs.
We relate the power of SWL to the problem of
distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs and show
that SWL and MPSNs are strictly more powerful than the WL test and not less powerful than
the 3-WL test. We deepen the analysis by comparing our model with traditional graph neural
networks (GNNs) with ReLU activations in terms
of the number of linear regions of the functions
they can represent. We empirically support our
theoretical claims by showing that MPSNs can
distinguish challenging strongly regular graphs
for which GNNs fail and, when equipped with
orientation equivariant layers, they can improve
classification accuracy in oriented SCs compared
to a GNN baseline.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK 2 Twitter, UK
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK 4 Max
Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany 5 Institute of Natural Sciences and School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 6 School
of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia 7 Department of Mathematics and Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
Correspondence to: Cristian Bodnar <cb2015@cam.ac.uk>,
Fabrizio Frasca <ffrasca@twitter.com>, Yu Guang Wang
<yuguang.wang@mis.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

v10

v6

v9

v8
v1

v5

v3
v2

v4

v7

Figure 1. Message Passing with upper and boundary adjacencies
illustrated for vertex v2 and edge (v5 , v7 ) in the complex.

1. Introduction
Graphs are among the most common abstractions for complex systems of relations and interactions, arising in a broad
range of fields from social science to high energy physics.
Graph neural networks (GNNs), which trace their origins
to the 1990s (Sperduti, 1994; Goller & Kuchler, 1996; Gori
et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009; Bruna et al., 2014; Li et al.,
2015), have recently achieved great success in learning tasks
with graph-structured data.
GNNs typically apply a local permutation-invariant functions aggregating the neighbour features for each node, resulting in a permutation equivariant function on the graph
(Maron et al., 2018). The design of the local aggregator is
important: if chosen to be an injective function, the resulting
GNN is equivalent in its expressive power to the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) graph isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Leman,
1968; Xu et al., 2019b; Morris et al., 2019). Due to their
equivalence to the WL algorithm, message-passing type
GNNs are unable to learn certain tasks on graphs. In particular, they are limited in their capability of detecting graph
structure such as triangles or cliques (Chen et al., 2020).
While other architectures equivalent to higher-dimensional
k-WL tests have been proposed (Maron et al., 2019), they
suffer from high computational and memory complexity,
and lack the key property of GNNs: Locality.
We tackle this problem by considering local higher-order
interactions. Among many modelling frameworks that have
been proposed to describe complex systems with higherorder relations (Battiston et al., 2020), we specifically focus on simplicial complexes, a convenient middle ground
between graphs (which are a particular case of simplicial

