Posterior Value Functions:
Hindsight Baselines for Policy Gradient Methods

Chris Nota 1 Bruno Castro da Silva 1 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
Hindsight allows reinforcement learning agents
to leverage new observations to make inferences
about earlier states and transitions. In this paper, we exploit the idea of hindsight and introduce posterior value functions. Posterior value
functions are computed by inferring the posterior distribution over hidden components of the
state in previous timesteps and can be used to
construct novel unbiased baselines for policy gradient methods. Importantly, we prove that these
baselines reduce (and never increase) the variance
of policy gradient estimators compared to traditional state value functions. While the posterior
value function is motivated by partial observability, we extend these results to arbitrary stochastic
MDPs by showing that hindsight-capable agents
can model stochasticity in the environment as a
special case of partial observability. Finally, we
introduce a pair of methods for learning posterior
value functions and prove their convergence.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an area of artificial intelligence in which computational agents learn to act in complex
environments through reward and punishment. Many RL
agents work by choosing a sequence of actions and comparing the resulting outcome (in terms of rewards) to some
prior expected outcome (called a baseline). Such agents
then alter their behavior to make better-than-expected outcomes more likely and worse-than-expected ones less so.
To avoid bias, baselines are usually computed in a way that
carefully avoids incorporating any information about the
actual outcome, including anything the agent learns about
the environment after choosing an action. However, in many
1

College of Information and Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. Correspondence
to: Chris Nota <cnota@cs.umass.edu>, Philip S. Thomas
<pthomas@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

cases, such information can be useful for assessing which
outcomes were likely to have occurred, and failing to use it
can mislead the agent.
For example, consider a morning commute. When you get
into your car, you may expect the drive to take a certain
length of time. This morning, however, you run into traffic on the freeway and discover you will be substantially
delayed in getting to work. If you were an RL agent using
traditional methods, you would respond to this worse-thanexpected outcome by reducing the likelihood of all of the
“actions” that you took prior to encountering the traffic. For
example, you would decrease the probability of using your
turn indicator when approaching the on-ramp. As a human,
you know this is foolish—the traffic was not caused by using the turn indicator or any other actions you took while
driving (presuming there was no alternate route available!).
Unless you chose to leave earlier, arriving to work late was
inevitable, and your past driving should be evaluated relative to this new information (the presence of traffic), not
according to the assumptions you made while sitting in
your driveway. The ability to use such information to better
understand earlier circumstances is known as hindsight.
We present a new class of baselines, called posterior value
functions, which exploit the idea of hindsight. We prove
that posterior value functions can reduce the variance of updates to an agent’s behavior (i.e., policy gradient estimators)
compared to standard approaches, while never increasing
variance or introducing bias. We analyze the resulting variance in detail and show using several examples that the
improvement can be large. We introduce efficient methods
for learning posterior value functions through interactions
with the environment and prove that they converge almost
surely. Finally, we illustrate these results empirically.

2. Background and Notation
In RL, the environment is typically represented as a
Markov decision process (MDP). An MDP is a tuple,
(S, A, P, R, d0 ), where S is the set of possible states, A
is the set of possible actions, R : S × A → R is the reward
function, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the transition function,
and d0 : S → [0, 1] is the initial state distribution.

