High Confidence Generalization for Reinforcement Learning

James E. Kostas 1 Yash Chandak 1 Scott M. Jordan 1 Georgios Theocharous 2 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
We present several classes of reinforcement learning algorithms that safely generalize to Markov
decision processes (MDPs) not seen during training. Specifically, we study the setting in which
some set of MDPs is accessible for training. For
various definitions of safety, our algorithms give
probabilistic guarantees that agents can safely generalize to MDPs that are sampled from the same
distribution but are not necessarily in the training set. These algorithms are a type of Seldonian algorithm (Thomas et al., 2019), which is a
class of machine learning algorithms that return
models with probabilistic safety guarantees for
user-specified definitions of safety.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is often desirable for
trained agents to be robust to changes in their environments
and tasks. For example, users of RL algorithms may wish to
train an agent using an imperfect simulation and then deploy
the agent in the real world. Unfortunately, trained RL agents
are often sensitive to changes in their environment: even
slight modifications may catastrophically upset an agent’s
ability to perform a task (Witty et al., 2018). In this work, we
present a class of RL algorithms, called high confidence generalization algorithms (HCGAs), that provide probabilistic
safety guarantees for agents’ performances for environments
not necessarily seen during training. These guarantees guard
against catastrophic outcomes and ensure that agents can
successfully generalize to entire distributions of tasks.
This work focuses on the setting where an RL task is represented by some distribution of Markov decision processes
(MDPs). We assume that the agent is trained on some set
of MDPs (that is, a training set) drawn independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) from this distribution. Our
algorithms then provide guarantees regarding an agent’s per1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA 2 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: James E. Kostas <jekostas@umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

formance on MDPs drawn from the distribution, including
MDPs not in the training set.
HCGAs first train using a standard RL algorithm and then
perform a safety test on the resulting policy. The safety
test provides guarantees on the trained agent’s performance.
While some sophistication can be added to the learning process to account for the nature of the task, in their most basic
form, the algorithms presented in this work are agnostic
to the policy structure, the RL algorithm used for training,
and the hyperparameters of the training algorithm. Also, no
assumptions are required about the MDPs or the distribution
from which they are drawn. These properties make HCGAs
versatile and robust; they can be employed in any setting
matching the above description, regardless of the training
algorithm and policy representation used for the task.
The contributions of this paper are: 1) a presentation and
analysis of HCGAs, and a proof that they provide the probabilistic guarantees that we claim; 2) a presentation and
analysis of a class of HCGAs which provides guarantees
regarding the expected performance on the MDP distribution representing the task; 3) the proposal and analysis of an
extension to the class of HCGAs described above; this extension uses control variates designed for the HCGA setting to
improve these algorithms without violating the safety guarantees; 4) a presentation and analysis of classes of HCGAs
with risk-sensitive performance guarantees; and 5) empirical
results from two environment distributions that demonstrate
that the safety guarantees hold in practice and that the control variate extension may improve results without violating
the safety guarantees.

2. Related Work
Safe policy improvement with baseline bootstrapping
(SPIBB) (Laroche et al., 2019) is a class of safe RL algorithms with some similarities to HCGAs. Both classes of
algorithms generalize with high confidence to some target
MDP or MDPs that may be inaccessible for training. However, the problem setting differs in several ways. Unlike
HCGAs, SPIBB algorithms do not have direct access to any
environment. Instead SPIBB algorithms have a baseline
policy which they aim to improve and data (state, action,
reward, state tuples) gathered from the target MDP using
this baseline policy (some SPIBB algorithms need not have

