Self-Tuning for Data-Efficient Deep Learning

Ximei Wang * 1 Jinghan Gao * 1 Mingsheng Long 1 Jianmin Wang 1

Abstract
Deep learning has made revolutionary advances to
diverse applications in the presence of large-scale
labeled datasets. However, it is prohibitively timecostly and labor-expensive to collect sufficient labeled data in most realistic scenarios. To mitigate
the requirement for labeled data, semi-supervised
learning (SSL) focuses on simultaneously exploring both labeled and unlabeled data, while transfer
learning (TL) popularizes a favorable practice of
fine-tuning a pre-trained model to the target data.
A dilemma is thus encountered: Without a decent
pre-trained model to provide an implicit regularization, SSL through self-training from scratch
will be easily misled by inaccurate pseudo-labels,
especially in large-sized label space; Without exploring the intrinsic structure of unlabeled data,
TL through fine-tuning from limited labeled data
is at risk of under-transfer caused by model shift.
To escape from this dilemma, we present SelfTuning to enable data-efficient deep learning by
unifying the exploration of labeled and unlabeled
data and the transfer of a pre-trained model, as
well as a Pseudo Group Contrast (PGC) mechanism to mitigate the reliance on pseudo-labels and
boost the tolerance to false labels. Self-Tuning
outperforms its SSL and TL counterparts on five
tasks by sharp margins, e.g. it doubles the accuracy of fine-tuning on Cars with 15% labels.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, deep learning has made revolutionary
advances to diverse machine learning problems and applications in the presence of large-scale labeled datasets.
However, in most real-world scenarios, it is prohibitively
time-costly and labor-expensive to collect sufficient labeled
data through manual labeling, especially when labeling
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, 100084. E-mail: Ximei Wang
(wxm17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn). Correspondence to: Mingsheng
Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

must be done by an expert such as a doctor in medical
applications. To mitigate the requirement for labeled data,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) focuses on simultaneously
exploring both labeled and unlabeled data, while transfer
learning (TL) popularizes a favorable practice of fine-tuning
a pre-trained model to the target data.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a powerful approach
for addressing the lack of labeled data by also exploring
unlabeled examples. Recent advances in semi-supervised
learning (Sohn et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b) reveal that
self-training (Lee, 2013), which picks up the class with the
highest predicted probability of a sample as its pseudo-label,
is empirically and theoretically (Wei et al., 2021) proved
effective on unlabeled data. However, an obvious obstacle
in pseudo-labeling is the confirmation bias (Arazo et al.,
2020): the performance of a student is restricted by the
teacher when learning from inaccurate pseudo-labels. In
a prior study, we investigated the current state-of-the-art
SSL method, FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020), on a target
dataset CUB-200-2011 (Wah et al., 2011) containing 200
bird species. As Figure 4(a) shows, keeping the same label
proportion of 15%, the test accuracy of FixMatch drops
rapidly as the descending accuracy of pseudo-labels when
the label space enlarges from 10 (CUB10) to 200 (CUB200).
This observation reveals that SSL through self-training from
scratch, without a decent pre-trained model to provide an
implicit regularization, will be easily misled by inaccurate
pseudo-labels, especially in large-sized label space.
Fine-tuning a pre-trained model to a labeled target dataset
is a popular form of transfer learning (TL) and increasingly
becoming a common practice within computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP) communities. For
instance, ResNet (He et al., 2016) and EfficientNet (Tan
& Le, 2019) models pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009) are widely fine-tuned into various CV tasks, while
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)
models pre-trained on large-scale corpus achieve strong
performance on diverse NLP tasks. Recent works on finetuning mainly focus on how to better exploit a target labeled
data and a pre-trained model from various perspectives,
such as weights (Li et al., 2018), features (Li et al., 2019),
singular values (Chen et al., 2019) and category relationship (You et al., 2020). In a prior study, we investigated the
current state-of-the-art TL method, Co-Tuning, on standard

