Compositional Video Synthesis with Action Graphs

Amir Bar * 1 Roei Herzig * 1 Xiaolong Wang 2 3 Anna Rohrbach 3 Gal Chechik 4 5
Trevor Darrell 3 Amir Globerson 1

Abstract
Videos of actions are complex signals containing
rich compositional structure in space and time.
Current video generation methods lack the ability
to condition the generation on multiple coordinated and potentially simultaneous timed actions.
To address this challenge, we propose to represent the actions in a graph structure called Action Graph and present the new “Action Graph To
Video” synthesis task. Our generative model for
this task (AG2Vid) disentangles motion and appearance features, and by incorporating a scheduling mechanism for actions facilitates a timely
and coordinated video generation. We train and
evaluate AG2Vid on the CATER and SomethingSomething V2 datasets, and show that the resulting videos have better visual quality and semantic
consistency compared to baselines. Finally, our
model demonstrates zero-shot abilities by synthesizing novel compositions of the learned actions.1

1. Introduction
Learning to generate visual content is a fundamental task in
computer vision and graphics, with numerous applications
from sim-to-real training of autonomous agents, to creating
visuals for games and movies. While the quality of generating still images has leaped forward recently (Brock et al.,
2019; Karras et al., 2020), generating videos remains in its
infancy. Generating actions and interactions between objects is perhaps the most challenging aspect of conditional
video generation. When constructing a complex scene with
multiple agents (e.g. a driving scene with several cars or a
basketball game with a set of players) it would be important
to have control over multiple agents and their actions as well
*

Equal contribution 1 The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University 2 UC San Diego 3 UC Berkeley 4 NVIDIA
Research 5 Bar-Ilan University. Correspondence to: Amir Bar
<amir.bar@cs.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
See the project page for code and pretrained models:
https://roeiherz.github.io/AG2Video.

Figure 1. We propose a new task called Action Graph to Video.
To represent input actions, we use a graph structure called Action
Graph, where nodes are objects and edges are actions with start/end
frames specified by T (s, e) and optional attributes (such as object
destination coordinates) specified by L(x, y), where (x, y) ∈ R2
is a spatial offset. Together with input first frame and scene layout,
our goal is to synthesize a video that follows the input Action
Graph instructions. We include an example over CATER (Girdhar
& Ramanan, 2020) dataset. The annotated object-action trajectories are only shown for illustration purposes.

as to coordinate them w.r.t. each other (e.g. to generate a
Pick ’n’ Roll move in basketball). Actions create long-range
spatio-temporal dependencies between people and objects
they interact with. For example, when a player passes a ball,
the entire movement sequence of all the entities (thrower,
ball, receiver) must be coordinated and carefully timed. This
paper specifically addresses this challenge, the task of generating coordinated and timed actions, as an important step
towards generating videos of complex scenes.
Current approaches for conditional video generation are not
well suited to condition the generation on multiple coordinated (potentially simultaneous) timed actions. One line
of work, Class Conditional Video Generation (Tulyakov
et al., 2018; Nawhal et al., 2020a) relies on a single
action (Tulyakov et al., 2018) and a potential object
class (Nawhal et al., 2020a). However, this approach cannot
deal with variable number of objects, multiple simultaneous

