Near-Optimal Representation Learning for Linear Bandits and Linear RL

Jiachen Hu * 1 Xiaoyu Chen * 1 Chi Jin 2 Lihong Li 3 Liwei Wang 1 4

Abstract
This paper studies representation learning for
multi-task linear bandits and multi-task episodic
RL with linear value function approximation. We
first consider the setting where we play M linear bandits with dimension d concurrently, and
these bandits share a common k-dimensional linear representation so that k  d and k  M .
We propose a sample-efficient algorithm, MTLROFUL, which leverages
the √
shared representation
√
to achieve Õ(M dkT + d kM T ) regret, with
T being the number of total steps. Our regret√significantly improves upon the baseline Õ(M d T )
achieved by solving each task independently. We
further develop a lower bound that shows our regret is near-optimal when d > M . Furthermore,
we extend the algorithm and analysis to multi-task
episodic RL with linear value function approximation under low inherent Bellman error (Zanette
et al., 2020a). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first theoretical result that characterize the
benefits of multi-task representation learning for
exploration in RL with function approximation.

1. Introduction
Multi-task representation learning is the problem of learning
a common low-dimensional representation among multiple
related tasks (Caruana, 1997). This problem has become
increasingly important in many applications such as natural
language processing (Ando & Zhang, 2005; Liu et al., 2019),
computer vision (Li et al., 2014), drug discovery (Ramsundar et al., 2015), and reinforcement learning (Wilson et al.,
2007; Teh et al., 2017; D’Eramo et al., 2019). In these cases,
common information can be extracted from related tasks to
improve data efficiency and accelerate learning.
*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS, Peking University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University 3 Amazon
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University. Correspondence to:
Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While representation learning has achieved tremendous success in a variety of applications (Bengio et al., 2013), its
theoretical understanding is still limited. A widely accepted
assumption in the literature is the existence of a common representation shared by different tasks. For example, Maurer
et al. (2016) proposed a general method to learn data representation in multi-task supervised learning and learning-tolearn setting. Du et al. (2020) studied few-shot learning via
representation learning with assumptions on a common representation among source and target tasks. Tripuraneni et al.
(2020) focused on the problem of multi-task linear regression with low-rank representation, and proposed algorithms
with sharp statistical rates.
Inspired by the theoretical results in supervised learning, we
take a step further to investigate provable benefits of representation learning for sequential decision making problems.
First, we study the multi-task low-rank linear bandits problem, where M tasks of d-dimensional (infinite-arm) linear
bandits are concurrently learned for T steps. The expected
reward of arm xi ∈ Rd for task i is θi> xi , as determined by
an unknown linear parameter θi . To take advantage of the
multi-task representation learning framework, we assume
that θi ’s lie in an unknown k-dimensional subspace of Rd ,
where k is much smaller compared to d and M (Yang et al.,
2020). The dependence among tasks makes it possible to
achieve a regret bound better than solving each task independently. Specifically, if the tasks are solved independently
with standard algorithms such as OFUL
√ (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011), the total regret is Õ(M d T ).1 By leveraging
the common representation
among
√
√ tasks, we can achieve
a better regret Õ(M dkT + d M kT ). Our algorithm is
also robust to the linear representation assumption when the
model is misspecified. If the k-dimensional subspace approximates the rewards with√error at most
√ ζ, our algorithm
√
can still achieve regret Õ(M dkT +d kM T +M T dζ).
Moreover, we prove a regret lower bound indicating that
the regret of our algorithm is not improvable except for
logarithmic factors in the regime d > M .
Compared with multi-task linear bandits, multi-task reinforcement learning is a more popular research topic with
a long line of works in both theoretical side and empirical side (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Parisotto et al., 2015; Liu
1

Õ hides the logarithmic factors.

