Scaling Up Visual and Vision-Language Representation Learning
With Noisy Text Supervision

Chao Jia 1 Yinfei Yang 1 Ye Xia 1 Yi-Ting Chen 1 Zarana Parekh 1 Hieu Pham 1 Quoc V. Le 1
Yunhsuan Sung 1 Zhen Li 1 Tom Duerig 1

Abstract
Pre-trained representations are becoming crucial
for many NLP and perception tasks. While representation learning in NLP has transitioned to training on raw text without human annotations, visual and vision-language representations still rely
heavily on curated training datasets that are expensive or require expert knowledge. For vision applications, representations are mostly learned using
datasets with explicit class labels such as ImageNet or OpenImages. For vision-language, popular datasets like Conceptual Captions, MSCOCO,
or CLIP all involve a non-trivial data collection
(and cleaning) process. This costly curation process limits the size of datasets and hence hinders
the scaling of trained models. In this paper, we
leverage a noisy dataset of over one billion image
alt-text pairs, obtained without expensive filtering or post-processing steps in the Conceptual
Captions dataset. A simple dual-encoder architecture learns to align visual and language representations of the image and text pairs using a
contrastive loss. We show that the scale of our
corpus can make up for its noise and leads to
state-of-the-art representations even with such a
simple learning scheme. Our visual representation
achieves strong performance when transferred to
classification tasks such as ImageNet and VTAB.
The aligned visual and language representations
enables zero-shot image classification and also
set new state-of-the-art results on Flickr30K and
MSCOCO image-text retrieval benchmarks, even
when compared with more sophisticated crossattention models. The representations also enable
cross-modality search with complex text and text
+ image queries.

1. Introduction
In the existing literature, visual and vision-language representation learning are mostly studied separately with different training data sources. In the vision domain, pre-training
on large-scale supervised data such as ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009), OpenImages (Kuznetsova et al., 2020), and JFT300M (Sun et al., 2017; Kolesnikov et al., 2020) has proven
to be critical for improving performance on downstream
tasks via transfer learning. Curation of such pre-training
datasets requires heavy work on data gathering, sampling,
and human annotation, and hence is difficult to scale.
Pre-training has also become the de-facto approach
in vision-language modeling (Lu et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2020c; Li et al., 2020). However, vision-language
pre-training datasets such as Conceptual Captions (Sharma
et al., 2018), Visual Genome Dense Captions (Krishna
et al., 2016), and ImageBERT (Qi et al., 2020) require
even heavier work on human annotation, semantic parsing,
cleaning and balancing. As a result, the scales of these
datasets are only in the realm of ∼10M examples. This is at
least an order of magnitude smaller than their counterparts
in the vision domain, and much smaller than large corpora
of text from the internet for NLP pre-training (e.g., Devlin
et al. (2019); Radford et al. (2019); Yang et al. (2019); Liu
et al. (2019b); Raffel et al. (2020)).
In this work, we leverage a dataset of over one billion noisy
image alt-text pairs to scale visual and vision-language representation learning. We follow the procedures described
in the Conceptual Captions dataset (Sharma et al., 2018)
to have a large noisy dataset. But instead of applying the
complex filtering and post-processing steps as proposed
by (Sharma et al., 2018) to clean the dataset, we only apply
simple frequency-based filtering. The resulting dataset is
noisy, but is two orders of magnitude larger than the Conceptual Captions dataset. We show that visual and visionlanguage representations pre-trained on our exascale dataset
achieve very strong performance on a wide range of tasks.

1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Chao Jia <chaojia@google.com>, Yinfei Yang <yinfeiy@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To train our model, we use an objective that aligns the visual
and language representations in a shared latent embedding
space using a simple dual-encoder architecture. Similar

