SagaNet: A Small Sample Gated Network for Pediatric Cancer Diagnosis

Yuhan Liu 1 Shiliang Sun 1

Abstract
The scarcity of available samples and the high annotation cost of medical data cause a bottleneck in
many digital diagnosis tasks based on deep learning. This problem is especially severe in pediatric
tumor tasks, due to the small population base of
children and high sample diversity caused by the
high metastasis rate of related tumors. Targeted
research on pediatric tumors is urgently needed
but lacks sufficient attention. In this work, we propose a novel model to solve the diagnosis task of
small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs). To solve
the problem of high noise and high diversity in the
small sample scenario, the model is constrained to
pay attention to the valid areas in the pathological
image with a masking mechanism, and a lengthaware loss is proposed to improve the tolerance
to feature diversity. We evaluate this framework
on a challenging small sample SRBCTs dataset,
whose classification is difficult even for professional pathologists. The proposed model shows
the best performance compared with state-of-theart deep models and generalization on another
pathological dataset, which illustrates the potentiality of deep learning applications in difficult
small sample medical tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based methods have enjoyed marvelous success over a variety of tasks in recent years, and their application in the medical field also illustrates excellent potentiality. The outstanding performance of deep models heavily depends on the availability of vast training databases.
Nevertheless, this is a considerable obstacle when tackling
medical data due to several reasons. First, different from
labeling natural images or language with the help of ordinary volunteers, annotating medical data requires experts
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Shiliang
Sun <slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to devote a lot of time and endeavors during busy work.
Second, for the protection of data privacy, many hospitals or
institutions are unwilling or not allowed to share data about
specific diseases. Third, although some diseases have high
mortality and are worthy of attention, the affected patients
have a small population base and incidence. Under such
difficulties, designing effective deep models becomes a challenge that researchers focusing on medical data processing
have to face.
Strong dependence on large datasets makes deep learning
challenging to be applied to diseases whose cases are scarce.
As the experimental analysis in (Campanella et al., 2019)
concludes, when the number of pathological slices is less
than 10,000, the performance of deep models is often unsatisfactory. This problem is especially severe in many
pediatric diseases. The small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs) (Sharma et al., 2017) we studied in this work are one
kind of such diseases due to their small number and diverse
shapes.
The reason for the common small sample problem in pediatric pathology research is that pediatric cancer data are
very difficult to collect. Compared with adults, the cancer
incidence is lower in children. For example, the most common tumor in adults is hepatocellular carcinoma, which has
an incidence rate of about 40 per million (Di Bisceglie et al.,
1988), while the hepatoblastoma in children, the most common pediatric liver malignancy, is only 1.5 per million on
incidence (Tang et al., 2011). Coupled with the considerable
difference in the population base, the number of pathological tumor slices in children is significantly lower than the
number of adult tumor slices, which is a huge challenge
for deep learning. At the same time, the severe shortage of
pediatric pathologists and expensive time cost bring more
obstacles.
Faced with such a pediatric cancer research problem with
small data size, a simple idea is to directly use a model
from adult cancer pathology research for transfer learning.
However, compared with adult tumors, children tumors are
very different in terms of tumor origin, cell source, frequent
location, and disease spectrum (Ma et al., 2018)(Marshall
et al., 2014), which in turn leads to significant differences
in cell morphology on pathological slices. In most cases,
models suitable for adult pathology tasks cannot be directly

