Contrastive Learning Inverts the Data Generating Process

Roland S. Zimmermann * 1 2 Yash Sharma * 1 2 Steffen Schneider * 1 2 3 Matthias Bethge † 1 Wieland Brendel † 1

Abstract
Contrastive learning has recently seen tremendous
success in self-supervised learning. So far, however, it is largely unclear why the learned representations generalize so effectively to a large variety
of downstream tasks. We here prove that feedforward models trained with objectives belonging
to the commonly used InfoNCE family learn to
implicitly invert the underlying generative model
of the observed data. While the proofs make certain statistical assumptions about the generative
model, we observe empirically that our findings
hold even if these assumptions are severely violated. Our theory highlights a fundamental connection between contrastive learning, generative
modeling, and nonlinear independent component
analysis, thereby furthering our understanding of
the learned representations as well as providing
a theoretical foundation to derive more effective
contrastive losses.1

1. Introduction
With the availability of large collections of unlabeled
data, recent work has led to significant advances in selfsupervised learning. In particular, contrastive methods have
been tremendously successful in learning representations
for visual and sequential data (Logeswaran & Lee, 2018;
Wu et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2018; Hénaff, 2020; Tian et al.,
2019; Hjelm et al., 2019; Bachman et al., 2019; He et al.,
2020a; Chen et al., 2020a; Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski
et al., 2020a;b; Ravanelli et al., 2020). While a number
of explanations have been provided as to why contrastive
learning leads to such informative representations, existing
theoretical predictions and empirical observations appear
to be at odds with each other (Tian et al., 2019; Bachman
et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020; Saunshi et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 IMPRS for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 EPFL,
Geneva, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Roland S. Zimmermann
<roland.zimmermann@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Online version and code: brendel-group.github.io/cl-ica/

In a nutshell, contrastive methods aim to learn representations where related samples are aligned (positive pairs, e.g.
augmentations of the same image), while unrelated samples
are separated (negative pairs) (Chen et al., 2020a). Intuitively, this leads to invariance to irrelevant details or transformations (by decreasing the distance between positive
pairs), while preserving a sufficient amount of information
about the input for solving downstream tasks (by increasing
the distance between negative pairs) (Tian et al., 2020). This
intuition has recently been made more precise by (Wang &
Isola, 2020), showing that a commonly used contrastive loss
from the InfoNCE family (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2012;
Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020a) asymptotically converges to a sum of two losses: an alignment loss that pulls
together the representations of positive pairs, and a uniformity loss that maximizes the entropy of the learned latent
distribution.
We show that an encoder learned with a contrastive loss
from the InfoNCE family can recover the true generative
factors of variation (up to rotations) if the process that generated the data fulfills a few weak statistical assumptions.
This theory bridges the gap between contrastive learning,
nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) and generative modeling (see Fig. 1). Our theory reveals implicit
assumptions encoded in the InfoNCE objective about the
generative process underlying the data. If these assumptions
are violated, we show a principled way of deriving alternative contrastive objectives based on assumptions regarding
the positive pair distribution. We verify our theoretical findings with controlled experiments, providing evidence that
our theory holds true in practice, even if the assumptions on
the ground-truth generative model are partially violated.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to analyze
under what circumstances representation learning methods
used in practice provably represent the data in terms of its
underlying factors of variation. Our theoretical and empirical results suggest that the success of contrastive learning
in many practical applications is due to an implicit and approximate inversion of the data generating process, which
explains why the learned representations are useful in a wide
range of downstream tasks.
In summary, our contributions are:

