Winograd Algorithm for AdderNet

Wenshuo Li 1 Hanting Chen 1 2 Mingqiang Huang 3 Xinghao Chen 1 Chunjing Xu 1 Yunhe Wang 1

Abstract
Adder neural network (AdderNet) is a new kind
of deep model that replaces the original massive
multiplications in convolutions by additions while
preserving the high performance. Since the hardware complexity of additions is much lower than
that of multiplications, the overall energy consumption is thus reduced significantly. To further
optimize the hardware overhead of using AdderNet, this paper studies the winograd algorithm,
which is a widely used fast algorithm for accelerating convolution and saving the computational
costs. Unfortunately, the conventional Winograd
algorithm cannot be directly applied to AdderNets since the distributive law in multiplication is
not valid for the `1 -norm. Therefore, we replace
the element-wise multiplication in the Winograd
equation by additions and then develop a new set
of transform matrixes that can enhance the representation ability of output features to maintain the
performance. Moreover, we propose the `2 -to-`1
training strategy to mitigate the negative impacts
caused by formal inconsistency. Experimental results on both FPGA and benchmarks show that
the new method can further reduce the energy
consumption without affecting the accuracy of
the original AdderNet.

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of deep neural networks has been well
demonstrated in a large variety of machine learning problems. With the rapid development of the accessible datasets,
learning theory and algorithms and the computing hardware,
the performance of considerable computer vision tasks has
been improved by these neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs). (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)
1
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
Peking
3
University.
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence
to: Wenshuo Li <liwenshuo@huawei.com>, Yunhe Wang
<yunhe.wang@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Method

Relative Power

CNN

6.09
2.71
2.1
1

Winograd CNN
AdderNet
Winograd AdderNet

6.09
2.71
2.1
1

Figure 1. Comparison of relative power consuming between CNN,
Winograd CNN, AdderNet and Winograd AdderNet. All data is
achieved under 8-bit fixed-point number. *: The relative power of
Winograd CNN is estimated by theoretical analysis.

first applies the deep CNN on the large-scale image classification and a series of subsequent network architectures
are explored for boosting the accuracy such as ResNet (He
et al., 2016), EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019), and GhostNet (Han et al., 2020). In addition, there is a great number
of networks presented for addressing different task including object detection (Tan et al., 2020), segmentation (Tao
et al., 2020), and low-level computer vision tasks (Guo et al.,
2019; Zhang & Patel, 2018; Ren et al., 2019). Although
these models can obtain state-of-the-art performance, most
of them require massive computations and cannot be easily
used on portable devices such as microphones, robots and
self-driving cars.
To reduce the computational costs of pre-trained deep neural
networks without affecting their performance is also a very
important problem, a series of works have been explored
for removing the network redundancy such as pruning (Han
et al., 2015), distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), and neural
architecture search (Liu et al., 2018a). Besides, according
to the investigation in (Dally, 2015), the energy consuming varies largely with different operations and different
numeric precision (e.g., the energy consumption of an 32bit multiplication is about 100× larger than that of an 8-bit
addition). Therefore, quantization is now becoming the
most common scheme for deploying deep neural networks
on resource limited devices. (Qiu et al., 2016) finds that
8-bit fixed-point number is sufficient for CNN to achieve
a promising accuracy, and soon 8-bit fixed-point number
becomes a common practice.
Furthermore, (Courbariaux et al., 2016) proposes binary
networks to quantize neural network to binary values (i.e.,
+1 and -1) to have an extreme simplification of deep networks. (Rastegari et al., 2016) inserts a scale factor after
each binarized layer to enhance the representational capability. (Lin et al., 2017) proposes ABC-Net to use the linear

