Parallelizing Legendre Memory Unit Training

Narsimha Chilkuri 1 Chris Eliasmith 1 2

Abstract
Recently, a new recurrent neural network (RNN)
named the Legendre Memory Unit (LMU) was
proposed and shown to achieve state-of-the-art
performance on several benchmark datasets. Here
we leverage the linear time-invariant (LTI) memory component of the LMU to construct a simplified variant that can be parallelized during training
(and yet executed as an RNN during inference),
resulting in up to 200 times faster training. We
note that our efficient parallelizing scheme is general and is applicable to any deep network whose
recurrent components are linear dynamical systems. We demonstrate the improved accuracy
of our new architecture compared to the original
LMU and a variety of published LSTM and transformer networks across seven benchmarks. For
instance, our LMU sets a new state-of-the-art result on psMNIST, and uses half the parameters
while outperforming DistilBERT and LSTM models on IMDB sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), the most popular class of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), process
information in an inherently sequential manner. This prevents parallelization within training examples, and thus, they
cannot fully leverage today’s commodity GPU hardware.
This sequential nature of RNNs is one of the critical reasons
for the shift towards purely self-attention based architectures
such as the transformer and its derivatives (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020), especially in
the domain of Natural Language Processing (NLP). Parallelization makes training such networks far more efficient
on GPUs, and thus allows them to be applied to enormous
datasets – for example, the Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus
(C4) which comprises 750GB of English text (Raffel et al.,
2019). Hence, such models, via unsupervised pre-training,
1
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo
Applied Brain Research. Correspondence to: Narsimha Chilkuri
<narasimha.chilkuri@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

make it possible for us to exploit resources such as the internet,1 which produces 20TB of text data each month. A
feat such as this, from the training perspective, would be
unimaginable using LSTM or other RNN based models.
In this paper, we exploit the idea that linear recurrence
relations can be solved. More specifically, a linear timeinvariant (LTI) system’s state update equation can be written
in a non-sequential fashion (Åström & Murray, 2010). This
allows for the computation of the hidden state of an LTI system to be done in parallel, thus overcoming the fundamental
constraint that traditional RNNs suffer from. Despite this
desirable property, to our knowledge, such systems have
remained underexplored. This perhaps has to do with the
general belief that nonlinear dynamics are critical for solving complicated problems, especially AI level tasks. Here,
we challenge that notion by focussing our attention on a
specific LTI system, the memory component of the recently
proposed Legendre Memory Unit (Voelker et al., 2019),
and demonstrating superior performance of our model on
a variety of tasks, including predicting a nonlinear, chaotic
dynamical system.
The Legendre Memory Unit (LMU) is an RNN cell that is
constructed by coupling an LTI system to a nonlinear one.
The LTI system, known as the Delay Network (Voelker &
Eliasmith, 2018), is the core component of the LMU that
projects a sliding window of length θ of the input signal
onto the Legendre basis – hence the name Legendre Memory
Unit. This construction, which employs the Delay Network
(DN) to act as the memory and a nonlinear recurrent layer
to compute arbitrary functions across time, has been shown
to outperform LSTMs and other RNNs on various tasks. Of
special interest to us is the ability of the LMU to handle
temporal dependencies across 100,000 time-steps, which is
orders of magnitude better than the LSTM.
In the following pages, we start by simplifying the LMU
such that recurrence exists only in the linear system. After
showing that the training of this simplified variant can be
parallelized, we turn to the question of its effectiveness. We
do so by first considering the two synthetic tasks that the
original LMU was validated on: psMNIST and MackeyGlass. We show that our variant exceeds the original LMU’s
performance on both of these tasks, while also establishing
1

https://commoncrawl.org

