End-to-End Learning of Coherent Probabilistic Forecasts for
Hierarchical Time Series
Syama Sundar Rangapuram 1 Lucien D. Werner 2 3 Konstantinos Benidis 1 Pedro Mercado 1 Jan Gasthaus 1
Tim Januschowski 1

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to forecasting of hierarchical time series that produces coherent, probabilistic forecasts without requiring
any explicit post-processing step. Unlike the stateof-the-art, the proposed method simultaneously
learns from all time series in the hierarchy and
incorporates the reconciliation step as part of a
single trainable model. This is achieved by applying the reparameterization trick and utilizing the
observation that reconciliation can be cast as an
optimization problem with a closed-form solution.
These model features make end-to-end learning of
hierarchical forecasts possible, while accomplishing the challenging task of generating forecasts
that are both probabilistic and coherent. Importantly, our approach also accommodates general
aggregation constraints including grouped, temporal, and cross-temporal hierarchies. An extensive
empirical evaluation on real-world hierarchical
datasets demonstrates the advantages of the proposed approach over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In many practically important applications, multivariate
time series have a natural hierarchical structure, where time
series at upper levels of hierarchy are aggregates of those
at lower levels (Petropoulos et al., 2020). Prominent examples include retail sales, where sales are tracked at product,
store, state and country levels (Seeger et al., 2016; 2017),
and electricity forecasting, where consumption/production
quantities are desired at the individual, grid, and regional
levels (Taieb et al., 2020; Jeon et al., 2019). Although series
at the bottom of the hierarchy are typically sparse, noisy
1

AWS AI Labs, Germany. 2 Department of Computing & Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California, USA. 3 Work done while at Amazon. Correspondence
to: Syama S. Rangapuram <rangapur@amazon.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and devoid of the high level patterns that are apparent in
aggregate (Ben Taieb et al., 2017), forecasts have value
at all levels: bottom-level forecasts may be of more interest for automated decision making on operational horizons
whereas forecasts at the top level enable strategic decision
making (Januschowski & Kolassa, 2019). However, generating forecasts independently for time series at each level does
not guarantee that the forecasts are coherent, i.e., forecasts
of aggregated time series are the sum of forecasts of the
corresponding disaggregated time series.
Thus, the main challenge of forecasting hierarchical time
series is to exploit the information available across all levels
of a given hierarchy while producing coherent forecasts.
Prior work in hierarchical forecasting follows a two-stage
approach: base forecasts are first obtained independently
for each time series in the hierarchy and are then combined
and revised in a post-processing step to ensure coherence.
Two main issues arise with such a two-stage procedure: (i)
the model parameters for each time series are learned independently, thereby discarding information, and (ii) the base
forecasts are revised without any regard to the learned model
parameters. Another fundamental limitation of most existing methods is that they can only produce point (rather than
probabilistic) forecasts. Probabilistic forecasts are required
in practice for better decision making and risk management (Berrocal et al., 2010). The notable exception is (Ben
Taieb et al., 2017), although it is still a two-step procedure.
In this work, we present a novel approach to probabilistic
forecasting of hierarchical time series that incorporates both
learning and reconciliation into a single end-to-end model.
Model parameters are learned simultaneously from all time
series in the hierarchy. The probabilistic forecasts from the
model are guaranteed to be coherent without requiring any
post-processing step. The key insights behind the proposed
method are the differentiability of the sampling operation,
thanks to the reparametrization trick (Kingma & Welling,
2013), and the implementation of the reconciliation step on
samples as a convex optimization problem. This allows one
to combine typically independent components (generation
of base forecasts, sampling and reconciliation) into a single
trainable model.

