Safe Reinforcement Learning with Linear Function Approximation

Sanae Amani 1 Christos Thrampoulidis 2 Lin F. Yang 1

Abstract
Safety in reinforcement learning has become increasingly important in recent years. Yet, existing solutions either fail to strictly avoid choosing unsafe actions, which may lead to catastrophic results in safety-critical systems, or fail
to provide regret guarantees for settings where
safety constraints need to be learned. In this paper, we address both problems by first modeling safety as an unknown linear cost function
of states and actions, which must always fall
below a certain threshold. We then present algorithms, termed SLUCB-QVI and RSLUCBQVI, for finite-horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) with linear function approximation. We show that SLUCB-QVI and RSLUCBQVI,
while with
 √
 no safety violation, achieve a
Õ κ d3 H 3 T regret, nearly matching that of
state-of-the-art unsafe algorithms, where H is the
duration of each episode, d is the dimension of the
feature mapping, κ is a constant characterizing
the safety constraints, and T is the total number
of action played. We further present numerical
simulations that corroborate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the study of an agent trying
to maximize its expected cumulative reward by interacting
with an unknown environment over time (Sutton and Barto,
2018). In most classical RL algorithms, agents aim to maximize a long term gain by exploring all possible actions.
However, freely exploring all actions may be harmful in
many real-world systems where playing even one unsafe
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles. 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver. Correspondence to: Sanae Amani <samani@ucla.edu>,
Christos Thrampoulidis <cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca>, Lin F. Yang
<linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

action may lead to catastrophic results. Thus, safety in RL
has become a serious issue that restricts the applicability of
RL algorithms to many real-world systems. For example,
in a self-driving car, it is critical to explore those policies
that avoid crash and damage to the car, people and property.
Switching cost limitations in medical applications (Bai et al.,
2019) and legal restrictions in financial managements (Abe
et al., 2010) are other examples of safety-critical applications. All the aforementioned safety-critical environments
introduce the new challenge of balancing the goal of reward
maximization with the restriction of playing safe actions.
To address this major concern, the learning algorithm needs
to guarantee that it does not violate certain safety constraints.
From a bandit optimization point of view, (Amani et al.,
2019; Pacchiano et al., 2020; Amani and Thrampoulidis,
2021; Moradipari et al., 2019) study a linear bandit problem,
in which, at each round, a linear cost constraint needs to be
satisfied with high probability. For this problem, they propose no-regret algorithms that with high probability never
violate the constraints. There has been a surge of research
activity to address the issue of safe exploration in RL when
the environment is modeled via the more challenging and
complex setting of an unknown MDP. Many of existing algorithms model the safety in RL via Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP), that extends the classical MDP to settings with extra constraints on the total expected cost over a
horizon. To address the safety requirements in CMDPs, different approaches such as Primal-Dual Policy Optimization
(Paternain et al., 2019b;a; Stooke et al., 2020), Constrained
Policy Optimization (Achiam et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020),
and Reward Constrained Policy Optimization (Tessler et al.,
2018) have been proposed. These algorithms come with
either no theoretical guarantees or asymptotic convergence
guarantee in the batch offline setting. In another line of
work studying CMDP in online settings, (Efroni et al., 2020;
Turchetta et al., 2020; Garcelon et al., 2020; Zheng and
Ratliff, 2020; Ding et al., 2020a; Qiu et al., 2020; Ding
et al., 2020b; Xu et al., 2020; Kalagarla et al., 2020) propose
algorithms coming with sub-linear bounds on the number
of constraint violation. Additionally, the safety constraint
considered in the aforementioned papers is defined by the
cumulative expected cost over a horizon falling below a
certain threshold.
In this paper, we propose an upper confidence bound (UCB)-

