Solving Inverse Problems with a Flow-based Noise Model

Jay Whang 1 Qi Lei 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 3

Abstract
We study image inverse problems with a normalizing flow prior. Our formulation views the solution
as the maximum a posteriori estimate of the image
conditioned on the measurements. This formulation allows us to use noise models with arbitrary
dependencies as well as non-linear forward operators. We empirically validate the efficacy of
our method on various inverse problems, including compressed sensing with quantized measurements and denoising with highly structured noise
patterns. We also present initial theoretical recovery guarantees for solving inverse problems with
a flow prior.

1. Introduction
Inverse problems seek to reconstruct an unknown signal
from observations (or measurements), which are produced
by some process that transforms the original signal. Because
such processes are often lossy and noisy, inverse problems
are typically formulated as reconstructing x from its measurements
y = f (x) + δ
(1)
where f is a known deterministic forward operator and δ
is an additive noise which may have a complex structure
itself. An impressively wide range of applications can be
posed under this formulation with an appropriate choice of
f and δ, such as compressed sensing (Candes et al., 2006;
Donoho, 2006), computed tomography (Chen et al., 2008),
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Lustig et al., 2007),
and phase retrieval (Candes et al., 2015a;b).

plausible solution among them. Sparsity has classically
been a very influential structural prior for various inverse
problems (Candes et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006; Baraniuk
et al., 2010). Alternatively, recent approaches introduced
deep generative models as a powerful signal prior, showing
significant gains in reconstruction quality compared to sparsity priors (Bora et al., 2017; Asim et al., 2019; Van Veen
et al., 2018; Menon et al., 2020).
However, most existing methods assume the setting of Gaussian noise model and are unsuitable for structured and correlated noise, making them less applicable in many real-world
scenarios. For instance, when an image is ruined by handdrawn scribbles or a piece of audio track is overlayed with
human whispering, the noise to be removed follows a very
complex distribution. These settings deviate significantly
from Gaussian noise settings, yet they are much more realistic and deserve more attention. In this paper, we propose to
use a normalizing flow model to represent the noise distribution and derive principled methods for solving inference
problems under this general noise model.
Contributions.
• We present a general formulation for obtaining maximum a posteriori (MAP) reconstructions for dependent
noise and general forward operators. Notably, our
method can leverage deep generative models for both

In general for a non-invertible forward operator f , there can
be potentially infinitely many signals that match given observations. Thus the recovery algorithm must critically rely on
a priori knowledge about the original signal to find the most
1
Dept. of Computer Science, UT Austin, TX, USA 2 Dept.
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 3 Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UT Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Jay Whang
<jaywhang@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Noisy

Ours

Asim
et al.

Bora
et al.

BM3D

Figure 1. Result of denoising MNIST digits. The first column
contains noisy observations, and subsequent columns contain reconstructions.

