Which Transformer architecture fits my data?
A vocabulary bottleneck in self-attention

Noam Wies 1 Yoav Levine 1 Daniel Jannai 1 Amnon Shashua 1

Abstract
After their successful debut in natural language
processing, Transformer architectures are now becoming the de-facto standard in many domains.
An obstacle for their deployment over new modalities is the architectural configuration: the optimal
depth-to-width ratio has been shown to dramatically vary across data types (e.g., 10x larger over
images than over language). We theoretically predict the existence of an embedding rank bottleneck that limits the contribution of self-attention
width to the Transformer expressivity. We thus directly tie the input vocabulary size and rank to the
optimal depth-to-width ratio, since a small vocabulary size or rank dictates an added advantage of
depth over width. We empirically demonstrate the
existence of this bottleneck and its implications
on the depth-to-width interplay of Transformer
architectures, linking the architecture variability
across domains to the often glossed-over usage of
different vocabulary sizes or embedding ranks in
different domains. As an additional benefit, our
rank bottlenecking framework allows us to identify size redundancies of 25% − 50% in leading
NLP models such as ALBERT and T5.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of the Transformer as a sequence-tosequence model for machine translation, its variants have
achieved state-of-the-art results in various domains, such
as text (Devlin et al., 2019), images (Chen et al., 2020;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Jun et al., 2020), audio (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Baevski et al., 2020), video (Weissenborn
et al., 2020), mathematical problem solving (Saxton et al.,
2019), reinforcement learning (Vinyals et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2021) and bioinformatics (Rives et al., 2019; Rao
et al., 2021). While the architecture’s operation is mostly
1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Correspondence to:
Noam Wies <noam.wies@cs.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

unchanged, the chosen ratio between the number of selfattention layers (depth) and the dimension of the internal
representation (width) varies greatly across different applications. For example, for a fixed BERT-Base size of 110M
parameters, popular architectures range from 12-layered
networks to much narrower 128-layered networks.
In language applications, the depth-to-width ratio of Transformer models is relatively consistent: increase in model
size is mainly done via widening (Levine et al., 2020), so
that the largest self-attention architectures are very wide
relative to their depths (Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020). In other domains this aspect seems unresolved, even
when comparing leading models within the same field. In
computer vision, for example, the Vision Transformer (ViT)
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) sets the state-of-the-art on ImageNet in a transfer learning setup with depth-to-width ratios
corresponding to common language models. Conversely,
Image GPT (Chen et al., 2020) and Sparse Transformer
(Jun et al., 2020) achieve state-of-the-art results in unsupervised learning and density estimation, respectively, by using
significantly deeper and narrower models.
Recently, Henighan et al. (2020) perform an ablation study
which includes data from different domains, and report empirical evidence for the existence of different “ideal” depthto-width ratios per data modality. Figure 4 in that study
leads the authors to conclude that the depth-to-width ratio
of image and math models should be 10x larger than that
of language models. A possible take-away can be that the
representations of the different data types require different
depth-to-width specifications from the architecture. In a contemporary study, Levine et al. (2020) quantify the optimal
depth-to-width ratio per self-attention network size. Their
results justify the relative shallowness of current attentionbased language models, and moreover suggest that further
deepening should be logarithmic in widening. Importantly,
their theoretical framework pertains to the self-attention architecture expressivity and is agnostic to the input modality.
The two different views above give rise to the following
question: does the optimal depth-to-width ratio depend
on the data modality, or is it a consequence of architecture expressivity considerations? In this paper, we establish architecture expressivity results that explain the ob-

