Reinforcement Learning with Prototypical Representations
Denis Yarats 1 2 Rob Fergus 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Lerrel Pinto 1

Abstract
Learning effective representations in image-based
environments is crucial for sample efficient Reinforcement Learning (RL). Unfortunately, in RL,
representation learning is confounded with the
exploratory experience of the agent – learning a
useful representation requires diverse data, while
effective exploration is only possible with coherent representations. Furthermore, we would like
to learn representations that not only generalize
across tasks but also accelerate downstream exploration for efficient task-specific training. To
address these challenges we propose Proto-RL,
a self-supervised framework that ties representation learning with exploration through prototypical representations. These prototypes simultaneously serve as a summarization of the exploratory experience of an agent as well as a basis
for representing observations. We pre-train these
task-agnostic representations and prototypes on
environments without downstream task information. This enables state-of-the-art downstream
policy learning on a set of difficult continuous control tasks. We open-source our code at https:
//github.com/denisyarats/proto.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) with rich visual observations
has proven to be a recipe for success in a variety of domains ranging from gameplay (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver
et al., 2016) to robotics (Levine et al., 2015). A crucial
ingredient for successful image-based RL is to learn an encoder that maps the high-dimensional input to a compact
representation capturing the latent state of the environment.
Standard RL methods can then be applied using the latent
representation to efficiently learn policies. Unfortunately,
representation learning in RL poses several challenges.
First, fitting encoders using the scarce supervisory signal
1

New York University 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Denis Yarats <denisyarats@cs.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

from rewards alone is sample inefficient and leads to poor
performance. Prior work (Srinivas et al., 2020; Yarats et al.,
2019) addresses this problem by leveraging self-supervised
techniques alongside standard image-based RL, which leads
to more robust and effective representations. However, such
techniques are not effective in settings where task-specific
reward, which drives exploration, is absent.
A second, more fundamental challenge is that in the context
of RL, representation learning is intimately connected to the
exploration of the environment and vice-versa (Sekar et al.,
2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021). The data observed by the agent
is non-stationary and depends on the regions of state space
covered during exploration. If exploration is ineffective,
the latent space produced by the encoder cannot properly
characterize all parts of the environment, degrading performance for downstream tasks. Conversely, the exploration
strategy cannot be defined directly on input images since no
algorithm would be able to exhaustively explore all possible
images. Hence, a representation accurately capturing the latent state of the environment is needed so that the agent can
distinguish novel latent states from those already visited and
focus exploration on the former. This leads to a chicken and
egg problem, where learning useful representations requires
diverse data, while effective exploration is only possible
with coherent representations.
Finally, a desirable property of latent representations is to
generalize across tasks defined in the same environment.
This requires the representation to support a wide range of
policies. Furthermore, the representation should also facilitate exploration for new tasks through the organization
inherent in the latent space. Recent approaches to representation learning in RL (Srinivas et al., 2020; Laskin et al.,
2020; Yarats et al., 2021) are effective for a specific task
but the representations obtained are intrinsically tied to it
and often require to re-learn representations under a different objective in cases where the desired behavior induces a
previously unseen state visitation distribution.
In this work, we address the three challenges described
above through Proto-RL, a framework for image-based RL
that learns self-supervised visual representations without
access to task-specific rewards. Concretely, we consider the
few-shot unsupervised RL setting, which consists of two
distinct phases. In the first phase, the agent explores an

