A New Formalism, Method and Open Issues for Zero-Shot Coordination

Johannes Treutlein 1 2 * Michael Dennis 3 Caspar Oesterheld 4 Jakob Foerster 1 2 5

Abstract
In many coordination problems, independently
reasoning humans are able to discover mutually
compatible policies. In contrast, independently
trained self-play policies are often mutually incompatible. Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) has
recently been proposed as a new frontier in multiagent reinforcement learning to address this fundamental issue. Prior work approaches the ZSC
problem by assuming players can agree on a
shared learning algorithm but not on labels for
actions and observations, and proposes other-play
as an optimal solution. However, until now, this
“label-free” problem has only been informally defined. We formalize this setting as the label-free
coordination (LFC) problem by defining the labelfree coordination game. We show that other-play
is not an optimal solution to the LFC problem as it
fails to consistently break ties between incompatible maximizers of the other-play objective. We
introduce an extension of the algorithm, otherplay with tie-breaking, and prove that it is optimal
in the LFC problem and an equilibrium in the
LFC game. Since arbitrary tie-breaking is precisely what the ZSC setting aims to prevent, we
conclude that the LFC problem does not reflect
the aims of ZSC. To address this, we introduce an
alternative informal operationalization of ZSC as
a starting point for future work.

1. Introduction
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), variations
of the self-play (SP) regime (Tesauro, 1994) have been suc1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of
California, Berkeley, USA 4 Department of Computer Science,
Duke University, Durham, USA 5 Facebook AI Research, USA
*
Part of the work was done as an intern at the Center for HumanCompatible AI, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Johannes Treutlein <treutlein@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1.0

0.9

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0
1.0

1.0

Figure 1. Rewards in the lever coordination game. Levers with
equal rewards cannot be distinguished without labels.

cessful in producing superhuman policies for two-player
zero-sum games such as chess, go, and poker (Campbell
et al., 2002; Silver et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018).
SP leads to policies that are highly adapted to each other
and thus often appear artifical. This is not a problem in
two-player zero-sum games as all optimal policies are interchangeable (Nash, 1951), at least when considering optimal
opponents.
In fully cooperative MARL, however, such arbitrary conventions can be undesirable, as they fail when paired with
agents that were not present during SP training. For instance,
consider a situation in which robots must avoid collisions,
by either swerving right or left or slowing down to avoid
the other robot. Here, robots trained via SP would randomly
learn to swerve either left or right and thus crash half the
time at test time when paired in cross-play (XP) with agents
from independent training runs. Similarly, the arbitrary conventions learned by agents, e.g., in the card-game Hanabi,
can prevent successful human-AI coordination (Foerster
et al., 2019; Carroll et al., 2019).
This shortcoming of SP in fully cooperative problems motivates the study of the zero-shot coordination (ZSC) problem, which Hu et al. (2020) operationalize as finding a
general-purpose learning algorithm that allows independently trained agents to coordinate successfully at test time.
The independent training is a proxy for the independent decision making that humans have to undertake when solving
coordination tasks, while the ability to agree on an algorithm
corresponds to having a common high-level approach for
solving these problems.

