Scalable Evaluation of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Melting Pot

Joel Z. Leibo * 1 Edgar Duéñez-Guzmán * 1 Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets * 1 John P. Agapiou * 1 Peter Sunehag 1
Raphael Koster 1 Jayd Matyas 1 Charles Beattie 1 Igor Mordatch 2 Thore Graepel 1

Abstract
Existing evaluation suites for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) do not assess generalization to novel situations as their primary objective (unlike supervised-learning benchmarks).
Our contribution, Melting Pot, is a MARL evaluation suite that fills this gap, and uses reinforcement learning to reduce the human labor required
to create novel test scenarios. This works because
one agent’s behavior constitutes (part of) another
agent’s environment. To demonstrate scalability,
we have created over 80 unique test scenarios
covering a broad range of research topics such
as social dilemmas, reciprocity, resource sharing,
and task partitioning. We apply these test scenarios to standard MARL training algorithms, and
demonstrate how Melting Pot reveals weaknesses
not apparent from training performance alone.

1. Introduction
No broadly accepted benchmark test set for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) research yet exists. This lack of
a standardized evaluation protocol has impeded progress in
the field by making it difficult to obtain like-for-like comparisons between algorithms. The situation in MARL is now in
stark contrast to the status quo in single-agent reinforcement
learning (SARL) where a diverse set of benchmarks suitable
for different purposes are available (e.g. Brockman et al.
(2016); Fortunato et al. (2019); Machado et al. (2018); Osband et al. (2019); Tassa et al. (2018); Torrado et al. (2018)).
Further afield, the comparison to the evaluation landscape
in other machine learning subfields is even more unfavorable. Datasets like ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and their
associated evaluation methodology achieve a level of rigor
and community acceptance unparalleled in reinforcement
learning.
Within the SARL research community there have been sev*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Joel Z. Leibo <jzl@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

eral recent calls to import the methodological stance concerning the primacy of generalization from supervised learning (Cobbe et al., 2019; Farebrother et al., 2018; Juliani et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2018a;b). However, MARL research is
still lagging behind. No one has yet attempted to build a
benchmark with the explicit aim of pushing standards for
judging multi-agent reinforcement learning research toward
making generalization the first-and-foremost goal.
Supervised learning research benefits immensely from having a clear experimental protocol and set of benchmarks that
explicitly measure how well methods generalize outside
the data to which they were exposed in training (Chollet,
2019; Deng et al., 2009; LeCun et al., 2015). This facilitates
clear like-for-like comparison between methods, channeling
competition between research groups, and driving progress.
One problem that arises when trying to import these ideas to
reinforcement learning however is that generating a test set
of environments is a lot more labor intensive than labeling
a set of images. The engineering challenge of creating just
a single test environment is akin to designing and implementing a new computer game. Thus calls to appreciate the
primacy of generalization in SARL appear sometimes to
justify a Sisyphean struggle to create ever more clever and
more diverse intelligence tests.
This obstacle to scalability turns out to be much less severe for research aimed at multi-agent intelligence. In fact,
multi-agent approaches have a natural advantage over singleplayer approaches in the measurement arena. In multi-agent
systems, agents naturally pose tasks to one another. Any
change to the policy of one agent changes the environment experienced by a set of interdependent others. For
instance, if a focal agent learns an effective policy against
a fixed set of co-players, it could be rendered useless if
the co-players change. This aspect of multi-agent learning
is more commonly associated with proposals for “training
time” ideas like autocurricula (Baker et al., 2019; Bansal
et al., 2017; Leibo et al., 2019a; Sukhbaatar et al., 2017)
and open-endedness (Clune, 2019). Here however, we propose to make a different use of it. We can take advantage
of multi-agent interaction to create large and diverse sets
of generalization tests by pre-training “background populations” of agents to use for subsequent evaluation only,
never training on them—much like the test images in the

