A Discriminative Technique for Multiple-Source Adaptation

Corinna Cortes 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1 Ningshan Zhang 3

Abstract
We present a new discriminative technique for
the multiple-source adaptation (MSA) problem.
Unlike previous work, which relies on density
estimation for each source domain, our solution
only requires conditional probabilities that can be
straightforwardly accurately estimated from unlabeled data from the source domains. We give a
detailed analysis of our new technique, including
general guarantees based on Rényi divergences,
and learning bounds when conditional Maxent is
used for estimating conditional probabilities for a
point to belong to a source domain. We show that
these guarantees compare favorably to those that
can be derived for the generative solution, using
kernel density estimation. Our experiments with
real-world applications further demonstrate that
our new discriminative MSA algorithm outperforms the previous generative solution as well as
other domain adaptation baselines.

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms are applied to an increasingly broad
array of problems. For some tasks, large amounts of labeled
data are available to train very accurate predictors. But, for
most new problems or domains, no such supervised information is at the learner’s disposal. Furthermore, labeling
data is costly since it typically requires human inspection
and agreements between multiple expert labelers. Can we
leverage past predictors learned for various domains and
combine them to devise an accurate one for a new task? Can
we provide guarantees for such combined predictors? How
should we define that combined predictor? These are some
of the challenges of multiple-source domain adaptation.
The problem of domain adaptation from multiple sources
admits distinct instances defined by the type of source in1

Google Research, New York, NY; 2 Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY; 3 Hudson River Trading,
New York, NY. Correspondence to: Ananda Theertha Suresh
<theertha@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

formation available to the learner, the number of source
domains, and the amount of labeled and unlabeled data
available from the target domain (Mansour et al., 2008;
2009a; Hoffman et al., 2018; Pan and Yang, 2010; Muandet
et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2014; Hoffman et al., 2012; Gong
et al., 2013a;b; Zhang et al., 2015; Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng
et al., 2015; Motiian et al., 2017b;a; Wang et al., 2019b;
Konstantinov and Lampert, 2019; Liu et al., 2015; Saito
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a). The specific instance we
are considering is one where the learner has access to multiple source domains and where, for each domain, they only
have at their disposal a predictor trained for that domain and
some amount of unlabeled data. No other information about
the source domains, in particular no labeled data is available. The target domain or distribution is unknown but it is
assumed to be in the convex hull of the source distributions,
or relatively close to that. The multiple-source adaptation
(MSA) problem consists of combining relatively accurate
predictors available for each source domain to derive an
accurate predictor for any such new mixture target domain.
This problem was first theoretically studied by Mansour
et al. (2008; 2009a) and subsequently by Hoffman et al.
(2018; 2021), who further provided an efficient algorithm
for this problem and reported the results of a series of experiments with that algorithm and favorable comparisons with
alternative solutions.
As pointed out by these authors, this problem arises in a
variety of different contexts. In speech recognition, each
domain may correspond to a different group of speakers and
an acoustic model learned for each domain may be available.
Here, the problem consists of devising a general recognizer
for a broader population, a mixture of the source domains
(Liao, 2013). Similarly, in object recognition, there may
be accurate models trained on different image databases
and the goal is to come up with an accurate predictor for a
general domain, which is likely to be close to a mixture of
these sources (Torralba and Efros, 2011). A similar situation
often appears in sentiment analysis and various other natural
language processing problems where accurate predictors are
available for some source domains such as TVs, laptops
and CD players, each previously trained on labeled data,
but no labeled data or predictor is at hand for the broader
category of electronics, which can be viewed as a mixture of
the sub-domains (Blitzer et al., 2007; Dredze et al., 2008).

