Monotonic Robust Policy Optimization with Model Discrepancy

Yuankun Jiang 1 Chenglin Li 2 Wenrui Dai 1 Junni Zou 1 Hongkai Xiong 2

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) algorithms tend to overﬁt due to the model
discrepancy between source and target environments. Though applying domain randomization
during training can improve the average performance by randomly generating a sufﬁcient diversity of environments in simulator, the worst-case
environment is still neglected without any performance guarantee. Since the average and worstcase performance are both important for generalization in RL, in this paper, we propose a policy
optimization approach for concurrently improving
the policy’s performance in the average and worstcase environment. We theoretically derive a lower
bound for the worst-case performance of a given
policy by relating it to the expected performance.
Guided by this lower bound, we formulate an optimization problem to jointly optimize the policy
and sampling distribution, and prove that by iteratively solving it the worst-case performance is
monotonically improved. We then develop a practical algorithm, named monotonic robust policy
optimization (MRPO). Experimental evaluations
in several robot control tasks demonstrate that
MRPO can generally improve both the average
and worst-case performance in the source environments for training, and facilitate in all cases
the learned policy with a better generalization capability in some unseen testing environments.

1. Introduction
With deep neural network approximation, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has extended classical reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms to successfully solving complex
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of
Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yuankun Jiang <yuankunjiang@sjtu.edu.cn>, Chenglin Li <lcl1985@sjtu.edu.cn>, Junni
Zou <zou-jn@cs.sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

control tasks, e.g., playing computer games with humanlevel performance (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2018)
and trafﬁc signal control (Chen et al., 2020). DRL often
requires tremendous amounts of data to train a reliable policy, especially with random exploration. It thus becomes
infeasible for some practical tasks, such as robotic control
and autonomous driving, as training in the real world is not
only expensive and time-consuming, but also dangerous.
Therefore, a very limited set of real samples is available
for training these tasks, resulting in overﬁtting and poor
generalization (Kang et al., 2019). One alternative solution
is to learn the policy in a simulator (i.e., source environment
for training) and then transfer it to the real world (i.e., target
environment for testing). However, it is currently impossible to model the exact environment and physics of the
real world. For instance, physical effects like nonrigidity
and ﬂuid dynamics are quite difﬁcult to accurately model
in simulation. How to mitigate the model discrepancy between source and target environments remains challenging
for generalization in RL.
Since one can manipulate simulator settings during training,
the policy can be trained on various environments, and thus
be able to resist to model discrepancy when it is deployed on
the test environment. Based on this, a simple yet effective
method is proposed by Peng et al. (2018) and referred to as
domain randomization (DR). It randomizes the simulator
(e.g., by randomizing the distribution of environment parameters) to generate a variety of environments for training the
policy in the source domain. Compared with training in a
single environment, recent researches have shown that policies learned through an ensemble of environment dynamics
obtained by DR achieve a better generalization performance
in terms of expected return. The expected return is referred
to as the average performance across all the trajectories sampled from different environments. Since these trajectories,
regardless of their performance, are sampled according to
a ﬁxed distribution, the trajectories with the worst performance would severely degrade the overall performance.
In contrast, another line of research on the generalization in
RL is from the perspective of control theory, i.e., learning
policies that are robust to environment perturbations. Robust
RL algorithms learn policies, also using model ensembles
produced by perturbing parameters of the nominal model.
EPOpt (Rajeswaran et al., 2017), a representative of them,

