Near-Optimal Entrywise Anomaly Detection for
Low-Rank Matrices with Sub-Exponential Noise

Vivek F. Farias 1 Andrew A. Li 2 Tianyi Peng 3

Abstract
We study the problem of identifying anomalies in
a low-rank matrix observed with sub-exponential
noise, motivated by applications in retail and inventory management. State of the art approaches
to anomaly detection in low-rank matrices apparently fall short, since they require that nonanomalous entries be observed with vanishingly
small noise (which is not the case in our problem,
and indeed in many applications). So motivated,
we propose a conceptually simple entrywise approach to anomaly detection in low-rank matrices.
Our approach accommodates a general class of
probabilistic anomaly models. We extend recent
work on entrywise error guarantees for matrix
completion, establishing such guarantees for subexponential matrices, where in addition to missing entries, a fraction of entries are corrupted by
(an also unknown) anomaly model. Viewing the
anomaly detection as a classification task, to the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to achieve
the min-max optimal detection rate (up to log
factors). Using data from a massive consumer
goods retailer, we show that our approach provides significant improvements over incumbent
approaches to anomaly detection.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of identifying anomalies in a low-rank
matrix: specifically, let M ∗ be some low-rank matrix, and
let X = M ∗ + E + A, where E is a noise matrix with
independent, mean-zero entries, and where A is a sparse
matrix of anomalies. We observe only X, and only on
1

some subset of matrix entries Ω. The anomaly detection
problem concerns identifying the support of A simply from
this observation.
One of the most popular approaches to solving this problem
is the following convex optimization formulation, referred to
as ‘stable principal component pursuit’ (stable PCP) (Zhou
et al., 2010),
min kM̂ k∗ + λ2 kÂk1 + λ1 kPΩ (X − M̂ − Â)k2F ,

(1)

M̂ ,Â

where λ1 and λ2 are regularization parameters. The three
matrix norms in the objective are meant to promote, from
left to right, low-rankedness in M̂ , sparsity in Â, and fit to X
on the observed entries Ω. Upon solving problem (1), Â can
be used to estimate the support of A. Now in the absence of
anomalies, this optimization problem (after removing the Â
terms) is in essence optimal under a variety of assumptions
on the distributions of E and Ω. In contrast, the available
results for anomaly detection are weaker. Perhaps most
limiting, results that guarantee recovery of M ∗ require that
the ‘average’ noise kEkF /n vanishes, where n is the size of
the matrix. In this setting, noise in observing any individual
matrix entry in Ω grows negligibly small in large matrices.
This is limiting:
1. X is typically noisy: In the practical problem that
motivates this work, M ∗ + E can be viewed as a
matrix of centered Poisson entries with mean M ∗ .
Clearly then, EkEkF will scale with the size of the
matrix, so theoretical guarantees for extant anomaly
detection approaches do not apply.
2. Even ignoring this theoretical limitation, we will see
that in the setting where X is noisy (such as in our motivating application), the optimization approach above
can perform quite poorly.

Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2 Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
3
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Correspondence
to: Tianyi Peng <tianyi@mit.edu>.

Against the above backdrop, we make the following contributions to the problem of anomaly detection in matrices:

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. An optimal algorithm: We develop a new algorithm
for low-rank matrices with sub-exponential noise, and

1.1. Overview of Main Contributions

