Federated Learning of User Verification Models Without Sharing Embeddings

Hossein Hosseini 1 Hyunsin Park 1 Sungrack Yun 1 Christos Louizos 1 Joseph Soriaga 1 Max Welling 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of training User Verification (UV) models in federated setting, where
each user has access to the data of only one class
and user embeddings cannot be shared with the
server or other users. To address this problem,
we propose Federated User Verification (FedUV),
a framework in which users jointly learn a set
of vectors and maximize the correlation of their
instance embeddings with a secret linear combination of those vectors. We show that choosing
the linear combinations from the codewords of
an error-correcting code allows users to collaboratively train the model without revealing their
embedding vectors. We present the experimental
results for user verification with voice, face, and
handwriting data and show that FedUV is on par
with existing approaches, while not sharing the
embeddings with other users or the server.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent increase in the research and development of User Verification (UV) models with various
modalities such as voice (Snyder et al., 2017; Yun et al.,
2019), face (Wang et al., 2018), fingerprint (Cao & Jain,
2018), or iris (Nguyen et al., 2017). Machine learningbased UV features have been adopted by commercial smart
devices such as mobile phones, AI speakers and automotive
infotainment systems for a variety of applications such as
unlocking the system or providing user-specific services,
e.g., music recommendation, schedule notification, or other
configuration adjustments (Matei, 2017; Barclays, 2013;
Mercedes, 2020).
User verification is a binary decision problem of accepting
or rejecting a test example based on its similarity to the
user’s training examples. We consider embedding-based
classifiers, in which a test example is accepted if its em1
Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.. Correspondence to: Hossein Hosseini <hhossein@qti.qualcomm.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

bedding is close enough to a reference embedding, and
otherwise rejected. Such classifiers are usually trained with
a loss function that is composed of two terms, 1) a positive
loss that minimizes the distance of the instance embedding
to the positive class embedding, and 2) a negative loss that
maximizes the distance to the negative class embeddings.
The negative loss term is needed to prevent the class embeddings from collapsing into a single point (Bojanowski &
Joulin, 2017).
Verification models need to be trained with a large variety
of users’ data so that the model learns different data characteristics and can reliably reject imposters. However, due to
the privacy-sensitive nature of the biometric data used for
verification, it is not possible to centrally collect large training datasets. One approach to address the data collection
problem is to train the model in the federated setup, which
is a framework for training models by repeatedly communicating the model weights and gradients between a central
server and a group of users (McMahan et al., 2017a). Federated learning (FL) enables training of verification models
without users having to share their data with the server or
other users.
Training UV models in federated setup, however, poses two
challenges. First, each user has access to the data of only
one class. Second, since the embedding vector is used for
the verification, it is considered security-sensitive information and cannot be shared with the server or other users.
Without having access to embedding vectors of others, however, users cannot compute the negative loss term. A recent
work (Yu et al., 2020) studied the problem of federated
learning with only positive labels and proposed FedAwS, a
method that allows users and the server to jointly train the
model. In FedAwS, at each round, users train the model
with the positive loss function and send the new models to
the server. The server computes the average model and then
updates it using an approximated negative loss function that
maximizes the pairwise distances between user embeddings.
FedAwS keeps the embedding of each user private from
other users but reveals all embeddings to the server.
In this paper, we propose Federated User Verification
(FedUV), a framework for training UV models in federated
setup using only the positive loss term. Our contributions
are summarized in the following.

