On a Combination of Alternating Minimization and Nesterov’s Momentum

Sergey Guminov 1 2 3 Pavel Dvurechensky 4 2 3 Nazarii Tupitsa 1 2 3 Alexander Gasnikov 1 2 3

Abstract
Alternating minimization (AM) procedures are
practically efficient in many applications for solving convex and non-convex optimization problems. On the other hand, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient is theoretically optimal first-order
method for convex optimization. In this paper
we combine AM and Nesterov’s acceleration to
propose an accelerated alternating minimization
algorithm. We prove 1/k 2 convergence rate in
terms of the objective for convex problems and
1/k in terms of the squared gradient norm for nonconvex problems, where k is the iteration counter.
Our method does not require any knowledge of
neither convexity of the problem nor function parameters such as Lipschitz constant of the gradient, i.e. it is adaptive to convexity and smoothness and is uniformly optimal for smooth convex
and non-convex problems. Further, we develop
its primal-dual modification for strongly convex
problems with linear constraints and prove the
same 1/k 2 for the primal objective residual and
constraints feasibility.

1. Introduction
Alternating minimization (AM) optimization algorithms
have been known for a long time (Ortega & Rheinboldt,
1970; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1989). These algorithms assume that the decision variable is divided into several blocks
and minimization in each block can be done explicitly. AM
algorithms have a number of applications in machine learning problems. For example, iteratively reweighted least
squares can be seen as an AM algorithm. Other applications include robust regression (McCullagh & Nelder, 1989)
1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny,
Russia 2 Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS,
Moscow, Russia 3 HDI Lab @ National Research University Higher
School of Economics, Russian Federation 4 Weierstrass Institute
for Applied Analysis and Stochastics, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Nazarii Tupitsa <tupitsa@phystech.edu>, Pavel
Dvurechensky <pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and sparse recovery (Daubechies et al., 2010). The famous
Expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm can also be seen
as an AM algorithm (McLachlan & Krishnan, 1996; Andresen & Spokoiny, 2016).
The initial motivation for this paper was accelerating algorithms for optimal transport (OT) applications, which
are widespread in the machine learning community (Cuturi,
2013; Cuturi & Doucet, 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017). The
ubiquitous Sinkhorn’s algorithm can be seen as an alternating minimization algorithm for the dual to the entropyregularized optimal transport problem. Recent Greenkhorn
algorithm (Altschuler et al., 2017), which is a greedy version of Sinkhorn’s algorithm, is a greedy modification of
an AM algorithm. For the Wasserstein barycenter (Agueh
& Carlier, 2011) problem, the extension of the Sinkhorn’s
algorithm is known as the Iterative Bregman Projections
(IBP) algorithm (Benamou et al., 2015), which can be seen
as an alternating minimization procedure (Kroshnin et al.,
2019). This motivated us to have a wider look on alternating
minimization algorithms and try to accelerate general AM
algorithm.
Sublinear 1/k convergence rate was proved for general AM
algorithm for n = 2 in (Beck, 2015). Despite the same convergence rate as for the gradient method, AM-algorithms
converge faster in practice as they are free of the choice of
the step-size and are adaptive to the local smoothness of the
problem. At the same time, there are accelerated gradient
methods (AGM) which use a momentum term to have a
faster convergence rate of 1/k 2 (Nesterov, 1983) and use
gradient steps rather than block minimization. Our goal in
this paper is to combine the idea of alternating minimization and momentum acceleration to propose an accelerated
alternating minimization method. As applications of our
general approach, we develop accelerated alternating least
squares algorithm and apply it to a non-convex collaborative
filtering problem, and propose accelerated Sinkhorn’s algorithm for OT distances and accelerated Iterative Bregman
Projections algorithm for Wasserstein barycenters.
Related work. Besides mentioned above works on AM
algorithms, we mention (Beck & Tetruashvili, 2013; Saha
& Tewari, 2013; Sun & Hong, 2015), where non-asymptotic
convergence rates for AM algorithms for convex problems
were proposed and their connection with cyclic coordinate

