FOP: Factorizing Optimal Joint Policy of Maximum-Entropy Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Tianhao Zhang * 1 Yueheng Li * 1 Chen Wang 1 Guangming Xie 1 Zongqing Lu 1

Abstract
Value decomposition recently injects vigorous vitality into multi-agent actor-critic methods. However, existing decomposed actor-critic methods
cannot guarantee the convergence of global optimum. In this paper, we present a novel
multi-agent actor-critic method, FOP, which
can factorize the optimal joint policy induced
by maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) into individual policies. Theoretically, we prove that factorized individual
policies of FOP converge to the global optimum.
Empirically, in the well-known matrix game and
differential game, we verify that FOP can converge to the global optimum for both discrete and
continuous action spaces. We also evaluate FOP
on a set of StarCraft II micromanagement tasks,
and demonstrate that FOP substantially outperforms state-of-the-art decomposed value-based
and actor-critic methods.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has recently made great progress in many aspects by solving
social dilemma (Hughes et al., 2018; Eccles et al., 2019),
characterizing influence between agents (Jaques et al.,
2019), optimizing both efficiency and fairness (Jiang &
Lu, 2019), incorporating agent communication (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2016; Das et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020), considering relation between agents (Jiang et al., 2020) or their
underlying network (Zhang et al., 2018; Qu et al., 2019).
Among these, fully cooperative MARL that maximizes a
reward shared by all agents particularly has attracted much
attention. Centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE) is usually adopted as the learning paradigm for both
*

Equal contribution, the listing order is randomly determined.
Peking University. Correspondence to: Guangming Xie <xiegming@pku.edu.cn>, Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

value-based and actor-critic MARL methods, where global
information can be accessed during centralized training and
learned policies are executed with only local information
in a decentralized way (Oliehoek et al., 2008; Kraemer &
Banerjee, 2016). CTDE can resolve the non-stationarity
under partial observability and has demonstrated great potential to address complex real-world problems, such as
traffic signal control (Zhang et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021)
and autonomous driving cars (Zhou et al., 2020). However, CTDE suffers from the joint action-value function
whose complexity grows exponentially with the number of
agents, which restricts the performance of related MARL
algorithms.
Value decomposition (Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al.,
2018; Son et al., 2019; Rashid et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021) has witnessed success in handling the
joint action-value function to effectively enable CTDE in
value-based MARL methods. It aims to express the joint
action-value function by individual action-value functions
under the constraint of Individual-Global-Max (IGM) for the
optimal consistency of joint and individual actions. However, existing decomposed value-based MARL methods
limit to discrete actions.
When facing tasks with continuous actions, multi-agent
actor-critic methods (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018;
Wei et al., 2018; Iqbal & Sha, 2019) are often taken into
consideration. However, the exploration or sub-optimal behavior of one agent could negatively affect other agents’
policy learning through the centralized critic (Wang et al.,
2020). To address this problem, some studies (Wang et al.,
2020; de Witt et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020) decompose the
centralized critic to reduce the influence among agents during policy improvement. Although these decomposed actorcritic methods lead to improved performance, they cannot
guarantee the learned individual policies lead to the optimal
joint behavior.
In this paper, we aim to successfully enable agents to perform globally optimal behavior by simply executing the
individual policy in any factorizable task, no matter discrete or continuous action space. We introduce a more general condition than IGM, Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO),
which extends the factorizable task to both discrete and con-

