On Signal-to-Noise Ratio Issues in
Variational Inference for Deep Gaussian Processes

Tim G. J. Rudner * 1 Oscar Key * 2 Yarin Gal 1 Tom Rainforth 1

1. Introduction
Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) are a powerful class of
probabilistic models for supervised learning tasks (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Bui et al., 2016; Salimbeni &
Deisenroth, 2017). They are a multi-layer hierarchical generalization of conventional Gaussian processes (GPs, Rasmussen & Williams (2006)), themselves flexible nonparametric models that have seen a wide range of applications to a variety of machine learning problems (Mockus,
1994; Hensman et al., 2014; Wilson & Nickisch, 2015).
DGP s aim to retain the advantages of GP s—such as their
well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and robustness to overfitting—while also overcoming their limitations—such as
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdon 2 Computer Science Department, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Tim G. J. Rudner <tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2
reg

.2
.0

dreg snr

We show that the gradient estimates used in
training Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) with
importance-weighted variational inference are
susceptible to signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) issues.
Specifically, we show both theoretically and via
an extensive empirical evaluation that the SNR
of the gradient estimates for the latent variable’s
variational parameters decreases as the number
of importance samples increases. As a result,
these gradient estimates degrade to pure noise if
the number of importance samples is too large.
To address this pathology, we show how doublyreparameterized gradient estimators, originally
proposed for training variational autoencoders,
can be adapted to the DGP setting and that the
resultant estimators completely remedy the SNR
issue, thereby providing more reliable training.
Finally, we demonstrate that our fix can lead to
consistent improvements in the predictive performance of DGP models.

.4
reg snr

Abstract

1
dreg

0

50
K

0
100

Figure 1. Signal-to-noise ratio (SNRs) in IWVI for DGPs under the
standard gradient estimators (REG) and our improved estimator
(DREG) as a function of the number of importance samples (K).
The different lines show SNRs for four different variational parameters. As K increases, the SNR of REG decreases and the SNR of
DREG increases.

the restricted form of their predictive distribution. In
essence, DGPs are an even more general and powerful class
of models than traditional GPs (Damianou & Lawrence,
2013), allowing us to combine multi-layer function composition with a principled Bayesian approach to obtaining
predictive uncertainties.
Unfortunately, this modeling power comes with a caveat:
Exact inference in DGPs is intractable and one has to rely on
approximate inference schemes to train them. Typically this
is done using stochastic variational inference (SVI) methods (Hoffman et al., 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017),
which recast the inference problem into that of stochastic
optimization of an evidence lower bound (ELBO) with respect to the parameters of an approximating distribution.
The resulting SVI-based approaches to training DGPs lead to
state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of challenging
problems requiring uncertainty quantification (Salimbeni &
Deisenroth, 2017).
Despite the successes of these approaches, Salimbeni et al.
(2019) find that they do not perform well when applied
to DGP models that have been extended to include latent
variables that allow them to represent non-Gaussianity and
multimodality in data. To address this, they propose an
importance-weighted variational inference (IWVI; Burda
et al. (2016); Mnih & Rezende (2016); Domke & Sheldon

