A Value-Function-based Interior-point Method
for Non-convex Bi-level Optimization

Risheng Liu 1 2 3 Xuan Liu 1 2 Xiaoming Yuan 4 Shangzhi Zeng 4 Jin Zhang 5 6

Abstract
Bi-level optimization model is able to capture a
wide range of complex learning tasks with practical interest. Due to the witnessed efficiency in
solving bi-level programs, gradient-based methods have gained popularity in the machine learning community. In this work, we propose a new
gradient-based solution scheme, namely, the Bilevel Value-Function-based Interior-point Method
(BVFIM). Following the main idea of the logbarrier interior-point scheme, we penalize the regularized value function of the lower level problem
into the upper level objective. By further solving a
sequence of differentiable unconstrained approximation problems, we consequently derive a sequential programming scheme. The numerical advantage of our scheme relies on the fact that, when
gradient methods are applied to solve the approximation problem, we successfully avoid computing
any expensive Hessian-vector or Jacobian-vector
product. We prove the convergence without requiring any convexity assumption on either the
upper level or the lower level objective. Experiments demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed
BVFIM on non-convex bi-level problems.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid growth of complexity of
machine learning tasks, an increasing number of models with hierarchical structures have arisen from various fields (Dempe, 2018; Liu et al., 2021). In these
models, according to different hierarchies, parameters
1

DUT-RU International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology. 2 Key Laboratory for
Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province.
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou. 4 Department of Mathematics, The
University of Hong Kong. 5 Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology. 6 National Center for
Applied Mathematics Shenzhen.. Correspondence to: Jin Zhang
<zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

are mainly divided into two types, for instance, hyperparameters and model parameters in hyper-parameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2017; Okuno et al., 2018;
Mackay et al., 2018), network structures and weights in
neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2019a; Liang et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019), meta learners and base learners
in meta learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al.,
2019; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019), generators and discriminators in adversarial learning (Pfau & Vinyals, 2016),
actors and critics in reinforcement learning (Yang et al.,
2019), different components in image processing (Liu et al.,
2019b; 2020a;b;c), etc.
Bi-Level Optimizations (BLOs) have been recognized as
important tools to capture these machine learning applications with hierarchical structures. Mathematically, BLOs
can be formulated as the following optimization problem:
min

x∈X ,y∈Rn

F (x, y), s.t. y ∈ S(x),

(1)

where S(x) := arg miny f (x, y), the UL constraint X ⊂
Rm is a compact set, and the Upper-Level (UL) objective
F : X × Rn → R and the Lower-Level (LL) objective
f : Rm × Rn → R are continuously differentiable and
jointly continuous functions. Indeed, BLOs are by nature
a class of hierarchical problem with optimization problems
in the constraints. Specifically, aiming to optimize the UL
objective F , LL variable y is selected from the optimal solution set S(x) of the LL problem governed by UL variable
x. Due to the hierarchical structure and nested relationship between UL and LL problems, BLOs are challenging
both theoretically and numerically, especially when the LL
solution set S(x) is not singleton (Jeroslow, 1985).
1.1. Related Work
BLOs in Eq. (1) are generalizations of several well-known
optimization problems as well-noted. Since BLOs can
model highly complicated learning tasks as aforementioned,
it is not surprising that they are hard to solve. In early
works, the standard methods for solving BLOs are the random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) which evaluates the
learning models through randomly sampled parameter values, or the more sophisticated Bayesian optimization (Hutter
et al., 2011). Unfortunately, these gradient-free methods

