Learning Fair Policies in Decentralized Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Matthieu Zimmer * 1 Claire Glanois * 1 Umer Siddique 1 Paul Weng 1 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning fair policies
in (deep) cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL). We formalize it in a principled
way as the problem of optimizing a welfare function that explicitly encodes two important aspects
of fairness: efficiency and equity. We provide a
theoretical analysis of the convergence of policy
gradient for this problem. As a solution method,
we propose a novel neural network architecture,
which is composed of two sub-networks specifically designed for taking into account these two
aspects of fairness. In experiments, we demonstrate the importance of the two sub-networks for
fair optimization. Our overall approach is general
as it can accommodate any (sub)differentiable
welfare function. Therefore, it is compatible with
various notions of fairness that have been proposed in the literature (e.g., lexicographic maximin, generalized Gini social welfare function,
proportional fairness). Our method is generic and
can be implemented in various MARL settings:
centralized training and decentralized execution,
or fully decentralized. Finally, we experimentally validate our approach in various domains
and show that it can perform much better than
previous methods, both in terms of efficiency and
equity.

1. Introduction
Adaptive distributed control systems start to be considered
in real applications, e.g., traffic light control (van der Pol &
Oliehoek, 2016), multi-robot patrolling (Portugal & Rocha,
2013), or internet congestion (Jay et al., 2019). Although
those systems generally may impact many end-users, the
*

Equal contribution 1 UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, China 2 Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Paul Weng
<paul.weng@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

current main focus is on their performance with respect to
the total (or average) of some per-user efficiency measure
(e.g., waiting times of cars in traffic light control, safety of
different sites in patrolling, or throughput of users in internet
congestion). However, this approach is clearly unsatisfactory due to the users’ conflicting interests. Thus, for such
systems, fairness becomes a key factor to consider in their
designs for their successful deployments and operations.
Fairness is a multifaceted concept (Section 2), which can
refer to or include different aspects, e.g., impartiality, equity,
Pareto-efficiency, envy-freeness, or proportionality among
others. Given the importance of this notion, it has been
investigated in various scientific disciplines, from philosophy to computer science, including economics and applied
mathematics. In this work, fairness specifically refers to
the combination of the first three aspects. Interestingly, this
definition of fairness can be encoded in a fair social welfare
function, which combines the users’ utilities and can be
used to evaluate and compare different solutions.
In this paper, we consider adaptive distributed control systems modeled as cooperative decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), and study the problem of
learning fair distributed policies. This approach applies to
situations where a system designer needs to implement a
distributed system to solve a specific task (e.g., traffic regulation, patrolling, or congestion control) for many users in
a fair way. Thanks to our definition of fairness, this problem can be expressed as a fair optimization problem, i.e.,
optimization of a fair social welfare function.
This formalization can then be tackled with standard multiagent deep reinforcement learning techniques. Yet, as agents
need to learn both efficiency and equity, two conflicting
aspects of fairness, a naive approach is insufficient, as shown
in our experiments. Thus, we propose a novel architecture
specifically designed for fair optimization in multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning (MADRL), which is shown to
experimentally over-perform previous approaches.
Contributions We formulate a general and principled
model for the problem of learning fair solutions in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (Section 3). We propose a simple, scalable and efficient decentralized method to

