Strategic Classification Made Practical

Sagi Levanon 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract
Strategic classification regards the problem of
learning in settings where users can strategically
modify their features to improve outcomes. This
setting applies broadly and has received much
recent attention. But despite its practical significance, work in this space has so far been predominantly theoretical. In this paper we present
a learning framework for strategic classification
that is practical. Our approach directly minimizes
the “strategic” empirical risk, achieved by differentiating through the strategic response of users.
This provides flexibility that allows us to extend
beyond the original problem formulation and towards more realistic learning scenarios. A series
of experiments demonstrates the effectiveness of
our approach on various learning settings.

1. Introduction
Across a multitude of domains—from loan approval to online dating to hiring and admissions—predictive machine
learning models are becoming imperative for informing decisions that affect the lives of humans. But when people
benefit from certain predictive outcomes, they are prone to
act strategically to improve those outcomes. This has raised
awareness as to the idea that standard learning algorithms
may not be robust to such behavior, and there is a growing
recognition as to the prevalence of this phenomena. Given
the breadth of domains in which strategic user behavior is
likely, practical tools for learning in strategic settings are of
considerable importance.
In this paper we study practical aspects of learning in the setting of strategic classification (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011;
Hardt et al., 2016). In this problem, users respond to a
published classifier by strategically modifying their features
(at some cost) to improve their predicted outcomes. As
a concrete example, consider a bank offering loans. The
1
Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld
<nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

bank would like to approve a loan only if it is likely to be
returned, and to aid in decision-making, the bank trains
a classifier to predict loan returns. Applicants, however,
would like their requests to be approved—regardless of their
actual credibility. To promote their interests, they can modify their applications (at some cost) to best align with the
bank’s classification rule. From the bank’s perspective, such
modifications can invalidate model predictions, and the primary goal in strategic classification is to design learning
algorithms that are robust to this form of ‘gaming’.
Note that gaming is caused by the model itself, indirectly
through how it shapes user incentives, and to its detriment.
In this sense, strategic classification exemplifies how machine learning can be amenable to Goodhart’s Law, a principle in policymaking stating that “when a measure becomes
a target, it ceases to be a good measure”. Strategic classification thus succinctly captures a natural form of tension
that arises between a learning-based system and its users.
There has been much recent work on this topic, studying aspects such as generalization (Sundaram et al., 2020; Zhang
& Conitzer, 2021), equilibrium and dynamics (Perdomo
et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Izzo et al., 2021; Miller
et al., 2021), online learning (Dong et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2019; Ahmadi et al., 2020), causality and decision outcomes
(Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2019; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Shavit
et al., 2020; Bechavod et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2020), transparency (Ghalme et al., 2021; Bechavod et al., 2021), and
social perspectives (Hu et al., 2019; Milli et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2020).
But despite this flurry of recent work, algorithms for strategic classification are not in widespread use. The key reason
for this is that work in this space has been predominantly
theoretical. This has several practical implications. First,
for mathematical tractability, strong assumptions are made
(e.g., that the cost function is fixed and known). But the robustness of these methods to violations of their assumptions
is not well understood. Second, methods tend to be crafted
for very particular learning settings, and do not easily extend beyond the narrow context in which they are originally
studied. Third, currently available algorithms lag far behind
recent advances in machine learning methodology; they are
prone to issues of scale, expressivity, and runtime, and lack
the flexibility and modularity that current approaches readily provide (e.g., the ability to seamlessly “add a layer” or

