State Relevance for Off-Policy Evaluation

Simon P. Shen 1 Yecheng Jason Ma 2 Omer Gottesman 3 Finale Doshi-Velez 1

Abstract
Importance sampling-based estimators for offpolicy evaluation (OPE) are valued for their simplicity, unbiasedness, and reliance on relatively
few assumptions. However, the variance of these
estimators is often high, especially when trajectories are of different lengths. In this work, we introduce Omitting-States-Irrelevant-to-Return Importance Sampling (OSIRIS), an estimator which
reduces variance by strategically omitting likelihood ratios associated with certain states. We
formalize the conditions under which OSIRIS is
unbiased and has lower variance than ordinary
importance sampling, and we demonstrate these
properties empirically.

1. Introduction
In the context of reinforcement learning, our work focuses
on the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem, where the goal
is to estimate the value of a given policy using historical
data collected under a different policy (Sutton & Barto,
2018). OPE is often a necessary step in many real-world
applications of reinforcement learning whenever running
evaluation policies is costly or risky, for example, in healthcare and education settings (Murphy et al., 2001; Mandel
et al., 2014). In particular, we focus on the OPE approaches
based on importance sampling (IS), which correct the historical data to account for the difference between the policies
(Precup et al., 2000). IS-based estimators are popular for
their appealing statistical properties (Thomas & Brunskill,
2016; Jiang & Li, 2016; Farajtabar et al., 2018; Thomas,
2015).
However, current IS-based estimators struggle in scenarios
involving trajectories of different lengths. In these settings,
IS-based estimators have large variance that increases with
trajectory length because IS weights are products of likelihood ratios (Doroudi et al., 2018). Resolving this issue is
1
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 3 Brown University, Providence, RI. Correspondence to: Simon P. Shen <simonshen@fas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

important as many domains have trajectories with different
lengths: in health settings, patients’ length of stays may
vary drastically; in education settings, students may spend
different amounts of time using various online tools.
Motivated by the observation that IS variance is driven
by a large and varying number of likelihood ratios, we
present a new estimator, Omitting-States-Irrelevant-toReturn Importance Sampling (OSIRIS), which strategically
omits likelihood ratios associated with certain states. The
goal of the estimator is to reduce IS variance while introducing minimal bias. We first identify the variance contributed
to ordinary IS by likelihood ratios that would be omitted
by OSIRIS. This analysis motivates the method’s idea to
omit likelihood ratios corresponding to “irrelevant” states,
where the action taken does not affect the trajectory return,
and this omission criterion keeps OSIRIS unbiased. Based
on this criterion, we describe a practical algorithm using a
statistical test to estimate state relevance. Finally, we experimentally validate this implementation of OSIRIS on a suite
of discrete- and continuous-state environments. Because
the estimator’s procedure is to set “irrelevant” likelihood
ratios to 1, it can be easily used alongside other variants of
importance sampling estimators.

2. Background
Markov Decision Process We consider a standard reinforcement learning framework in which an agent, characterized by a policy π, interacts with a finite Markov decision
process (MDP), characterized by a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ). S
and A represent the state and action spaces, respectively;
P (s0 | s, a) and R(s, a) represent the transition distribution
and the reward function, respectively; and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the
temporal discount factor. The agent starts at an initial state
s1 drawn from the initial state distribution P (s1 ). At each
time step t, the agent performs an action at ∼ π(· | st ),
observes reward rt = R(st , at ), and transitions to state
st+1 ∼ P (· | st , at ). Once the agent reaches a terminal state
(e.g. at time T + 1), the trajectory is complete and is defined
as τ = (s1 , a1 , r1 , . . . , sT , aT , rT , sT +1 ). The discounted
rewards collected between anyPtimes t1 and t2 in traject2
tory τ is defined as gt1 :t2 (τ ) ≡ t=t
γ t−t1 rt , and the full
1
trajectory return is simply denoted by g(τ ) ≡ g1:T (τ ).

