Lipschitz Normalization for Self-Attention Layers
with Application to Graph Neural Networks

George Dasoulas 1 2 Kevin Scaman 1 Aladin Virmaux 1

Abstract
Attention based neural networks are state of the
art in a large range of applications. However, their
performance tends to degrade when the number
of layers increases. In this work, we show that enforcing Lipschitz continuity by normalizing the attention scores can significantly improve the performance of deep attention models. First, we show
that, for deep graph attention networks (GAT),
gradient explosion appears during training, leading to poor performance of gradient-based training algorithms. To address this issue, we derive a
theoretical analysis of the Lipschitz continuity of
attention modules and introduce LipschitzNorm, a
simple and parameter-free normalization for selfattention mechanisms that enforces the model to
be Lipschitz continuous. We then apply LipschitzNorm to GAT and Graph Transformers and
show that their performance is substantially improved in the deep setting (10 to 30 layers). More
specifically, we show that a deep GAT model with
LipschitzNorm achieves state of the art results for
node label prediction tasks that exhibit long-range
dependencies, while showing consistent improvements over their unnormalized counterparts in
benchmark node classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, attention models became extremely
popular in a wide variety of deep learning applications.
These architectures made their first appearance in natural
language processing and neural machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani et al.,
2017), and gradually became state-of-the-art in multiple machine learning tasks, including sequential data learning (Radford et al., 2018; Luong et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2016), graph
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies France 2 DaSciM, LIX,
École Polytechnique, France. Correspondence to: George Dasoulas <george.dasoulas1@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

classification (Velickovic et al., 2018; Li et al., 2016) and
computer vision (Xu et al., 2015). Notably, Vaswani et al.
(2017) showed that efficient deep learning models could
be created using attention layers only, leading to the Transformer architecture. Compared to convolutional or linear
layers, attention layers have the advantage of allowing the
selection of key features in the data while being amenable
to backpropagation and gradient descent schemes.
Unfortunately, attention models tend to suffer from poor
performance when their depth increases, and most applications have a relatively small number of layers (e.g. 6 for
the Transformers in Vaswani et al., 2017). While depth is
not necessarily synonymous with increased performance,
deep architectures showed extremely good performance in
many difficult tasks (e.g. image classification) that exhibit
complex structural information (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014). Although there are cases of NLP models, such as
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), that can scale to very deep
architectures (up to 96 layers), for graph attention models
state-of-the-art architectures remain shallow and building
deep architectures remains an open problem. In the case
of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hamilton et al., 2017b),
the model depth is directly related to the neighborhood size
on which the model aggregates information. In such a case,
shallow neural networks are fundamentally unable to capture long-range characteristics, and designing deep graph
neural networks is thus a subject of extensive research (Li
et al., 2018; 2019; 2020; Loukas, 2020).
In this work, we show that enforcing Lipschitz continuity
by normalizing the attention scores can significantly improve the performance of deep attention models. To do
so, we present LipschitzNorm, a normalization scheme for
self-attention layers that enforces Lipschitz continuity, and
apply this normalization to attention-based GNNs, including
graph attention networks (GAT) (Velickovic et al., 2018),
and graph transformers (GT) (Yun et al., 2019; Shi et al.,
2020). Moreover, we show that, without normalization,
gradient explosion appears in these architectures due to a
lack of Lipschitz continuity of the original attention mechanism (Kim et al., 2020). Finally, we show that such a
normalization allows to build deeper graph neural networks
that show good performance for node label prediction tasks

