The Symmetry between Arms and Knapsacks:
A Primal-Dual Approach for Bandits with Knapsacks

Xiaocheng Li 1 Chunlin Sun 2 Yinyu Ye 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the bandits with knapsacks
(BwK) problem and develop a primal-dual based
algorithm that achieves a problem-dependent logarithmic regret bound. The BwK problem extends
the multi-arm bandit (MAB) problem to model
the resource consumption associated with playing each arm, and the existing BwK literature has
been mainly focused on deriving asymptotically
optimal distribution-free regret bounds. We frst
study the primal and dual linear programs underlying the BwK problem. From this primal-dual
perspective, we discover symmetry between arms
and knapsacks, and then propose a new notion
of sub-optimality measure for the BwK problem.
The sub-optimality measure highlights the important role of knapsacks in determining algorithm
regret and inspires the design of our two-phase
algorithm. In the frst phase, the algorithm identifes the optimal arms and the binding knapsacks,
and in the second phase, it exhausts the binding
knapsacks via playing the optimal arms through
an adaptive procedure. Our regret upper bound
involves the proposed sub-optimality measure and
it has a logarithmic dependence on length of horizon T and a polynomial dependence on m (the
numbers of arms) and d (the number of knapsacks). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
frst problem-dependent logarithmic regret bound
for solving the general BwK problem.

1. Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a problem in
which a limited amount of resource must be allocated between competing (alternative) choices in a way that maximizes the expected gain (Gittins et al., 2011). It is a bench*
Equal contribution 1 Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom 2 Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Chunlin Sun <chunlin@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

mark problem for decision making under uncertainty that
has been studied for nearly a century. As a prototypical
reinforcement learning problem, MAB problem exemplifes
the exploration–exploitation tradeoff dilemma (Weber et al.,
1992). The original problem frst formulated in its predominant version in (Robbins, 1952), has inspired a recent line
of research that considers additional constraints that refect
more accurately the reality of the online decision making
process. Bandits with Knapsacks (BwK) was introduced by
(Badanidiyuru et al., 2013) to allow more general constraints
on the decisions across time, in addition to the customary
limitation on the time horizon. The BwK problem, as a
general framework, encompasses a wide range of applications, including dynamic pricing and revenue management
(Besbes & Zeevi, 2012), online advertisement (Mehta et al.,
2005), network and routing (Agrawal et al., 2014), etc.
While the existing BwK literature (Badanidiyuru et al.,
2013; Agrawal & Devanur, 2014) has derived algorithms
that achieve optimal problem-independent regret bounds,
a problem-dependent bound that captures the optimal performance of an algorithm on a specifc BwK problem instance remains an open question. For the setting of standard
MAB problem, the problem-dependent bound has been well
understood, and an upper bound with logarithmic dependence on T can be achieved by both UCB-based algorithm
(Auer et al., 2002) and Thompson sampling-based algorithm
(Agrawal & Goyal, 2012). In this paper, we focus on developing a problem-dependent bound for the BwK problem
and identify parameters that characterize the hardness of a
BwK problem instance.
Two existing works along this line are (Flajolet & Jaillet, 2015) and (Sankararaman & Slivkins, 2020). The
paper (Flajolet & Jaillet, 2015) considers several specifc
settings for the problem, and for the general BwK problem, it achieves an O(2m+d log T ) regret bound (with
other problem-dependent parameters omitted) where m
is the number of arms and d is the number of the knapsacks/resource constraints. In addition, the results in (Flajolet & Jaillet, 2015) require the knowledge of some parameters of the problem instance a priori. The recent work
(Sankararaman & Slivkins, 2020) considers the BwK problem under the assumptions that there is only one single

