Fast Algorithms for Stackelberg Prediction Game with Least Squares Loss

Jiali Wang 1 He Chen 2 Rujun Jiang 1 Xudong Li 1 Zihao Li 2

Abstract
The Stackelberg prediction game (SPG) has been
extensively used to model the interactions between the learner and data provider in the training
process of various machine learning algorithms.
Particularly, SPGs played prominent roles in cybersecurity applications, such as intrusion detection, banking fraud detection, spam filtering, and
malware detection. Often formulated as NP-hard
bi-level optimization problems, it is generally
computationally intractable to find global solutions to SPGs. As an interesting progress in this
area, a special class of SPGs with the least squares
loss (SPG-LS) have recently been shown polynomially solvable by a bisection method. However,
in each iteration of this method, a semidefinite
program (SDP) needs to be solved. The resulted
high computational costs prevent its applications
for large-scale problems. In contrast, we propose
a novel approach that reformulates a SPG-LS as a
single SDP of a similar form and the same dimension as those solved in the bisection method. Our
SDP reformulation is, evidenced by our numerical experiments, orders of magnitude faster than
the existing bisection method. We further show
that the obtained SDP can be reduced to a second
order cone program (SOCP). This allows us to
provide real-time response to large-scale SPG-LS
problems. Numerical results on both synthetic
and real world datasets indicate that the proposed
SOCP method is up to 20,000+ times faster than
the state of the art.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, machine learning (ML) algorithms have
been extensively used to extract useful information from
data and found numerous applications in our daily life. In
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China 2 School of
Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, China. Correspondence
to: Rujun Jiang <rjjiang@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

certain areas, such as cybersecurity, the nature of applications requires high robustness of ML algorithms against
adversarial attacks. A typical scenario would be the training
data that the ML algorithms or the learner relied on is deliberately altered by a malicious adversary. In this case, the
key assumption for the success of ML algorithms, i.e., the
stationarity of data or equivalently the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption, fails to hold. To alleviate this difficulty, researchers have proposed various game
theoretic approaches (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011; Tong
et al., 2018; Vorobeychik & Kantarcioglu, 2018; Bishop
et al., 2020) to model the strategic interactions between the
learner and the attacker – in our case, the adversarial data
provider.
In practice, there are also many applications that the learner
and the data providers are not entirely antagonistic, where
the data providers often manipulate the data only for their
own interests. Introduced by Brückner & Scheffer (2011),
the SPG is used to model the interactions between the
learner and the data provider as a two-players non-zerosum sequential game for such cases. In the SPG, the learner
is regarded as the leader who makes the first move to commit to a predictive model without knowing the strategy of
the data provider (or the follower). Then, the data provider,
based on the available information of the learner’s predictive
model, selects his costs-minimizing strategy to modify the
data against the learner. Under the rationality assumption
of both the learner and data provider, Brückner & Scheffer
(2011) introduced the notion of Stackelberg equilibrium as
the optimal strategy of the SPG and proposed to find it via
solving a corresponding bi-level optimization problem. Particularly, the bi-level optimization problem minimizes the
prediction loss from the learner’s perspective under the constraint that the data has been optimally modified from the
data provider’s perspective. Since then, SPGs have received
a lot of attention in the literature (Shokri et al., 2012; Zhou
& Kantarcioglu, 2016; Wahab et al., 2016; Papernot et al.,
2018; Naveiro & Insua, 2019; Zhou et al., 2019). Unfortunately, bi-level optimization problems are generally NP-hard
(Jeroslow, 1985) and their optimal solutions are intrinsically
difficult to obtain, which severely limit the applicability of
SPGs in real world use cases.
Recently, Bishop et al. (2020) made the first step to globally solve a special subclass of SPGs. Specifically, they

