Globally-Robust Neural Networks

Klas Leino 1 Zifan Wang 1 Matt Fredrikson 1

Abstract
The threat of adversarial examples has motivated
work on training certifiably robust neural networks
to facilitate efficient verification of local robustness at inference time. We formalize a notion of
global robustness, which captures the operational
properties of on-line local robustness certification
while yielding a natural learning objective for
robust training. We show that widely-used architectures can be easily adapted to this objective by
incorporating efficient global Lipschitz bounds
into the network, yielding certifiably-robust
models by construction that achieve state-of-theart verifiable accuracy. Notably, this approach
requires significantly less time and memory than
recent certifiable training methods, and leads to
negligible costs when certifying points on-line; for
example, our evaluation shows that it is possible
to train a large robust Tiny-Imagenet model in a
matter of hours. Our models effectively leverage
inexpensive global Lipschitz bounds for real-time
certification, despite prior suggestions that tighter
local bounds are needed for good performance;
we posit this is possible because our models
are specifically trained to achieve tighter global
bounds. Namely, we prove that the maximum
achievable verifiable accuracy for a given dataset
is not improved by using a local bound.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of training neural networks that
are robust to input perturbations with bounded `p norm.
Precisely, given an input point, x, network, F , and norm
bound, , this means that F makes the same prediction on
all points within the `p -ball of radius  centered at x.
This problem is significant as deep neural networks have been
shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (Papernot
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Correspondence to: Klas Leino <kleino@cs.cmu.edu>, Matt
Fredrikson <mfredrik@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Illustration of global robustness. The model
abstains from predicting on the margin between the classes
(dark gray), which has width at least .

et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2014), wherein perturbations
are chosen to deliberately cause misclassification. While
numerous heuristic solutions have been proposed to address
this problem, these solutions are often shown to be ineffective
by subsequent adaptive attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017).
Thus, this paper focuses on training methods that produce
models whose robust predictions can be efficiently certified
against adversarial perturbations (Lee et al., 2020; Tsuzuku
et al., 2018; Wong et al., 2018).
We begin by introducing a notion of global robustness for
classification models (Section 2.1), which requires that
classifiers maintain a separation of width at least  (in feature
space) between any pair of regions that are assigned different
prediction labels. This separation means that there are certain
inputs on which a globally-robust classifier must refuse
to give a prediction, instead signaling that a violation has
occurred (see Figure 1). While requiring the model to abstain
in some cases may at first appear to be a hindrance, we note
that in operational terms this is no different than composing
a model with a routine that only returns predictions when
/2-local robustness can be certified.
While it is straightforward to construct a globally-robust
model in this way via composition with a certification
procedure, doing so with most current certification methods
leads to severe penalties on performance or utility. Most
techniques for verifying local robustness are costly even on
small models (Fischetti & Jo, 2018; Fromherz et al., 2021;
Gehr et al., 2018; Jordan et al., 2019; Tjeng & Tedrake,

