GeomCA: Geometric Evaluation of Data Representations

Petra Poklukar 1 Anastasia Varava 1 Danica Kragic 1

Abstract
Evaluating the quality of learned representations
without relying on a downstream task remains
one of the challenges in representation learning.
In this work, we present Geometric Component
Analysis (GeomCA) algorithm that evaluates representation spaces based on their geometric and
topological properties. GeomCA can be applied
to representations of any dimension, independently of the model that generated them. We
demonstrate its applicability by analyzing representations obtained from a variety of scenarios,
such as contrastive learning models, generative
models and supervised learning models.

1. Introduction
Efficient data representations have been shown to improve
machine learning models in numerous domains such as supervised and transfer learning (Oneto et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020), density estimation (Kirichenko et al., 2020),
reinforcement learning (Ghosh & Bellemare, 2020), to name
a few. Significant progress has been made on learning representations with different structures, for example disentangled (Pfau et al., 2020; Kim & Mnih, 2018), in the form of
a specific manifold or curvature (Arvanitidis et al., 2018;
2020; Moor et al., 2020; Schönenberger et al., 2020), or
with particular similarity as learned by contrastive learning
algorithms (Le-Khac et al., 2020). In general, data representations are desirable not only due to their low dimensionality but also because they enable measuring meaningful
distances, which is especially critical in noisy data or visual
data such as images and videos.
The quality of learned representations is typically determined by their performance on a specific downstream task.
For example, disentanglement is determined by the accuracy of classifiers trained to predict the underlying factors
of variation present in the dataset (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim
& Mnih, 2018; Locatello et al., 2019). In reinforcement
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Petra Poklukar <poklukar@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learning and robotics, usefulness of representations is evaluated on the performance of the policy (Ghadirzadeh et al.,
2020; Laskin et al., 2020) and the robotics task (Lippi et al.,
2020), respectively. However, such evaluation favors representations that are tied to the downstream task, making
them difficult to be generalized across variety of tasks.
A more general way to evaluate representations is to analyze how well their global structure, i.e., their geometric
and topological properties, reflect the underlying structure
of the data manifold. This direction has been recently explored in the context of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) where it is challenging
to define an appropriate downstream task for evaluation.
Recently proposed methods, such as Improved Precision
and Recall (IPR) (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019) and Geometry Score (GS) (Khrulkov & Oseledets, 2018), have shown
success in detecting failure cases of GANs but provide little
insight into the actual structure of learned representations,
thus hindering further investigation of local areas of the
representation space where the potential failures arise.

Figure 1. Example of two images of different class label in the
ImageNet dataset belonging to the same connected component in
the VGG16 representation space.

In this work, we present a method for evaluating the structure of both the entire representation space and any of its
connected components. We achieve this by comparing two
discrete sets representing the true data manifold: the reference representation set R and the evaluation representation
set E. Depending on the application, R and E can consist
of raw data points or their features obtained from a neural
network. Intuitively, if the structure of evaluated representations E is well aligned with the structure of the reference

