Optimization of Graph Neural Networks:
Implicit Acceleration by Skip Connections and More Depth

Keyulu Xu * 1 Mozhi Zhang 2 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Kenji Kawaguchi * 3

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been studied through the lens of expressive power and generalization. However, their optimization properties are less well understood. We take the first
step towards analyzing GNN training by studying the gradient dynamics of GNNs. First, we
analyze linearized GNNs and prove that despite
the non-convexity of training, convergence to a
global minimum at a linear rate is guaranteed
under mild assumptions that we validate on realworld graphs. Second, we study what may affect
the GNNs’ training speed. Our results show that
the training of GNNs is implicitly accelerated by
skip connections, more depth, and/or a good label
distribution. Empirical results confirm that our
theoretical results for linearized GNNs align with
the training behavior of nonlinear GNNs. Our
results provide the first theoretical support for the
success of GNNs with skip connections in terms
of optimization, and suggest that deep GNNs with
skip connections would be promising in practice.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli
et al., 2009) are an effective framework for learning with
graphs. GNNs learn node representations on a graph by
extracting high-level features not only from a node itself
but also from a node’s surrounding subgraph. Specifically, the node representations are recursively aggregated
and updated using neighbor representations (Merkwirth &
Lengauer, 2005; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Defferrard et al.,
2016; Kearnes et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2020).
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in studying the
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) 2 The University of Maryland 3 Harvard University. Correspondence to: Keyulu Xu <keyulu@mit.edu>, Kenji Kawaguchi
<kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

theoretical aspects of GNNs to understand their success and
limitations. Existing works have studied GNNs’ expressive
power (Keriven & Peyré, 2019; Maron et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Sato et al., 2019; Loukas, 2020),
generalization capability (Scarselli et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019b; Xu et al., 2020; Garg et al., 2020), and extrapolation
properties (Xu et al., 2021). However, the understanding
of the optimization properties of GNNs has remained limited. For example, researchers working on the fundamental
problem of designing more expressive GNNs hope and often empirically observe that more powerful GNNs better fit
the training set (Xu et al., 2019; Sato et al., 2020; Vignac
et al., 2020). Theoretically, given the non-convexity of GNN
training, it is still an open question whether better representational power always translates into smaller training loss.
This motivates the more general questions:
Can gradient descent find a global minimum for GNNs?
What affects the speed of convergence in training?
In this work, we take an initial step towards answering the
questions above by analyzing the trajectory of gradient descent, i.e., gradient dynamics or optimization dynamics. A
complete understanding of the dynamics of GNNs, and deep
learning in general, is challenging. Following prior works
on gradient dynamics (Saxe et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2019a;
Bartlett et al., 2019), we consider the linearized regime, i.e.,
GNNs with linear activation. Despite the linearity, key properties of nonlinear GNNs are present: The objective function
is non-convex and the dynamics are nonlinear (Saxe et al.,
2014; Kawaguchi, 2016). Moreover, we observe the learning curves of linear GNNs and ReLU GNNs are surprisingly
similar, both converging to nearly zero training loss at the
same linear rate (Figure 1). Similarly, prior works report
comparable performance in node classification benchmarks
even if we remove the non-linearities (Thekumparampil
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019). Hence, understanding the
dynamics of linearized GNNs is a valuable step towards
understanding the general GNNs.
Our analysis leads to an affirmative answer to the first question. We establish that gradient descent training of a linearized GNN with squared loss converges to a global minimum at a linear rate. Experiments confirm that the assump-

