Optimizing persistent homology based functions

Mathieu Carrière 1 Frédéric Chazal 2 Marc Glisse 2 Yuichi Ike 3 Hariprasad Kannan 2 Yuhei Umeda 3

Abstract
Solving optimization tasks based on functions
and losses with a topological flavor is a very active, growing field of research in data science and
Topological Data Analysis, with applications in
non-convex optimization, statistics and machine
learning. However, the approaches proposed in
the literature are usually anchored to a specific application and/or topological construction, and do
not come with theoretical guarantees. To address
this issue, we study the differentiability of a general map associated with the most common topological construction, that is, the persistence map.
Building on real analytic geometry arguments, we
propose a general framework that allows us to define and compute gradients for persistence-based
functions in a very simple way. We also provide a simple, explicit and sufficient condition for
convergence of stochastic subgradient methods
for such functions. This result encompasses all
the constructions and applications of topological
optimization in the literature. Finally, we provide associated code, that is easy to handle and to
mix with other non-topological methods and constraints, as well as some experiments showcasing
the versatility of our approach.

1. Introduction
Persistent homology is a central tool in Topological Data
Analysis that allows to efficiently infer relevant topological
features of complex data in a descriptor called persistence diagram. It has found many applications in Machine Learning
(ML) where it initially played the role of a feature engineering tool, either through the direct use of persistence
diagrams or through dedicated ML architectures that handle
them—see, e.g., (Hofer et al., 2017; Umeda, 2017; Carrière
et al., 2020; Dindin et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020). For
1

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, France 2 Université Paris-Saclay,
CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, France
3
Fujitsu Ltd., Kanagawa, Japan. Correspondence to: Mathieu
Carrière <mathieu.carriere@inria.fr>.

the last few years, a growing number of works have successfully been using persistence theory in different ways,
focusing on, for instance, better understanding, designing
and improvement of neural network architectures—see, e.g.,
(Rieck et al., 2019; Moor et al., 2020; Carlsson & Gabrielsson, 2020; Gabrielsson & Carlsson, 2019)—or design regularization and loss functions incorporating topological terms
and penalties for various ML tasks—see, e.g., (Chen et al.,
2019; Hofer et al., 2019; 2020; Clough et al., 2020). These
new use cases of persistence generally involve minimizing functions that depend on persistence diagrams. Such
functions are in general non-convex and not differentiable,
and thus their theoretical and practical minimization can
be difficult. In some specific cases, persistence-based functions can be designed to be differentiable and/or some effort
have to be made to compute their gradient, so that standard gradient descent techniques can be used to minimize
them—see e.g., (Wang et al., 2020; Poulenard et al., 2018;
Brüel-Gabrielsson et al., 2020). In the general case, recent attempts have been made to better understand their
differential structures (Leygonie et al., 2021). Moreover,
building on powerful tools provided by software libraries
such as PyTorch or TensorFlow, practical methods allowing
to encode and optimize a large family of persistence-based
functions have been proposed and experimented with (BrüelGabrielsson et al., 2020; Solomon et al., 2021). However,
in all these cases, the algorithms used to minimize these
functions do not come with theoretical guarantees of convergence to a global or local minimum.
Contributions and organization of the article. The aim
of this article is to provide a general framework that includes
almost all persistence-based functions from the literature,
and for which stochastic subgradient descent algorithms are
easy to implement and come with convergence guarantees.
More precisely, we first observe that the persistence map,
converting a filtration over a given simplicial complex 1 into
a persistence diagram, can be thought of as a map between
Euclidean spaces (Section 2). This observation allows us to
prove that the persistence map is semi-algebraic and, using
classical arguments from o-minimal geometry, to study the
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The presentation is restricted to simplicial complexes for simplicity, but this generalizes to other complexes as well. We present
an example with cubical complexes in Supplementary Material.

