Robust Representation Learning via Perceptual Similarity Metrics

Saeid Asgari Taghanaki * 1 Kristy Choi * 2 Amir Khasahmadi 1 Anirudh Goyal 3

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in artificial intelligence
is learning useful representations of data that yield
good performance on a downstream task, without
overfitting to spurious input features. Extracting
such task-relevant predictive information is particularly difficult for real-world datasets. In this
work, we propose Contrastive Input Morphing
(CIM), a representation learning framework that
learns input-space transformations of the data to
mitigate the effect of irrelevant input features on
downstream performance. Our method leverages
a perceptual similarity metric via a triplet loss
to ensure that the transformation preserves taskrelevant information. Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on tasks which
typically suffer from the presence of spurious
correlations: classification with nuisance information, out-of-distribution generalization, and
preservation of subgroup accuracies. We additionally show that CIM is complementary to other
mutual information-based representation learning
techniques, and demonstrate that it improves the
performance of variational information bottleneck
(VIB) when used together.

1. Introduction
At the heart of human intelligence is the property of robust
generalization – given one or a handful of examples, we
are typically able to learn a concept and apply it across a
variety of tasks and conditions. Modern machine learning
aims to replicate this phenomenon with our artificial agents
– one such way to do so is via representation learning, or
extracting features from raw data that enable predictions
with high accuracy (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Vincent et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2016; Van Den Oord et al.,
2017; Oord et al., 2018). In particular, the recent successes
*

1
Equal contribution
Autodesk AI Lab 2 Computer
Science,
Stanford University 3 Mila,
Université de
Montréal.
Correspondence to: Saeid Asgari Taghanaki
<saeid.asgari.taghanaki@autodesk.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of deep neural networks (Dean et al., 2012; LeCun et al.,
2015) have been pivotal towards stepping closer to this goal.
However, their rapidly growing size and large-scale training
procedures, coupled with complex, high-dimensional data
sources, pose significant challenges for learning models that
perform well on a given task without overfitting to spurious
input features (Zhang et al., 2016; Ilyas et al., 2019; Geirhos
et al., 2020). As a result, trained networks have been shown
to fail spectacularly on out-of-domain generalization tasks
(Beery et al., 2018; Rosenfeld et al., 2018) and exhibit poor
performance for rare subgroups present in data (Hashimoto
et al., 2018; Goel et al., 2020), among others.
A wide range of methods tackle this problem, including
regularization, data augmentation, leveraging causal explanations, and self-training (Srivastava et al., 2014; Chen et al.,
2020b; Sagawa et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020b; Gulrajani
& Lopez-Paz, 2020). In particular, prior art places a heavy
emphasis on lossless access to the input data during training,
then constructing a high-level representation which extracts
the necessary task relevant information. Yet it is reasonable
to assume that in some cases, we desire access to only a subset of the input which is relevant to the task – for example,
the background color in an image of a “7” is unnecessary for
identifying its digit class. The fundamental challenge, then,
is discerning which parts of the input are relevant without
requiring access to privileged information (e.g. the nature
of the downstream task) at training time.
Our approach, Contrastive Input Morphing (CIM), leverages labeled supervision to learn lossy input-space transformations of the data that mitigate the effect of irrelevant
input features on downstream predictive performance. The
key workhorse of CIM is an auxiliary network called the
Transformation Network (TN). Drawing inspiration from
the “robustness” of the human visual system (Geirhos et al.,
2020), perceptual similarity metrics (Wang et al., 2004;
Zhang et al., 2018), and metric learning (Goldberger et al.,
2004; Weinberger & Saul, 2009; Schroff et al., 2015; Koch,
2015), the TN is trained via a triplet loss that computes the
perceptual similarity between sets of transformed inputs, examples from the same class as the input (positive examples),
and those from competing classes (negative examples). This
measure of similarity is captured by the structural similarity
metric, or SSIM (Wang et al., 2004) – a metric developed
to extract features of an image that are striking to human

