Riemannian Convex Potential Maps
Samuel Cohen * 1 Brandon Amos * 2 Yaron Lipman 2 3

Abstract
Modeling distributions on Riemannian manifolds
is a crucial component in understanding nonEuclidean data that arises, e.g., in physics and
geology. The budding approaches in this space
are limited by representational and computational
tradeoffs. We propose and study a class of flows
that uses convex potentials from Riemannian optimal transport. These are universal and can model
distributions on any compact Riemannian manifold without requiring domain knowledge of the
manifold to be integrated into the architecture. We
demonstrate that these flows can model standard
distributions on spheres, and tori, on synthetic and
geological data. Our source code is freely available online at github.com/facebookresearch/rcpm.

1. Introduction
Today’s generative models have had wide-ranging successes
of modeling non-trivial probability distributions that naturally arise in fields such as physics (Köhler et al., 2019;
Rezende et al., 2019), climate science (Mathieu & Nickel,
2020), and reinforcement learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
Generative modeling on “straight” spaces (i.e., Euclidean)
are pretty well-developed and include (continuous) normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2018), generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and variational auto-encoders (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014).
In many applications however, data resides on spaces with
more complicated structure, e.g., Riemannian manifolds
such as spheres, tori, and cylinders. Using Euclidean generative models on this data is problematic from two aspects:
first, Euclidean models will allocate mass in “infeasible”
areas of the space; and second, Euclidean models will often
*
Equal contribution 1 University College London 2 Facebook
AI Research 3 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence
to: Samuel Cohen <samuel.cohen.19@ucl.ac.uk>, Brandon
Amos <brandon.amos.cs@gmail.com>, Yaron Lipman <ylipman@fb.com,yaron.lipman@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of a discrete c-concave function (blue) over
a base manifold M (bold line). These consist of discrete components {↵i , yi } and have a Riemannian gradient r 2 Tx M.

need to squeeze mass in zero volume subspaces. Moreover,
knowledge of the space geometry can improve the learning
process by incorporating an efficient geometric inductive
bias as part of the modeling and learning pipeline.
Flow-based generative models are the state-of-the-art in
Euclidean settings and are starting to be extended to Riemannian manifolds (Rezende et al., 2020; Mathieu & Nickel,
2020; Lou et al., 2020). However, in contrast with some
models in the Euclidean case (Kong & Chaudhuri, 2020;
Huang et al., 2020), the representational capacity and universality of these models is not well-understood. Some of
these approaches are efficiently tailored to specific choices
of manifolds, but the methods and theory of flows on general
Riemannian manifolds are not well-understood.
In this paper we introduce the Riemannian Convex Potential
Map (RCPM), a generic model for generative modeling on
arbitrary Riemannian manifolds that enjoys universal representational power. RCPM (illustrated in fig. 2) is based on
Optimal Transport (OT) over Riemannian manifolds (McCann, 2001; Villani, 2008; Sei, 2013; Rezende et al., 2020)
and generalizes the convex potential flows in the Euclidean
setting by Huang et al. (2020). We prove that RCPMs
are universal on any compact Riemannian manifold, which
comes from the fact that our discrete c-concave potential
functions are universal. Our experimental demonstrations
show that RCPMs are competitive and model standard distributions on spheres and tori. We further show a case study
in modeling continental drift where we transport Earth’s
land mass on the sphere.

