Multi-group Agnostic PAC Learnability

Guy N. Rothblum 1 Gal Yona 1

Abstract
An agnostic PAC learning algorithm finds a predictor that is competitive with the best predictor in
a benchmark hypothesis class, where competitiveness is measured with respect to a given loss function. However, its predictions might be quite suboptimal for structured subgroups of individuals,
such as protected demographic groups. Motivated
by such fairness concerns, we study “multi-group
agnostic PAC learnability”: fixing a measure of
loss, a benchmark class H and a (potentially) rich
collection of subgroups G , the objective is to learn
a single predictor such that the loss experienced
by every group g ∈ G is not much larger than the
best possible loss for this group within H. Under
natural conditions, we provide a characterization
of the loss functions for which such a predictor
is guaranteed to exist. For any such loss function
we construct a learning algorithm whose sample
complexity is logarithmic in the size of the collection G . Our results unify and extend previous
positive and negative results from the multi-group
fairness literature, which applied for specific loss
functions.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tools are used to make and inform increasingly consequential decisions about individuals. Examples range from medical risk prediction to hiring decisions
and criminal justice. Automated classification and risk prediction come with benefits, but they also raise substantial
societal concerns. One prominent concern is that these
algorithms might discriminate against protected and/or disadvantaged groups. In particular, a learned predictor might
perform differently on a protected subgroup compared to the
general population. The growing literature on algorithmic
fairness has studied different concerns. Many works aim
* Equal contribution 1 Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Guy N. Rothblum <rothblum@alum.mit.edu>, Gal Yona <gal.yona@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to ensure parity or balance between demographic groups,
e.g. similar rates of positive predictions or similar false
positive or false negative rates (Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg
et al., 2016). Other works consider accuracy guarantees,
such as calibration (Dawid, 1982), for protected groups.
Protections at the level of a single group might be too weak
(Dwork et al., 2012), and recent works have studied extending these notions to the setting of multiple overlapping
groups (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018; Kearns et al., 2018).
In this work, we focus on the setting of (supervised) agnostic
learning (Kearns et al., 1994). Given an i.i.d. training
set of labeled data, the goal is to learn a predictor h that
performs well on the underlying distribution. Performance
is measured by a loss function, and with respect to a fixed
class H: the loss incurred by the predictor h should be
competitive with the best predictor in H. To capture a
wide variety of settings, we aim to be quite general in our
treatment of different loss functions.
With fairness in mind, the agnostic learning paradigm raises
a fundamental concern: since the predictor’s loss is measured over the entire underlying distribution, it might not reflect the predictor’s performance on sub-populations such as
protected demographic groups. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that standard machine learning tools, when applied
to standard data sets, produce predictors whose performance
on protected demographic groups is quite poor (Buolamwini
& Gebru, 2018).
Motivated by these concerns, we study multi-group agnostic
learning. For a rich collection G of (potentially) overlapping
groups, our goal is to learn a single predictor h, such that
the loss experienced by every group g ∈ G (when classified
by h) is not much larger than the loss of the best predictor
for that group in the class H. We emphasize that this should
hold for all groups in G simultaneously.
To see how this objective is different from the usual agnostic PAC, consider the simple example in which H is the
class of hyperplanes and we have two subgroups S, T ⊆ X .
Suppose that the data is generated such that every group g
has a hyperplane h g that has very low error on it (but that
these are different, so e.g. h T has large loss on S and vice
versa). This means that there is no classifier h ∈ H that
perfectly labels the data. If S is small compared to T, then
the agnostic learning objective could be satisfied by h T , the

