Projection techniques to update the truncated SVD
of evolving matrices with applications

Vassilis Kalantzis 1 Georgios Kollias 1 Shashanka Ubaru 1
Athanasios N. Nikolakopoulos 2 Lior Horesh 1 Kenneth L. Clarkson 3

Abstract
Updating the rank-k truncated Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of a matrix subject to the periodic addition of new rows (and/or columns) is
a major computational kernel in important realworld applications such as latent semantic indexing and recommender systems. In this work we
propose a new algorithm to update the truncated
SVD of evolving matrices, i.e., matrices which
are periodically augmented with a new set of rows
(and/or columns). The proposed algorithm undertakes a projection viewpoint and builds a pair of
subspaces which approximate the linear span of
the sought singular vectors of the evolving matrix. We discuss and analyze two different choices
to form the projection subspace, with the second
approach being slower but leading to higher accuracy. Experiments on matrices from different
applications suggest that the proposed algorithm
can lead to higher qualitative accuracy than previous state-of-the-art approaches, as well as more
accurate approximations of the truncated SVD.
Moreover, the new algorithm is generally faster
than other competitive approaches.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of updating the rank-k
truncated SVD of a sparse matrix subject to additions of new
rows and/or columns. More specifically, let B ∈ Cm×n be a
matrix for which its rank-k (truncated) SVD Bk is available.
Our goal is to obtain an approximate rank-k SVD Ak of
matrix
 

B
A=
, or A = B E ,
E
1
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown
Heights, NY 10598 2 Amazon, 550 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109
(work done prior to joining Amazon) 3 IBM Research, Almaden
Research Center, San Jose, CA 95120. Correspondence to: Vassilis
Kalantzis <vkal@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where E denotes the matrix of newly added rows or columns.
This process can be repeated several times, where at each
instance matrix A becomes matrix B in the next level. A
similar problem, not explored in this paper, is to approximate the rank-k SVD of B after modifying its existing
entries, e.g., see (Zha & Simon, 1999).
Updating the SVD of evolving matrices is an important task
in several real-world applications. One such example is
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) in which the truncated SVD
of the current term-document matrix needs to be updated
as new terms/documents are added to the collection (Berry
et al., 1995; Deerwester et al., 1990; Zha & Simon, 1999;
Chen & Saad, 2009). Another example is the update of
latent-factor models of user-item rating matrices in top-N
recommendation (Cremonesi et al., 2010; Nikolakopoulos
et al., 2019; Sarwar et al., 2002). Additional applications
can be found in geostatistical screening (Horesh et al., 2015),
and dimensionality reduction (Chen & Saad, 2008).
The standard approach to update the truncated SVD is to
disregard any previously available information and apply
directly to matrix A an off-the-shelf, high-performance library (Baglama & Reichel, 2005; Hernandez et al., 2005;
Wu & Stathopoulos, 2015; Halko et al., 2011; Ubaru et al.,
2019). This approach might be feasible when the original
matrix is updated only once or twice, however becomes increasingly impractical as multiple row/column updates take
place over time. Therefore, it becomes crucial to develop
algorithms which return a reasonable approximation of the
leading singular triplets while taking advantage of previous efforts. Such schemes have already been considered
extensively for the case of full SVD (Brand, 2003; Gu et al.,
1994; Moonen et al., 1992) and rank-k SVD (Berry et al.,
1995; Sarwar et al., 2002; Vecharynski & Saad, 2014; Zha
& Simon, 1999; Baker et al., 2012).
Contributions
1. We propose and analyze a projection scheme to update
the rank-k SVD of evolving matrices. Our scheme uses
a right singular projection subspace equal to Cn , and
only determines the left singular projection subspace.

