Augmented World Models Facilitate Zero-Shot Dynamics Generalization
From a Single Offline Environment

Philip J. Ball * 1 Cong Lu * 1 Jack Parker-Holder 1 Stephen Roberts 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from large-scale offline
datasets provides us with the ability to learn policies without potentially unsafe or impractical exploration. Significant progress has been made in
the past few years in dealing with the challenge of
correcting for differing behavior between the data
collection and learned policies. However, little
attention has been paid to potentially changing
dynamics when transferring a policy to the online setting, where performance can be up to 90%
reduced for existing methods. In this paper we
address this problem with Augmented World Models (AugWM). We augment a learned dynamics
model with simple transformations that seek to
capture potential changes in physical properties
of the robot, leading to more robust policies. We
not only train our policy in this new setting, but
also provide it with the sampled augmentation as
a context, allowing it to adapt to changes in the
environment. At test time we learn the context
in a self-supervised fashion by approximating the
augmentation which corresponds to the new environment. We rigorously evaluate our approach
on over 100 different changed dynamics settings,
and show that this simple approach can significantly improve the zero-shot generalization of a
recent state-of-the-art baseline, often achieving
successful policies where the baseline fails.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) describes the problem
setting where RL agents learn policies solely from previously collected experience without further interaction with
the environment (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020).
This could have tremendous implications for real world
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Philip Ball <ball@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Cong
Lu <cong.lu@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

problems (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019), with the potential to
leverage rich datasets of past experience where exploration
is either not feasible (e.g. a Mars Rover) or unsafe (e.g. in
medical settings). As such, interest in offline RL has surged
in recent times.
This work focuses on model-based offline RL, which has
achieved state-of-the-art performance through the use of
uncertainty penalized updates (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi
et al., 2020). However, existing work only addresses the
issue of transferring from different behavior policies in the
same environment, ignoring any possibility of distribution
shift. Consider the case where it is expensive to collect data,
and we have access to a single dataset from a robot. Using
existing methods we would be unable to make any changes
that impact the dynamics, such as using a newer model of
the robot or deploying it in a different room.
A related setting is the Sim2Real problem which considers
transferring an agent from a simulated environment to the
real world. A popular recent approach is domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; James et al., 2017), the process of
randomizing non-essential regions of the observation space
to make agents robust to ‘observational overfitting’ (Song
et al., 2020). Indeed, methods seeking to generalize to novel
dynamics have also shown promise (Peng et al., 2018), by
randomizing physical properties such as the mass of the
agent. A significant limitation of these approaches is the
requirement for a simulator, which may not be available.
In this work we take inspiration from Sim2Real to generalize
solely from an offline dataset, in a learned simulator or
World Model (WM). We therefore describe our problem
setting as follows: an agent must learn to generalize to
unseen test-time dynamics whilst having access to offline
data from only a single environment; we call this “dynamics
generalization from a single offline environment”.
In this paper we concentrate on the zero-shot performance
of our agents to unseen dynamics, as it may not be practical (nor safe) to perform multiple rollouts at test time. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel form of data augmentation: rather than augment observations, we focus on
augmenting the dynamics. We first learn a world model of
the environment, and then augment the transition function at

