Alternative Microfoundations for Strategic Classification

Meena Jagadeesan 1 Celestine Mendler-Dünner 1 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract
When reasoning about strategic behavior in a machine learning context it is tempting to combine
standard microfoundations of rational agents with
the statistical decision theory underlying classification. In this work, we argue that a direct combination of these ingredients leads to brittle solution
concepts of limited descriptive and prescriptive
value. First, we show that rational agents with
perfect information produce discontinuities in the
aggregate response to a decision rule that we often do not observe empirically. Second, when any
positive fraction of agents is not perfectly strategic, desirable stable points—where the classifier
is optimal for the data it entails—no longer exist.
Third, optimal decision rules under standard microfoundations maximize a measure of negative
externality known as social burden within a broad
class of assumptions about agent behavior. Recognizing these limitations we explore alternatives
to standard microfoundations for binary classification. We describe desiderata that help navigate
the space of possible assumptions about agent responses, and we then propose the noisy response
model. Inspired by smoothed analysis and empirical observations, noisy response incorporates imperfection in the agent responses, which we show
mitigates the limitations of standard microfoundations. Our model retains analytical tractability,
leads to more robust insights about stable points,
and imposes a lower social burden at optimality.

1. Introduction
Consequential decisions compel individuals to react in response to the specifics of the decision rule. This individuallevel response in aggregate can disrupt both statistical patterns and social facts that motivated the decision rule, leading to unforeseen consequences. A similar conundrum in
1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Meena

Jagadeesan <mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the context of macroeconomic policy making fueled the
microfoundations program following the influential critique
of macroeconomics by Lucas in the 1970s (Lucas Jr, 1976).
Microfoundations refers to a vast theoretical project that
aims to ground theories of aggregate outcomes and population forecasts in microeconomic assumptions about individual behavior. Oversimplifying a broad endeavor, the hope
was that if economic policy were microfounded, it would
better anticipate the response that the policy induces.
Predominant in neoclassical economic theory is the assumption of an agent that exhaustively maximizes a utility function on the basis of perfectly accurate information. This modeling assumption about agent behavior underwrites many celebrated results on markets, mechanisms, and
games. Although called into question by behavioral economics and related fields (e.g. see (Camerer et al., 2004)),
the assumption remains central to economic theory and has
become standard in computer science, as well.
When reasoning about incentives and strategic behavior in
the context of classification tasks, it is tempting to combine the predominant modeling assumptions from microeconomic theory with the statistical decision theory underlying
classification. In the resulting model, agents have perfect information about the decision rule and compute best-response
feature changes according to their utility function with the
goal of achieving a better classification outcome. We refer
to this agent model as standard microfoundations. Assuming that agents follow this model, the decision maker then
chooses the decision rule that maximizes their own objective in anticipation of the resulting agent response. This is
the conceptual route taken in the area of strategic classification, but similar observations may apply more broadly to
the intersection of economics and learning.
1.1. Our work
We argue that standard microfoundations are a poor basis
for studying strategic behavior in binary classification. We
make this point through three observations that illustrate
the limited descriptive power of the standard model and the
problematic solution concepts it implies. In response, we
explore the space of alternative agent models for strategic
classification, and we identify desiderata that when satisfied by microfoundations lead to more realistic and robust

