Analyzing Monotonic Linear Interpolation in Neural Network Loss Landscapes
James Lucas 1 2 Juhan Bae 1 2 Michael R. Zhang 1 2 Stanislav Fort 3 Richard Zemel 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract
Linear interpolation between initial neural network parameters and converged parameters after
training with stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
typically leads to a monotonic decrease in the
training objective. This Monotonic Linear Interpolation (MLI) property, first observed by Goodfellow et al. (2014), persists in spite of the nonconvex objectives and highly non-linear training
dynamics of neural networks. Extending this
work, we evaluate several hypotheses for this
property that, to our knowledge, have not yet
been explored. Using tools from differential geometry, we draw connections between the interpolated paths in function space and the monotonicity of the network — providing sufficient conditions for the MLI property under mean squared
error. While the MLI property holds under various settings (e.g. network architectures and learning problems), we show in practice that networks
violating the MLI property can be produced systematically, by encouraging the weights to move
far from initialization. The MLI property raises
important questions about the loss landscape geometry of neural networks and highlights the need
to further study their global properties.

1. Introduction
A simple and lightweight method to probe neural network
loss landscapes is to linearly interpolate between the parameters at initialization and the parameters found after training.
More formally, consider a neural network with parameters
✓ 2 Rd trained with respect to loss function L : Rd ! R
on a dataset D. Let the neural network be initialized with
some parameters ✓ 0 . Then, using a gradient descent optimizer, the network converges to some final parameters
✓ T . A linear path is then constructed between these two
parameters denoted ✓ ↵ = (1 ↵)✓ 0 + ↵✓ T . A surprising
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Stanford University.
Correspondence to: James Lucas <jlucas@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Monotonic linear interpolation for a ResNet-20 trained
on CIFAR-10 from initialization to an optimum (red) and from
an unrelated initialization to the same optimum (blue). On the
left, we show a 2D slice of the loss landscape, defined by the two
initializations and optimum, along with the optimization trajectory
projected onto the plane (orange). On the right, we show the
interpolated loss curves, with training loss shown relative to the
proportion of distance travelled to the optimum.

phenomenon, first observed by Goodfellow et al. (2014), is
that the function L(✓ ↵ ) typically monotonically decreases
on the interval ↵ 2 [0, 1]. We call this effect the Monotonic
Linear Interpolation (MLI) property of neural networks.
The MLI property is illustrated in Figure 1. The interpolated path (✓ ↵ ) exhibits the MLI property as the training
loss monotonically decreases along this line. Even more
surprising, linear interpolation between an unrelated random initialization and the same converged parameters also
satisfies the MLI property.
Goodfellow et al. (2014) showed that the MLI property
persists on various architectures, activation functions, and
training objectives in neural network training. They conclude their study by stating that “the reason for the success
of SGD on a wide variety of tasks is now clear: these tasks
are relatively easy to optimize.” In our work, we observe
that networks violating the MLI property can be produced
systematically and are also trained without significant difficulty. Moreover, since the publication of their research,
there have been significant developments both in terms of
the neural network architectures that we train today (He
et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017) and
our theoretical understanding of them (Amari et al., 2020;
Jacot et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018; Frankle & Carbin,
2018; Fort & Ganguli, 2019). Hence, with a wider lens that
addresses these developments, we believe that further investigation of this phenomenon is likely to yield new insights
into neural network optimization and their loss landscapes.

