Provable Generalization of SGD-trained Neural Networks of Any Width
in the Presence of Adversarial Label Noise
Spencer Frei 1 Yuan Cao 2 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract
We consider a one-hidden-layer leaky ReLU network of arbitrary width trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) following an arbitrary initialization. We prove that SGD produces neural
networks that have classification accuracy competitive with that of the best halfspace over the
distribution for a broad class of distributions that
includes log-concave isotropic and hard margin
distributions. Equivalently, such networks can
generalize when the data distribution is linearly
separable but corrupted with adversarial label
noise, despite the capacity to overfit. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work to show
that overparameterized neural networks trained
by SGD can generalize when the data is corrupted
with adversarial label noise.

1. Introduction
The remarkable ability of neural networks trained by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to generalize, even when
trained on data that has been substantially corrupted with
random noise, seems at ends with much of contemporary
statistical learning theory (Zhang et al., 2017). How can a
model class which is rich enough to fit randomly labeled
data fail to overfit when a significant amount of random
noise is introduced into the labels? And how is it that a local
optimization method like SGD is so successful at learning
such model classes, even when the optimization problem is
highly non-convex?
In this paper, we approach these questions by analyzing
the performance of SGD-trained networks on distributions
which can have substantial amounts of label noise. For a
distribution D over features (x, y) ∈ Rd × {±1}, let us
1
Department of Statistics, UCLA 2 Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

define
OPT :=

min

v∈Rd , kvk=1



P(x,y)∼D y 6= sgn hv, xi

(1)

as the optimal classification error achieved by a halfspace
hv, ·i. We prove that for a broad class of distributions, SGDtrained one-hidden-layer
√ neural networks achieve classification error at most Õ( OPT) in polynomial time. Equivalently, one-hidden-layer
neural networks can learn halfs√
paces up to risk Õ( OPT) in the distribution-specific agnostic PAC learning setting. Our result holds for neural
networks with leaky-ReLU activations trained on the crossentropy loss and, importantly, hold for any initialization,
and for networks of arbitrary width.
By comparing the generalization of the neural network with
that of the best linear classifier over the distribution, we can
make two different but equally important claims about the
training of overparameterized neural networks. The first
view is that SGD produces neural networks with classification error that is competitive with that of the best linear
classifier over the distribution, and that this behavior can occur for neural networks of any width and any initialization.
In this view, our work provides theoretical support for the
hypothesis put forward by Nakkiran et al. (2019) that the
performance of SGD-trained networks in the early epochs
of training can be explained by that of a linear classifier.
The second view is that of the problem of learning halfspaces in the presence of adversarial label noise. (Note
that adversarial label noise is distinct from the notions of
adversarial examples or adversarial training (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018), where the features x are
perturbed rather than the labels y.) In this setting, one views
the (clean) data as initially coming from a linearly separable distribution but for which each sample (x, y) ∼ D
has its label flipped y 7→ −y with some sample-dependent
probability p(x) ∈ [0, 1]. Then the best error achieved by
a halfspace is Ex∼Dx [p(x)] = OPT. Viewed from this perspective, our result shows that despite the clear capacity of
an overparameterized neural network to overfit to corrupted
labels, when trained by SGD, such networks
√ can still generalize (albeit achieving the suboptimal risk OPT). We note
that the optimization algorithm we consider is vanilla online SGD without any explicit regularization methods such

