Meta-Cal: Well-controlled Post-hoc Calibration by Ranking

Xingchen Ma 1 Matthew B. Blaschko 1

Abstract
In many applications, it is desirable that a classi­
ﬁer not only makes accurate predictions, but also
outputs calibrated posterior probabilities. How­
ever, many existing classiﬁers, especially deep
neural network classiﬁers, tend to be uncalibrated.
Post-hoc calibration is a technique to recalibrate a
model by learning a calibration map. Existing ap­
proaches mostly focus on constructing calibration
maps with low calibration errors, however, this
quality is inadequate for a calibrator being useful.
In this paper, we introduce two constraints that
are worth consideration in designing a calibration
map for post-hoc calibration. Then we present
Meta-Cal, which is built from a base calibrator
and a ranking model. Under some mild assump­
tions, two high-probability bounds are given with
respect to these constraints. Empirical results
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet and a
range of popular network architectures show our
proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms the
current state of the art for post-hoc multi-class
classiﬁcation calibration.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning have resulted in very
high accuracy in many classiﬁcation tasks. In the context of
computer vision, there has been a steady increase in top-1
accuracy on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) since
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). While highly accurate
models are desirable in general, in some applications, we
want that the output of a classiﬁer is a calibrated posterior
probability. This is especially important in cost-sensitive
classiﬁcation tasks, such as medical diagnosis (Ma et al.,
2017) and autonomous driving (Chen et al., 2015).
The goal of classiﬁcation calibration is to obtain a prob­
abilistic model that has low calibration error. A formal
deﬁnition of calibration error will be given in Section 3.
1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium. Correspondence to:
Xingchen Ma <xingchen.ma@esat.kuleuven.be>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To achieve this objective, one can design models with intrinsically low calibration errors. These models (Wilson
et al., 2016; Pereyra et al., 2017; Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2016; Malinin & Gales, 2018; Milios et al., 2018; Mad­
dox et al., 2019) are usually developed with a Bayesian
nature and tend to be expensive to train and make infer­
ences. On the other end of the spectrum, a post-hoc calibra­
tion method transforms outputs of an existing classiﬁcation
model into well-calibrated predictions by learning a train­
able post-processing step. A lot of effort (Zhang et al., 2020;
Guo et al., 2017; Ding et al., 2020; Patel et al., 2020; Wenger
et al., 2020; Kull et al., 2019) has been done along this line
given the design difﬁculties and computational burdens of
the former approach. In this work, we focus on post-hoc
multi-class calibration.
Among the existing literature on post-hoc calibration, some
methods (Zhang et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2017; Ding et al.,
2020; Patel et al., 2020) seek calibration maps that preserve
classiﬁcation accuracy, while some other works (Wenger
et al., 2020; Kull et al., 2019) focus more on calibration
error without explicitly enforcing accuracy-preservation.
Compared with the latter, there is no potential accuracy
drop in the former, but its family of calibration maps is
less ﬂexible. We will formalize the limitation of such a
family by giving a lower bound of its calibration error in
Proposition 2. In this work, we try to get the best of both
worlds by combining an existing calibration model with a
bipartite ranking model, and we call our proposed post-hoc
calibration method Meta-Cal.
Similar to previous works (Wenger et al., 2020; Kull et al.,
2019), Meta-Cal does not enforce the overall accuracy being
kept. As we will show later in Section 4, such a calibrator
can be of little importance even if its calibration error is low.
Additional constraints should be taken into consideration.
In this work, we introduce two constraints: (i) miscover­
age rate, (ii) coverage accuracy. In Section 4.1 and Sec­
tion 4.2, we show Meta-Cal has full control over these two
constraints. An intuitive interpretation of the above two con­
straints is by considering a quality assurance (QA) system.
In such a system, two desired properties are: (i) for products
accepted by the QA system, their quality requirements are
satisﬁed with high conﬁdence, (ii) the QA system does not
perform unnecessary rejection. The ﬁrst point corresponds
to the coverage accuracy of a calibration map and the sec­

