The Distributed Discrete Gaussian Mechanism
for Federated Learning with Secure Aggregation

Peter Kairouz 1 Ziyu Liu 1 Thomas Steinke 1

Abstract
We consider training models on private data that
are distributed across user devices. To ensure
privacy, we add on-device noise and use secure
aggregation so that only the noisy sum is revealed
to the server. We present a comprehensive end-toend system, which appropriately discretizes the
data and adds discrete Gaussian noise before performing secure aggregation. We provide a novel
privacy analysis for sums of discrete Gaussians
and carefully analyze the effects of data quantization and modular summation arithmetic. Our theoretical guarantees highlight the complex tension
between communication, privacy, and accuracy.
Our extensive experimental results demonstrate
that our solution is essentially able to match the
accuracy to central differential privacy with less
than 16 bits of precision per value.

1. Introduction
Software and service providers rely on increasingly complex data analytics and machine learning models to improve
their services. However, training these machine learning
models hinges on the availability of large datasets, which
are often distributed across user devices and contain sensitive information. The collection of these datasets comes
with several privacy risks – can the service provider address issues around consent, transparency, control, breaches,
persistence, processing, and release of data? There is thus
a strong desire for technologies which systematically address privacy concerns while preserving, to the best extent
possible, the utility of the offered services.
To address this need, several privacy-enhancing technologies have been studied and built over the past few years.
Prominent examples of such technologies include federated
1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Peter Kairouz
<kairouz@google.com>, Ziyu Liu <klz@google.com>, Thomas
Steinke <ddg@thomas-steinke.net>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learning (FL) to ensure that raw data never leaves users’
devices (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2019), cryptographic secure aggregation (SecAgg) to prevent a server
from inspecting individual user updates (Bonawitz et al.,
2017; Bell et al., 2020), and differentially private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD) to train models with provably
limited information leakage (Abadi et al., 2016; Tramèr
& Boneh, 2020). While these technologies have been extremely well studied in a separate fashion, little work has
focused on understanding precisely how they can be combined in a rigorous and principled fashion. Towards this end,
we present a comprehensive end-to-end system where each
client appropriately discretizes their model update and adds
discrete Gaussian noise to it before sending it for modular
secure summation using SecAgg. This provides the first
concrete step towards building a communication-efficient
FL system with distributed DP1 and SecAgg guarantees.
Organization The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. We present some preliminaries in Section 2,
summarize our main results in Section 3, and review related
works in Section 4. In Section 5, we introduce the distributed discrete Gaussian mechanism, analyze its privacy
guarantees, and show how to apply it in federated learning.
We present experiments in Section 6 and conclude with a
few interesting extensions in Section 7. All formal definitions, proofs, algorithmic details, extensions, and additional
experiments are deferred to the supplementary material.

2. Preliminaries
We begin by defining the Rényi divergence of order α ∈
(1, ∞) of distribution P with respect to distribution Q as
"
α−1 #
1
P (X)
Dα (P kQ) :=
log E
.
X←P
α−1
Q(X)
We now state the definitions of concentrated DP (Bun
& Steinke, 2016) and Rényi DP (Mironov, 2017) and
relate these to the standard definition of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b;a).
Definition 1 (Concentrated Differential Privacy). A ran1
See “Distributed DP” paragraph in Section 4 for a definition
of this notion of DP and a literature review.

