Resource Allocation in Multi-armed Bandit Exploration:
Overcoming Sublinear Scaling with Adaptive Parallelism

Brijen Thananjeyan 1 Kirthevasan Kandasamy 1 Ion Stoica 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 Ken Goldberg 1
Joseph E. Gonzalez 1

Abstract
We study exploration in stochastic multi-armed
bandits when we have access to a divisible resource that can be allocated in varying amounts
to arm pulls. We focus in particular on the allocation of distributed computing resources, where
we may obtain results faster by allocating more resources per pull, but might have reduced throughput due to nonlinear scaling. For example, in
simulation-based scientific studies, an expensive
simulation can be sped up by running it on multiple cores. This speed-up however, is partly offset
by the communication among cores, which results
in lower throughput than if fewer cores were allocated per trial to run more trials in parallel. In
this paper, we explore these trade-offs in two settings. First, in a fixed confidence setting, we need
to find the best arm with a given target success
probability as quickly as possible. We propose an
algorithm which trades off between information
accumulation and throughput and show that the
time taken can be upper bounded by the solution
of a dynamic program whose inputs are the gaps
between the sub-optimal and optimal arms. We
also prove a matching hardness result. Second,
we present an algorithm for a fixed deadline setting, where we are given a time deadline and need
to maximize the probability of finding the best
arm. We corroborate our theoretical insights with
simulation experiments that show that the algorithms consistently match or outperform baseline
algorithms on a variety of problem instances.

1. Introduction
In multi-armed bandit exploration, an agent draws samples
from a set of n arms, where, upon pulling arm i, it receives
a stochastic reward drawn from a distribution with mean
1

University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Brijen
Thananjeyan <bthananjeyan@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example of the setting using n = 3 arms. An algorithm has a divisible resource (y-axis) that can be split up to
generate samples by pulling the 3 arms. Each pull takes time (xaxis) to complete. Allocating more resources to a pull produces
faster results, but at the cost of decreased throughput, e.g. using
twice the resources for a pull will provide results only 1.5x faster.
When a pull completes, the resources used are freed and can be
reallocated to new pulls.

µi . The goal is to identify the best arm, i.e., argmaxi µi , by
adaptively choosing which arms to pull. This problem is
known in the literature as best-arm identification (BAI).
As an example, consider simulation-based studies in physics,
which are used for estimating cosmological constants and
controlling nuclear fusion reactors (Davis et al., 2007; Xing
et al., 2019). Pulling an arm may correspond to running
a stochastic simulation with specific values for parameters
(cosmological constants or reactor parameters) which affect the output of the simulation. Here, searching for the
optimal parameters is naturally modeled as a BAI problem.
BAI is also used in model selection (Li et al., 2017), A/B
testing (Howard & Ramdas, 2019), and other configuration
tuning tasks. Traditionally, BAI is studied in two settings:
fixed confidence and fixed budget. In the former, we must
identify the best arm with a given target success probability,
while keeping the number of arm pulls to a minimum. In the
latter, we are given a budget of pulls and should maximize
the probability of identifying the best arm.
The focus of work in the BAI literature has been the sequential setting in which the agent can pull only one arm
at a time (Bubeck et al., 2009; Audibert & Bubeck, 2010;
Even-Dar et al., 2002). There is also a line of work on the
batch parallel setting, where the agent can pull a fixed number of arms at a time (Jun et al., 2016). These formulations

