BORE: Bayesian Optimization by Density-Ratio Estimation

Louis C. Tiao 1 2 Aaron Klein 3 Matthias Seeger 3 Edwin V. Bonilla 2 1 Cédric Archambeau 3 Fabio Ramos 1 4

`(x)

1

g(x)
0
latent function
observations y < τ
observations y ≥ τ

2

y

Bayesian optimization (BO) is among the most
effective and widely-used blackbox optimization
methods. BO proposes solutions according to an
explore-exploit trade-off criterion encoded in an
acquisition function, many of which are computed
from the posterior predictive of a probabilistic
surrogate model. Prevalent among these is the
expected improvement (EI). The need to ensure
analytical tractability of the predictive often poses
limitations that can hinder the efficiency and applicability of BO. In this paper, we cast the computation of EI as a binary classification problem,
building on the link between class-probability
estimation and density-ratio estimation, and the
lesser-known link between density-ratios and EI.
By circumventing the tractability constraints, this
reformulation provides numerous advantages, not
least in terms of expressiveness, versatility, and
scalability.

density

Abstract

1

τ = 0.08

0

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

x

1.0

1.5

2.0

0

γ = 0.33

1

Φ(y)

Figure 1. Optimizing a synthetic function f (x) = sin(3x) + x2 −
0.7x with observation noise ε ∼ N (0, 0.22 ). In the main pane,
the noise-free function is represented by the solid gray curve, and
N = 27 noisy observations are represented by the crosses ‘×’.
Observations with output y in the top-performing γ = 1/3 proportion are shown in red; otherwise, they are shown in blue. Their
corresponding densities, `(x) and g(x), respectively, are shown in
the top pane. BORE exploits the correspondence between the EI
acquisition function and the ratio of densities `(x)/g(x).

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient methodology for the optimization of expensive blackbox functions (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari et al., 2015). In brief,
BO proposes candidate solutions according to an acquisition
function that encodes the explore-exploit trade-off. At the
core of BO is a probabilistic surrogate model based on which
the acquisition function can be computed.
Of the many acquisition functions that have been devised,
the expected improvement (EI) (Mockus et al., 1978; Jones
et al., 1998) remains predominant, due in large to its effectiveness in spite of its relative simplicity. In particular, while
acquisition functions are generally difficult to compute, let
alone optimize (Wilson et al., 2018), EI has a closed-form
1

University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 2 CSIRO’s
Data61, Sydney, Australia 3 Amazon, Berlin, Germany
4
NVIDIA, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Louis Tiao
<louis.tiao@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

expression when the model’s posterior predictive is Gaussian. However, while this condition makes EI easier to work
with, it can also preclude the use of richer families of models: one must ensure analytical tractability of the predictive,
often at the expense of expressiveness, or otherwise resort
to sampling-based approximations (Balandat et al., 2020).
By virtue of its flexibility, well-calibrated predictive uncertainty, and conjugacy properties, Gaussian process (GP)
regression (Williams & Rasmussen, 1996) is a widelyused probabilistic model in BO. To extend GP-based BO
to problems with discrete variables (Garrido-Merchán &
Hernández-Lobato, 2020), structures with conditional dependencies (Jenatton et al., 2017), or to capture nonstationary phenomenon (Snoek et al., 2014), it is common to apply
simple modifications to the covariance function, as this can
often be done without compromising the tractability of the
predictive. Suffice it to say, there exist estimators more naturally adept at dealing with these conditions (e.g. decision
trees in the case of discrete variables). Indeed, to scale BO to
problem settings that produce vast numbers of observations,

