TeachMyAgent: a Benchmark for Automatic Curriculum Learning in Deep RL

Clément Romac * 1 Rémy Portelas * 1 Katja Hofmann 2 Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 1

Abstract
Training autonomous agents able to generalize
to multiple tasks is a key target of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) research. In parallel
to improving DRL algorithms themselves, Automatic Curriculum Learning (ACL) study how
teacher algorithms can train DRL agents more efficiently by adapting task selection to their evolving abilities. While multiple standard benchmarks
exist to compare DRL agents, there is currently
no such thing for ACL algorithms. Thus, comparing existing approaches is difficult, as too
many experimental parameters differ from paper
to paper. In this work, we identify several key
challenges faced by ACL algorithms. Based on
these, we present TeachMyAgent (TA), a benchmark of current ACL algorithms leveraging procedural task generation. It includes 1) challengespecific unit-tests using variants of a procedural Box2D bipedal walker environment, and 2)
a new procedural Parkour environment combining most ACL challenges, making it ideal for
global performance assessment. We then use
TeachMyAgent to conduct a comparative study
of representative existing approaches, showcasing
the competitiveness of some ACL algorithms that
do not use expert knowledge. We also show that
the Parkour environment remains an open problem. We open-source our environments, all studied ACL algorithms (collected from open-source
code or re-implemented), and DRL students in a
Python package available at https://github.
com/flowersteam/TeachMyAgent.

1. Introduction
When looking at how structured and gradual human-learning
is, one can argue that randomly presenting tasks to a learning
*
Equal contribution 1 Inria, France 2 Microsoft Research, UK.
Correspondence to: Clément Romac <clement.romac@inria.fr>,
Rémy Portelas <remy.portelas@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

agent is unlikely to be optimal for complex learning problems. Building upon this, curriculum learning has long been
identified as a key component for many machine learning
problems (Selfridge et al., 1985; Elman, 1993; Bengio et al.,
2009; Cangelosi & Schlesinger, 2015) in order to organize
samples showed during learning. While such a curriculum
can be hand-designed by human experts on the problem,
the field of Automatic Curriculum Learning (Graves et al.,
2017; Portelas et al., 2020a) focuses on designing teacher
algorithms able to autonomously sequence learning problem
selection so as to maximize agent performance (e.g. over
a set of samples in supervised learning, or game levels in
DRL).
Parallel to these lines of works, DRL researchers have been
increasingly interested in finding methods to train generalist agents (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018;
Vanschoren, 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019) to go beyond initial
successes on solving single problems, e.g individual Atari
games (Mnih et al., 2015) or navigation in fixed scenarios (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Many
works proposed novel DRL learning architectures able to
successfully infer multi-purpose action policies when given
an experience stream composed of randomly sampled tasks
(Schaul et al., 2015; Hessel et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019;
Hessel et al., 2019). Here and thereafter tasks denote learning problems in general, for instance multiple mazes to solve
(a.k.a environments) or, in the context of robotic manipulation, multiple state configuration to obtain (a.k.a. goals)
(Portelas et al., 2020a). To compare existing and future
Multi-task DRL agents, Cobbe et al. (2020) proposed a
suite of 16 atari-like environments, all relying on Procedural
Content Generation (PCG) to generate a wide diversity of
learning situations. The high-diversity induced by PCG has
been identified as particularly beneficial to foster generalization abilities to DRL agents (Justesen et al., 2018; Risi &
Togelius, 2019; OpenAI et al., 2019).
An important aspect not covered by these prior works is that
they all rely on proposing randomly selected tasks to their
agent, i.e. they do not consider using curriculum in learning. One can argue that random task selection is inefficient,
especially when considering complex continuous task sets,
a.k.a task spaces, which can feature subspaces of varying
difficulties ranging from trivial to unfeasible. Following this
observation, many works attempted to train given multi-task

