On the Explicit Role of Initialization on the
Convergence and Implicit Bias of Overparametrized Linear Networks

Hancheng Min 1 2 Salma Tarmoun 1 3 René Vidal 1 4 Enrique Mallada 1 2

Abstract
Neural networks trained via gradient descent with
random initialization and without any regularization enjoy good generalization performance in
practice despite being highly overparametrized. A
promising direction to explain this phenomenon
is to study how initialization and overparametrization affect convergence and implicit bias of training algorithms. In this paper, we present a novel
analysis of single-hidden-layer linear networks
trained under gradient flow, which connects initialization, optimization, and overparametrization.
Firstly, we show that the squared loss converges
exponentially to its optimum at a rate that depends
on the level of imbalance of the initialization.
Secondly, we show that proper initialization constrains the dynamics of the network parameters to
lie within an invariant set. In turn, minimizing the
loss over this set leads to the min-norm solution.
Finally, we show that large hidden layer width,
together with (properly scaled) random initialization, ensures proximity to such an invariant set
during training, allowing us to derive a novel nonasymptotic upper-bound on the distance between
the trained network and the min-norm solution.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have shown excellent empirical performance in many application domains such as vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Rawat & Wang, 2017),
speech (Hinton et al., 2012; Graves et al., 2013) and video
games (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2017). Among
the many unexplained puzzles behind this success is the
fact that gradient descent with random initialization, and
1
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 3 Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A. Correspondence
to: Hancheng Min <hanchmin@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

without explicit regularization, enjoys good generalization
performance despite being highly overparametrized.
One possible explanation of such phenomenon is the implicit bias or regularization that first order gradient algorithms induce under proper initialization assumptions. For
example, in classification tasks, gradient descent on separable data can induce a bias towards the max-margin solution (Soudry et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Lyu &
Li, 2019). Similarly, in regression tasks, it has been shown
that (deep) matrix factorization models trained by first order
methods yield solutions with low nuclear norm (Gunasekar
et al., 2017) and low rank (Arora et al., 2019a). Along
the same vein, Saxe et al. (2014); Gidel et al. (2019) have
shown that deep linear networks sequentially learn dominant
singular values of the the input-output correlation matrix.
Another possible explanation is that, in the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) regime, the gradient flow of a randomly initialized infinitely wide neural network can be well approximated by the flow of its linearization at initialization (Jacot
et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019c;b). In
this regime, training infinitely wide neural networks mimics
kernel methods. In particular, the NTK flow is constrained
to lie on a manifold, which improves generalization performance as discussed in (Arora et al., 2019b).
While the aforementioned analysis is quite insightful, it requires assumptions on the model and the initialization that
are often disconnected. For example, the implicit bias characterized in (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2019a)
requires vanishing initialization, while the analysis of convergence of gradient algorithms for linear networks requires
balanced (Arora et al., 2018b;a) or spectral (Saxe et al.,
2014; Gidel et al., 2019) initialization. Similarly, the NTK
regime (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019c), requires random initialization and infinitely wide networks, making the
non-asymptotic analysis challenging (Arora et al., 2019c).
This paper aims to bridge some of these gaps. We present
a novel analysis of the gradient flow dynamics of overparametrized single-hidden layer linear networks, which
provides a common set of conditions on initialization that
lead to convergence and implicit bias. Specifically, we
exploit a certain measure of imbalance at initialization to

