Quantifying Ignorance in Individual-Level Causal-Effect Estimates under
Hidden Confounding

Andrew Jesson 1 Sören Mindermann 1 Yarin Gal 1 Uri Shalit 2

Abstract
We study the problem of learning conditional
average treatment effects (CATE) from highdimensional, observational data with unobserved
confounders. Unobserved confounders introduce
ignorance—a level of unidentifiability—about
an individual’s response to treatment by inducing bias in CATE estimates. We present a new
parametric interval estimator suited for highdimensional data, that estimates a range of possible CATE values when given a predefined bound
on the level of hidden confounding. Further, previous interval estimators do not account for ignorance about the CATE associated with samples
that may be underrepresented in the original study,
or samples that violate the overlap assumption.
Our interval estimator also incorporates model uncertainty so that practitioners can be made aware
of such out-of-distribution data. We prove that
our estimator converges to tight bounds on CATE
when there may be unobserved confounding and
assess it using semi-synthetic, high-dimensional
datasets.

1. Introduction
How will a patient’s health be affected by taking a given
medication (Perez, 2019)? How will a job seeker’s employment be affected by participating in a training program?
Making effective personalized recommendations depends
on being able to answer such questions. Answering such
questions requires knowledge about the causal effect that
a treatment or intervention (medication, training program)
has on a person. And knowing the effect of the treatment
requires knowledge about the individual.
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold standard
1

OAMTL, University of Oxford 2 Machine Learning and
Causal Inference in Healthcare Lab, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Andrew Jesson <andrew.jesson@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for discovering population-level causal effects of such treatments. However, in many cases, RCTs are prohibitively
expensive or unethical. For example, researchers cannot
randomly prescribe smoking to assess health risks. Observational data, often with larger sample sizes, lower costs,
and more relevance to the target population, offer an alternative way to learn about individual-level causal effects. The
price paid for using observational data, however, is lower
certainty in the estimated causal effects.
When there is sufficient knowledge about both the population and the individual, inferring the individual’s response
to treatment is possible, and corresponding recommendations can be made with relative certainty. A widely used
quantity expressing an individual’s response to treatment is
the Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE), which
is defined in the next section.
There are, however, many reasons why we would not know
enough about someone to make an informed recommendation. For example, there may be insufficient similarity:
when an individual is unrepresented in the study population, which can be the case if the data comes from a small
study or just one hospital. There may also be insufficient
overlap (ubiquitous, especially for high-dimensional data
(D’Amour et al., 2020)): when an individual lacks representation in either the treatment or control group, which can be
the case if there are socio-economic barriers to accessing
treatment. Finally, there may be insufficient context: when
there are unobserved factors (confounders) that influence
both an individual’s odds of receiving treatment, as well as
their outcome.
When confronted by such ignorance about a person’s response to treatment, recommending treatments based on a
model’s point estimate of the CATE can be dangerous - doubly so in high-stakes domains such as health care. Instead,
it may be preferable to defer the recommendation when the
CATE estimate is uncertain: this might entail consulting
with a domain expert, using a safe default treatment, collecting additional data on subjects similar to the one in question,
or broadening the context of the study by incorporating
additional confounding covariates.
In this paper, we provide a measure of ignorance that unifies

