Locally Adaptive Label Smoothing for Predictive Churn

Dara Bahri 1 Heinrich Jiang 1

Abstract
Training modern neural networks is an inherently
noisy process that can lead to high prediction
churn– disagreements between re-trainings of the
same model due to factors such as randomization
in the parameter initialization and mini-batches–
even when the trained models all attain similar
accuracies. Such prediction churn can be very
undesirable in practice. In this paper, we present
several baselines for reducing churn and show
that training on soft labels obtained by adaptively
smoothing each example’s label based on the example’s neighboring labels often outperforms the
baselines on churn while improving accuracy on
a variety of benchmark classification tasks and
model architectures.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have proved to be immensely successful at solving complex classification tasks
across a range of problems. Much of the effort has been
spent towards improving their predictive performance (i.e.
accuracy), while comparatively little has been done towards improving the stability of training these models
(Zheng et al., 2016). Modern DNN training is inherently
noisy due to factors such as the random initialization of
network parameters (Glorot & Bengio, 2010), the minibatch ordering (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015), the effects
of various data augmentation (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar,
2019) or pre-processing tricks (Santurkar et al., 2018), and
the non-determinism arising from the hardware (Turner &
Nowotny, 2015), all of which are exacerbated by the nonconvexity of the loss surface (Scardapane & Wang, 2017).
This results in local optima corresponding to models that
have very different predictions on the same data points.
This may seem counter-intuitive, but even when the different runs all produce very high accuracies for the classification task, their predictions can still differ quite drastically
1

Google Research, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to:
Dara Bahri <dbahri@google.com>.

as we will show later in the experiments. Thus, even an
optimized training procedure can lead to high prediction
churn, which refers to the proportion of sample-level disagreements between classifiers caused by different runs of
the same training procedure1 .
In practice, reducing such predictive churn can be critical.
For example, in a production system, models are often continuously improved on by being trained or retrained with
new data or better model architectures and training procedures. In such scenarios, a candidate model for release
must be compared to the current model serving in production. Oftentimes, this decision is conditioned on more than
just overall offline test accuracy– in fact, the offline metrics
are often not completely aligned with the actual goal, especially if these models are used as part of a larger system
(e.g. maximizing offline click-through rate vs. maximizing revenue or user satisfaction) (Deng et al., 2013; Beel
et al., 2013; Dmitriev & Wu, 2016). As a result, these comparisons require extensive and costly live experiments, requiring human evaluation in situations where the candidate
and the production model disagree (i.e. in many situations,
the true labels are not available without a manual labeler)
(Theocharous et al., 2015; Deng, 2015; Deng & Shi, 2016).
In these cases, it can be highly desirable to lower predictive
churn.
Despite the practical relevance of lowering churn, there has
been surprisingly little work done in this area, which we
highlight in the related work section. In this work, we focus on predictive churn reduction under retraining the same
model architecture on an identical train and test set. Our
main contributions are as follows:
• We provide one of the first comprehensive analyses of
baselines to lower prediction churn, showing that popular approaches designed for other goals are effective
baselines for churn reduction, even compared to methods designed for this goal.
• We improve label smoothing, a global smoothing
method popular for calibrating model confidence, by
utilizing the local information leveraged by the k1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Concretely, given two classifiers applied to the same test samples, the prediction churn between them is the fraction of test samples with different predicted labels.

