HoroPCA: Hyperbolic Dimensionality Reduction via Horospherical Projections

Ines Chami * 1 Albert Gu * 1 Dat Nguyen * 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
This paper studies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for data lying in hyperbolic spaces.
Given directions, PCA relies on: (1) a parameterization of subspaces spanned by these directions,
(2) a method of projection onto subspaces that
preserves information in these directions, and (3)
an objective to optimize, namely the variance explained by projections. We generalize each of
these concepts to the hyperbolic space and propose H ORO PCA, a method for hyperbolic dimensionality reduction. By focusing on the core problem of extracting principal directions, H ORO PCA
theoretically better preserves information in the
original data such as distances, compared to previous generalizations of PCA. Empirically, we
validate that H ORO PCA outperforms existing dimensionality reduction methods, significantly reducing error in distance preservation. As a data
whitening method, it improves downstream classification by up to 3.9% compared to methods
that don’t use whitening. Finally, we show that
H ORO PCA can be used to visualize hyperbolic
data in two dimensions.

1. Introduction
Learning representations of data in hyperbolic spaces has
recently attracted important interest in Machine Learning
(ML) (Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Sala et al., 2018) due to their
ability to represent hierarchical data with high fidelity in low
dimensions (Sarkar, 2011). Many real-world datasets exhibit hierarchical structures, and hyperbolic embeddings
have led to state-of-the-art results in applications such
as question answering (Tay et al., 2018), node classification (Chami et al., 2019), link prediction (Balazevic et al.,
2019; Chami et al., 2020b) and word embeddings (Tifrea
et al., 2018). These developments motivate the need for
algorithms that operate in hyperbolic spaces such as nearest
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Ines Chami <chami@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

neighbor search (Krauthgamer & Lee, 2006; Wu & Charikar,
2020), hierarchical clustering (Monath et al., 2019; Chami
et al., 2020a), or dimensionality reduction which is the focus
of this work.
Euclidean Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a fundamental dimensionality reduction technique which seeks
directions that best explain the original data. PCA is an
important primitive in data analysis and has many important
uses such as (i) dimensionality reduction (e.g. for memory efficiency), (ii) data whitening and pre-processing for
downstream tasks, and (iii) data visualization.
Here, we seek a generalization of PCA to hyperbolic geometry. Given a core notion of directions, PCA involves the
following ingredients:
1. A nested sequence of affine subspaces (flags) spanned
by a set of directions.
2. A projection method which maps points to these subspaces while preserving information (e.g. dot-product)
along each direction.
3. A variance objective to help choose the best directions.
The PCA algorithm is then defined as combining these primitives: given a dataset, it chooses directions that maximize
the variance of projections onto a subspace spanned by
those directions, so that the resulting sequence of directions
optimally explains the data. Crucially, the algorithm only depends on the directions of the affine subspaces and not their
locations in space (Fig. 1a). Thus, in practice we can assume
that they all go through the origin (and hence become linear
subspaces), which greatly simplifies computations.
Generalizing PCA to manifolds is a challenging problem
that has been studied for decades, starting with Principal
Geodesic Analysis (PGA) (Fletcher et al., 2004) which parameterizes subspaces using tangent vectors at the mean of
the data, and maximizes distances from projections to the
mean to find optimal directions. More recently, the Barycentric Subspace Analysis (BSA) method (Pennec, 2018) was
introduced. It finds a more general parameterization of
nested sequences of submanifolds by minimizing the unexplained variance. However, both PGA and BSA map points
onto submanifolds using closest-point or geodesic projections, which do not attempt to preserve information along
principal directions; for example, they cannot isometrically

