Neuro-algorithmic Policies Enable Fast Combinatorial Generalization

Marin Vlastelica 1 , Michal Rolínek 1 Georg Martius 1
input
2 frames

representation
learning
costpredictor

t

C

c1
c2
N

ResNet18

W

E
S

goalpredictor
ResNet18

Dijkstra's shortest path

t+2
t+1

predicted
trajectory

?

Hamming
distance

expert
trajectory

L

y(C)
start goal

Figure 1: Architecture of the neuro-algorithmic policy. Two subsequent frames are processed by two simplified ResNet18s:
the cost-predictor outputs a tensor (width × height × time) of vertex costs C t (v) and the goal-predictor outputs heatmaps
for start and goal. The time-dependent shortest path solver finds the shortest path to the goal. Hamming distance between
the proposed and expert trajectory is used as loss for training. Videos and Code are available at martius-lab.github.io/NAP.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Although model-based and model-free approaches to learning the control of systems have
achieved impressive results on standard benchmarks, generalization to task variations is still
lacking. Recent results suggest that generalization for standard architectures improves only after obtaining exhaustive amounts of data. We
give evidence that generalization capabilities are
in many cases bottlenecked by the inability to
generalize on the combinatorial aspects of the
problem. We show that, for a certain subclass of
the MDP framework, this can be alleviated by a
neuro-algorithmic policy architecture that embeds
a time-dependent shortest path solver in a deep
neural network. Trained end-to-end via blackboxdifferentiation, this method leads to considerable
improvement in generalization capabilities in the
low-data regime.

1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
Germany. Correspondence to: Marin Vlastelica <mvlastelica@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

One of the central topics in machine learning research is
learning control policies for autonomous agents. Many different problem settings exist within this area. On one end
of the spectrum are imitation learning approaches, where
prior expert data is available and the problem becomes a supervised learning problem. On the other end lie approaches
that require interaction with the environment to obtain data
for policy extraction, posing the problem of exploration.
Most Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms fall into the
latter category. In this work, we concern ourselves primarily
with the setting where limited expert data is available, and a
policy needs to be extracted by imitation learning.
Independently of how a policy is extracted, a central question of interest is: how well will it generalize to variations
in the environment and the task? Recent studies have shown
that standard deep RL methods require exhaustive amounts
of exposure to environmental variability before starting to
generalize (Cobbe et al., 2020).
There exist several approaches addressing the problem of
generalization in control. One option is to employ modelbased approaches that learn a transition model from data
and use planning algorithms at runtime or to improve valuelearning. This has been argued to be the best strategy in the
presence of an accurate model and sufficient computation
time (Daw et al., 2005). Furthermore, one can use the transition model alongside a reward model to generate offline data
to improve value function learning (Sutton, 1991; Janner
et al., 2019). However, learning a precise transition model

