Symmetric Spaces for Graph Embeddings: A Finsler-Riemannian Approach

Federico López 1 Beatrice Pozzetti 2 Steve Trettel 3 Michael Strube 1 Anna Wienhard 2

Abstract
Learning faithful graph representations as sets of
vertex embeddings has become a fundamental intermediary step in a wide range of machine learning applications. We propose the systematic use
of symmetric spaces in representation learning, a
class encompassing many of the previously used
embedding targets. This enables us to introduce a
new method, the use of Finsler metrics integrated
in a Riemannian optimization scheme, that better
adapts to dissimilar structures in the graph. We develop a tool to analyze the embeddings and infer
structural properties of the data sets. For implementation, we choose Siegel spaces, a versatile
family of symmetric spaces. Our approach outperforms competitive baselines for graph reconstruction tasks on various synthetic and real-world
datasets. We further demonstrate its applicability
on two downstream tasks, recommender systems
and node classification.

1. Introduction
The goal of representation learning is to embed real-world
data, frequently modeled on a graph, into an ambient space.
This embedding space can then be used to analyze and perform tasks on the discrete graph. The predominant approach
has been to embed discrete structures in an Euclidean space.
Nonetheless, data in many domains exhibit non-Euclidean
features (Krioukov et al., 2010; Bronstein et al., 2017), making embeddings into Riemannian manifolds with a richer
structure necessary. For this reason, embeddings into hyperbolic (Krioukov et al., 2009; Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Sala
et al., 2018; López & Strube, 2020) and spherical spaces
(Wilson et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2017; Xu & Durrett, 2018)
have been developed. Recent work proposes to combine
different curvatures through several layers (Chami et al.,
1
Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg,
Germany 2 Mathematical Institute, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 3 Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence to: Federico López
<federico.lopez@h-its.org>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Symmetric spaces have a rich structure of totally
geodesic subspaces, including flat subspaces (orange) and hyperbolic planes (blue). This compound, yet computationally tractable
geometry allows isometric embeddings of many graphs, including those with subgraphs of dissimilar geometry. For example
the graph embedded in the picture has both trees and grids as
subgraphs.

2019; Bachmann et al., 2020; Grattarola et al., 2020), to
enrich the geometry by considering Cartesian products of
spaces (Gu et al., 2019; Tifrea et al., 2019; Skopek et al.,
2020), or to use Grassmannian manifolds or the space of
symmetric positive definite matrices (SPD) as a trade-off
between the representation capability and the computational
tractability of the space (Huang & Gool, 2017; Huang et al.,
2018; Cruceru et al., 2020). A unified framework in which
to encompass these various examples is still missing.
In this work, we propose the systematic use of symmetric
spaces in representation learning: this is a class comprising all the aforementioned spaces. Symmetric spaces are
Riemannian manifolds with rich symmetry groups which
makes them algorithmically tractable. They have a compound geometry that simultaneously contains Euclidean as
well as hyperbolic or spherical subspaces, allowing them
to automatically adapt to dissimilar features in the graph.
We develop a general framework to choose a Riemannian
symmetric space and implement the mathematical tools required to learn graph embeddings (§2). Our systematic view

