Characterizing the Gap Between Actor-Critic and Policy Gradient
Junfeng Wen 1 Saurabh Kumar 2 Ramki Gummadi 3 Dale Schuurmans 1 3

Abstract
Actor-critic (AC) methods are ubiquitous in reinforcement learning. Although it is understood
that AC methods are closely related to policy gradient (PG), their precise connection has not been
fully characterized previously. In this paper, we
explain the gap between AC and PG methods by
identifying the exact adjustment to the AC objective/gradient that recovers the true policy gradient
of the cumulative reward objective (PG). Furthermore, by viewing the AC method as a two-player
Stackelberg game between the actor and critic, we
show that the Stackelberg policy gradient can be
recovered as a special case of our more general
analysis. Based on these results, we develop practical algorithms, Residual Actor-Critic and Stackelberg Actor-Critic, for estimating the correction
between AC and PG and use these to modify the
standard AC algorithm. Experiments on popular
tabular and continuous environments show the
proposed corrections can improve both the sample efficiency and final performance of existing
AC methods.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient (PG) (Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 2001) is
the foundation of many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Sutton and Barto, 2018). The basic PG method (Sutton et al., 2000) requires access to the state-action values
of the current policy, which is challenging to obtain. For
instance, Monte-Carlo value estimates (Williams, 1992) are
unbiased but suffer from high variance and low sample efficiency. To address this issue, actor-critic (AC) methods
learn a parametrized value function (critic) to estimate the
state-action values. This approach has inspired many successful algorithms (Mnih et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Haarnoja et al., 2018a) that achieve impressive performance
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada 2 Stanford University 3 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Junfeng Wen <junfengwen@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

on a range of challenging tasks. Despite the success of AC
methods, AC and PG have subtle differences that are only
partially characterized in the literature (Konda and Tsitsiklis,
2000; Sutton et al., 2000). In particular, the distinction between PG and practical AC methods which use an arbitrarily
parametrized critic (e.g. high-capacity function approximators such as neural networks) is unclear. In this paper, we
investigate the intuition that explicitly quantifying this difference and minimizing it to increase AC’s fidelity to PG
can benefit practical AC methods.
A key difficulty in understanding the difference between
AC and PG is the use of non-linear function approximation. A non-linear parametrization violates the compatibility requirement between the actor and critic (Sutton et al.,
2000) needed to ensure equivalence of PG and the policy improvement step in AC. Additionally, the critic in AC, which
estimates the policy’s state-action values, can be highly inaccurate since it may suffer from bias and is not optimized
to convergence. Consequently, the policy improvement step
of AC may differ substantially from the corresponding PG
update which uses the true state-action values.
In this paper, we precisely characterize the gap between
these two policy improvement updates. We start by investigating natural objective functions for AC and show that
several classic algorithms can just be seen as alternative
schedules for the actor and critic updates under these objectives (Table 1). From these observations, we then quantify the gap between AC and PG from both objective and
gradient perspectives. From the objective perspective, we
calculate the difference between the actor objective and
the original cumulative reward objective used to derive PG;
while from the gradient perspective, we identify the difference of the policy improvement update in AC when using
an arbitrary critic versus following the true policy gradient.
Given this understanding of the difference between PG and
AC, we propose two solutions to close their gap and reduce the bias introduced by the critic in practice. First, we
develop novel update rules for AC that estimate this gap
and add a correction to standard updates used in AC; in
particular, we propose a new AC framework, which we call
Residual Actor-Critic (Res-AC). Second, we explore AC
from a game-theoretic perspective and treat AC as a Stackelberg game (Fiez et al., 2020; Sinha et al., 2017). By treating

