Beyond log2 (T) Regret for Decentralized Bandits in Matching Markets
Soumya Basu 1 Karthik Abinav Sankararaman 2 Abishek Sankararaman 3

Abstract
We design decentralized algorithms for regret
minimization in two sided matching markets with
one-sided bandit feedback that significantly improves upon the prior works (Liu et al., 2020a;
Sankararaman et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020b).
First, for general markets, for any ">0, we design an algorithm that achieves a O(log1+" (T ))
regret to the agent-optimal stable matching, with
unknown time horizon T , improving upon the
O(log2 (T )) regret achieved in (Liu et al., 2020b).
Second, we provide the optimal ⇥(log(T )) regret
for markets satisfying uniqueness consistency –
markets where leaving participants don’t alter the
original stable matching. Previously, ⇥(log(T ))
regret was achievable (Sankararaman et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2020b) in the much restricted serial
dictatorship setting, when all arms have the same
preference over the agents. We propose a phase
based algorithm, where in each phase, besides
deleting the globally communicated dominated
arms, the agents locally delete arms with which
they collide often. This local deletion is pivotal in
breaking deadlocks arising from rank heterogeneity of agents across arms. We further demonstrate
superiority of our algorithm over existing works
through simulations.

1. Introduction
Decentralized decision making by competing agents under
uncertainty, each one motivated by one’s own objective,
is a key feature in online market places, e.g. TaskRabbit,
UpWork, DoorDash. An emerging line of research (Aridor
et al., 2020; Johari et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020a; Sankararaman et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020b) in the field of multi-agent
1
Google, Mountain View, CA, USA 2 Facebook, Menlo
Park, CA, USA 3 Amazon, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Soumya Basu <basusoumya@utexas.edu>, Karthik
Abinav Sankararaman <karthikabinavs@gmail.com>, Abishek
Sankararaman <abishek.90@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

bandits is dedicated to understanding algorithmic principles
in the interplay of competition, learning and regret minimization. The two-sided matching market (Gale & Shapley,
1962) is one such thread, where regret minimization is first
studied in (Liu et al., 2020a) with a centralized arbiter, and
in (Sankararaman et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020b) at different
levels of decentralization.
We study the fully decentralized two-sided matching market, comprising of N demand-side entities (a.k.a. agents)
and K supply-side entities (a.k.a. arms). Each entity has a
separate preference ranking of the opposite side agents, i.e.
each agent over K arms, and each arm over N agents, and
aims to match with the most preferred entity. In the bandit
setting, the agents lack prior knowledge of their respective
preferences, thus need to learn the preferences only through
their own past interactions, while the arms know their preferences. In each round, every agent simultaneously chooses
an arm of their choice, and are either matched to their arm
of choice and receive a stochastic reward (reward defines
agents’ preference); or are blocked, are notified of this, and
receive no reward.
A matching between agents and arms is stable if there exist no pair of agents and arms that are not matched with
each other under the matching, prefer each other over their
current partners. When each participant knows its preference and the agents propose to the arms across multiple
rounds, the system admits any stable matching as a Nash
equilibrium. Further, the agent-optimal stable matching is
the one, which yields the highest reward among multiple
possible stable matchings, to all agents (Gale & Shapley,
1962). Our objective is to design a uniform protocol for
the agents, which allows each agent to quickly find and
match with its agent-optimal arm, thus maximizing their
cumulative reward.
Under a restrictive special case, known as serial dictatorship,
where all arms have the same preference (Sankararaman
et al., 2021) shows it is possible for each agent to attain
O(N K log(T )) cumulative regret (the gap between optimal
and achieved reward) in T rounds. They rely on an Upper
confidence bound (UCB) based algorithm, called UCB-D3,
that uses strategic deletion of arms done through global communication alongside UCB based explore-exploit. When
the decentralization is relaxed, and each agent observes the

