Gaussian Process-Based Real-Time Learning for Safety Critical Applications

Armin Lederer 1 Alejandro José Ordóñez Conejo 2 Korbinian Maier 1 Wenxin Xiao 3 Jonas Umlauft 1
Sandra Hirche 1

Abstract
The safe operation of physical systems typically
relies on high-quality models. Since a continuous
stream of data is generated during run-time, such
models are often obtained through the application
of Gaussian process regression because it
provides guarantees on the prediction error. Due
to its high computational complexity, Gaussian
process regression must be used offline on batches
of data, which prevents applications, where a fast
adaptation through online learning is necessary
to ensure safety. In order to overcome this issue,
we propose the LoG-GP. It achieves a logarithmic
update and prediction complexity in the number
of training points through the aggregation of
locally active Gaussian process models. Under
weak assumptions on the aggregation scheme, it
inherits safety guarantees from exact Gaussian
process regression. These theoretical advantages
are exemplarily exploited in the design of a safe
and data-efficient, online-learning control policy.
The efficiency and performance of the proposed
real-time learning approach is demonstrated in
a comparison to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent technological trends enable an increasing autonomy
of physical systems, often operating in uncertain and dynamically changing environments. In order to ensure safety
and high performance of these systems, they need the ability
to quickly adapt to new situations by inferring mathematical
models from observed data. Especially in control applications, predictions and model updates must typically be performed in real-time due to the fast evolution of many physical processes. These applications include the control of au1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Tecnológico de
Costa Rica, Cartago, Costa Rica 3 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Armin Lederer <armin.lederer@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tonomous cars (Kendall et al., 2019), unmanned aerial vehicles (Andersson et al., 2017), robotic manipulators (NguyenTuong & Peters, 2010), combustion engines (Lee et al.,
2017), and many others, where update rates in the magnitude of 102 Hz to 104 Hz are required. In case of predictive
control schemes, where possible future trajectories are inferred and evaluated, multiple predictions are made for a
single control command, requiring prediction rates, which
are orders of magnitudes higher (Kong et al., 2015).
A common supervised machine learning technique in safety
critical applications are Gaussian processes (GPs), which
provide a high expressive power, and guarantee probabilistically bounded prediction errors (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). Since the computational complexity of updates and
predictions grows strongly with the number of training
points, many approximations have been developed to enable
the employment in real-time applications. Deterministic
training conditional approximations (Nguyen-Tuong &
Peters, 2010; Schreiter et al., 2016) and inducing point methods (Huber, 2014; Bijl et al., 2017) can speed up predictions,
while variational inference approaches for streaming data
(Bui et al., 2017) allow fast model updates and exhibit
a beneficial performance-complexity trade-off compared
to stochastic variational inference (Hensman et al., 2013).
However, error bounds from exact GP inference as derived
by, e.g., Srinivas et al. (2012); Lederer et al. (2019a), do not
extend to these methods, which prevents the usage in safety
critical applications. Even though finite feature approximations of kernels (Gijsberts & Metta, 2013) are advantageous
in this regard and yield constant update and prediction complexities, safety guarantees require an impractically high
number of features (Mutný & Krause, 2018). Therefore,
there is a clear lack of methods which allow updates and
predictions in real-time for safety critical applications.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel, computationally efficient, GP-based method for real-time predictions
and model updates in safety critical applications, called
locally growing random tree of GPs (LoG-GP). Based on
distributed Gaussian processes (Deisenroth & Ng, 2015), we
propose an iterative random division of individual models,
which results in a random tree as computation graph and
guarantees logarithmic complexity of model updates. In
order to reduce the complexity of predictions, the number of

