Revisiting Peng’s Q(λ) for Modern Reinforcement Learning

Tadashi Kozuno 1 * Yunhao Tang 2 * Mark Rowland 3 Rémi Munos 4 Steven Kapturowski 3 Will Dabney 3
Michal Valko 4 David Abel 3

Abstract
Off-policy multi-step reinforcement learning
algorithms consist of conservative and nonconservative algorithms: the former actively cut
traces, whereas the latter do not. Recently, Munos
et al. (2016) proved the convergence of conservative algorithms to an optimal Q-function. In
contrast, non-conservative algorithms are thought
to be unsafe and have a limited or no theoretical guarantee. Nonetheless, recent studies have
shown that non-conservative algorithms empirically outperform conservative ones. Motivated
by the empirical results and the lack of theory,
we carry out theoretical analyses of Peng’s Q(λ),
a representative example of non-conservative algorithms. We prove that it also converges to an
optimal policy provided that the behavior policy
slowly tracks a greedy policy in a way similar
to conservative policy iteration. Such a result
has been conjectured to be true but has not been
proven. We also experiment with Peng’s Q(λ)
in complex continuous control tasks, confirming
that Peng’s Q(λ) often outperforms conservative
algorithms despite its simplicity. These results
indicate that Peng’s Q(λ), which was thought to
be unsafe, is a theoretically-sound and practically
effective algorithm.

1. Introduction
Q-learning is a canonical algorithm in reinforcement learning (RL) (Watkins, 1989). It is a single-step algorithm, in
that it only uses individual transitions to update value estimates. Many multi-step generalisations of Q-learning have
been proposed, which allow temporally-extended trajectories to be used in the updating of values (Bertsekas & Ioffe,
*
Equal contribution 1 Independent Researcher, Okayama, Japan
(Now at the University of Alberta) 2 Columbia University, NY,
USA 3 DeepMind, London, UK 4 DeepMind, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Tadashi Kozuno <tadashi.kozuno@gmail.com>,
Yunhao Tang <yt2541@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1996; Watkins, 1989; Peng & Williams, 1994; 1996; Precup
et al., 2000; Harutyunyan et al., 2016; Munos et al., 2016;
Rowland et al., 2020), potentially leading to more efficient
credit assignment. Indeed, multi-step algorithms have often
been observed to outperform single-step algorithms for control in a variety of RL tasks (Mousavi et al., 2017; Harb &
Precup, 2017; Hessel et al., 2018; Barth-Maron et al., 2018;
Kapturowski et al., 2018; Daley & Amato, 2019).
However, using multi-step algorithms for RL comes with
both theoretical and practical difficulties. The discrepancy
between the policy that generated the data to be learnt from
(the behavior policy) and the policy being learnt about (the
target policy) can lead to complex, non-convergent behavior
in these algorithms, and so must be considered carefully.
There are two main approaches to deal with this discrepancy
(cf. Table 1). Conservative methods ensure convergence is
guaranteed no matter what behavior policy is used, typically
by truncating the trajectories used for learning. By contrast,
non-conservative methods typically do not truncate trajectories, and as a result do not come with generic convergence
guarantees. Nevertheless, non-conservative methods have
consistently been found to outperform conservative methods
in practical large-scale applications. Thus, there is a clear
gap in our understanding about non-conservative methods;
why do they so work well in practice, but lack the guarantees
of their conservative counterparts?
In this paper, we address this question by studying a representative non-conservative algorithm, Peng’s Q(λ) (Peng
& Williams, 1994; 1996, PQL), in more realistic learning
settings. Our results show that while PQL does not learn
optimal policies under arbitrary behavior policies, a convergence guarantee can be recovered if the behavior policy
tracks the target policy, as is often the case in practice. This
represents a closing of the gap between the strong empirical
performance of non-conservative methods and their previous lack of theoretical guarantees.
More concretely, our primary theoretical contributions bring
new understanding to PQL, and are summarized as follows:
• A proof that PQL with a fixed behavior policy converges
to a ”biased” (i.e., different from Q∗ ) fixed-point.
• Analysis of the quality of the resulting policy.

