Order-Agnostic Cross Entropy for Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation

Cunxiao Du 1 Zhaopeng Tu 2 Jing Jiang 1

Abstract
We propose a new training objective named orderagnostic cross entropy (OA XE) for fully nonautoregressive translation (NAT) models. OA XE
improves the standard cross-entropy loss to ameliorate the effect of word reordering, which is
a common source of the critical multimodality
problem in NAT. Concretely, OA XE removes the
penalty for word order errors, and computes the
cross entropy loss based on the best possible alignment between model predictions and target tokens.
Since the log loss is very sensitive to invalid references, we leverage cross entropy initialization
and loss truncation to ensure the model focuses
on a good part of the search space. Extensive
experiments on major WMT benchmarks show
that OA XE substantially improves translation performance, setting new state of the art for fully
NAT models. Further analyses show that OA XE
alleviates the multimodality problem by reducing token repetitions and increasing prediction
confidence. Our code, data, and trained models are available at https://github.com/
tencent-ailab/ICML21_OAXE.

1. Introduction
Non-autoregressive translation (NAT, Gu et al., 2018; Libovický & Helcl, 2018) has received increasing attention for
its efficient decoding by predicting every target token in parallel. However, such advantage comes at the cost sacrificing
translation quality due to the multimodality problem. There
exist many possible translations of the same sentence, while
vanilla NAT models may consider them at the same time due
to the independent predictions, which leads to multi-modal
outputs in the form of token repetitions (Gu et al., 2018).
1
School of Computing and Information System, Singapore
Management University, Singapore. Work was done when Cunxiao
Du was under the Rhino-Bird Elite Training Program of Tencent
AI Lab. 2 Tencent AI Lab, China. Correspondence to: Zhaopeng
Tu <zptu@tencent.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

A number of recent efforts have explored ways to improve
the NAT models’ ability to handle multimodality. One
thread of research relaxes the fully non-autoregressive restriction and iteratively refine the generated outputs with K
decoding passes (Lee et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2019). However, the iterative refinement method improves translation
quality by sacrificing the primary benefit of NAT models –
fast inference (Kasai et al., 2021).
Another thread of work focuses on improving fully NAT
models (i.e., one decoding pass) to maintain their advantage
of decoding efficiency. Along this direction, recent works
have incorporated approaches to improving the standard
cross-entropy loss to ameliorate the effect of multimodality.
Ghazvininejad et al. (2020) state that modeling word order
is difficult for NAT, since the model cannot condition on
its previous predictions like its autoregressive counterpart.
Starting from this intuition, they propose a new training
loss that softens the penalty for word order errors, which
assigns loss based on the best possible monotonic alignment
between target tokens and model predictions. Similarly, Libovický & Helcl (2018); Saharia et al. (2020) marginalize
all the monotonic alignments between target and predictions
to compute loss. While both approaches improve NAT performance by relaxing the word order restriction based on the
monotonic alignment assumption, they cannot handle word
reordering – a common source of multimodality problem
(see Figure 1). In response to this problem, we propose to
remove the penalty for word order errors, which makes the
loss more compatible with parallel decoding in NAT.
To achieve this more relaxed loss, we introduce orderagnostic cross entropy (OA XE), a new training objective
function that computes the cross entropy loss based on the
best possible alignment between model predictions and target tokens. Compared with previous studies (Ghazvininejad
et al., 2020; Saharia et al., 2020), OA XE guides NAT models to focus on lexical matching, which is at the core of
machine translation tasks. We use Hungarian algorithm to
efficiently implement OA XE (e.g., 7 lines of core code, see
Appendix A.1), which makes our new loss accommodate
existing NAT models seamlessly. The log loss is sensitive
to invalid and noisy references (Kang & Hashimoto, 2020),
and there exists a large number of invalid alignments in the
search space, which will hurt the performance of OA XE in
the form of log loss. We tackle these challenges by removing

