Model-Based Reinforcement Learning via Latent-Space Collocation

Oleh Rybkin * 1 Chuning Zhu * 1 Anusha Nagabandi 2 Kostas Daniilidis 1 Igor Mordatch 3 Sergey Levine 4

Abstract
The ability to plan into the future while utilizing only raw high-dimensional observations, such
as images, can provide autonomous agents with
broad capabilities. Visual model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods that plan future actions directly have shown impressive results on
tasks that require only short-horizon reasoning,
however, these methods struggle on temporally
extended tasks. We argue that it is easier to
solve long-horizon tasks by planning sequences
of states rather than just actions, as the effects
of actions greatly compound over time and are
harder to optimize. To achieve this, we draw on
the idea of collocation, which has shown good
results on long-horizon tasks in optimal control
literature, and adapt it to the image-based setting by utilizing learned latent state space models.
The resulting latent collocation method (LatCo)
optimizes trajectories of latent states, which improves over previously proposed shooting methods for visual model-based RL on tasks with
sparse rewards and long-term goals. See the
videos on the supplementary website https:
//orybkin.github.io/latco/.

LatCo optimization over latent states

CEM optimization over actions

Figure 1: Top: Latent collocation (LatCo) on a tool use task,
where the thermos needs to be pushed with the stick. Each
image shows a full plan at that optimization step, visualized
via a diagnostic network. LatCo optimizes a latent state
sequence and is able to temporarily violate the dynamics
during planning, such as the stick flying in the air without
an apparent cause. This allows it to rapidly discover the
high-reward regions, while the subsequent refinement of the
planned trajectory focuses on feasibly achieving it. Bottom:
in contrast, shooting optimizes an action sequence directly
and is unable to discover picking the stick as the actions that
lead to that are unlikely to be sampled.

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania 2 Covariant
Google AI 4 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Oleh Rybkin
<oleh@seas.upenn.edu>.

fueled by improvements in modeling (Finn et al., 2016;
Hafner et al., 2019), they leave much room for improvement in terms of planning and optimization. Many of the
current best-performing deep model-based RL approaches
use only gradient-free action sampling as the underlying optimizer (Chua et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2020), and are
typically applied to tasks with very short horizons, such as
planning a sequence of 5 (Ebert et al., 2018) or 12 (Hafner
et al., 2019) actions. On longer-horizon tasks, we observe
that these shooting methods struggle with local optima, as
credit assignment for individual actions becomes harder.
In this work, we study how more powerful planners can
be used with these models to achieve better longer-horizon
reasoning.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

It is appealing instead of optimizing a sequence of actions
to optimize a sequence of states. While small deviations in

For autonomous agents to perform complex tasks in
open-world settings, they must be able to process highdimensional sensory inputs, such as images, and reason over
long horizons about the potential effects of their actions. Recent work in model-based reinforcement learning (RL) has
shown impressive results in autonomous skill acquisition directly from image inputs, demonstrating improvements both
in terms of data efficiency and generalization (Ebert et al.,
2018; Hafner et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Schrittwieser
et al., 2020). While these advancements have been largely
3

