PODS: Policy Optimization via Differentiable Simulation

Miguel Zamora 1 Momchil Peychev 1 Sehoon Ha 2 Martin Vechev 1 Stelian Coros 1

Abstract
Current reinforcement learning (RL) methods use
simulation models as simple black-box oracles.
In this paper, with the goal of improving the performance exhibited by RL algorithms, we explore
a systematic way of leveraging the additional information provided by an emerging class of differentiable simulators. Building on concepts established by Deterministic Policy Gradients (DPG)
methods, the neural network policies learned with
our approach represent deterministic actions. In
a departure from standard methodologies, however, learning these policies does not hinge on
approximations of the value function that must
be learned concurrently in an actor-critic fashion.
Instead, we exploit differentiable simulators to
directly compute the analytic gradient of a policy’s value function with respect to the actions
it outputs. This, in turn, allows us to effciently
perform locally optimal policy improvement iterations. Compared against other state-of-the-art
RL methods, we show that with minimal hyperparameter tuning our approach consistently leads
to better asymptotic behavior across a set of payload manipulation tasks that demand a high degree of accuracy and precision.

1. Introduction
The main goal in RL is to formalize principled algorithmic
approaches to solving sequential decision-making problems.
As a defning characteristic of RL methodologies, agents
gain experience by acting in their environments in order to
learn how to achieve specifc goals. While learning directly
in the real world (Haarnoja et al., 2019; Kalashnikov et al.,
2018) is perhaps the holy grail in the feld, this remains
a fundamental challenge: RL is notoriously data hungry,
and gathering real-world experience is slow, tedious and
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Georgia, USA. Correspondence to: Miguel Zamora
<miguel.zamora@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

potentially unsafe. Fortunately, recent years have seen exciting progress in simulation technologies that create realistic
virtual training grounds, and sim-2-real efforts (Tan et al.,
2018; Hwangbo et al., 2019) are beginning to produce impressive results.
A new class of differentiable simulators (Zimmermann et al.,
2019; Liang et al., 2019; de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018;
Degrave et al., 2019) is currently emerging. These simulators not only predict the outcome of a particular action,
but they also provide derivatives that capture the way in
which the outcome will change due to infnitesimal changes
in the action. Rather than using simulators as simple black
box oracles, we therefore ask the following question: how
can the additional information provided by differentiable
simulators be exploited to improve RL algorithms?
To provide an answer to this question, we propose a novel
method to effciently learn control policies for fnite horizon
problems. The policies learned with our approach use neural
networks to model deterministic actions. In a departure from
established methodologies, learning these policies does not
hinge on learned approximations of the system dynamics
or of the value function. Instead, we leverage differentiable
simulators to directly compute the analytic gradient of a policy’s value function with respect to the actions it outputs for
a specifc set of points sampled in state space. We show how
to use this gradient information to compute frst and second
order update rules for locally optimal policy improvement
iterations. Through a simple line search procedure, the process of updating a policy avoids instabilities and guarantees
monotonic improvement of its value function.
To evaluate the policy optimization scheme that we propose,
we apply it to a set of control problems that require payloads
to be manipulated via stiff or elastic cables. We have chosen
to focus our attention on this class of high-precision dynamic
manipulation tasks for the following reasons:
• they are inspired by real-world applications ranging
from cable-driven parallel robots and crane systems to
UAV-based transportation to (Figure 1);
• the systems we need to learn control policies for exhibit
rich, highly non-linear dynamics;
• the specifc tasks we consider constitute a challeng-

