Whitening for Self-Supervised Representation Learning

Aleksandr Ermolov 1 Aliaksandr Siarohin 1 Enver Sangineto 1 Nicu Sebe 1

Abstract
Most of the current self-supervised representation
learning (SSL) methods are based on the contrastive loss and the instance-discrimination task,
where augmented versions of the same image instance (“positives”) are contrasted with instances
extracted from other images (“negatives”). For the
learning to be effective, many negatives should be
compared with a positive pair, which is computationally demanding. In this paper, we propose
a different direction and a new loss function for
SSL, which is based on the whitening of the latentspace features. The whitening operation has a
“scattering” effect on the batch samples, avoiding
degenerate solutions where all the sample representations collapse to a single point. Our solution
does not require asymmetric networks and it is
conceptually simple. Moreover, since negatives
are not needed, we can extract multiple positive
pairs from the same image instance. The source
code of the method and of all the experiments is
available at: https://github.com/htdt/
self-supervised.

1. Introduction
One of the current main bottlenecks in deep network training is the dependence on large annotated training datasets,
and this motivates the recent surge of interest in unsupervised methods. Specifically, in self-supervised representation learning (SSL), a network is (pre-)trained without
any form of manual annotation, thus providing a means to
extract information from unlabeled-data sources (e.g., text
corpora, videos, images from the Internet, etc.). In selfsupervision, label-based information is replaced by a prediction problem using some form of context or using a pretext
task. Pioneering work in this direction was done in Natural
Language Processing (NLP), in which the co-occurrence
1
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science
(DISI), University of Trento, Italy. Correspondence to: Aleksandr
Ermolov <aleksandr.ermolov@unitn.it>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of words in a sentence is used to learn a language model
(Mikolov et al., 2013a;b; Devlin et al., 2019). In Computer
Vision, typical contexts or pretext tasks are based on: (1)
the temporal consistency in videos (Wang & Gupta, 2015;
Misra et al., 2016; Dwibedi et al., 2019), (2) the spatial
order of patches in still images (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016;
Misra & van der Maaten, 2020; Hénaff et al., 2019) or (3)
simple image transformation techniques (Ji et al., 2019; He
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2018). The intuitive idea behind most
of these methods is to collect pairs of positive and negative
samples: two positive samples should share the same semantics, while negatives should be perceptually different.
A triplet loss (Sohn, 2016; Schroff et al., 2015; Hermans
et al., 2017; Wang & Gupta, 2015; Misra et al., 2016) can
then be used to learn a metric space representing the human
perceptual similarity. However, most of the recent studies
use a contrastive loss (Hadsell et al., 2006) or one of its
variants (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; van den Oord et al.,
2018; Hjelm et al., 2019), while Tschannen et al. (2019)
show the relation between the triplet and the contrastive
losses.
It is worth noticing that the success of both kinds of losses
is strongly affected by the number and the quality of the
negative samples. For instance, in the case of the triplet loss,
a common practice is to select hard/semi-hard negatives
(Schroff et al., 2015; Hermans et al., 2017). On the other
hand, Hjelm et al. (2019) have shown that the contrastive
loss needs a large number of negatives to be competitive.
This implies using batches with a large size, which is computationally demanding, especially with high-resolution images. In order to alleviate this problem, Wu et al. (2018)
use a memory bank of negatives, which is composed of
feature-vector representations of all the training samples.
He et al. (2020) conjecture that the use of large and fixedrepresentation vocabularies is one of the keys to the success
of self-supervision in NLP. The solution proposed in MoCo
He et al. (2020) extends Wu et al. (2018) using a memoryefficient queue of the last visited negatives, together with a
momentum encoder which preserves the intra-queue representation consistency. Chen et al. (2020a) have performed
large-scale experiments confirming that a large number of
negatives (and therefore a large batch size) is required for
the contrastive loss to be efficient.
Very recently, Grill et al. (2020) proposed an alternative

