Equivariant Networks for Pixelized Spheres

Mehran Shakerinava 1 2 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2

Abstract
Pixelizations of Platonic solids such as the cube
and icosahedron have been widely used to represent spherical data, from climate records to
Cosmic Microwave Background maps. Platonic
solids have well-known global symmetries. Once
we pixelize each face of the solid, each face also
possesses its own local symmetries in the form
of Euclidean isometries. One way to combine
these symmetries is through a hierarchy. However, this approach does not adequately model
the interplay between the two levels of symmetry transformations. We show how to model this
interplay using ideas from group theory, identify the equivariant linear maps, and introduce
equivariant padding that respects these symmetries. Deep networks that use these maps as
their building blocks generalize gauge equivariant CNNs on pixelized spheres. These deep networks achieve state-of-the-art results on semantic segmentation for climate data and omnidirectional image processing. Code is available at
https://git.io/JGiZA.

1. Introduction
Representing signals on the sphere is an important problem
across many domains; in geodesy and astronomy, discrete
maps assign scalars or vectors to each point on the surface
of the earth or points in the sky. To this end, various pixelizations or tilings of the sphere, often based on Platonic solids,
have been used. Here, each face of the solid is refined using
a triangular, hexagonal, or square grid and further recursive
refinements can bring the resulting polyhedron closer and
closer to a sphere, enabling an accurate projection from the
surface of a sphere; see Fig. 2.
Our objective is to enable deep learning on this representation of spherical signals. A useful learning bias when deal1
School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute. Correspondence to: Mehran
Shakerinava <mehran.shakerinava@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We model the rotational symmetry of the sphere by combining the rotational symmetry of a Platonic solid and isometries
of each of its face grids. The bottom row shows one such symmetry
transformation for scalar features on the quad sphere. The top row
shows the corresponding transformation for regular features. Note
that the 90○ rotation of the cube around the vertical axis also rolls
the feature grids on top, in addition to rotating them. We identify
the equivariant linear maps that make this diagram commute.

ing with structured data is to design equivariant models that
preserve the symmetries of the structure at hand; the equivariance constraint ensures that symmetry transformations
of the data result in the same symmetry transformations of
the representation. To this end, we first need to identify the
symmetries of pixelized spheres.
While Platonic solids have well-known symmetries (Coxeter, 1973), their pixelization does not simply extend these
symmetries. To appreciate this point it is useful to contrast
the situation with the pixelization of a circle using a polygon:
when using an m-gon, the cyclic group Cm approximates
the rotational symmetry of the circle, SO(2). By further
pixelizing and projecting each edge of the m-gon using 2
pixels, we get a regular 2m-gon, with a larger symmetry
group Cm < C2m < SO(2) – therefore in this case further
pixelization simply extends the symmetry. However, this
does not happen with the sphere and its symmetry group
SO(3) – that is, pixelized spheres are not homogeneous
spaces for any finite subgroup of SO(3).

