Permutation Weighting
David Arbour * 1 Drew Dimmery * 2 3 Arjun Sondhi 4

Abstract
A commonly applied approach for estimating
causal effects from observational data is to is
to apply weights which render treatments independent of observed pre-treatment covariates.
This property is known as balance; in its absence, estimated causal effects may be arbitrarily biased. In this work we introduce permutation weighting, a method for estimating balancing weights using a standard binary classifier
(regardless of cardinality of treatment). A large
class of probabilistic classifiers may be used in
this method; the choice of loss for the classifier implies the particular definition of balance.
We bound bias and variance in terms of the excess risk of the classifier, show that these disappear asymptotically, and demonstrate that our
classification problem directly minimizes imbalance. Additionally, hyper-parameter tuning and
model selection can be performed with standard
cross-validation methods. Empirical evaluations
indicate that permutation weighting provides favorable performance in comparison to existing
methods.

1. Introduction
Observational causal inference methods infer causal effects in the absence of an explicit randomization mechanism. Given observed treatments, outcomes, and a sufficient set of confounding pretreatment covariates, identification of the causal effect is made possible by rendering treatment independent of the covariates (Rubin, 2011; Pearl,
2009). Inverse propensity score weighting (IPW) is a common way to accomplish this, where outcomes are weighted
by the inverse probability of receiving the observed treat*
Equal contribution 1 Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA
Work carried out while at Facebook Core Data Science, Menlo
Park, CA, USA 3 Forschungsverbund Data Science, University of
Vienna, Vienna, AT 4 Flatiron Health, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: David Arbour <darbour26@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ment given covariates (Hernán and Robins, 2010). If these
probabilities correctly represent the conditional distribution, then the weighted data will have independence between treatment and covariates. This property is known
as balance; for example, in a binary or categorical treatment setting, all treatment groups would have the same
weighted distribution of covariates. Unlike in design-based
causal inference, where the relationship between treatment
and covariates is known by design, propensity scores often must be estimated from observed data. Under model
misspecification, however, there are no guarantees of balance, and there may remain arbitrary dependencies between treatment and covariates. Nevertheless, IPW has become widely used in a variety of fields, e.g., epidemiology
(Cole and Hernán, 2008), economics (Hirano et al., 2003)
and computer science (Dudı́k et al., 2011).
In this paper, we present permutation weighting (PW), a
method for estimating balancing weights for general treatment types by solving a binary classification problem. In
contrast to prior work, where the target distribution is
implicitly defined via the balance objective, PW explicitly represents the balanced dataset by permuting observed
treatments, emulating the target randomized control trial
(RCT) (Hernán and Taubman, 2008). As a result, the
problem of inferring balancing weights reduces to estimating importance sampling weights between the observed
and permuted data. We estimate these importance sampling weights using classifier-based density ratio estimation (Qin, 1998; Cheng et al., 2004; Bickel et al., 2007).
This procedure is amenable to general treatment types—
binary, multi-valued or continuous—and reduces them all
to the same simple binary classification problem which can
be solved with off-the-shelf methods. The choice of classifier and specification of the classification problem implies the balance condition. Existing methods (Imai and
Ratkovic, 2014; Hazlett, 2016; Fong et al., 2018; Zhao,
2019) with balance constraints correspond to particular
choices of loss and feature representations for this classifier. We show that minimizing error in our classification
problem directly minimizes the bias and variance of the
causal estimator, and imbalance. This property also implies that cross-validation can be used to tune classifier hyperparameters (section 4.1) and choose between balancing
weight specifications using standard software (section 4.3).

