Adaptive Newton Sketch: Linear-time Optimization with Quadratic
Convergence and Effective Hessian Dimensionality

Jonathan Lacotte 1 Yifei Wang 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
We propose a randomized algorithm with
quadratic convergence rate for convex optimization problems with a self-concordant, composite,
strongly convex objective function. Our method
is based on performing an approximate Newton
step using a random projection of the Hessian.
Our first contribution is to show that, at each iteration, the embedding dimension (or sketch size)
can be as small as the effective dimension of the
Hessian matrix. Leveraging this novel fundamental result, we design an algorithm with a sketch
size proportional to the effective dimension and
which exhibits a quadratic rate of convergence.
This result dramatically improves on the classical
linear-quadratic convergence rates of state-of-theart sub-sampled Newton methods. However, in
most practical cases, the effective dimension is
not known beforehand, and this raises the question of how to pick a sketch size as small as the
effective dimension while preserving a quadratic
convergence rate. Our second and main contribution is thus to propose an adaptive sketch size
algorithm with quadratic convergence rate and
which does not require prior knowledge or estimation of the effective dimension: at each iteration,
it starts with a small sketch size, and increases
it until quadratic progress is achieved. Importantly, we show that the embedding dimension
remains proportional to the effective dimension
throughout the entire path and that our method
achieves state-of-the-art computational complexity for solving convex optimization programs with
a strongly convex component. We discuss and
illustrate applications to linear and quadratic programming, as well as logistic regression and other
generalized linear models.
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Jonathan Lacotte <lacotte@stanford.edu>,
Yifei Wang <wangyf18@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
We consider a composite optimization problem of the form
x∗ : = argmin {f (x) : = f0 (x) + g(x)} ,

(1)

x∈Rd

where f0 , g : Rd → R are both closed, twice differentiable
convex functions. Here, we denote R : = R ∪ {+∞} and
by dom f the domain of f . We are interested in the structured setting where forming the Hessian matrix ∇2 f0 (x) is
prohibitively expensive, but we have available at small computational cost a Hessian matrix square-root ∇2 f0 (x)1/2 ,
that is, a matrix ∇2 f0 (x)1/2 of dimensions n × d such that
(∇2 f0 (x)1/2 )> ∇2 f0 (x)1/2 = ∇2 f0 (x) for some integer
n ⩾ d, and n eventually very large. Moreover, we assume
the function g to be µ-strongly convex, i.e., ∇2 g(x)  µId .
Large-scale optimization problems of this form are becoming ever more common in applications, due to the increasing dimensionality of data (e.g., genomics, medicine, highdimensional models). Typically, the function f0 may represent an objective value we aim to minimize over a convex
set C ⊆ Rd , that is, we aim to solve minx∈C f0 (x). A common practice to turn this constrained optimization problem
into an unconstrained one is to add to the objective function
a penalty or barrier function g(x) which encodes C (e.g.,
logarithmic barrier functions for polyhedral constraints or
`p -norm regularization for `p -ball constraints). In many
cases of practical interest, a matrix square-root ∇2 f0 (x)1/2
can be computed efficiently. For instance, in the broad
context of empirical risk minimization,
the function f0 has
Pm
the separable form f0 (x) = i=1 `i (a>
i x) where the functions `i are twice-differentiable and convex. In this case, a
suitable Hessian matrix square root is given by the n × d
1/2
matrix ∇2 f0 (x)1/2 : = diag(`00i (a>
) A. On the other
i x)
hand, we assume that the Hessian of the function g is wellstructured, so that its computation is relatively cheap in
comparison to that of f0 . For instance, if the constraint set
is the unit simplex (i.e., x ⩾ 0 and 1> x ⩽ 1), then the
Hessian of the associated logarithmic barrier function is a
diagonal matrix plus a rank one matrix. Other examples
include problems for which g has a separable structure such
as typical regularizers for ill-posed
P inverse problems (e.g.,
graph regularization g(x) = 12 i,j∈E (xi − xj )2 , `p -norms
with p > 1 or approximations of `1 -norm).

