Stabilizing Equilibrium Models by Jacobian Regularization

Shaojie Bai 1 Vladlen Koltun 2 J. Zico Kolter 1

Abstract
Deep equilibrium networks (DEQs) are a new
class of models that eschews traditional depth in
favor of finding the fixed point of a single nonlinear layer. These models have been shown to
achieve performance competitive with the stateof-the-art deep networks while using significantly
less memory. Yet they are also slower, brittle to
architectural choices, and introduce potential instability to the model. In this paper, we propose
a regularization scheme for DEQ models that explicitly regularizes the Jacobian of the fixed-point
update equations to stabilize the learning of equilibrium models. We show that this regularization
adds only minimal computational cost, significantly stabilizes the fixed-point convergence in
both forward and backward passes, and scales
well to high-dimensional, realistic domains (e.g.,
WikiText-103 language modeling and ImageNet
classification). Using this method, we demonstrate, for the first time, an implicit-depth model
that runs with approximately the same speed and
level of performance as popular conventional deep
networks such as ResNet-101, while still maintaining the constant memory footprint and architectural simplicity of DEQs. Code is available
here.

1. Introduction
While conventional deep networks like ResNets (He et al.,
2016) and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) rely on hierarchical layer stacking, the recently-proposed deep equilibrium networks (DEQs) (Bai et al., 2019) directly model
the “infinite-depth” representation of a single layer fθ by
solving for its fixed point (i.e., “equilibrium”) z? :
z? = fθ (z? ; x),
where x is the original input. Importantly, to train these
models, one could directly differentiate through the final
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 2 Intel Labs,
USA. Correspondence to: Shaojie Bai <shaojieb@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

equilibrium z? by the implicit function theorem (Krantz &
Parks, 2012), irrespective of the method used to solve for
this equilibrium in the forward pass. Therefore, like other
implicit-depth architectures such as Neural ODEs (Chen
et al., 2018), DEQs have the notable advantages that their
forward passes can rely on any black-box root solvers (e.g.,
Newton, quasi-Newton, simplest forward iterations), and
that their training only consumes O(1) memory. With this
formulation, prior works have managed to extend the DEQ
framework for multiple large-scale applications, such as
language modeling (Bai et al., 2019) and large-scale image
classification or segmentation (Bai et al., 2020).
However, these models suffer from a few issues. First,
despite their memory efficiency, DEQs are also slower than
conventional deep networks that achieve the same level
of accuracy. Second, the number of iterations required to
solve for the equilibrium quickly grows over the course
of training, indicating a trend for approaching instability.
Third, the DEQ model is sensitive to architectural choices,
and sometimes even small modifications could break the
model’s stability of convergence. Some recent works have
tackled this third issue by exploiting provably convergent
layers via monotone operator splitting theories (Winston
& Kolter, 2020) and Lipschitz boundedness (Revay et al.,
2020). However, these structural solutions rely extensively
on specific layer parameterizations, rendering DEQ models
unscalable and even more inflexible.
In this paper, we first summarize and provide empirical evidence on all of these downsides of the equilibrium networks
that have so far thwarted many from extending DEQs to
both broader applications and more architectural variants.
To address these issues, we further propose a regularization
solution to improve on DEQ models’ stability, efficiency
and flexibility. Importantly, while prior DEQs adopted regularization methods direcly borrowed from explicit deep networks (e.g., recurrent dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016)),
we introduce a simple and theoretically-motivated Jacobian
regularization pursuant to DEQ models’ implicitness. We
will discuss in detail how this Jacobian regularization relates
to the contractivity of DEQ’s forward non-linear system and
backward linear system, and is thus able to effectively stabilize not only forward but also backward dynamics of DEQ
networks. There are two immediate benefits of the resulting
stability in the dynamics. First, solving a DEQ requires
far fewer iterations than before, which makes regularized

