Just How Toxic is Data Poisoning? A Unified Benchmark for Backdoor and
Data Poisoning Attacks
Avi Schwarzschild * 1 Micah Goldblum * 2 Arjun Gupta 3 John P. Dickerson 2 Tom Goldstein 2

Abstract
Data poisoning and backdoor attacks manipulate
training data in order to cause models to fail during inference. A recent survey of industry practitioners found that data poisoning is the number
one concern among threats ranging from model
stealing to adversarial attacks. However, it remains unclear exactly how dangerous poisoning
methods are and which ones are more effective
considering that these methods, even ones with
identical objectives, have not been tested in consistent or realistic settings. We observe that data
poisoning and backdoor attacks are highly sensitive to variations in the testing setup. Moreover,
we find that existing methods may not generalize
to realistic settings. While these existing works
serve as valuable prototypes for data poisoning,
we apply rigorous tests to determine the extent
to which we should fear them. In order to promote fair comparison in future work, we develop
standardized benchmarks for data poisoning and
backdoor attacks.

1. Introduction
Data poisoning is a security threat to machine learning systems in which an attacker controls the behavior of a system
by manipulating its training data. This class of threats is
particularly germane to deep learning systems because they
require large amounts of data to train and are therefore often trained (or pre-trained) on large datasets scraped from
the web. For example, the Open Images and the Amazon Products datasets contain approximately 9 million and
233 million samples, respectively, that are scraped from a
wide range of potentially insecure, and in many cases unknown, sources (Kuznetsova et al., 2020; Ni et al., 2019).
1

2

Department of Mathematics, Department of Computer Science, and 3 Department of Robotics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Avi Schwarzschild
<avi1@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

At this scale, it is often infeasible to properly vet content.
Furthermore, many practitioners create datasets by harvesting system inputs (e.g., emails received, files uploaded) or
scraping user-created content (e.g., profiles, text messages,
advertisements) without any mechanisms to bar malicious
actors from contributing data. The dependence of industrial
AI systems on datasets that are not manually inspected has
led to fear that corrupted training data could produce faulty
models (Jiang et al., 2017). In fact, a recent survey of 28
industry organizations found that these companies are significantly more afraid of data poisoning than other threats
from adversarial machine learning (Kumar et al., 2020b).
Poisoning attacks can be put into two broad categories.
Backdoor data poisoning causes a model to misclassify
test-time samples that contain a trigger – a visual feature
in images or a particular character sequence in the natural
language setting (Chen et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019; Saha
et al., 2019; Turner et al., 2018). For example, one might
tamper with training images so that a vision system fails to
identify any person wearing a shirt with the trigger symbol
printed on it. In this threat model, the attacker modifies data
at both train time (by placing poisons) and at inference time
(by inserting the trigger). Triggerless poisoning attacks, on
the other hand, do not require modification at inference time
(Biggio et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2020; Muñoz-González
et al., 2017; Shafahi et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019; Aghakhani
et al., 2020b; Geiping et al., 2020). A variety of innovative
backdoor and triggerless poisoning attacks – and defenses –
have emerged in recent years, but inconsistent and perfunctory experimentation has rendered performance evaluations
and comparisons misleading.
In this paper, we develop a framework for benchmarking
and evaluating a wide range of poison attacks on image
classifiers. Specifically, we provide a way to compare attack
strategies and shed light on the differences between them.
Our goal is to address the following weaknesses in the current literature. First, we observe that the reported success
of poisoning attacks in the literature is often dependent on
specific (and sometimes unrealistic) choices of network architecture and training protocol, making it difficult to assess
the viability of attacks in real-world scenarios. Second, we
find that the percentage of training data that an attacker can

