Locally Persistent Exploration in Continuous Control Tasks with Sparse
Rewards
Susan Amin * 1 2 Maziar Gomrokchi * 1 2 Hossein Aboutalebi * 3 4 Harsh Sajita 1 2 Doina Precup 1 2

Abstract
A major challenge in reinforcement learning is
the design of exploration strategies, especially for
environments with sparse reward structures and
continuous state and action spaces. Intuitively, if
the reinforcement signal is very scarce, the agent
should rely on some form of short-term memory
in order to cover its environment efficiently. We
propose a new exploration method, based on two
intuitions: (1) the choice of the next exploratory
action should depend not only on the (Markovian)
state of the environment, but also on the agent’s
trajectory so far, and (2) the agent should utilize a
measure of spread in the state space to avoid getting stuck in a small region. Our method leverages
concepts often used in statistical physics to provide explanations for the behavior of simplified
(polymer) chains in order to generate persistent
(locally self-avoiding) trajectories in state space.
We discuss the theoretical properties of locally
self-avoiding walks and their ability to provide a
kind of short-term memory through a decaying
temporal correlation within the trajectory. We provide empirical evaluations of our approach in a
simulated 2D navigation task, as well as higherdimensional MuJoCo continuous control locomotion tasks with sparse rewards.

1. Introduction
As reinforcement learning agents typically learn tasks
through interacting with the environment and receiving reinforcement signals, a fundamental problem arises when these
signals are rarely available. The sparsely distributed rewards
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada 2 Mila - Québec Artificial
Intelligence Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada 4 Waterloo Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: Susan
Amin <susan.amin@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

call for a clever exploration strategy that exposes the agent
to the unseen regions of the space via keeping track of the
visited state-action pairs (Fu et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2018).
However, that cannot be the case for high-dimensional continuous space-and-action spaces, as defining a notion of density for such tasks is intractable and heavily task-dependent
(Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Taı̈ga et al., 2019).
Here, we introduce an exploration algorithm that works
independently of the extrinsic rewards received from the
environment and is inherently compatible with continuous
state-and-action tasks. Our proposed approach takes into
account the agent’s short-term memory regarding the action
trajectory, as well as the trajectory of the observed states
in order to sample the next exploratory action. The main
intuition is that in a pure exploration mode with minimal
extrinsic reinforcement, the agent should plan trajectories
that expand in the available space and avoid getting stuck in
small regions. In other words, the agent may need to be “persistent” in its choice of actions; for example, in a locomotion
task, an agent may want to pick a certain direction and maintain it for some number of steps in order to ensure that it
can move away from its current location, where it might be
stuck at. The second intuition is that satisfying the first condition requires a notion of spread measure in the state space
to warrant the agent’s exposure to unvisited regions. Moreover, in sparse reward settings, while the agent’s primary
intention must be to avoid being trapped in local regions by
maintaining a form of short-term memory, it must still employ a form of memory evaporation mechanism to maintain
the possibility of revisiting the informative states. Note that
in continuous state-and-action settings, modern exploration
methods (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Houthooft et al., 2016b;
Ciosek et al., 2019) fail to address the fore-mentioned details
simultaneously.
Our polymer-based exploration technique (PolyRL) is inspired by the theory of freely-rotating chains (FRCs) in
polymer physics to implement the aforementioned intuitions. FRCs describe the chains (collections of transitions
or moves) whose successive segments are correlated in their
orientation. This feature introduces a finite (short-term)
stiffness (persistence) in the chain, which induces what we
call locally self-avoiding random walks (LSA-RWs). The
strategy that emerges from PolyRL induces consistent move-

