Parameter-free Locally Accelerated Conditional Gradients

Alejandro Carderera * 1 Jelena Diakonikolas * 2 Cheuk Yin (Eric) Lin * 2 Sebastian Pokutta * 3

Abstract
Projection-free conditional gradient (CG) methods are the algorithms of choice for constrained
optimization setups in which projections are often
computationally prohibitive but linear optimization over the constraint set remains computationally feasible. Unlike in projection-based methods, globally accelerated convergence rates are
in general unattainable for CG. However, a very
recent work on Locally accelerated CG (LaCG)
has demonstrated that local acceleration for CG is
possible for many settings of interest. The main
downside of LaCG is that it requires knowledge
of the smoothness and strong convexity parameters of the objective function. We remove this
limitation by introducing a novel, Parameter-Free
Locally accelerated CG (PF-LaCG) algorithm, for
which we provide rigorous convergence guarantees. Our theoretical results are complemented
by numerical experiments, which demonstrate local acceleration and showcase the practical improvements of PF-LaCG over non-accelerated algorithms, both in terms of iteration count and
wall-clock time.

1. Introduction
Conditional gradient (CG) (or Frank-Wolfe (FW)) methods (Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Levitin & Polyak, 1966) are a
fundamental class of projection-free optimization methods,
most frequently used to minimize smooth convex objective functions over constrained sets onto which projections
are computationally prohibitive; see Combettes & Pokutta
(2021) for an overview. These methods have received significant recent attention in the machine learning and optimization communities, due to the fact that they eschew
projections and produce solutions with sparse representa*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA, USA 2 Department of Computer Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 3 Zuse Institute Berlin
and Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Jelena Diakonikolas <jelena@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tions (Jaggi, 2013; Garber, 2016; Hazan & Luo, 2016; Braun
et al., 2017; 2019; Lei et al., 2019; Tsiligkaridis & Roberts,
2020; Combettes et al., 2020).
While CG methods have been applied to many different
problem settings (see, e.g., Hazan & Luo (2016); Zhou
et al. (2018); Pedregosa et al. (2020); Lei et al. (2019);
Tsiligkaridis & Roberts (2020); Dvurechensky et al. (2020);
Zhang et al. (2020); Négiar et al. (2020); Carderera &
Pokutta (2020); Kerdreux et al. (2021)), in this paper, we
are interested in using CG-type methods to solve problems
of the form:
min f (x),
(P)
x∈X

where f is an L-smooth (gradient-Lipschitz) and m-strongly
convex function and X ⊆ Rn is a polytope.
We assume that we are given access to the objective function
f and to the feasible set X via the following two oracles:
Oracle 1.1 (First Order Oracle (FOO)). Given x ∈ X , the
FOO returns f (x) and ∇f (x).
Oracle 1.2 (Linear Minimization Oracle (LMO)). Given
c ∈ Rn , the LMO returns argmin hc, xi.
x∈X

While being of extreme practical importance, these LMObased methods in general do not achieve the globally optimal rates for smooth (and possibly strongly convex) minimization that are attained by projection-based methods. In
particular, LMO-based algorithms cannot converge globally
faster than O(1/k) for the class of smooth strongly convex
functions where k is the number of iterations (up to the
dimension threshold n) (Lan, 2013; Jaggi, 2013). Moreover,
the dependence of the convergence rate on the dimension is
unavoidable in general.
At the same time, it was shown by Diakonikolas et al. (2020)
that optimal rates can be obtained asymptotically, referred
to as locally optimal rates. That is, after a finite number of
iterations (independent of the target accuracy ) with potentially sub-optimal convergence, optimal convergence rates
can be achieved. While Diakonikolas et al. (2020) resolve
the question of acceleration for CG-type methods, it unfortunately depends on the knowledge of m and L. Although the
latter can be removed with the common line search-based
arguments, the knowledge of a good estimate of the former
is crucial in achieving acceleration. This makes the Locally-

