Meta-learning Hyperparameter Performance Prediction with Neural Processes

Ying Wei 1 Peilin Zhao 2 Junzhou Huang 2

Abstract
The surrogate that predicts the performance of
hyperparameters has been a key component for
sequential model-based hyperparameter optimization. In practical applications, a trial of a hyperparameter configuration may be so costly that a
surrogate is expected to return an optimal configuration with as few trials as possible. Observing
that human experts draw on their expertise in a
machine learning model by trying configurations
that once performed well on other datasets, we
are inspired to build a trial-efficient surrogate by
transferring the meta-knowledge learned from historical trials on other datasets. We propose an
end-to-end surrogate named as Transfer Neural
Processes (TNP) that learns a comprehensive set
of meta-knowledge, including the parameters of
historical surrogates, historical trials, and initial
configurations for other datasets. Experiments on
extensive OpenML datasets and three computer
vision datasets demonstrate that the proposed algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance in
at least one order of magnitude less trials.

1. Introduction
In the pipeline of a machine learning system, model configuration poses daunting challenges: 1) how to choose the
optimal algorithm among hundreds to thousands of machine
learning algorithms? 2) how to configure the optimal hyperparameters after an algorithm is specified? Brute-force
exploration, obviously, is prohibitively expensive and impractical. Though experts pinpoint a configuration relatively
quickly, practitioners outside machine learning possibly get
bogged down in the meticulous design. These challenges
highlight the critical importance of automating model configuration where automated hyperparameter optimization
(HPO) is investigated in this paper.
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Ying Wei <yingwei@cityu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Free from the limitations of exhaustive search (Bergstra &
Bengio, 2012) being computationally expensive and modelspecific methods (Keerthi et al., 2007) being too customizable to be applied in general, sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) has been the current state-of-the-art for
HPO. The core of SMBO is to learn from observed hyperparameter performances a surrogate model which maps a
hyperparamter configuration to the measured performance
on a dataset. Sequentially, in each trial, a promising configuration is selected by optimizing the surrogate and thereupon
evaluated; the new observation is incorporated to further
improve the surrogate. While existing surrogate models
including Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Snoek et al., 2012),
parzen estimators (Bergstra et al., 2011), random forest (Hutter et al., 2011), and neural networks (Snoek et al., 2015;
Springenberg et al., 2016) have shown their effectiveness
provided with sufficient observations, it is imperative to return an optimal configuration in very few trials in real-world
applications where a trial on huge datasets is costly.
Transferring knowledge from historical trials on other
datasets, which we focus on, has been a promising approach
to speed up HPO. The inspiration comes from how machine learning experts hone their skills in a model – a set of
hyperparameter configurations that perform well on some
explored datasets, especially those bearing striking similarity with the target dataset of interest, are likely qualified
candidates for the target. Following the convention of transfer learning, the most important research question to address
is what to transfer. Existing studies instantiate what to transfer as observations (Schilling et al., 2015; Swersky et al.,
2013; Yogatama & Mann, 2014), parameters of a surrogate
model (Bardenet et al., 2013; Feurer et al., 2018; Perrone
et al., 2018; Wistuba et al., 2016), and initial configurations
to warmstart SMBO (Feurer et al., 2015; Lindauer & Hutter,
2018; Wistuba et al., 2015). Nevertheless, we argue the necessity of transferring all of them to expedite HPO. Figure 1
shows that transferring only observations, only parameters,
or only initial configurations fails to return a satisfactory
surrogate close to the groundtruth response function.
Unfortunately, simultaneously transferring all these knowledge is non-trivial for GP-based surrogate models. For
example, it is particularly challenging to leverage the parameters of previous multitask GP surrogates (Swersky et al.,
2013) where only observations are transferred. Even con-

