Learning and Planning in Average-Reward Markov Decision Processes

Yi Wan * 1 Abhishek Naik * 1 Richard S. Sutton 1 2

Abstract
We introduce learning and planning algorithms
for average-reward MDPs, including 1) the first
general proven-convergent off-policy model-free
control algorithm without reference states, 2) the
first proven-convergent off-policy model-free prediction algorithm, and 3) the first off-policy learning algorithm that converges to the actual value
function rather than to the value function plus
an offset. All of our algorithms are based on using the temporal-difference error rather than the
conventional error when updating the estimate of
the average reward. Our proof techniques are a
slight generalization of those by Abounadi, Bertsekas, and Borkar (2001). In experiments with an
Access-Control Queuing Task, we show some of
the difficulties that can arise when using methods
that rely on reference states and argue that our
new algorithms can be significantly easier to use.

1. Average-Reward Learning and Planning
The average-reward formulation of Markov decision processes (MDPs) is arguably the most important for reinforcement learning and artificial intelligence (see, e.g., Sutton
& Barto 2018 Chapter 10, Naik et al. 2019) yet has received much less attention than the episodic and discounted
formulations. In the average-reward setting, experience is
continuing (not broken up into episodes) and the agent seeks
to maximize the average reward per step, or reward rate,
with equal weight given to immediate and delayed rewards.
In addition to this control problem, there is also the prediction problem of estimating the value function and the
reward rate for a given target policy. Solution methods for
these problems can be divided into those that are driven by
experiential data, called learning algorithms, those that are
driven by a model of the MDP, called planning algorithms,
and combined methods that first learn a model and then plan
*

Equal contribution. 1 University of Alberta and Alberta
Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Canada.
2
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yi Wan <wan6@ualberta.ca>,
Abhishek Naik <abhishek.naik@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

with it. For learning and combined methods, both control
and prediction problems can be further subdivided into onpolicy versions, in which data is gathered using the target
policy, and off-policy versions, in which data is gathered
using a second policy, called the behavior policy. In general, both policies may be non-stationary. For example, in
the control problem, the target policy should converge to a
policy that maximizes the reward rate. Useful surveys of
average-reward learning are given by Mahadevan (1996)
and Dewanto et al. (2020).
On-policy problems are generally easier than off-policy
problems and permit more capable algorithms with convergence guarantees. For example, on-policy prediction
algorithms with function approximation and convergence
guarantees include average-cost TD(λ) (Tsitsiklis & Van
Roy 1999), LSTD(λ) (Konda 2002), and LSPE(λ) (Yu &
Bertsekas 2009). On-policy control algorithms that have
been proved to converge asymptotically or to achieve sublinear regret or to be probably approximately correct under
various conditions include tabular learning algorithms (e.g.,
Wheeler & Narendra 1986, Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 2019a,b),
tabular combined algorithms (e.g., Kearns & Singh 2002,
Brafman & Tennenholtz 2002, Auer & Ortner 2006, Jaksch
et al. 2010), and policy gradient algorithms (e.g., Sutton et
al. 1999, Marbach & Tsitsiklis 2001, Kakade 2001, Konda
2002).
The off-policy learning control problem is particularly challenging, and theoretical results are available only for the tabular, discrete-state setting without function approximation.
The most important prior algorithm is RVI Q-learning, introduced by Abounadi, Bertsekas, and Borkar (1998, 2001).
The same paper also introduced SSP Q-learning, but SSP
Q-learning was limited to MDPs with a special state that
is recurrent under all stationary policies, whereas RVI Qlearning is convergent for more general MDPs. Ren and
Krogh (2001) presented a tabular algorithm and proved
its convergence, but their algorithm required knowledge
of properties of the MDP which are not in general known.
Gosavi (2004) also introduced an algorithm and proved its
convergence, but it was limited in the same way as SSP
Q-learning. Yang et al. (2016) presented an algorithm and
claimed to prove its convergence, but their proof is not
correct (as we detail in Appendix D). The earliest tabular
average-reward off-policy learning control algorithms that

