Randomized Exploration for Reinforcement Learning with General Value
Function Approximation

Haque Ishfaq * 1 2 Qiwen Cui * 3 Viet Nguyen 1 2 Alex Ayoub 4 Zhuoran Yang 5 Zhaoran Wang 6
Doina Precup 1 2 7 Lin F. Yang 8

Abstract
We propose a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm inspired by the popular randomized least squares value iteration (RLSVI) algorithm as well as the optimism principle. Unlike
existing upper-confidence-bound (UCB) based
approaches, which are often computationally intractable, our algorithm drives exploration by simply perturbing the training data with judiciously
chosen i.i.d. scalar noises. To attain optimistic
value function estimation without resorting to a
UCB-style bonus, we introduce an optimistic reward sampling procedure. When the value functions can be represented by a function class F, our
algorithm achieves
√ a worst-case regret bound of
e
O(poly(dE H) T ) where T is the time elapsed,
H is the planning horizon and dE is the eluder dimension of F. In the linear setting, our algorithm
reduces to LSVI-PHE,
a variant of RLSVI, that
√
enjoys an e
O( d3 H 3 T ) regret. We complement
the theory with an empirical evaluation across
known difficult exploration tasks.

1. Introduction
The exploration-exploitation trade-off is a core problem in
reinforcement learning (RL): an agent may need to sacrifice
short-term rewards to achieve better long-term returns. A
good RL algorithm should explore efficiently and find a nearoptimal policy as quickly and robustly as possible. A big
open problem is the design of provably efficient exploration
*
Equal contribution 1 Mila 2 School of Computer Science,
McGill University 3 School of Mathematical Science, Peking University 4 Amii and Department of Computing Science, University
of Alberta 5 Department of Operations Research and Financial
Engineering, Princeton University 6 Industrial Engineering Management Sciences, Northwestern University 7 DeepMind, Montreal
8
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Haque Ishfaq
<haque.ishfaq@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

when general function approximation is used to estimate
the value function, i.e., the expectation of long-term return.
In this work, we propose an exploration strategy inspired
by the popular Randomized Least Squares Value Iteration
(RLSVI) algorithm (Osband et al., 2016b; Russo, 2019;
Zanette et al., 2020a) as well as by the optimism principle
(Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2001; Jaksch et al., 2010; Jin
et al., 2018; 2020; Wang et al., 2020), which is efficient in
both statistical and computational sense, and can be easily
plugged into common RL algorithms, including UCB-VI
(Azar et al., 2017), UCB-Q (Jin et al., 2018) and OPPO (Cai
et al., 2019).
The main exploration idea is the well-known “optimism in
the face of uncertainty (OFU)” principle, which leads to
numerous upper confidence bound (UCB)-type algorithms.
These algorithms compute statistical confidence regions for
the model or the value function, given the observed history,
and perform the greedy policy with respect to these regions,
or upper confidence bounds. However, it is costly or even intractable to compute the upper confidence bound explicitly,
especially for structured MDPs or general function approximations. For instance, in Wang et al. (2020), computing the
confidence bonus requires sophisticated sensitivity sampling
and a width function oracle. The computational cost hinders
the practical application of these UCB-type algorithms.
Another recently rediscovered exploration idea is Thompson
sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933; Osband et al., 2013). It
is motivated by the Bayesian perspective on RL, in which
we have a prior distribution over the model or the value
function; then we draw a sample from this distribution and
compute a policy based on this sample. Theoretical guarantees exist for both Bayesian regret (Russo & Van Roy, 2013)
and worst-case regret (Agrawal & Jia, 2017) for this approach. Although TS is conceptually simple, in many cases
the posterior is intractable to compute and the prior may
not exist at all. Recently, approximate TS, also known as
randomized least squares value iteration (RLSVI) or following the perturbed leader (Kveton et al., 2019), has received
significant attention due to its good empirical performance.
It has been proven that RLSVI enjoys sublinear worst-case
or frequentist regret in tabular RL, by simply adding Gaus-

