KNAS: Green Neural Architecture Search
Jingjing Xu 1 * Liang Zhao 2 Junyang Lin 3 Rundong Gao 1 Xu Sun 1 2 Hongxia Yang 3

Abstract
Many existing neural architecture search (NAS)
solutions rely on downstream training for architecture evaluation, which takes enormous computations. Considering that these computations bring
a large carbon footprint, this paper aims to explore
a green (namely environmental-friendly) NAS solution that evaluates architectures without training.
Intuitively, gradients, induced by the architecture
itself, directly decide the convergence and generalization results. It motivates us to propose the
gradient kernel hypothesis: Gradients can be used
as a coarse-grained proxy of downstream training to evaluate random-initialized networks. To
support the hypothesis, we conduct a theoretical
analysis and find a practical gradient kernel that
has good correlations with training loss and validation performance. According to this hypothesis, we propose a new kernel based architecture
search approach KNAS. Experiments show that
KNAS achieves competitive results with orders of
magnitude faster than “train-then-test” paradigms
on image classification tasks. Furthermore, the
extremely low search cost enables its wide applications. The searched network also outperforms
strong baseline RoBERTA-large on two text classification tasks. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/Jingjing-NLP/KNAS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) is a field to automatically
explore the optimal architecture (Zoph & Le, 2017; Baker
et al., 2017). The search procedure can be divided into
three components: search space, optimization approaches,
architecture evaluation. Search space defines all network
candidates that can be examined to produce the final archi*
The joint work between Peking University and Alibaba
Group. 1 MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School
of EECS, Peking University 2 Center for Data Science, Peking
University 3 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Jingjing Xu
<jingjingxu@pku.edu.cn>, Xu Sun <xusun@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tecture. The optimization method dictates how to explore
the search space. Architecture evaluation is responsible for
helping the optimization method to evaluate the quality of
architectures. Recent NAS approaches have been able to
generate state-of-the-art models on downstream tasks (Zoph
et al., 2018; Tan & Le, 2019).
However, despite good performance, NAS usually requires
huge computations to find the optimal architecture, most
of which are used for architecture evaluation. For example,
Zoph & Le (2017) use 800 GPUs for 28 days resulting in
22,400 GPU-hours. Strubell et al. (2019) find that a single
neural architecture search solution can emit as much carbon
as five cars in their lifetimes. The major recent advance
of NAS is to reduce the search costs. One research line
focuses on search methods without architecture evaluation,
like DART (Liu et al., 2019; Chu et al., 2020c). While being
simple, previous studies have shown these approaches suffer
from well-known performance collapse due to an inevitable
aggregation of skip connections (Ying et al., 2019; Chu et al.,
2020b). Another line focuses on reducing architecture evaluation costs by using techniques like early-stopping (Liang
et al., 2019), weight-sharing (Pham et al., 2018), performance predicting (Liu et al., 2018), and so on. Compared to
the original full-training solution, these techniques achieve
promising speedup. However, if we consider a complicated
search space with plenty of networks, they still require many
computations.
In this work, we aim to explore a more challenging question:
Can we evaluate architectures without training? Before
answering this question, it is essential to figure out how
architecture affects optimization. It is widely accepted that
gradients, induced by neural networks, play a crucial role in
optimization (Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Pascanu et al., 2013). Motivated by this common
belief, we propose a bold hypothesis: gradients can be used
as a coarse-grained proxy of downstream training to evaluate
randomly-initialized architectures. To support the hypothesis, we conduct a comprehensive theoretical analysis and
identify a key gradient feature, the Gram matrix of gradients
(GM). For any neural networks, the F-norm of GM decides
the upper bound of convergence rate. Higher F-norm is
expected for a higher convergence rate. Intuitively, GM
can be regarded as a health index of gradients. Each element in GM is the dot product between any two gradient

