Continuous Coordination As a Realistic Scenario for Lifelong Learning

Hadi Nekoei * 1 Akilesh Badrinaaraayanan * 1 2 Aaron Courville 1 2 3 Sarath Chandar 1 4 3

Abstract

Current deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are still highly task-specific and lack the
ability to generalize to new environments. Lifelong learning (LLL), however, aims at solving
multiple tasks sequentially by efficiently transferring and using knowledge between tasks. Despite
a surge of interest in lifelong RL in recent years,
the lack of a realistic testbed makes robust evaluation of LLL algorithms difficult. Multi-agent
RL (MARL), on the other hand, can be seen as
a natural scenario for lifelong RL due to its inherent non-stationarity, since the agents’ policies
change over time. In this work, we introduce
a multi-agent lifelong learning testbed that supports both zero-shot and few-shot settings. Our
setup is based on Hanabi — a partially-observable,
fully cooperative multi-agent game that has been
shown to be challenging for zero-shot coordination. Its large strategy space makes it a desirable
environment for lifelong RL tasks. We evaluate
several recent MARL methods, and benchmark
state-of-the-art LLL algorithms in limited memory and computation regimes to shed light on
their strengths and weaknesses. This continual
learning paradigm also provides us with a pragmatic way of going beyond centralized training
which is the most commonly used training protocol in MARL. We empirically show that the
agents trained in our setup are able to coordinate well with unseen agents, without any additional assumptions made by previous works. The
code and all pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/chandar-lab/Lifelong-Hanabi.

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair 4 École Polytechnique de Montréal. Correspondence to: Hadi Nekoei <hadinekoei94@gmail.com>, Akilesh
Badrinaaraayanan <akilesh041195@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown an immense
potential to achieve superhuman performance (Mnih et al.,
2013; Silver et al., 2018) on some narrow and well-defined
tasks. In contrast, humans can quickly and continually learn
new tasks while maintaining the skills to solve previously
learned tasks. The ability of an AI system to effectively
update new information over time is known as lifelong
learning (LLL) or continual learning, and one can postulate this as one of the fundamental ingredients of general
AI. Balancing between learning from recent experiences
while not forgetting the knowledge acquired from the past
is a well-studied problem known as the stability-plasticity
dilemma (Carpenter & Grossberg, 1987). Catastrophic forgetting is a phenomenon in which training the model with
new information obstructs previously learned knowledge.
This is a common failure case in training neural networks
to adapt to new tasks or learning from non-stationary data
streams (i.e. non-iid) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). Alleviating catastrophic-forgetting is crucial to enable real-world
applications where input distributions can shift and where
retraining on past data or from scratch is infeasible. While
lifelong learning has been identified as an important and
challenging problem decades ago (Thrun, 1998; Ring, 1998),
it has recently seen a surge of interest (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018b; 2019; Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Aljundi et al., 2018) with the success of deep learning.
Several standard benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate novel LLL approaches, mostly for supervised learning
settings such as Permuted MNIST (Goodfellow et al., 2013),
Split MNIST/CUB/CIFAR (Zenke et al., 2017; Chaudhry
et al., 2018b). One fundamental issue with using datasets
like MNIST as a source of data is the lack of resulting task
complexity especially with the large capacity of modern neural networks. Another issue with most current LLL benchmarks is that the relation between tasks cannot be quantified
easily. Consequently, most of the evaluation efforts have
focused mainly on mitigating catastrophic forgetting, while
an ideal LLL system should in addition measure forward
and backward transfer. Some recent works have shown limitations of LLL benchmarks (Antoniou et al., 2020; Roady
et al., 2020). For instance, it has been shown that after continual training, the performance of a model trained from
scratch using only samples from the episodic memory at

