Tensor Programs IV:
Feature Learning in Infinite-Width Neural Networks

Greg Yang 1 Edward J. Hu 2 3

Abstract
As its width tends to infinity, a deep neural
network’s behavior under gradient descent can
become simplified and predictable (e.g. given
by the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)), if it
is parametrized appropriately (e.g. the NTK
parametrization). However, we show that the standard and NTK parametrizations of a neural network do not admit infinite-width limits that can
learn features, which is crucial for pretraining and
transfer learning such as with BERT. We propose
simple modifications to the standard parametrization to allow for feature learning in the limit. Using the Tensor Programs technique, we derive
explicit formulas for such limits. On Word2Vec
and few-shot learning on Omniglot via MAML,
two canonical tasks that rely crucially on feature
learning, we compute these limits exactly. We
find that they outperform both NTK baselines and
finite-width networks, with the latter approaching
the infinite-width feature learning performance as
width increases. See arXiv:2011.14522 for the
full version of this paper.

1. Introduction
The study of infinite-width limits of neural networks, in
particular the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), has recently
solved many longstanding open problems on the optimization and generalization of overparametrized neural networks
(Jacot et al., 2018). However, in the NTK limit, (last
layer) features learned during pretraining are essentially
the same as those from random initialization (Corollary 3.8
and Theorem N.12); this is verified empirically in Word2Vec
in Fig. 1. As feature learning lies at the core of deep learning’s far-ranging impact so far (Brown et al., 2020b; Devlin
et al., 2019; He et al., 2016) (e.g. without feature learning,
1
Microsoft Research AI 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI 3 Work
done partly during the Microsoft AI Residency Program. Correspondence to: Greg Yang <gregyang@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. PCA of Word2Vec embeddings of top US cities and
states, for NTK, width-64, and width-∞ feature learning networks
(Definition 4.1). NTK embeddings are essentially random (thus
trivializing any “transfer” learning), while cities and states get
naturally separated in embedding space as width increases in the
feature learning regime.

transfer learning via pretraining and finetuning, such as with
BERT, is meaningless, as we will discuss in Section 3), this
insight amounts to a fatal weakness of the NTK theory as a
model of neural networks in practice.
Our Contributions We seek to capture feature learning in overparametrized networks by considering other
parametrizations and their infinite-width limits. By slightly
modifying the standard parametrization (SP), in fact, we can
enable feature learning that is maximal in a natural sense.
We describe how to compute this limit exactly (and rigorously) via the Tensor Programs technique developed in
(Yang, 2019a;b; 2020a;b). We explicitly calculate this limit
for the tasks of Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013a;b) and fewshot learning on Omniglot via MAML (Finn et al., 2017),
two standard tasks relying crucially on feature learning. On
both tasks, our proposed feature learning limit outperforms
both NTK baselines and finite-width networks, with the
latter approaching the infinite-width feature learning performance as width increases.
More generally, we classify a natural space of neural network parametrizations that generalizes standard, NTK, and
Mean Field parametrizations. We show what we call the
Dynamical Dichotomy Theorem, which roughly says any
parametrization in this space either admits feature learning
or has an infinite-width training dynamics given by kernel gradient descent, but not both. Furthermore, any such
infinite-width limit can be computed using the Tensor Programs technique.
In the main text, we describe relevent related works as
they arise, but see Appendix A for a more comprehensive
discussion of the surrounding literature.

