Scaling Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Selective Parameter Sharing

Filippos Christianos 1 Georgios Papoudakis 1 Arrasy Rahman 1 Stefano V. Albrecht 1

Abstract
Sharing parameters in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning has played an essential role in allowing algorithms to scale to a large number of
agents. Parameter sharing between agents signifcantly decreases the number of trainable parameters, shortening training times to tractable
levels, and has been linked to more effcient learning. However, having all agents share the same
parameters can also have a detrimental effect on
learning. We demonstrate the impact of parameter
sharing methods on training speed and converged
returns, establishing that when applied indiscriminately, their effectiveness is highly dependent on
the environment. We propose a novel method to
automatically identify agents which may beneft from sharing parameters by partitioning them
based on their abilities and goals. Our approach
combines the increased sample effciency of parameter sharing with the representational capacity
of multiple independent networks to reduce training time and increase fnal returns.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) aims to jointly
train multiple agents to solve a given task in a shared environment. Recent work has focused on novel techniques
for experience sharing (Christianos et al., 2020), agent modelling (Albrecht & Stone, 2018), and communication between agents (Rangwala & Williams, 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020) to address the non-stationarity and multi-agent credit
assignment problems (Papoudakis et al., 2019). A problem
that has received less attention to date is how to scale MARL
algorithms to many agents, with typical numbers in previous
works ranging between two and ten agents.
One common implementation technique to facilitate training with a larger number of agents is parameter sharing
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Filippos Christianos
<f.christianos@ed.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(e.g. (Gupta et al., 2017)) whereby agents share some or all
parameters in their policy networks. In the literature, parameter sharing is typically applied indiscriminately across
all agents, which we call naive. Naive parameter sharing
has been effective primarily due to the similar (if not identical) observation and reward functions between agents found
in many multi-agent environments. This similarity allows
agents to share representations in intermediate neural network layers. Despite the occasional effectiveness of naive
parameter sharing, it is not supported by theoretical work
and has not received much attention beyond being mentioned as an implementation detail. Indeed, naive parameter
sharing can decrease training time, but we show that it can
be detrimental to fnal convergence in many environments,
even when paired with implementation details that generally
accompany it. We observe in our experiments that when the
transition or the reward functions are distinct across agents,
hidden representations that can be shared are harder to form,
and fully-shared parameters are not effective.
These limitations, however, do not imply that parameter
sharing does not have a place in MARL. In contrast, we
believe that it is an essential tool in scaling deep MARL algorithms to large numbers of agents, provided it can be done
selectively, so as not to limit fnal performance. Therefore,
we aim to beneft from parameter sharing when possible but
also avoid potential bottlenecks. We introduce a method,
Selective Parameter Sharing (SePS)* , to automatically identify agents which may beneft from sharing parameters by
partitioning them based on their abilities and goals. This partitioning is performed by encoding each agent to an embedding space by observing their trajectories, and then applying
an unsupervised clustering algorithm to the encodings.
We can acquire an intuition of the setting this paper discusses by imagining a team of robots that must learn to run
a restaurant, fulflling both waiters and cooks’ roles. Of
course, agents belonging to the same group have to learn
similar policies and therefore shared latent representations
can signifcantly decrease learning requirements (i.e. there
is no need for each cook to learn separately how to chop ingredients). Nevertheless, waiters and cooks have almost no
common functionalities, and the representational capacity
* We provide an open-source implementation of SePS here:
https://github.com/uoe-agents/seps

