AutoSampling: Search for Effective Data Sampling Schedules

Ming Sun 1 Haoxuan Dou 1 Baopu Li 2 Lei Cui 1 Junjie Yan 1 Wanli Ouyang 3

Abstract
Data sampling acts as a pivotal role in training
deep learning models. However, an effective sampling schedule is difficult to learn due to the inherently high dimension of parameters in learning the
sampling schedule. In this paper, we propose an
AutoSampling method to automatically learn sampling schedules for model training, which consists
of the multi-exploitation step aiming for optimal
local sampling schedules and the exploration step
for the ideal sampling distribution. More specifically, we achieve sampling schedule search with
shortened exploitation cycle to provide enough
supervision. In addition, we periodically estimate
the sampling distribution from the learned sampling schedules and perturb it to search in the distribution space. The combination of two searches
allows us to learn a robust sampling schedule. We
apply our AutoSampling method to a variety of
image classification tasks illustrating the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Data sampling policies can greatly influence the performance of model training in computer vision tasks, and
therefore finding robust sampling policies can be important.
Handcrafted rules, e.g. data resampling, reweighting, and
importance sampling, promote better model performance by
adjusting the training data frequency and order (Estabrooks
et al., 2004; Weiss et al., 2007; Bengio et al., 2009; Johnson
& Guestrin, 2018; Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018; Shrivastava et al., 2016; Jesson et al., 2017). But they heavily rely
on the assumption over the dataset and cannot adapt well to
datasets with their own characteristics. To handle this issue,
learning-based methods (Li et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2017;
Fan et al., 2017) were designed to automatically reweight
or select training data utilizing meta-learning techniques or
a policy network.
1

SenseTime Research 2 Baidu USA LLC 3 The University of
Sydney. Correspondence to: Baopu Li <baopuli@baidu.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, existing learning-based sampling methods still
rely on human priors as proxies to optimize sampling policies, which may fail in practice. Such priors often include assumptions on policy network design for data selection (Fan
et al., 2017), or dataset conditions like noisiness (Li et al.,
2019; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015) or imbalance (Wang et al.,
2019). These approaches take image features, losses, importance or their representations as inputs and apply the policy
network or other learning approaches with small amount of
parameters for estimating the sampling probability. However, for example, images with similar visual features can
be redundant in training, and their losses or features fed into
the policy network are more likely to be close, causing the
same probability to be sampled for redundant samples if
we rely on aforementioned priors. Therefore, we propose
to directly optimize the sampling schedule itself so that no
prior knowledge is required for the dataset. Specifically, the
sampling schedule refers to order by which data are selected
for the entire training course. In this way, we only rely on
data themselves to determine the optimal sampling schedule
without any prior.
Directly optimizing a sampling schedule is challenging due
to its inherent high dimension. For example, for the ImageNet classification dataset (Deng et al., 2009) with around
one million samples, the dimension of parameters would
be in the same order. While popular approaches such as
deep reinforcement learning (Cubuk et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020), Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2015),
population-based training (Jaderberg et al., 2017) or simple random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) have already
been utilized to tune low-dimensional hyper-parameters like
augmentation schedules, their applications in data sampling
schedules remain unexploited. For instance, the dimension
of a data augmentation policy is generally only in dozens,
and it needs thousands of training runs (Cubuk et al., 2018)
to sample enough rewards to find an optimal augmentation
policy because high-quality rewards require many epochs of
training to obtain. As such, optimizing a sampling schedule
may require orders of magnitude more rewards than data
augmentation to gather and hence training runs, which results in prohibitively slow convergence. To overcome the
aforementioned challenge, we propose a data sampling policy search framework, named AutoSampling, to sufficiently
learn an optimal sampling schedule in a population-based

