Oblivious Sketching for Logistic Regression

Alexander Munteanu 1 Simon Omlor 2 David P. Woodruff 3

Abstract
What guarantees are possible for solving logistic
regression in one pass over a data stream? To
answer this question, we present the first data
oblivious sketch for logistic regression. Our
sketch can be computed in input sparsity time
over a turnstile data stream and reduces the
size of a d-dimensional data set from n to only
poly(µd log n) weighted points, where µ is a useful parameter which captures the complexity of
compressing the data. Solving (weighted) logistic regression on the sketch gives an O(log n)approximation to the original problem on the full
data set. We also show how to obtain an O(1)approximation with slight modifications. Our
sketches are fast, simple, easy to implement, and
our experiments demonstrate their practicality.

1. Introduction
Sketches and coresets are arguably the most promising
and widely used methods to facilitate the analysis of
massive data with provable accuracy guarantees (Phillips,
2017; Munteanu & Schwiegelshohn, 2018; Feldman, 2020).
Sketching has become a standard tool in core research areas such as data streams (Muthukrishnan, 2005) and numerical linear algebra (Mahoney, 2011; Woodruff, 2014),
and constantly paves its way into diverse areas including
computational geometry (Braverman et al., 2019; Meintrup et al., 2019), computational statistics (Geppert et al.,
2017; Munteanu, 2019), machine learning (Nelson, 2020)
and artificial intelligence (van den Brand et al., 2020; Gajjar & Musco, 2020; Molina et al., 2018). Following the
sketch-and-solve paradigm, we first apply a simple and fast
1
Authors listed in alphabetical order.
Dortmund Data
Science Center, Faculties of Statistics and Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany 2 Faculty
of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Munteanu <alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de>, Simon Omlor <simon.omlor@tu-dortmund.de>, David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

dimensionality reduction technique to compress the data
to a significantly smaller sketch of polylogarithmic size.
In a second step we feed the sketch to a standard solver
for the problem, that needs little or no modifications. The
theoretically challenging part is to prove an approximation
guarantee for the solution obtained from the sketch with
respect to the original large data set.
1.1. Related work
Deficiencies of coreset constructions. Most works on logistic regression have studied coresets as a data reduction
method. Those are small subsets of the data, often obtained by subsampling from a properly designed importance
sampling distribution (Huggins et al., 2016; Tolochinsky &
Feldman, 2018; Munteanu et al., 2018; Tukan et al., 2020;
Samadian et al., 2020). Those results often rely on regularization as a means to obtain small coresets. This changes the
sampling distribution such that they do not generally apply
to the unregularized setting that we study. The above coreset
constructions usually require random access to the data and
are thus not directly suitable for streaming computations.
Even where row-order processing is permissible, at least two
passes are required, one for calculating or approximating
the probabilities and another for subsampling and collecting
the data, since the importance sampling distributions usually depend on the data. A widely cited general scheme for
making static (or multi-pass) constructions streamable in
one pass is the merge & reduce framework (Bentley & Saxe,
1980). However, this comes at the cost of additional polylogarithmic overhead in the space requirements and also in
the update time. The latter is a severe limitation when it
comes to high velocity streams that occur for instance in
large scale physical experiments such as the large hadron
collider, where up to 100 GB/s need to be processed and
data rates are anticipated to grow quickly to several TB/s in
the near future (Rohr, 2018). While the amortized insertion
time of merge & reduce is constant for some problems, in
the worst case Θ(log n) repeated coreset constructions are
necessary for the standard construction to propagate through
the tree structure; see e.g. (Feldman et al., 2020). This poses
a prohibitive bottleneck in high velocity applications. Any
data that passes and cannot be processed in real time will be
lost forever.
Another limitation of coresets and the merge & reduce

