Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models

Alex Nichol * 1 Prafulla Dhariwal * 1

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM)
are a class of generative models which have recently been shown to produce excellent samples. We show that with a few simple modifications, DDPMs can also achieve competitive
log-likelihoods while maintaining high sample
quality. Additionally, we find that learning variances of the reverse diffusion process allows sampling with an order of magnitude fewer forward
passes with a negligible difference in sample quality, which is important for the practical deployment of these models. We additionally use precision and recall to compare how well DDPMs
and GANs cover the target distribution. Finally,
we show that the sample quality and likelihood
of these models scale smoothly with model capacity and training compute, making them easily
scalable. We release our code and pre-trained
models at https://github.com/openai/
improved-diffusion.

1. Introduction
Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) introduced diffusion probabilistic models, a class of generative models which match a
data distribution by learning to reverse a gradual, multi-step
noising process. More recently, Ho et al. (2020) showed
an equivalence between denoising diffusion probabilistic
models (DDPM) and score based generative models (Song
& Ermon, 2019; 2020), which learn a gradient of the logdensity of the data distribution using denoising score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005). It has recently been shown that this
class of models can produce high-quality images (Ho et al.,
2020; Song & Ermon, 2020; Jolicoeur-Martineau et al.,
2020) and audio (Chen et al., 2020b; Kong et al., 2020),
but it has yet to be shown that DDPMs can achieve loglikelihoods competitive with other likelihood-based models
such as autoregressive models (van den Oord et al., 2016)
*
Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Nichol <alex@openai.com>, Prafulla Dhariwal
<prafulla@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013). This raises various
questions, such as whether DDPMs are capable of capturing
all the modes of a distribution. Furthermore, while Ho et al.
(2020) showed extremely good results on the CIFAR-10
(Krizhevsky, 2009) and LSUN (Yu et al., 2015) datasets, it
is unclear how well DDPMs scale to datasets with higher diversity such as ImageNet. Finally, while Chen et al. (2020b)
found that DDPMs can efficiently generate audio using a
small number of sampling steps, it has yet to be shown that
the same is true for images.
In this paper, we show that DDPMs can achieve loglikelihoods competitive with other likelihood-based models,
even on high-diversity datasets like ImageNet. To more
tightly optimise the variational lower-bound (VLB), we
learn the reverse process variances using a simple reparameterization and a hybrid learning objective that combines the
VLB with the simplified objective from Ho et al. (2020).
We find surprisingly that, with our hybrid objective, our
models obtain better log-likelihoods than those obtained
by optimizing the log-likelihood directly, and discover that
the latter objective has much more gradient noise during
training. We show that a simple importance sampling technique reduces this noise and allows us to achieve better
log-likelihoods than with the hybrid objective.
After incorporating learned variances into our model, we
surprisingly discovered that we could sample in fewer steps
from our models with very little change in sample quality.
While DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) requires hundreds of forward passes to produce good samples, we can achieve good
samples with as few as 50 forward passes, thus speeding
up sampling for use in practical applications. In parallel to
our work, Song et al. (2020a) develops a different approach
to fast sampling, and we compare against their approach,
DDIM, in our experiments.
While likelihood is a good metric to compare against other
likelihood-based models, we also wanted to compare the
distribution coverage of these models with GANs. We use
the improved precision and recall metrics (Kynkäänniemi
et al., 2019) and discover that diffusion models achieve
much higher recall for similar FID, suggesting that they do
indeed cover a much larger portion of the target distribution.
Finally, since we expect machine learning models to con-

