Fast Margin Maximization via Dual Acceleration

Ziwei Ji 1 Nathan Srebro 2 Matus Telgarsky 1

Abstract

0.05

We present and analyze a momentum-based gradient method for training linear classifiers with
an exponentially-tailed loss (e.g., the exponential
or logistic loss), which maximizes the classification margin on separable data at a rate of e
O(1/t2 ).
This contrasts with a rate of O(1/ log(t)) for standard gradient descent, and O(1/t) for normalized
gradient descent. This momentum-based method
is derived via the convex dual of the maximummargin problem, and specifically by applying Nesterov acceleration to this dual, which manages to
result in a simple and intuitive method in the primal. This dual view can also be used to derive a
stochastic variant, which performs adaptive nonuniform sampling via the dual variables.

0.00

1. Introduction
First-order optimization methods, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and variants thereof, form the optimization backbone of deep learning, where they can find
solutions with both low training error and low test error
(Neyshabur et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2016). Motivated by
this observation of low test error, there has been extensive
work on the implicit bias of these methods: amongst those
predictors with low training error, which predictors do these
methods implicitly prefer?
For linear classifiers and linearly separable data, Soudry et al.
(2017) prove that gradient descent can not only minimize
the training error, but also maximize the margin. This could
help explain the good generalization of gradient descent,
since a larger margin could lead to better generalization
(Bartlett et al., 2017). However, gradient descent can only
maximize the margin at a slow O(1/ log(t)) rate.
It turns out that the margin can be maximized much faster
by simply normalizing the gradient: letting θt denote the
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA 2 Toyota Technical Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to:
Ziwei Ji <ziweiji2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

−0.05

margin

−0.10
−0.15
−0.20
−0.25

Alg1 / eq(1.1)
Normalized Gradient Descent
Gradient Descent
Batch Perceptron

−0.30
−0.35
−0.40

0

200

400

600

800

1000

gradient evaluations

Figure 1. Margin-maximization performance of the new
momentum-based method (cf. Algorithm 1 and eq. (1.1)), which
2
e
has a rate O(1/t
), compared with prior work discussed below.
All methods are first-order methods, and all but batch perceptron
use an exponentially-tailed smooth loss, whereas batch perceptron
applies gradient descent to the hard-margin problem directly. The
data here is linearly separable, specifically mnist digits 0 and 1.

step size and R the empirical risk with the exponential loss,
consider the normalized gradient step
wt+1 := wt − θt

∇R(wt )
.
R(wt )

Using√this normalized update,
√ margins are maximized at a
e
O(1/
t) rate with θt = 1/ t (Nacson et al., 2018), and at
a O(1/t) rate with θt = 1 (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019). A key
observation in proving such rates is that normalized gradient descent is equivalent to an entropy-regularized mirror
descent on a certain margin dual problem (cf. Section 3.1).
Contributions. In this work, we further exploit this duality relationship from prior work, and design a momentumbased algorithm with iterates given by


∇R(wt )
gt := βt gt−1 +
,
R(wt )


∇R(wt )
wt+1 := wt − θt gt +
.
R(wt )

(1.1)

