Estimating ↵-Rank from A Few Entries with Low Rank Matrix Completion
Yali Du * 1 Xue Yan * 2 Xu Chen 3 Jun Wang 1 Haifeng Zhang 2

Abstract
Multi-agent evaluation aims at the assessment of
an agent’s strategy on the basis of interaction with
others. Typically, existing methods such as ↵-rank
and its approximation still require to exhaustively
compare all pairs of joint strategies for an accurate ranking, which in practice is computationally
expensive. In this paper, we aim to reduce the
number of pairwise comparisons in recovering a
satisfying ranking for n strategies in two-player
meta-games, by exploring the fact that agents with
similar skills may achieve similar payoffs against
others. Two situations are considered: the first
one is when we can obtain the true payoffs; the
other one is when we can only access noisy payoff. Based on these formulations, we leverage
low-rank matrix completion and design two novel
algorithms for noise-free and noisy evaluations
respectively. For both of these settings, we theorize that O(nr log n) (n is the number of agents
and r is the rank of the payoff matrix) payoff entries are required to achieve sufficiently well strategy evaluation performance. Empirical results on
evaluating the strategies in three synthetic games
and twelve real world games demonstrate that
strategy evaluation from a few entries can lead to
comparable performance to algorithms with full
knowledge of the payoff matrix.

1. Introduction
Evaluation of multi-agent strategies is of vital importance
to drive the progress of learning strategies in combating
various tasks. In the multi-agent reinforcement learning
community, renowned evaluations include Elo, TrueSkill,
mElo2k, ↵-rank, (Elo, 1978; Herbrich et al., 2006; Balduzzi
*

Equal contribution 1 University College London, UK
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, GSAI, Renmin University of China. Correspondence to: Yali Du <yali.dux@gmail.com>, Haifeng Zhang
<haifeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Omidshafiei et al., 2019). The Elo and TrueSkill
both deal with ratings of agents in the pairwise competitions.
Though it is simple to implement and widely used, it is only
limited to transitive scenarios and is not suitable for games
like rock-paper-scissors of which consistent winners do
not exist. Baking in Hodge decomposition theory (Jiang
et al., 2011), Balduzzi et al. introduces multi-dimensional
elo (mElo2k) that decomposes a game into transitive and
cyclic components to tackle intransitive evaluations and
computes nash-averaging to evaluate different strategies.
↵-rank (Omidshafiei et al., 2019) is the most advanced algorithm which can both tackle intransitive evaluations and
be tractably computed in general games with more than
two players, such as Mahjong, Poker. It constructs Markov
transition matrix based on payoffs of joint strategies and
the invariant distribution of the constructed Markov chain
yields the strategy profile rankings.
Despite these advances, existing evaluating algorithms, however, need to evaluate all joint strategy profiles to obtain the
raw payoffs, before computing nash-averaging or ↵-rank.
Exhaustively comparing any pair of agents is neither feasible for real-world matches such as football matches, nor
computation-efficient for computerized agents evaluation
such as in game AI. A single Go match for two players can
take one hour to finish. It is even longer for some team-based
matches, such as football and basketball. On one hand, each
agent requires many interactions against agents (or tasks)
to obtain a confident estimate of expected winning rate (or
performance). On the other hand, exhaustive evaluation of
any joint strategy profiles further increases the burden of
computation. Rowland et al. (2019) approximates ↵-rank
from incomplete data and examines how many games are
needed for each agent pair, in order to achieve accurate evaluation of ↵-rank. Rashid et al. (2021) selects the agent pairs
whose payoff has highest expected information gain to a
belief over ↵-ranks. However, computationally this is still
expensive as all the agent pairs have to be enumerated and
compared.
In this paper, we consider the evaluation of meta-strategies
in two-player games, and we extend the approximation of
↵-rank in (Rowland et al., 2019) by removing the necessity of exhaustively comparing all agent pairs. Our study is
based on the observation that an agent’s performance is not
independent. Agents who have similar skills might perform

