Data Augmentation for Meta-Learning

Renkun Ni 1 Micah Goldblum 1 Amr Sharaf 2 Kezhi Kong 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Conventional image classifiers are trained by randomly sampling mini-batches of images. To
achieve state-of-the-art performance, practitioners
use sophisticated data augmentation schemes to
expand the amount of training data available for
sampling. In contrast, meta-learning algorithms
sample support data, query data, and tasks on
each training step. In this complex sampling scenario, data augmentation can be used not only to
expand the number of images available per class,
but also to generate entirely new classes/tasks. We
systematically dissect the meta-learning pipeline
and investigate the distinct ways in which data
augmentation can be integrated at both the image
and class levels. Our proposed meta-specific data
augmentation significantly improves the performance of meta-learners on few-shot classification
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation has become an essential part of the training pipeline for image classifiers and similar systems, as it
offers a simple and efficient way to significantly improve
performance (Cubuk et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2017). In
contrast, little work exists on data augmentation for metalearning. Existing frameworks for few-shot image classification use only horizontal flips, random crops, and color jitter
to augment images in a way that parallels augmentation
for conventional training (Bertinetto et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2019). Meanwhile, meta-learning methods have received
increasing attention as they have reached the cutting edge of
few-shot performance. While new meta-learning algorithms
emerge at a rapid rate, we show that, like image classifiers,
meta-learners can achieve significant performance boosts
through carefully chosen data augmentation strategies that
are injected into various stages of the meta-learning pipeline.
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Renkun Ni
<rn9zm@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Meta-learning frameworks use data for multiple purposes
during each gradient update, which creates the possibility for
a diverse range of data augmentations that are not possible
within the standard training pipeline. At the same time, it
is still unclear how different categories of data within the
training pipeline impact meta-learning performance. We
explore these possibilities and discover combinations of
augmentation types that improve performance over existing
methods. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• First, we break down the meta-learning pipeline and
find that each component contributes differently to
meta-learning performance: meta-learners are very sensitive to the amount of query data and number of tasks
and less sensitive to the amount of support data.
• Based on these findings, we uncover four modes of
augmentations for meta-learning that differ in where in
the training pipeline they are applied: support augmentation, query augmentation, task augmentation, and
shot augmentation.
• We test these four modes using a pool of image augmentations, and we confirm that query augmentation
is critical, while support augmentation often does not
provide performance benefits and may even degrade
accuracy in some cases.
• Finally, we combine augmentations and implement
a MaxUp strategy, which we call Meta-MaxUp, to
maximize performance. We achieve significant performance boosts for popular meta-learners on few-shot
benchmarks such as mini-ImageNet, CIFAR-FS and
Meta-Dataset.

2. Background and Related Work
2.1. The Meta-Learning Framework
Meta-learning algorithms aim to learn a network that can
easily adapt to new tasks with limited data and generalize to
unseen examples. In order to achieve this, they simulate the
adaptation and evaluation procedure during meta-training.
To simulate an N -way classification task, Ti , we sample
support data Tis and query data Tiq , so that Ti = {Tis , Tiq }.
As we will detail in the following paragraph, support will

