Improving Generalization in Meta-learning via Task Augmentation

Huaxiu Yao† 1 Long-Kai Huang 2 Linjun Zhang 3 Ying Wei 4 Li Tian 2
James Zou 1 Junzhou Huang 2 Zhenhui Li 5

Abstract
Meta-learning has proven to be a powerful
paradigm for transferring the knowledge from
previous tasks to facilitate the learning of a novel
task. Current dominant algorithms train a wellgeneralized model initialization which is adapted
to each task via the support set. The crux lies
in optimizing the generalization capability of the
initialization, which is measured by the performance of the adapted model on the query set of
each task. Unfortunately, this generalization measure, evidenced by empirical results, pushes the
initialization to overﬁt the meta-training tasks,
which signiﬁcantly impairs the generalization and
adaptation to novel tasks. To address this issue,
we actively augment a meta-training task with
“more data” when evaluating the generalization.
Concretely, we propose two task augmentation
methods, including MetaMix and Channel Shufﬂe.
MetaMix linearly combines features and labels of
samples from both the support and query sets. For
each class of samples, Channel Shufﬂe randomly
replaces a subset of their channels with the corresponding ones from a different class. Theoretical
studies show how task augmentation improves
the generalization of meta-learning. Moreover,
both MetaMix and Channel Shufﬂe outperform
state-of-the-art results by a large margin across
many datasets and are compatible with existing
meta-learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, or learning to learn (Thrun & Pratt, 1998),
empowers agents with the core aspect of intelligence–
†

Part of the work was done when H.Y. was a student at Penn
State University. H.Y. and LK.H. contribute equally. 1 Stanford
University, CA, USA 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 3 Rutgers
University, NJ, USA 4 City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
5
Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Ying Wei <yingwei@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

quickly learning a new task with as little as a few examples
by drawing upon the knowledge learned from prior tasks.
The resurgence of meta-learning recently pushes ahead with
more effective algorithms that have been deployed in areas such as computer vision (Kang et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019; Sung et al., 2018), natural language processing (Dou
et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2018; Madotto et al., 2019), and
robotics (Xie et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018). Some of the
dominant algorithms learn a transferable metric space from
previous tasks (Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016), unfortunately being only applicable to classiﬁcation problems.
Instead, gradient-based algorithms (Finn et al., 2017; 2018)
framing meta-learning as a bi-level optimization problem
are ﬂexible and general enough to be independent of problem types, which we focus on in this work.
The bi-level optimization procedure of gradient-based algorithms is illustrated in Figure 1a. In the inner-loop, the
initialization of a base model (a.k.a., base learner) globally
shared across tasks (i.e., θ0 ) is adapted to each task (e.g., φ1
for the ﬁrst task) via gradient descent over the support set
of the task. To reach the desired goal that optimizing from
this initialization leads to fast adaptation and generalization, a meta-training objective evaluating the generalization
capability of the initialization on all meta-training tasks is
optimized in the outer-loop. Speciﬁcally, the generalization
capability on each task is measured by the performance of
the adapted model on a set distinguished from the support,
namely the query set.
The learned initialization, however, is at high risk of two
forms of overﬁtting: (1) memorization overﬁtting (Yin et al.,
2020) (Figure 1b) where it solves meta-training tasks via
rote memorization and does not rely on support sets for
inner-loop adaptation and (2) learner overﬁtting (Rajendran et al., 2020) (Figure 1c) where it overﬁts to the metatraining tasks and fails to generalize to the meta-testing
tasks though support sets come into play during inner-loop
adaptation. Both types of overﬁtting hurt the generalization from meta-training to meta-testing tasks, which we
call meta-generalization in Figure 1a. Improving the metageneralization is especially challenging – standard regularizers like weight decay lose their power as they limit the
ﬂexibility of fast adaptation in the inner-loop.

