RNN with Particle Flow for Probabilistic Spatio-temporal Forecasting

Soumyasundar Pal† 1 Liheng Ma† 1 Yingxue Zhang 2 Mark Coates 1

Abstract
Spatio-temporal forecasting has numerous applications in analyzing wireless, traffic, and financial networks. Many classical statistical models
often fall short in handling the complexity and
high non-linearity present in time-series data. Recent advances in deep learning allow for better
modelling of spatial and temporal dependencies.
While most of these models focus on obtaining
accurate point forecasts, they do not characterize the prediction uncertainty. In this work, we
consider the time-series data as a random realization from a nonlinear state-space model and target
Bayesian inference of the hidden states for probabilistic forecasting. We use particle flow as the
tool for approximating the posterior distribution
of the states, as it is shown to be highly effective
in complex, high-dimensional settings. Thorough
experimentation on several real world time-series
datasets demonstrates that our approach provides
better characterization of uncertainty while maintaining comparable accuracy to the state-of-theart point forecasting methods.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal forecasting has many applications in intelligent traffic management, computational biology and
finance, wireless networks and demand forecasting. Inspired by the surge of novel learning methods for graph
structured data, many deep learning based spatio-temporal
forecasting techniques have been proposed recently (Li et al.,
2018; Bai et al., 2020). In addition to the temporal patterns
present in the data, these approaches can effectively learn
and exploit spatial relationships among the time-series using
various Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Defferrard et al.,
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Eningeering,
2
McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab, Montréal Research Center, Montréal, QC,
Canada. Correspondence to: Soumyasundar Pal <soumyasundar.pal@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
† Part of the research performed as an intern at Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab, Montréal Research Center.

2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017). Recent works establish that
graph-based spatio-temporal models outperform the graphagnostic baselines (Li et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020). In spite
of their accuracy in providing point forecasts, these models
have a serious drawback as they cannot gauge the uncertainty in their predictions. When decisions are made based
on forecasts, the availability of a confidence or prediction
interval can be vital.
There are numerous probabilistic forecasting techniques
for multivariate time-series, for example, DeepAR (Salinas
et al., 2020), DeepState (Rangapuram et al., 2018), DeepFactors (Wang et al., 2019), and the normalizing flow-based
algorithms in (Kurle et al., 2020; Rasul et al., 2021). Although these algorithms can characterize uncertainty via
confidence intervals, they are not designed to incorporate
side-knowledge provided in the form of a graph.
In this work, we model multivariate time-series as random
realizations from a nonlinear state-space model, and target
Bayesian inference of the hidden states for probabilistic forecasting. The general framework we propose can be applied
to univariate or multivariate forecasting problems, can incorporate additional covariates, can process an observed graph,
and can be combined with data-adaptive graph learning procedures. For the concrete example algorithm deployed in
experiments, we build the dynamics of the state-space model
using graph convolutional recurrent architectures. We develop an inference procedure that employs particle flow, an
alternative to particle filters, that can conduct more effective
inference for high-dimensional states.
The novel contributions in this paper are as follows:
1) we propose a graph-aware stochastic recurrent network
architecture and inference procedure that combine graph
convolutional learning, a probabilistic state-space model,
and particle flow;
2) we demonstrate via experiments on graph-based traffic
datasets that a specific instantiation of the proposed framework can provide point forecasts that are as accurate as the
state-of-the-art deep learning based spatio-temporal models.
The prediction error is also comparable to the existing deep
learning based techniques for benchmark non-graph multivariate time-series datasets;
3) we show that the proposed method provides a superior
characterization of the prediction uncertainty compared to

