Backdoor Scanning for Deep Neural Networks through K-Arm Optimization
Guangyu Shen * 1 Yingqi Liu * 1 Guanhong Tao 1 Shengwei An 1 Qiuling Xu 1 Siyuan Cheng 1 Shiqing Ma 2
Xiangyu Zhang 1

Abstract
Back-door attack poses a severe threat to deep
learning systems. It injects hidden malicious behaviors to a model such that any input stamped
with a special pattern can trigger such behaviors.
Detecting back-door is hence of pressing need.
Many existing defense techniques use optimization to generate the smallest input pattern that
forces the model to misclassify a set of benign
inputs injected with the pattern to a target label.
However, the complexity is quadratic to the number of class labels such that they can hardly handle
models with many classes. Inspired by Multi-Arm
Bandit in Reinforcement Learning, we propose a
K-Arm optimization method for backdoor detection. By iteratively and stochastically selecting
the most promising labels for optimization with
the guidance of an objective function, we substantially reduce the complexity, allowing to handle
models with many classes. Moreover, by iteratively refining the selection of labels to optimize,
it substantially mitigates the uncertainty in choosing the right labels, improving detection accuracy.
At the time of submission, the evaluation of our
method on over 4000 models in the IARPA TrojAI competition from round 1 to the latest round
4 achieves top performance on the leaderboard.
Our technique also supersedes five state-of-the-art
techniques in terms of accuracy and the scanning
time needed. The code of our work is available
at https://github.com/PurduePAML/
K-ARM_Backdoor_Optimization

1. Introduction
The semantics of a deep neural network is determined by
model parameters that are not interpretable. Trojan (back*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Guangyu Shen <shen447@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

door) attack exploits the uninterpretability and injects malicious hidden behaviors to neural networks. To activate
back-door behavior, the attacker stamps a trigger to a benign input and passes the stamped input to the trojaned
model, which then misclassifies the input to the target label.
When benign inputs are provided, the trojaned model has
comparable accuracy as the original one. The feasibility of
trojan attack has been demonstrated by many existing works.
For example, data poisoning (Gu et al., 2017) directly uses
stamped inputs in training to inject back-door. Neuron hijacking (Liu et al., 2018b) compromises a small number of
selected neurons by changing their associated weight values
through input reverse engineering and retraining. Cleanlabel attack (Shafahi et al., 2018) injects malicious features
to the target class samples instead of victim class samples,
and hence is more stealthy. More discussion can be found
in the related work section.
Realizing the prominent threat, researchers have developed
a number of defense techniques that range from detecting
malicious (stamped) inputs at runtime (Ma & Liu, 2019) to
offline model scanning for possible back-doors (Liu et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2019; Kolouri et al., 2020). The former is an on-the-fly technique and requires the presence of
malicious inputs. The latter determines if a given model
contains any backdoor. It usually assumes a small set of
benign inputs for all the classes of the model but not any
malicious inputs. Existing scanners usually consider two
types of backdoors. The first is universal backdoor that
causes misclassification (to the target label) for benign samples from any class when they are stamped with the trigger.
The second is label-specific backdoor that only causes misclassification of benign samples from a specific victim class
to the target label, when they are stamped with the trigger.
Neural Cleanse (NC) (Wang et al., 2019) uses optimization
to derive a trigger for each class and observes if there is any
trigger that is exceptionally small and hence likely injected
instead of naturally occurring feature. Artificial Brain Stimulation (ABS) (Liu et al., 2019) systematically intercepts
and changes internal neuron activation values on benign
inputs, and then observes if consistent misclassification can
be induced. If so, the corresponding neurons are considered
compromised and used to reverse engineer a trigger. More
existing techniques are discussed in the related work section.

