RNNRepair: Automatic RNN Repair via Model-based Analysis
Xiaofei Xie 1 2 Wenbo Guo 3 Lei Ma 4 5 2 Wei Le 6 Jian Wang 1 Lingjun Zhou 7 Xinyu Xing 3 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Due to their black-box nature, it is
rather challenging to interpret and properly repair these incorrect behaviors. This paper focuses
on interpreting and repairing the incorrect behaviors of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). We
propose a lightweight model-based approach (RNNRepair) to help understand and repair incorrect
behaviors of an RNN. Specifically, we build an
influence model to characterize the stateful and
statistical behaviors of an RNN over all the training data and to perform the influence analysis for
the errors. Compared with the existing techniques
on influence function, our method can efficiently
estimate the influence of existing or newly added
training samples for a given prediction at both
sample level and segmentation level. Our empirical evaluation shows that the proposed influence
model is able to extract accurate and understandable features. Based on the influence model, our
proposed technique could effectively infer the influential instances from not only an entire testing
sequence but also a segment within that sequence.
Moreover, with the sample-level and segmentlevel influence relations, RNNRepair could further remediate two types of incorrect predictions
at the sample level and segment level.

1. Introduction
In spite of many state-of-the-art applications and high test
accuracy, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) still make mistakes and output wrong predictions. To fix an incorrect
prediction, it is important to understand the root cause of
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Kyushu University, Japan 3 College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA,
USA 4 University of Alberta, Canada 5 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Canada 6 Iowa State University, USA 7 Tianjin
University, China. Correspondence to: Xiaofei Xie <xiaofei.xfxie@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the wrong prediction (Koh & Liang, 2017). Once the root
cause is identified, users may fix the errors by removing
harmful training data or adding specific data to improve
model accuracy (Hara et al., 2019). However, due to the
black-box nature of the DNN, it is challenging to identify
the “most responsible” training samples and explain the
wrong predictions. As a result, wrong predictions are difficult to be corrected. Recently, influence functions have been
widely studied for interpreting the predictions of DNNs by
estimating the effect of removing training samples (Koh &
Liang, 2017; Khanna et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2019; Hara
et al., 2019). However, using it as a method to remediate
misclassification or wrong prediction is still challenging.
First, existing influence-function based methods are mostly
designed for feed-forward neural networks (FNNs). Given
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), they usually suffer
from the vanishing gradient and long-distance dependency.
As a result, existing techniques could not be easily applied
for RNNs . Second, different from FNNs, RNNs often come
with stateful structures for processing sequential inputs (e.g.,
audio, natural language). For a sequential test input, we
need to study the effect of its segments more precisely. For
example, in automatic speech recognition, we want to identify which training samples are most responsible for the
poor recognition of a specific pronunciation (i.e., segment).
Existing methods mainly performed influence analysis for
the whole test input but not at the segment level. Third, to
use influence analysis based interpretation for repairing a
wrong prediction, one needs to select helpful samples from
a large number of collected or generated new samples. However, existing influence analysis based methods inevitably
introduce intensive computation, making the selection of
useful samples inefficient. As a result, it greatly limits their
potentiality to be used as a mechanism to repair the errors
of a model.
In this work, we propose a light-weight model-based influence analysis for RNNs, named RNNRepair1 . To capture
the stateful behaviors of training data, we first construct an
influence model from concrete prediction traces of all training data. This model extracts accurate features of inputs
from RNNs via state clustering. We then calculate the influential training samples for the segment of an input under
1

https://bitbucket.org/xiaofeixie/rnnrepair

