Megaverse: Simulating Embodied Agents at
One Million Experiences per Second

Aleksei Petrenko 1 2 Erik Wijmans 1 3 Brennan Shacklett 4 Vladlen Koltun 1

Figure 1. Megaverse is a new research platform that supports simulating embodied agents in immersive interactive 3D environments at
over 1,000,000 experiences per second on a single 8-GPU server. Video demonstrations of Megaverse scenarios and behaviors of trained
agents are available at www.megaverse.info

Abstract
We present Megaverse, a new 3D simulation
platform for reinforcement learning and embodied AI research. The efficient design of our engine enables physics-based simulation with highdimensional egocentric observations at more than
1,000,000 actions per second on a single 8-GPU
node. Megaverse is up to 70x faster than DeepMind Lab in fully-shaded 3D scenes with interactive objects. We achieve this high simulation
performance by leveraging batched simulation,
thereby taking full advantage of the massive parallelism of modern GPUs. We use Megaverse
to build a new benchmark that consists of several single-agent and multi-agent tasks covering
1
Intel Labs 2 University of Southern California 3 Georgia Institute of Technology 4 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Aleksei Petrenko <petrenko@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a variety of cognitive challenges. We evaluate
model-free RL on this benchmark to provide baselines and facilitate future research. The source
code is available at www.megaverse.info

1. Introduction
Since the advent of deep learning, progress in the field has
been driven by two factors: the availability of large amounts
of data and the ability to train big and expressive parametric models on this data. Deep reinforcement learning is no
exception: the existence of fast, efficient, and challenging
simulation environments that can generate millions of trajectories allowed researchers to quickly iterate, experiment
with learning at scale, and ultimately develop improved
models and learning algorithms.
The majority of RL environments used in contemporary
Deep RL research with high-dimensional observations are
based on repurposed game engines. For example, the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013),

