Lossless Compression of Efficient Private Local Randomizers

Vitaly Feldman 1 Kunal Talwar 1

Abstract
Locally Differentially Private (LDP) Reports are
commonly used for collection of statistics and machine learning in the federated setting. In many
cases the best known LDP algorithms require
sending prohibitively large messages from the
client device to the server (such as when constructing histograms over a large domain or learning a
high-dimensional model). Here we demonstrate
a general approach that, under standard cryptographic assumptions, compresses every efficient
LDP algorithm with negligible loss in privacy
and utility guarantees. The practical implication
of our result is that in typical applications every message can be compressed to the size of the
server’s pseudo-random generator seed. From this
general approach we derive low-communication
algorithms for the problems of frequency estimation and high-dimensional mean estimation. Our
algorithms are simpler and more accurate than
existing low-communication LDP algorithms for
these well-studied problems.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of collecting statistics and machine
learning in the setting where data is held on a large number
of user devices. The data held on devices in this federated
setting is often sensitive and thus needs to be analyzed with
privacy preserving techniques. One of the key approaches
to private federated data analysis relies on the use of locally differentially private (LDP) algorithms to ensure that
the report sent by a user’s device reveals little information
about that user’s data. Specifically, a randomized algorithm
R : X → Y is an ε-DP local randomizer if for every possible output y ∈ Y , and any two possible values of user
data x1 , x2 ∈ X, Pr[R(x1 ) = y] and Pr[R(x2 ) = y] are
within a factor of eε (where the probability is taken solely
with respect to the randomness of the algorithm R).
1

Apple.
Correspondence to:
taly.edu@gmail.com>.

Vitaly Feldman <vi-

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The concept of a local randomizer dates back to the work
of Warner (1965) where it was used to encourage truthfulness in surveys. In the context of modern data analysis it
was introduced by Evfimievski et al. (2003) and then related to differential privacy in the seminal work of Dwork
et al. (2006). Local randomizers are also used for collection of statistics and machine learning in several industrial
applications (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Apple’s Differential
Privacy Team, 2017; Ding et al., 2017). Practical applications such as building a histogram over a large domain or
training a model with millions of parameters (McMahan
et al., 2018), require applying the randomizer to high dimensional data. Many of the standard and most accurate ways
to randomize such data result in reports whose size scales
linearly with the dimension of the problem. Communication
from the user devices is often significantly constrained in
practical applications. This limits the scope of problems in
which we can achieve the best known utility-privacy tradeoff and motivates significant research interest in designing
communication-efficient LDP algorithms.
1.1

Our contribution

In this work, we explore practical and theoretical aspects
of designing low-communication LDP mechanisms. It has
long been noted that, by design, the output of an LDP randomizer contains a limited amount of information about the
input data. Thus it should be possible to reduce the communication down to the information content about the data
using standard tools from information theory. We will refer
to such reduction in communication as compression of the
LDP randomizer. To avoid confusion, we note that the goal
is not to compress the content of the original messages of
the randomizer but rather to find a different randomizer that
communicates the same information about the data point
using shorter messages.
Unfortunately, standard information-theoretic approaches
to such compression do not necessarily preserve privacy.
Bassily & Smith (2015) and Bun et al. (2019) describe general privacy preserving techniques for compressing LDP
protocols. Unfortunately, their techniques result either in
the loss of accuracy (as only a fraction of the user population ends up contributing a report) or an increase in ε by
a constant factor > 2. Increase by such a constant factor
is likely to make the algorithm impractical in the ε > 1

