Global inducing point variational posteriors for Bayesian neural networks and
deep Gaussian processes

Sebastian W. Ober 1 Laurence Aitchison 2

Abstract
We consider the optimal approximate posterior
over the top-layer weights in a Bayesian neural
network for regression, and show that it exhibits
strong dependencies on the lower-layer weights.
We adapt this result to develop a correlated approximate posterior over the weights at all layers
in a Bayesian neural network. We extend this
approach to deep Gaussian processes, unifying
inference in the two model classes. Our approximate posterior uses learned “global” inducing
points, which are defined only at the input layer
and propagated through the network to obtain inducing inputs at subsequent layers. By contrast,
standard, “local”, inducing point methods from
the deep Gaussian process literature optimise a
separate set of inducing inputs at every layer, and
thus do not model correlations across layers. Our
method gives state-of-the-art performance for a
variational Bayesian method, without data augmentation or tempering, on CIFAR-10 of 86.7%,
which is comparable to SGMCMC without tempering but with data augmentation (88% in Wenzel et al. 2020).1

1. Introduction
Deep models, formed by stacking together many simple
layers, give rise to extremely powerful machine learning
algorithms, from deep neural networks (DNNs) to deep
Gaussian processes (DGPs) (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013).
One approach to reason about uncertainty in these models
is to use variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999). VI
in Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) requires the user to
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Reference implementation at: github.com/LaurenceA/
bayesfunc

specify a family of approximate posteriors over the weights,
with the classical approach being independent Gaussian distributions over each individual weight (Hinton & Van Camp,
1993; Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015). Later work
has considered more complex approximate posteriors, for
instance using a Matrix-Normal distribution as the approximate posterior for a full weight-matrix (Louizos & Welling,
2016; Ritter et al., 2018) and hierarchical variational inference (Louizos & Welling, 2017; Dusenberry et al., 2020).
By contrast, DGPs use an approximate posterior defined
over functions – the standard approach is to specify the
inputs and outputs at a finite number of “inducing” points
(Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth,
2017).
Critically, these classical BNN and DGP approaches define approximate posteriors over functions that are independent across layers. An approximate posterior that factorises
across layers is problematic, because what matters for a
deep model is the overall input-output transformation for
the full model, not the input-output transformation for individual layers. This raises the question of what family of
approximate posteriors should be used to capture correlations across layers. One approach for BNNs would be to
introduce a flexible “hypernetwork”, used to generate the
weights (Krueger et al., 2017; Pawlowski et al., 2017). However, this approach is likely to be suboptimal as it does not
sufficiently exploit the rich structure in the underlying neural
network. For guidance, we consider the optimal approximate posterior over the top-layer units in a deep network for
regression. Remarkably, the optimal approximate posterior
for the last-layer weights given the earlier weights can be
obtained in closed form without choosing a restrictive family of distributions. In particular, the optimal approximate
posterior is given by propagating the training inputs through
lower layers to compute the top-layer representation, then
using Bayesian linear regression to map from the top-layer
representation to the outputs.
Inspired by this result, we use Bayesian linear regression to
define a generic family of approximate posteriors for BNNs.
In particular, we introduce learned “pseudo-outputs” at every layer, and compute the posterior over the weights by
performing linear regression from the inputs (propagated

