Online Learning for Load Balancing of Unknown Monotone Resource
Allocation Games
Ilai Bistritz 1 Nicholas Bambos 1
Abstract
2018; Boursier & Perchet, 2019; Mehrabian et al., 2020;
Nayyar et al., 2016; Alpcan et al., 2018; Bistritz et al.,
Consider N players that each uses a mixture of
2020; Magesh & Veeravalli, 2019; Alatur et al., 2020).
K resources. Each of the players’ reward functions includes a linear pricing term for each reIn distributed resource allocation, each user makes local
source that is controlled by the game manager.
decisions on which resources to use. Since users share the
We assume that the game is strongly monotone,
resources, the actions of one user affect the rewards of othso if each player runs gradient descent, the dyers. For example, many users accessing the same server
namics converge to a unique Nash equilibrium
cause service delay for each other. Positive network effects
(NE). Unfortunately, this NE can be inefficient
are also possible if users all want to use popular resources.
since the total load on a given resource can be
High congestion on a single resource increases the opervery high. In principle, we can control the toation costs for the manager, can lead to system failures,
tal loads by tuning the coefficients of the pricing
and incurs suboptimal performance for the users. Thereterms. However, finding pricing coefficients that
fore, load balancing is a key control objective for the manbalance the loads requires knowing the players’
ager that supervises the resource allocation protocol. For
reward functions and their action sets. Obtaindistributed resource allocation, designing an efficient load
ing this game structure information is infeasible
balancing protocol becomes far more challenging.
in a large-scale network and violates the users’
Game theory is a natural way to tackle distributed resource
privacy. To overcome this, we propose a simple
allocation (Alpcan et al., 2002; Marden & Wierman, 2013;
algorithm that learns to shift the NE of the game
Marden & Roughgarden, 2014). The game structure forto meet the total load constraints by adjusting the
malizes the effect of the interaction between users. The
pricing coefficients in an online manner. Our alplayers may be cooperative, or they may be selfishly intergorithm only requires the total load per resource
ested in maximizing their reward. In large-scale systems,
as feedback and does not need to know the reobtaining performance guarantees is challenging even with
ward functions or the action sets. We prove that
cooperative players since they have no information regardour algorithm guarantees convergence in L2 to a
ing the reward functions of their peers. A Nash equilibrium
NE that meets target total load constraints. Sim(NE) aims to predict the outcome of such a repeated inulations show the effectiveness of our approach
teraction. In monotone games (Rosen, 1965; Tatarenko &
when applied to smart grid demand-side manageKamgarpour, 2019; Mertikopoulos & Zhou, 2016), which
ment or power control in wireless networks.
are our focus here, simple distributed algorithms such as
gradient descent of players on their reward functions are
guaranteed to converge to a NE.

1. Introduction

As networks grow larger, allocating resources to users gets
more complicated. This is mainly because different users
have different preferences and requirements. Solving a
resource allocation problem in a centralized server that
knows all the parameters is infeasible for large-scale networks and also violates the users’ privacy. As a result, there
has been a surge of interest in distributed algorithms for resource allocation (Agrawal et al., 2018; Bistritz & Leshem,
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Ilai Bistritz <bistritz@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

A NE does not optimize global objectives and can lead to
poor performance. In resource allocation, this means that
there is no guarantee on the total loads on each resource
at NE. However, the manager controls the prices of the resources. By changing these prices the manager changes the
game and its NE. In principle, one can design prices that
guarantee a NE that balances the loads. However, this design requires knowing the reward functions of players and
their action sets. This would require the manager to collect
this information from the players, and then solve a largescale optimization problem. This centralized approach violates the privacy of the users and is infeasible in large-scale
networks. Even worse, the manager would need to collect

