Explainable Automated Graph Representation Learning with Hyperparameter
Importance

Xin Wang 1 Shuyi Fan 1 Kun Kuang 2 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract

Current graph representation (GR) algorithms require huge demand of human experts in hyperparameter tuning, which significantly limits their
practical applications, leading to an urge for automated graph representation without human intervention. Although automated machine learning
(AutoML) serves as a good candidate for automatic hyperparameter tuning, little literature has
been reported on automated graph presentation
learning and the only existing work employs a
black-box strategy, lacking insights into explaining the relative importance of different hyperparameters. To address this issue, we study explainable automated graph representation with hyperparameter importance in this paper. We propose
an explainable AutoML approach for graph representation (e-AutoGR) which utilizes explainable
graph features during performance estimation and
learns decorrelated importance weights for different hyperparameters in affecting the model performance through a non-linear decorrelated weighting regression. These learned importance weights
can in turn help to provide more insights in hyperparameter search procedure. We theoretically
prove the soundness of the decorrelated weighting
algorithm. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed e-AutoGR model against state-of-the-art
methods in terms of both model performance and
hyperparameter importance explainability.

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 College of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graph representation (GR) has attracted lots of research
attentions from both academia and industry, due to its wide
applications in the past decade (Tenenbaum et al., 2000;
Hamilton et al., 2017b; Zhu et al., 2020). The increasing
amount of graph data in recent years has posed great challenges for graph representation algorithms which normally
contain a large number of hyperparameters to be optimized
through careful tuning. Automated machine learning (AutoML) serves as a good candidate to reduce the human effort
necessary for model tuning through automating the process
of hyperparameter optimization and improving the performance of machine learning models (Hutter et al., 2019).
Existing AutoML models normally resort to a group of performance evaluation functions which take hyperparameters
as input to estimate the potential performance given various
configurations of hyperparameters. These evaluation functions are optimized in a black-box manner and unable to
explain the importance of each hyperparameter in affecting
the model performance. The only work applying AutoML
to graph representation (Tu et al., 2019) adopts Gaussian
Process with a predefined kernel as the covariance to estimate the hyperparameter performance, failing to explain
how each hyperparameter contributes to the estimated performance and why a certain value of each hyperparameter
is chosen for the next round of evaluation.
However, the complex relational information carried in
large-scale graphs leads to an urge for questions such as
what is the importance of each hyperparameter, how it contributes to the model performance and why one particular
value is selected for a hypeparameter in the next trial, which
serve as the key to scientific discoveries in automated graph
representation learning.
To answer these questions, we investigate explainable automated graph representation with hyperparameter importance
in this paper. Given that graphs in real world usually contain
billions of nodes and edges and the computational costs of
running graph representation algorithms on these graphs are
proportional to the number of nodes and edges, it will not
be realistic to search and optimize hyperparameters through
directly testing a graph representation algorithm on the original large-scale graph many times. Therefore, we propose

