Binary Classification from Multiple Unlabeled Datasets
via Surrogate Set Classification

Nan Lu * 1 2 Shida Lei * 1 Gang Niu 2 Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
To cope with high annotation costs, training a
classifier only from weakly supervised data has
attracted a great deal of attention these days.
Among various approaches, strengthening supervision from completely unsupervised classification is a promising direction, which typically
employs class priors as the only supervision
and trains a binary classifier from unlabeled (U)
datasets. While existing risk-consistent methods
are theoretically grounded with high flexibility,
they can learn only from two U sets. In this paper,
we propose a new approach for binary classification from m U sets for m ≥ 2. Our key idea is
to consider an auxiliary classification task called
surrogate set classification (SSC), which is aimed
at predicting from which U set each observed sample is drawn. SSC can be solved by a standard
(multi-class) classification method, and we use the
SSC solution to obtain the final binary classifier
through a certain linear-fractional transformation.
We built our method in a flexible and efficient
end-to-end deep learning framework and prove it
to be classifier-consistent. Through experiments,
we demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
method over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning with large-scale supervised training data has
shown great success on various tasks (Goodfellow et al.,
2016). However, in practice, obtaining strong supervision,
e.g., the complete ground-truth labels, for big data is very
costly due to the expensive and time-consuming manual
annotations (Zhou, 2018). Thus, it is desirable for machine
learning techniques to work with weaker forms of supervision, such as noisy labels (Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini
*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Nan Lu <lu@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>, Shida Lei <leishida@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2017; Van Rooyen & Williamson, 2018; Han et al.,
2018; 2020; Fang et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2020), partial labels (Cour et al., 2011; Ishida et al., 2017; 2019; Feng et al.,
2020; Lv et al., 2020), and pairwise comparison information
(Bao et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2021).
This paper focuses on a challenging setting which we call
Um classification: the goal is to learn a binary classifier
from m (m ≥ 2) sets of U data with different class priors, i.e., the proportion of positives in each U set. Such a
learning scheme can be conceivable in many real-world scenarios. For example, U sets with different class priors can
be naturally collected from spatial or temporal differences.
Considering morbidity rates, they can be potential patient
data collected from different areas (Croft et al., 2018). Likewise, considering approval rates, they can be unlabeled voter
data collected in different years (Newman, 2003). In such
cases, individual labels are often not available due to privacy
reasons, but the corresponding class priors of U sets, i.e.,
the morbidity rates or approval rates in the aforementioned
examples, can be obtained from related medical reports or
pre-existing census (Quadrianto et al., 2009; Ardehaly &
Culotta, 2017; Tokunaga et al., 2020), and is the unique
weak supervision that will be leveraged in this work.
Breakthroughs in Um classification research were brought
by Menon et al. (2015) and Lu et al. (2019) in proposing the
risk-consistent methods given two U sets. Recently, Scott &
Zhang (2020) extended them to incorporate multiple U sets
by two steps: firstly, pair all the U sets so that they are sufficiently different in each pair; secondly, linearly combine the
unbiased balanced risk estimators obtained from each pair.
Although this method is advantageous since it is compatible
with any model and stochastic optimizer, and is statistically
consistent, there are several issues that may limit its potential for practical use: first, the computational complexity
for the optimal pairing strategy is O(m3 ) for m U sets (Edmonds & Karp, 1972), which cannot work efficiently with
a large number of U sets; second, the optimal combination
weights are proved with strong model assumptions and thus
remaining difficult to be tuned in practice.
Now, a natural question arises: can we propose a computationally efficient method for Um classification with both
flexibility on the choice of models and optimizers and theo-

