Evaluating the Implicit Midpoint Integrator for Riemannian Manifold
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
James A. Brofos 1 Roy R. Lederman 1

Abstract
Riemannian manifold Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
is traditionally carried out using the generalized
leapfrog integrator. However, this integrator is
not the only choice and other integrators yielding valid Markov chain transition operators may
be considered. In this work, we examine the implicit midpoint integrator as an alternative to the
generalized leapfrog integrator. We discuss advantages and disadvantages of the implicit midpoint
integrator for Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, its theoretical properties, and an empirical assessment
of the critical attributes of such an integrator for
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo: energy conservation,
volume preservation, and reversibility. Empirically, we find that while leapfrog iterations are
faster, the implicit midpoint integrator has better
energy conservation, leading to higher acceptance
rates, as well as better conservation of volume
and better reversibility, arguably yielding a more
accurate sampling procedure.

1. Introduction
Riemannian manifold Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (RMHMC)
is a powerful algorithm for sampling from Bayesian posterior distributions (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011). Given
a log-posterior function L : Rm → R and a Riemannian
metric G : Rm → Rm×m (with the condition that G(q) is
positive definite for each q ∈ Rm ), RMHMC considers the
Hamiltonian dynamics corresponding to the Hamiltonian,
H(q, p) = −L(q) +

p> G−1 (q)p log det(G(q))
+
. (1)
2
2

Riemannian metrics are incorporated into HMC in order to
precondition dynamics and more efficiently explore the distribution. Irrespective of the choice of metric, the form of the
1

Figure 1. Trajectories computed by the leapfrog integrator and the
implicit midpoint integrator for a quadratic, separable Hamiltonian
H(q, p) = q > q/2 + p> p/2. Both integrators are stable but the
leapfrog integrator deviates from the level sets of the Hamiltonian
(faint blue circles) whereas every iterate of the implicit midpoint
integrator lies on the same energy level set as the previous one.

Hamiltonian in eq. (1) corresponds to a Gibbs distribution
proportional to exp(−H(q, p)) and tractable conditional
distribution p|q ∼ Normal(0, G(q)). However, the form of
this Hamiltonian is such that it cannot be written as the sum
of two functions, each a function of q or p alone; such a
Hamiltonian is called “non-separable.” The presence of a
non-separable Hamiltonian presents unique challenges for
numerical integration.
The leapfrog integrator and its variants are a ubiquitous
choice for the numerical integration of Hamiltonian mechanics for HMC; for instance see (Betancourt, 2012; Brubaker
et al., 2012; Byrne & Girolami, 2013; Girolami & Calderhead, 2011; Neal, 2010; Tripuraneni et al., 2017), among
many others. It may, therefore, not be apparent that numerical integrators other than the leapfrog method are applicable
to HMC, provided that they exhibit two properties:

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University.
Correspondence to: James A. Brofos <james.brofos@yale.edu>.

(i) The integrator has a unit Jacobian determinant so that
it preserves volume in (q, p)-space.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(ii) The integrator is symmetric under negation of the momentum variable.

