A Statistical Perspective on Distillation
Aditya Krishna Menon 1 Ankit Singh Rawat 1 Sashank J. Reddi 1 Seungyeon Kim 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a technique for improving a “student” model by replacing its one-hot
training labels with a label distribution obtained
from a “teacher” model. Despite its broad success, several basic questions — e.g., Why does
distillation help? Why do more accurate teachers
not necessarily distill better? — have received
limited formal study. In this paper, we present a
statistical perspective on distillation which sheds
light on these questions. Our core observation is
that a “Bayes teacher” providing the true classprobabilities can lower the variance of the student
objective, and thus improve performance. We
then establish a bias-variance tradeoff that quantifies the utility of teachers that approximate the
Bayes class-probabilities. This provides a formal
criterion as to what constitutes a “good” teacher,
namely, the quality of its probability estimates.
Finally, we illustrate how our statistical perspective facilitates novel applications of distillation to
bipartite ranking and multiclass retrieval.

et al., 2019). One commonly accepted intuition from Hinton
et al. (2015) is that the teacher’s soft labels provide “dark
knowledge” via weights on the “wrong” labels y 0 6= y for an
example (x, y). But what are the formal statistical benefits
of using soft over one-hot labels, and what is the “ideal”
set of soft labels? While several works have studied various aspects of distillation (Lopez-Paz et al., 2016; Phuong
& Lampert, 2019; Mobahi et al., 2020; Ji & Zhu, 2020;
Zhang & Sabuncu, 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; Hsu et al., 2021)
(cf. §2.2), precise answers to these questions remain elusive.
In this paper, we present a statistical perspective on distillation which sheds light on why it can aid performance,
explicate the statistical value of “dark knowledge”, and
provide a formal criterion as to what constitutes a “good”
teacher. Our key observation is that a teacher providing the
true (Bayes) class-probabilities can lower the variance of
the student objective, and thus improve performance. Further, teachers that reliably approximate these probabilities —
for which merely being accurate does not suffice — possess
a bias-variance tradeoff quantifying how they may improve
generalisation. Beyond providing conceptual insight, this
perspective facilitates novel applications of distillation to
problems such as bipartite ranking and multiclass retrieval.

1. Introduction

In sum, our contributions are:

Distillation is the process of using a “teacher” model to
improve the performance of a “student” model (Bucilǎ et al.,
2006; Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2015). In its simplest form, one trains the student to fit the teacher’s soft
distribution over labels, rather than one-hot training labels.
While originally devised as a means of model compression,
distillation has proven successful in improving students
with the same architecture as the teacher (Rusu et al., 2016;
Furlanello et al., 2018), and found several broader uses (Papernot et al., 2016; Yim et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019).

(i) We present a statistical view of distillation, by establishing that the student’s expected loss inherently smooths
labels with the Bayes class-probabilities (§3). We then
quantify the benefit of using these Bayes probabilities
in place of one-hot labels. This gives a statistical perspective on “dark knowledge”: for an example (x, y),
the logits on “wrong” labels y 0 6= y encode information about the underlying class distribution. This helps
the student minimise a better approximation to the true
generalisation error, which can improve performance.

Given its empirical success, it is natural to ask: why does distillation help? Answering this requires confronting a number of puzzling empirical observations, e.g., that improving
teacher accuracy can harm distillation performance (Müller
1

Google Research, New York. Correspondence to: Aditya
Krishna Menon <adityakmenon@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(ii) We quantify a bias-variance tradeoff for teachers providing an approximation to the Bayes probabilities (§4).
This gives a concrete criterion for assessing if a teacher
is “good”, i.e., the quality of its probability estimates as
estimated, e.g., by the log-loss. This does not necessarily correspond to a more accurate teacher; see Figure 1.
(iii) We illustrate how our statistical perspective facilitates
novel practical applications of distillation, e.g., to bipartite ranking and multiclass retrieval problems (§5).

