MSA Transformer
Roshan Rao 1 2 Jason Liu 3 Robert Verkuil 3 Joshua Meier 3
John F. Canny 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Tom Sercu 3 Alexander Rives 3 4

Abstract
Unsupervised protein language models trained
across millions of diverse sequences learn structure and function of proteins. Protein language
models studied to date have been trained to perform inference from individual sequences. The
longstanding approach in computational biology
has been to make inferences from a family of evolutionarily related sequences by fitting a model
to each family independently. In this work we
combine the two paradigms. We introduce a protein language model which takes as input a set
of sequences in the form of a multiple sequence
alignment. The model interleaves row and column
attention across the input sequences and is trained
with a variant of the masked language modeling
objective across many protein families. The performance of the model surpasses current state-ofthe-art unsupervised structure learning methods
by a wide margin, with far greater parameter efficiency than prior state-of-the-art protein language
models.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised models learn protein structure from patterns
in sequences. Sequence variation within a protein family conveys information about the structure of the protein
(Yanofsky et al., 1964; Altschuh et al., 1988; Göbel et al.,
1994). Since evolution is not free to choose the identity of
amino acids independently at sites that are in contact in the
folded three-dimensional structure, patterns are imprinted
onto the sequences selected by evolution. Constraints on the
structure of a protein can be inferred from patterns in related
sequences. The predominant unsupervised approach is to
fit a Markov Random Field in the form of a Potts Model to
1
UC Berkeley 2 Work performed during internship at FAIR.
Facebook AI Research 4 New York University. Code and weights
available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/
esm. Correspondence to: Roshan Rao <rmrao@berkeley.edu>,
Alexander Rives <arives@fb.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Column Attention

Untied Row Attention

Feed
Forward
LayerNorm
Column
Attention

Row Attention

Tied Row Attention

LayerNorm

Row
Attention
LayerNorm

Figure 1. Left: Sparsity structure of the attention. By constraining
attention to operate over rows and columns, computational cost
is reduced from O(M 2 L2 ) to O(LM 2 ) + O(M L2 ) where M is
the number of rows and L the number of columns in the MSA.
Middle: Untied row attention uses different attention maps for
each sequence in the MSA. Tied row attention uses a single attention map for all sequences in the MSA, thereby constraining the
contact structure. Ablation studies consider the use of both tied
and untied attention. The final model uses tied attention. Right:
A single MSA Transformer block. The depicted architecture is
from the final model, some ablations alter the ordering of row and
column attention.

a family of aligned sequences to extract a coevolutionary
signal (Lapedes et al., 1999; Thomas et al., 2008; Weigt
et al., 2009).
A new line of work explores unsupervised protein language
models (Alley et al., 2019; Rives et al., 2020; Heinzinger
et al., 2019; Rao et al., 2019). This approach fits large
neural networks with shared parameters across millions of
diverse sequences, rather than fitting a model separately
to each family of sequences. At inference time, a single
forward pass of an end-to-end model replaces the multistage pipeline, involving sequence search, alignment, and
model fitting steps, standard in bioinformatics. Recently,
promising results have shown that protein language models
learn secondary structure, long-range contacts, and function
via the unsupervised objective (Rives et al., 2020), making
them an alternative to the classical pipeline. While small and
recurrent models fall well short of state-of-the-art (Rao et al.,
2019), the internal representations of very large transformer
models are competitive with Potts models for unsupervised
structure learning (Rives et al., 2020; Rao et al., 2021).

