Learning to Generate Noise for Multi-Attack Robustness

Divyam Madaan 1 Jinwoo Shin 2 3 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3 4

Abstract
Adversarial learning has emerged as one of the
successful techniques to circumvent the susceptibility of existing methods against adversarial
perturbations. However, the majority of existing
defense methods are tailored to defend against a
single category of adversarial perturbation (e.g.
`∞ -attack). In safety-critical applications, this
makes these methods extraneous as the attacker
can adopt diverse adversaries to deceive the system. Moreover, training on multiple perturbations simultaneously significantly increases the
computational overhead during training. To address these challenges, we propose a novel metalearning framework that explicitly learns to generate noise to improve the model’s robustness
against multiple types of attacks. Its key component is Meta Noise Generator (MNG) that outputs optimal noise to stochastically perturb a
given sample, such that it helps lower the error on diverse adversarial perturbations. By utilizing samples generated by MNG, we train a
model by enforcing the label consistency across
multiple perturbations. We validate the robustness of models trained by our scheme on various
datasets and against a wide variety of perturbations, demonstrating that it significantly outperforms the baselines across multiple perturbations
with a marginal computational cost.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated enormous success
on multiple benchmark applications (Amodei et al., 2016;
Devlin et al., 2018), by achieving super-human performance
on certain tasks. However, to deploy them to safety-critical
applications (Shen et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2015; Mao et al.,
2019), we need to ensure that the model is robust as well
1

School of Computing, KAIST, South Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea 3 Graduate School of AI,
KAIST, South Korea 4 AITRICS, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Divyam Madaan <dmadaan@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

as accurate, since incorrect predictions may lead to severe
consequences. Notably, it is well-known that the existing
neural networks are highly susceptible to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013), which are carefully crafted
image perturbations that are imperceptible to humans but
derail the predictions of these otherwise accurate networks.
The emergence of adversarial examples has received significant attention in the research community, and several empirical (Madry et al., 2017; Dhillon et al., 2018; Song et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Carmon et al., 2019; Pang et al.,
2020) and certified (Wong & Kolter, 2017; Raghunathan
et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019) defense mechanisms have
been proposed to circumvent this phenomenon. However,
despite a large literature to improve upon the robustness
of neural networks, most of the existing defenses leverage
the knowledge of the adversaries and are based on the assumption of only a single type of adversarial perturbation.
Consequently, many of the proposed defenses were circumvented by stronger attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye
et al., 2018; Uesato et al., 2018; Tramer et al., 2020).
Meanwhile, several recent works (Schott et al., 2018;
Tramèr & Boneh, 2019) have demonstrated the vulnerability
of existing defense methods against multiple perturbations.
For the desired multi-attack robustness, Tramèr & Boneh
(2019); Maini et al. (2020) proposed various strategies to
aggregate multiple perturbations during training. However,
training with multiple perturbations comes at an additional
cost; it increases the training cost by a factor of four over
adversarial training, which is already an order of magnitude
more costly than standard training. This slowdown factor
hinders the research progress of robustness against multiple perturbations due to the large computation overhead
incurred during training. Some recent works reduce this
cost by reducing the complexity of generating adversarial
examples (Shafahi et al., 2019; Wong et al., 2020), however,
they are limited to `∞ adversarial training.
To address the drawbacks of existing methods, we propose
a novel training scheme, Meta Noise Generator with Adversarial Consistency (MNG-AC), which learns instancedependent noise to minimize the adversarial loss across
multiple perturbations while enforcing label consistency
between them, as illustrated in Figure 1 and explained in
details below.

