Confidence-Budget Matching for Sequential Budgeted Learning

Yonathan Efroni∗ 1 Nadav Merlis∗ 2 Aadirupa Saha 1 Shie Mannor 2 3

Abstract
A core element in decision-making under uncertainty is the feedback on the quality of the performed actions. However, in many applications,
such feedback is restricted. For example, in recommendation systems, repeatedly asking the user
to provide feedback on the quality of recommendations will annoy them. In this work, we formalize decision-making problems with querying budget, where there is a (possibly time-dependent)
hard limit on the number of reward queries allowed. Specifically, we consider multi-armed bandits, linear bandits, and reinforcement learning
problems. We start by analyzing the performance
of ‘greedy’ algorithms that query a reward whenever they can. We show that in fully stochastic
settings, doing so performs surprisingly well, but
in the presence of any adversity, this might lead to
linear regret. To overcome this issue, we propose
the Confidence-Budget Matching (CBM) principle that queries rewards when the confidence intervals are wider than the inverse square root of
the available budget. We analyze the performance
of CBM based algorithms in different settings and
show that they perform well in the presence of adversity in the contexts, initial states, and budgets.

1. Introduction
In the past few decades, there have been great advances in
the field of sequential decision making under uncertainty.
From a practical perspective, recent algorithms achieve superhuman performance in problems that had been considered unsolvable (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017). From
a theoretical perspective, algorithms with order-optimal
performance were presented to various important settings
(Garivier & Cappé, 2011; Azar et al., 2017, and others).
*

1
Equal contribution
Microsoft Research, New York
3
Technion, Israel Nvidia Research, Israel. Correspondence to:
Yonathan Efroni <jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>, Nadav Merlis
<merlis.nadav@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To solve such problems, most works share the same abstract
interaction model. At each round, an agent (i) observes some
information on the state of the environment, (ii) decides how
to act, based on previous interactions, and, (iii) observes
new feedback on the effect of its action. Finally, the environment changes its state based on the agent’s action, and the
cycle begins anew. Much effort had been devoted to study
specific instances of this abstract model, e.g., multi-armed
bandits (MABs) (Auer et al., 2002; Garivier & Cappé, 2011;
Kaufmann et al., 2012; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012), linear bandits (Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal
& Goyal, 2013; Abeille et al., 2017) and reinforcement learning (RL) settings (Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Dann
et al., 2019; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Efroni et al., 2019;
Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019; Tarbouriech et al., 2020;
Cohen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). However, there are
(still) several gaps between theory and practice that hinder
the application of these models in real-world problems.
One such evident gap is the need to act under a budget
constraint that limits the amount of feedback from the environment. That is, receiving feedback on the quality of the
agent’s actions has an inherent cost. Consider, for example, an online recommendation system. There, asking for
feedback from users negatively affects their experience, and
feedback should be requested sparingly. Another example
can be found in most large-scale RL domains, including autonomous driving. In many such cases, the reward should be
labeled manually, and the resources for doing so are limited.
Motivated by these problems, in this work, we aim to tackle
the following question:
How should an agent trade-off exploration and exploitation
when the feedback is limited by a budget?
In our efforts to answer this question, we study the effect of
time-varying observation budget in various decision-making
problems. Formally, we assume that at each round, the
agent observes a non-decreasing, possibly adversarial, budget B(t), which limits the number of queries for the reward
of the problem. We first show that when the problem is
stochastic and the budget is oblivious, greedily using any
available budget leads to good performance. However, as
soon as adversarial elements appear in the problem, or when
the budget is controlled by an adaptive adversary, such an algorithm miserably fails. To tackle this problem, we suggest

