Disentangling Syntax and Semantics in the Brain with Deep Networks

Charlotte Caucheteux 1 2 Alexandre Gramfort 1 Jean-Remi King 2 3

Inria, Saclay, France 2 Facebook AI Research, Paris,
France 3 École normale supérieure, PSL University, CNRS,
Paris, France. Correspondence to: Charlotte Caucheteux
<ccaucheteux@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Lexical Meaning
Words

ADV ADV ADJ
not very happy

Syntactic

Part of Speech

ADJ

Compositional

:(

1

Syntactic tree

:)

Within less than three years, transformers have enabled remarkable progress in natural language processing (Devlin
et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019). Pretraining these architectures on millions of texts to predict words from their
context greatly facilitates translation, text synthesis and the
retrieval of world-knowledge (Lample & Conneau, 2019;
Brown et al., 2020).

Lexical

:)

1. Introduction

Compositional
Meaning

B.

:(

The activations of language transformers like
GPT-2 have been shown to linearly map onto
brain activity during speech comprehension. However, the nature of these activations remains
largely unknown and presumably conflate distinct linguistic classes. Here, we propose a taxonomy to factorize the high-dimensional activations of language models into four combinatorial
classes: lexical, compositional, syntactic, and semantic representations. We then introduce a statistical method to decompose, through the lens
of GPT-2’s activations, the brain activity of 345
subjects recorded with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during the listening of
~4.6 hours of narrated text. The results highlight
two findings. First, compositional representations
recruit a more widespread cortical network than
lexical ones, and encompass the bilateral temporal, parietal and prefrontal cortices. Second,
contrary to previous claims, syntax and semantics
are not associated with separated modules, but,
instead, appear to share a common and distributed
neural substrate. Overall, this study introduces
a versatile framework to isolate, in the brain activity, the distributed representations of linguistic
constructs.

A.

Semantic

Abstract

Figure 1. Taxonomy A. To understand the meaning of a phrase,
one must combine the meaning of each word using the rules of
syntax. For example, the meaning of the phrase NOT VERY HAPPY
is (roughly) SAD, and can be found by recursively combining the
two adverbs and the adjective. B. Here, we aim to decompose lexical features (what relates to the word level) from the compositional
features (what relates to a combination of words) both for syntactic
representations (e.g. part-of-speech versus syntactic tree) and for
semantic representations (e.g. the set of word meaning versus the
meaning of their combination).

Interestingly, the activations of language transformers tend
to linearly map onto those of the human brain, when presented with the same sentences (Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva
& Wehbe, 2019; Abnar et al., 2019; Schrimpf et al., 2020;
Caucheteux & King, 2020; Goldstein et al., 2021). This
linear mapping suggests that, in spite of their vast learning1 and architectural differences2 , the brain and language
transformers converge to similar linguistic representations
(Caucheteux & King, 2020; Caucheteux et al., 2021).
However, the nature of these shared representations remains largely unknown. Three factors explain this gap-ofknowledge. First, linguistic theories are generally described
and interpreted in terms of combinatorial symbols (discrete
words, syntactic trees, etc). In contrast, brain and language
transformers generate high-dimensional vectors (a.k.a “distributed” representations). While these formats are formally
equivalent (Smolensky, 1990), interpreting vectorial representations in language models and in the brain is particularly
challenging.
1
The brain learns continuously from a small set of situated
sentences, whereas transformers learn from large sets of pure texts.
2
The brain is a single-stream recurrent architecture, whereas
the transformer is a multi-stream feedforward architecture.

