The Hintons in your Neural Network:
a Quantum Field Theory View of Deep Learning

Roberto Bondesan 1 Max Welling 1

Abstract
In this work we develop a quantum field theory
formalism for deep learning, where input signals
are encoded in Gaussian states, a generalization
of Gaussian processes which encode the agent’s
uncertainty about the input signal. We show how
to represent linear and non-linear layers as unitary
quantum gates, and interpret the fundamental excitations of the quantum model as particles, dubbed
“Hintons”. On top of opening a new perspective
and techniques for studying neural networks, the
quantum formulation is well suited for optical
quantum computing, and provides quantum deformations of neural networks that can be run
efficiently on those devices. Finally, we discuss
a semi-classical limit of the quantum deformed
models which is amenable to classical simulation.

1. Introduction and Contributions
Since its inception more than 10 years ago, deep learning
has achieved some stunning successes, transforming entire
fields such as speech recognition, automated translation,
computer vision and protein folding. It’s impact on industry
and the economy is so large that dedicated chips are being
developed just to process neural network workloads. A
natural question arises, what will drive the next wave of
innovation in this field?
One candidate for the next disruption in AI is quantum computing. Quantum computing is in its nascent phase with only
a modest number of qubits or qumodes (i.e. states of light)
available to perform computations. Moreover, it is not at all
clear how to map neural networks onto a quantum computer
in ways that provide clear benefits. Yet, the confluence of
deep learning and quantum computing holds promise and
deserves exploration.
1

Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V. (Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm
Technologies, Inc.). Correspondence to: Roberto Bondesan <rbondesa@qti.qualcomm.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this paper we propose a direct mapping of a deep neural network onto a optical quantum computer through the
language of quantum field theory. We consider data, e.g.
an image, as a finite sampling of an underlying continuous signal. We model this using quantum optical Gaussian
states and show that they represent a generalization of a
Gaussian process. We show how to compute the posterior
of this Quantum Gaussian Process given input data. Then
we show how both linear layers and nonlinear layers can be
represented as unitary transformations on these Gaussian
states.
Because nonlinearities map us outside of the scope of Gaussian states we discuss a number of special cases which are
tractable to simulate classically. The full architecture can
only be simulated on an optical quantum computer.
We also provide details on how to map our model onto an optical quantum computer, including quantum Gaussian state
preparation, and the implementation of linear and nonlinear
layers in terms of elementary universal gates.
While we have implemented and tested our tractable approximations we emphasize that our contribution is theoretical;
we do not expect that these tractable approximations perform better than their classical cousins. By describing deep
learning in the language of quantum field theory we pave
the way for the development of novel quantum neural network architectures in the future. We find the match between
neural networks and quantum field theory very natural indeed. And perhaps amusingly, in the process of formulating
deep learning in the language of quantum field theory we
discovered a new particle: The “Hinton” is the elementary
excitation of the quantum field from which optical quantum
neural networks are made.

2. Related Work
Several works have recently investigated quantum neural
networks as a variational quantum circuit using qubit architectures, e.g. (Farhi & Neven, 2018; Verdon et al., 2018;
Beer et al., 2019; Cong et al., 2019; Huggins et al., 2019;
Bondesan & Welling, 2020). Quantum optical neural networks similar to those described in this work have been
discussed in (Killoran et al., 2019; Steinbrecher et al., 2019;

