Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning with Function Approximation:
A Debiasing Approach

Yingjie Fei 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract

risk-seeking objective and β < 0 induces a risk-averse one.
It can also be seen that Vβ tends to the risk-neutral V as
β → 0. Risk-sensitive RL has been widely applied in behavioral modeling in neuroscience and psychology (Braun
et al., 2011; Nagengast et al., 2010; Niv et al., 2012; Shen
et al., 2014). Therefore, better designs and analyses of risksensitive RL algorithms may contribute to a better understanding of human behaviors, which further helps improve
human-oriented systems such as recommendation systems,
online marketplaces, human-computer interfaces and etc.

We study function approximation for episodic reinforcement learning with entropic risk measure.
We first propose an algorithm with linear function
approximation. Compared to existing algorithms,
which suffer from improper regularization and regression biases, this algorithm features debiasing
transformations in backward induction and regression procedures. We further propose an algorithm
with general function approximation, which is
shown to perform implicit debiasing transformations. We prove that both algorithms achieve a
sublinear regret and demonstrate a tradeoff between generality and efficiency. Our analysis provides a unified framework for function approximation in risk-sensitive reinforcement learning,
which leads to the first sub-linear regret bounds
in the setting.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning (RL) with the entropic risk measure,
a classical framework pioneered by the seminal work of
Howard & Matheson (1972). Informally, for a given risk
parameter β 6= 0, our goal is to learn a policy that maximizes
the following objective of a total reward R,
Vβ =

1
log{EeβR }.
β

(1)

Here, the expectation is taken over the policy, transitions
and possible randomness of the reward R; a formal definition is given in (2) below. The objective (1) admits the
Taylor expansion Vβ = E[R] + β2 Var(R) + O(β 2 ). Comparing it with the risk-neutral objective V = E[R] studied
in the standard RL setting, we see that β > 0 induces a
1
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA 2 Princeton
University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to:
Yingjie Fei <yf275@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, existing risk-sensitive RL algorithms suffer
serious drawbacks: they either are designed for the tabular
setting only, which do not scale to the large state-action
space of the real world, or lack finite-sample guarantees,
which makes it difficult to understand and interpret the behaviors of the algorithms in a principled way. We remedy
this unsatisfactory situation by studying algorithm design
with function approximation and regret guarantees. Function approximation enables algorithms to work efficiently
in large or even infinite state spaces, and regret quantifies
the performance of algorithms in terms of key model parameters. This is a challenging task, however, for reasons we
outline in the following.
Challenges. Most existing works on function approximation for RL with regret guarantees focus on the risk-neutral
setting and follow the paradigm of value-targeted regression. A key step of such approach is to estimate models by
least-squares regression. However, this line of works heavily exploits the linearity of risk-neutral objective V = E[R]
in both transition dynamics (implicitly captured by the expectation) and the reward R, which is not available in the
risk-sensitive objective (1). It is therefore unclear whether
this approach might apply to risk-sensitive RL given its nonlinear objective. Specifically, for linear function approximation, it is unclear what features, targets and regularization
should be used in the regression procedure, as well as how
they would lead to provable regret guarantees. Given these
complications in the linear setting, a principled algorithm
design for general function approximation appears even
more elusive.
Our contributions. In this work, we address the above

