Learning from Nested Data with Ornstein Auto-Encoders

Youngwon Choi 1 2 Sungdong Lee 1 Joong-Ho Won 1

Abstract
Many of real-world data, e.g., the VGGFace2
dataset, which is a collection of multiple portraits of individuals, come with nested structures
due to grouped observation. The Ornstein autoencoder (OAE) is an emerging framework for representation learning from nested data, based on
an optimal transport distance between random
processes. An attractive feature of OAE is its
ability to generate new variations nested within
an observational unit, whether or not the unit is
known to the model. A previously proposed algorithm for OAE, termed the random-intercept OAE
(RIOAE), showed an impressive performance in
learning nested representations, yet lacks theoretical justification. In this work, we show that
RIOAE minimizes a loose upper bound of the
employed optimal transport distance. After identifying several issues with RIOAE, we present the
product-space OAE (PSOAE) that minimizes a
tighter upper bound of the distance and achieves
orthogonality in the representation space. PSOAE
alleviates the instability of RIOAE and provides
more flexible representation of nested data. We
demonstrate the high performance of PSOAE in
the three key tasks of generative models: exemplar generation, style transfer, and new concept
generation.

1. Introduction
Many real-world data are collected in grouped observation
units. The resulting sample naturally possesses a nested
structure. For example, in the VGGFace2 dataset (Cao et al.,
2018), there are 3.31 million portraits of 9131 people, i.e.,
362.6 images for each person on average. Certainly, portraits of the same person are highly correlated. Likewise,
the images from MNIST dataset also retain correlated struc1
Department of Statistics, Seoul National University. 2 Current
affiliation: UCLA Center for Vision & Imaging Biomarkers. Correspondence to: Joong-Ho Won <wonj@stats.snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ture for each digit. In multicenter electronic health records,
patients are nested within a hospital. For such nested data,
representation learning aims to find a representation where
within-unit variation and between-unit variation are wellseparated in the representation space. It is also desirable that
the model can deal with an unknown, possibly unbounded,
total number of observational units. Similarly, it should be
considered that an unbounded number of variations can be
observed within a unit. In the VGGFace2 data, for example,
the identity of a portrait can be considered as an observational unit. The number of these units is possibly infinite,
and the available sample may not include all the units. All
of the possible variations from a unit may not be observed
either. In the MNIST data, on the other hand, the number of
observational units (digits) is finite and known. In sum, we
need a model that can adopt various nested structure.
As a concrete application of nested representation learning,
consider face unlock systems for smartphones. The training
of such a system is highly subject to data imbalance since in
addition to the initial training database, the acquired face images are based on a few snapshots of the users. Further, the
number of users in the database keeps increasing. The underlying face recognition algorithm will benefit if each user
is well-separated from others in the representation space,
and the images of these users can be augmented, including
those of virtual users.
The structure acquired from a representation learning model
can be demonstrated by sample generation. Three types
of tasks have been advocated to assess the quality of a
generative model (Zhu et al., 2017; Lake et al., 2019): 1)
exemplar generation, which generates new variations of a
given observational unit, 2) style transfer, which transfers
the variations within a given observation unit to another one,
and 3) new concept generation, which amounts to simulating
new observational units; this can be combined with tasks
1 and 2. An adequate representation for such nested data
should be a single representation that can address all three
tasks for an unbounded number of observational units and
variations.
Generative latent variable models (LVMs) such as the generative adversarial networks (GAN, Goodfellow et al., 2014),
the variational auto-encoder (VAE, Kingma & Welling,
2014), and the Wasserstein auto-encoder (WAE, Tolstikhin

