Householder Sketch for Accurate and Accelerated Least-Mean-Squares Solvers

Jyotikrishna Dass 1 Rabi Mahapatra 1

Abstract
Least-Mean-Squares (LMS) solvers comprise a
class of fundamental optimization problems such
as linear regression, and regularized regressions
such as Ridge, LASSO, and Elastic-Net. Data
summarization techniques for big data generate
summaries called coresets and sketches to speed
up model learning under streaming and distributed
settings. For example, (Maalouf et al., 2019) design a fast and accurate Caratheodory set on input
data to boost the performance of existing LMS
solvers. In retrospect, we explore classical Householder transformation as a candidate for sketching
and accurately solving LMS problems. We find it
to be a simpler, memory-efficient, and faster alternative that always existed to the above strong baseline. We also present a scalable algorithm based
on the construction of distributed Householder
sketches to solve LMS problem across multiple
worker nodes. We perform thorough empirical
analysis with large synthetic and real datasets to
evaluate the performance of Householder sketch
and compare with (Maalouf et al., 2019). Our results show Householder sketch speeds up existing
LMS solvers in the scikit-learn library up to 100x400x. Also, it is 10x-100x faster than the above
baseline with similar numerical stability. The distributed algorithm demonstrates linear scalability
with a near-negligible communication overhead.

1. Introduction
Least-Mean-Squares (LMS) solve a fundamental slice of
machine learning optimization and statistics problems that
comprise ordinary least squares linear regression (Seber &
Lee, 2012), regularized models such as ridge regression (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970), LASSO (Tibshirani, 2011), Elasticnet (Zou & Hastie, 2005). Such machine learning mod1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Jyotikrishna Dass <dass.jyotikrishna@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

els are statistically robust and easily interpretable. Hence,
they find applications in cancer research (Kidd et al., 2018),
genomics (D’Angelo et al., 2009), cryptocurrency (Panagiotidis et al., 2018), and most recently in understanding
factors of COVID-19 outbreak and its impact (Wang et al.,
2020; Lauer et al., 2020; Pandey et al., 2020). Training machine learning models on big data requires resources with
large memory, and high computational power. However, in
practical applications, data is naturally decentralized, which
calls for collaboratively training global machine learning
model across multiple sources without sharing original data
on a central server. A recent body of work aims to create
such secure multi-party computation framework for training
distributed regression models (Ben-Or et al., 1988; Sanil
et al., 2004; Gascón et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2019). In addition, efforts have to be made towards feasibility of real-time
learning at these sources with relatively smaller memory
and computing capabilities. Such distributed learning framework will also need to support streaming data batches to
update the models.
Addressing the above requirements entails reformulating the
fundamental machine learning problems and using smaller
and efficient representations of the original full data to accelerate the training time. Data summarization techniques for
big data in (Phillips, 2016; Jubran et al., 2019; Drineas et al.,
2006; Feldman et al., 2010; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2009)
generate such summaries called coresets and sketches to
solve the problems approximately. A coreset is a (weighted)
subset of data points whereas a sketch is a linear mapping
of few or all data points in the original dataset which aim to
preserve or approximate the covariance matrix. It is possible
to leverage these data summaries to speedup model learning, with data distributed across or streaming into various
locations. More recently, an award-winning work (Maalouf
et al., 2019) proposed a coreset and sketch fusion algorithm
LMS-B OOST which accurately solves and accelerates common LMS solvers for Linear, Ridge, LASSO, Elastic-Net
in scikit-learn library up to 100x.
1.1. Problem Setup
We define the Least-Mean-Squares (LMS) optimization
problem for a data set (X, y), X ∈ Rn×d , and y ∈ Rn ,
where, n  d, as minimizing the sum of squared loss
between the observed prediction xj w, and true response yi

