Learning Intra-Batch Connections for Deep Metric Learning

Jenny Seidenschwarz 1 Ismail Elezi 1 Laura Leal-Taixé 1

Abstract
The goal of metric learning is to learn a function
that maps samples to a lower-dimensional space
where similar samples lie closer than dissimilar
ones. Particularly, deep metric learning utilizes
neural networks to learn such a mapping. Most
approaches rely on losses that only take the relations between pairs or triplets of samples into
account, which either belong to the same class or
two different classes. However, these methods do
not explore the embedding space in its entirety. To
this end, we propose an approach based on message passing networks that takes all the relations
in a mini-batch into account. We refine embedding vectors by exchanging messages among all
samples in a given batch allowing the training process to be aware of its overall structure. Since not
all samples are equally important to predict a decision boundary, we use an attention mechanism
during message passing to allow samples to weigh
the importance of each neighbor accordingly. We
achieve state-of-the-art results on clustering and
image retrieval on the CUB-200-2011, Cars196,
Stanford Online Products, and In-Shop Clothes
datasets. To facilitate further research, we make
available the code and the models at https:
//github.com/dvl-tum/intra_batch.

1. Introduction
Metric learning is a widely popular technique that constructs
task-specific distance metrics by learning the similarity or
dissimilarity between samples. It is often used for object
retrieval and clustering by training a deep neural network to
learn a mapping function from the original samples into a
new, more compact, embedding space. In that embedding
space, samples coming from the same class should be closer
than samples coming from different classes.
1
Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Jenny Seidenschwarz
<j.seidenschwarz@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To learn the mapping function, current approaches utilize
siamese networks (Bromley et al., 1994), typically trained
using loss functions that measure distances between pairs
of samples of the same class (positive) or different classes
(negative). Contrastive loss (Bromley et al., 1994) minimizes the distance of the feature embeddings for a positive
pair, and maximizes their distance otherwise. Triplet loss
(Schultz & Joachims, 2003; Weinberger & Saul, 2009) takes
a triplet of images and pushes the embedding distance between an anchor and a positive sample to be smaller than
the distance between the same anchor and a negative sample
by a given margin. While the number of possible image
pairs and triplets in a dataset of size n is O(n2 ) and O(n3 ),
respectively, the vast majority of these pairs (or triplets)
are not informative and do not contribute to the loss. This
leads to slow convergence and possible overfitting when
the pairs (triplets) are not appropriately sampled. Perhaps
more worryingly, because these losses are focused on pairs
(triplets), they are unable to consider the global structure
of the dataset resulting in lower clustering and retrieval
performance. To compensate for these drawbacks, several
works resort to training tricks like intelligent sampling (Ge
et al., 2018; Manmatha et al., 2017), multi-task learning
(Zhang et al., 2016), or hard-negative mining (Schroff et al.,
2015; Xuan et al., 2020a). Recently, researchers started
exploring the global structure of the embedding space by
utilizing rank-based (Çakir et al., 2019; He et al., 2018a;
Revaud et al., 2019) or contextual classification loss functions (Çakir et al., 2019; Elezi et al., 2020; He et al., 2018a;
Revaud et al., 2019; Sohn, 2016; Song et al., 2016; Zheng
et al., 2019). The Group Loss (Elezi et al., 2020) explicitly
considers the global structure of a mini-batch and refines
class membership scores based on feature similarity. However, the global structure is captured using a handcrafted rule
instead of learning, hence its refinement procedure cannot
be adapted depending on the samples in the mini-batch.
1.1. Contributions
In this work, we propose a fully learnable module that takes
the global structure into account by refining the embedding
feature vector of each sample based on all intra-batch relations. To do so, we utilize message passing networks
(MPNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017). MPNs allow the samples
in a mini-batch to communicate with each other, and to

