Data augmentation for deep learning based
accelerated MRI reconstruction with limited data
Zalan Fabian 1 Reinhard Heckel 2 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have emerged as very successful tools for image restoration and reconstruction tasks. These networks are often trained endto-end to directly reconstruct an image from a
noisy or corrupted measurement of that image.
To achieve state-of-the-art performance, training
on large and diverse sets of images is considered
critical. However, it is often difficult and/or expensive to collect large amounts of training images.
Inspired by the success of Data Augmentation
(DA) for classification problems, in this paper,
we propose a pipeline for data augmentation for
accelerated MRI reconstruction and study its effectiveness at reducing the required training data
in a variety of settings. Our DA pipeline, MRAugment, is specifically designed to utilize the invariances present in medical imaging measurements
as naive DA strategies that neglect the physics
of the problem fail. Through extensive studies
on multiple datasets we demonstrate that in the
low-data regime DA prevents overfitting and can
match or even surpass the state of the art while
using significantly fewer training data, whereas
in the high-data regime it has diminishing returns.
Furthermore, our findings show that DA can improve the robustness of the model against various
shifts in the test distribution.

1. Introduction
In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), an extremely popular medical imaging technique, it is common to reduce the
acquisition time by subsampling the measurements, because
this reduces cost and increases accessibility of MRI to pa1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, and Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University. Correspondence to: Mahdi Soltanolkotabi <soltanol@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tients. Due to the subsampling, there are fewer equations
than unknowns, and therefore the signal is not uniquely identifiable from the measurements. To overcome this challenge
there has been a flurry of activity over the last decade aimed
at utilizing prior knowledge about the signal, in a research
area referred to as compressed sensing (Candes et al., 2006;
Donoho, 2006).
Compressed sensing methods reduce the required number
of measurements by utilizing prior knowledge about the
images during the reconstruction process, traditionally via a
convex regularization that enforces sparsity in an appropriate transformation of the image. More recently, deep learning techniques have been used to enforce much more nuanced forms of prior knowledge (see Ongie et al. (2020) and
references therein for an overview). The most successful of
these approaches aim to directly learn the inverse mapping
from the measurements to the image by training on a large
set of training data consisting of signal/measurement pairs.
This approach often enables faster reconstruction of images,
but more importantly, deep learning techniques yield significantly higher quality reconstructions. Thus, deep learning
techniques enable reconstructing a high-quality image from
fewer measurements which further reduces image acquisition times. For instance, in an accelerated MRI competition
known as fastMRI Challenge (Zbontar et al., 2018), all
the top contenders used deep learning reconstruction techniques.
Contrary to classical compressive sensing approaches, however, deep learning techniques typically rely on large sets
of training data consisting of images along with the corresponding measurement. This is also true about the use of
deep learning techniques in other areas such as computer vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP) where superb
empirical success has been observed. While large datasets
have been harvested and carefully curated in areas such as
vision and NLP, this is not feasible in many scientific applications including MRI. It is difficult and expensive to collect
the necessary datasets for a variety of reasons, including
patient confidentiality requirements, cost and time of data
acquisition, lack of medical data compatibility standards,
and the rarity of certain diseases.
A common strategy to reduce reliance on training data in

