Structured Convolutional Kernel Networks for Airline Crew Scheduling

Yassine Yaakoubi 1 2 François Soumis 1 Simon Lacoste-Julien † 2 3

Abstract
Motivated by the needs from an airline crew
scheduling application, we introduce structured
convolutional kernel networks (Struct-CKN),
which combine CKNs from Mairal et al. (2014)
in a structured prediction framework that supports constraints on the outputs. CKNs are a
particular kind of convolutional neural networks
that approximate a kernel feature map on training
data, thus combining properties of deep learning with the non-parametric flexibility of kernel
methods. Extending CKNs to structured outputs
allows us to obtain useful initial solutions on a
flight-connection dataset that can be further refined by an airline crew scheduling solver. More
specifically, we use a flight-based network modeled as a general conditional random field capable
of incorporating local constraints in the learning
process. Our experiments demonstrate that this
approach yields significant improvements for the
large-scale crew pairing problem (50,000 flights
per month) over standard approaches, reducing
the solution cost by 17% (a gain of millions of
dollars) and the cost of global constraints by 97%.

1. Introduction
Since crew costs are the second-highest spending source for
air passenger carriers, crew scheduling is of crucial importance for airlines. The crew pairing problem (CPP) searches
for a minimum-cost set of anonymous feasible pairings (rotations) from the scheduled flights, such that all flights are
covered exactly once, and all airline regulations and collective agreements are respected. The complexity of this
problem lies in the large number of possible pairings, as
the selection of pairings at minimal cost—a large integer
programming problem—cannot be performed using standard solvers. Seeking to obtain an efficient algorithm for
1

GERAD, Polytechnique Montréal, Canada 2 Mila, Canada
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal, Canada † Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Yassine Yaakoubi <YassineYaakoubi@outlook.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

large-scale monthly CPPs (up to 50,000 flights) and building on the column generation-based solver by Desaulniers
et al. (2020), Yaakoubi et al. (2020) proposed CommercialGENCOL-DCA, an improved solver starting with an aggregation, in clusters, of flights. The initial aggregation
partition permits replacing all flight-covering constraints
of flights in a cluster by a single constraint, thus allowing
the solver to cope with larger instances. Initial clusters can
either be extracted from the initial solution (Desaulniers
et al., 2020) or given separately, as in Yaakoubi et al. (2020),
where authors used convolutional neural networks (CNN)
to solve the flight-connection problem (a supervised multiclass classification problem). The objective of this problem
is to predict the next flight that a crew follows in its schedule given the previous flight. They used CNN to harness
the spatial locality (localized spatial features) and used a
similarity-based input, where neighboring factors have similar features. By passing initial clusters of flights to the
CPP solver, the reported reduction of solution cost averages
between 6.8% and 8.52%, mainly due to the reduction in
the cost of global constraints between 69.79% and 78.11%.
The cost of global constraints refers to the penalties incurred
when the workload is not fairly distributed among the bases
in proportion to the available personnel at each base.
However, a major weakness of their approach is that they
can only produce initial clusters and not an initial solution,
since they use a greedy predictor making one prediction at
a time (predicting sequentially the next flight given only the
previous flight). This prevents the predictor from incorporating constraints on the output and the produced solutions
cannot be used as initial solutions for the solver as they are
not sufficiently close to being feasible. A pairing is deemed
feasible if it satisfies safety rules and collective agreement
rules (Kasirzadeh et al., 2017); examples include minimum
connection time between two flights, minimum rest time,
and maximum number of duties in a pairing. By providing
an initial solution, we not only accelerate the optimization
process and calculate the feasibility of proposed pairings,
but we also propose clusters similar to the initial solution,
thus reducing the degree of incompatibility between current
solution and proposed pairings (Elhallaoui et al., 2010).
In this paper, we address this lack of constraint modeling,
while still enabling the use of a convolutional architecture.
For this purpose, we investigate the convolutional kernel

