Learn2Hop: Learned Optimization on Rough Landscapes
With Applications to Atomic Structural Optimization

Amil Merchant 1 2 Luke Metz 1 Sam Schoenholz 1 Ekin Dogus Cubuk 1

Abstract
Optimization of non-convex loss surfaces containing many local minima remains a critical problem
in a variety of domains, including operations research, informatics, and material design. Yet, current techniques either require extremely high iteration counts or a large number of random restarts
for good performance. In this work, we propose
adapting recent developments in meta-learning to
these many-minima problems by learning the optimization algorithm for various loss landscapes.
We focus on problems from atomic structural
optimization—ﬁnding low energy conﬁgurations
of many-atom systems—including widely studied models such as bimetallic clusters and disordered silicon. We ﬁnd that our optimizer learns a
‘hopping’ behavior which enables efﬁcient exploration and improves the rate of low energy minima
discovery. Finally, our learned optimizers show
promising generalization with efﬁciency gains
on never before seen tasks (e.g. new elements
or compositions). Code is available at https:
//learn2hop.page.link/github.

1. Introduction
Efﬁcient global optimization remains a problem of general research interest, with applications to a range of ﬁelds
including operations design (Ryoo & Sahinidis, 1995),
network analysis (Abebe & Solomatine, 1998), and bioinformatics (Liwo et al., 1999). Within the ﬁelds of chemical
physics and material design, efﬁcient global optimization
is particularly important for ﬁnding low potential energy
conﬁgurations of isolated groups of atoms (clusters) and
periodic systems (crystals); identifying low energy minima
1
Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA 2 This
work was done as part of the Google AI Residency Program
(https://research.google/careers/ai-residency/). Correspondence to:
Amil Merchant <amilmerchant@google.com>, Ekin D. Cubuk
<cubuk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the difﬁculties of global optimization on rough loss landscapes. In contrast to prior work where loss
surfaces are approximately convex, this paper focuses on global
optimization problems where minima are numerous and there is
unlikely to be a low loss path between local minima.

in these cases can yield new stable structures to be experimentally produced and tested for a wide variety of industrial
or scientiﬁc applications (Wales & Doye, 1997; Flikkema &
Bromley, 2004). However, even simple examples with a few
atoms have quite complex minima structures. Numeric approximations suggest that systems of only 147 atoms could
have 1060 distinct minima (Tsai & Jordan, 1993).
Global optimization problems can also be quite difﬁcult
when high loss barriers exist between local minima, as depicted in Figure 1.1 Despite being NP-hard in the worst case,
signiﬁcant work has been put into developing optimization
techniques for these structure prediction tasks. Nonetheless,
classical approaches to this problem continue to face a number of drawbacks including requirements of: a signiﬁcant
number of steps (Wales & Doye, 1997; Pickard & Needs,
2011), carefully selected hand-crafted features, or sensitive
dependence on learning rate schedules (Bitzek et al., 2006).
In this work, we propose adopting a new class of strategies
to these global optimization problems: learned optimization
(Bengio et al., 1992; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Metz et al.,
2018). Here, hand-designed update equations are replaced
with a learned function parameterized by a neural network
and trained via meta-optimization. While this strategy has
shown promise for training neural networks (Metz et al.,
2020) where falling into bad local minima is not a concern (Choromanska et al., 2015; Luo et al., 2018), current
techniques fail to prioritize global minimum discovery or
have not been tested on rough loss landscapes with many
unconnected local minima.
1
See Wales & Doye (1997) for examples of difﬁculties in optimizing Lennard-Jones potentials.

