Let’s Agree to Degree: Comparing Graph Convolutional Networks in the
Message-Passing Framework

Floris Geerts 1 Filip Mazowiecki 2 Guillermo A. Pérez 1 3

Abstract
We cast neural networks defined on graphs as
message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) to
study the distinguishing power of different classes
of such models. We are interested in when certain
architectures are able to tell vertices apart based
on the feature labels given as input with the graph.
We consider two variants of MPNNS: anonymous
MPNNs whose message functions depend only
on the labels of vertices involved; and degreeaware MPNNs whose message functions can additionally use information regarding the degree of
vertices. The former class covers popular graph
neural network (GNN) formalisms for which the
distinguished power is known. The latter covers
graph convolutional networks (GCNs), introduced
by Kipf and Welling, for which the distinguishing
power was unknown. We obtain lower and upper
bounds on the distinguishing power of (anonymous and degree-aware) MPNNs in terms of the
distinguishing power of the Weisfeiler-Lehman
(WL) algorithm. Our main results imply that
(i) the distinguishing power of GCNs is bounded
by the WL algorithm, but they may be one step
ahead; (ii) the WL algorithm cannot be simulated
by “plain vanilla” GCNs but the addition of a
trade-off parameter between features of the vertex
and those of its neighbours (as proposed by Kipf
and Welling) resolves this problem.

1. Introduction
A standard approach to learning tasks on graph-structured
data, such as vertex classification, edge prediction, and
graph classification, consists of the construction of a representation in some metric space of vertices and graphs that
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Antwerp, Belgium
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Germany
3
Flanders Make, Belgium. Correspondence to: Floris Geerts
<floris.geerts@uantwerpen.be>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

captures their structural information. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are currently considered the state-of-the art
approach for learning such representations. Many variants
of GNNs exist but they all follow a similar strategy. Each
vertex is initially associated with a feature vector. This is
followed by an iterative neighbourhood-aggregation scheme
where each vertex aggregates feature vectors of its neighbours, possibly combines this with its own current feature
vector, to finally obtain its new feature vector. After a number of iterations, each vertex is then represented by the
resulting feature vector. We refer to Zhou et al. (2018) and
Wu et al. (2019b) for extensive surveys on GNNs.
The adequacy of GNNs for graph learning tasks is directly
related to their distinguishing power which refers to the ability of GNNs to distinguish vertices and graphs in terms of
the computed representation. That is, when two vertices are
represented by the same feature vector, they are considered
the same with regards to any subsequent feature-based task.
Only recently a study of the distinguishing power of GNN
variants has been initiated. In Xu et al. (2019) and Morris
et al. (2019) the distinguishing power of GNNs is linked
to that of the classical Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) algorithm.
The WL algorithm starts from an initial vertex colouring of
the graph. Then, similarly as GNNs, the WL algorithm recursively aggregates the colouring of neighbouring vertices.
In each iterative step, a vertex colouring is obtained that
refines the previous one. The WL algorithm stops when no
further refinement is obtained. The distinguishing power of
the WL algorithm is well understood (Arvind et al., 2017).
More precisely, in Xu et al. (2019) and Morris et al. (2019)
it is shown that for any input graph if vertices can be distinguished by a GNN then they can be distinguished by the
WL algorithm. Conversely, Graph Isomorphism Networks
(GINs) were proposed in Xu et al. (2019) that can match the
distinguishing power of the WL algorithm, on any graph.
The construction of GINs relies on multi-layer perceptrons
and their ability to approximate arbitrary functions. Morris
et al. (2019) show that the distinguishing power of the WL
algorithm can also be matched using the simpler GraphSAGE architecture (Hamilton et al., 2017), provided that
the input graph is fixed. We refer to Sato (2020) for a survey
on the expressive power of GNNs.

