Inference for Network Regression Models with Community Structure

Mengjie Pan 1 Tyler H. McCormick 2 Bailey K. Fosdick 3

Abstract
Network regression models, where the outcome
comprises the valued edge in a network and the
predictors are actor or dyad-level covariates, are
used extensively in the social and biological sciences. Valid inference relies on accurately modeling the residual dependencies among the relations.
Frequently homogeneity assumptions are placed
on the errors which are commonly incorrect and
ignore critical, natural clustering of the actors. In
this work, we present a novel regression modeling framework that models the errors as resulting
from a community-based dependence structure
and exploits the subsequent exchangeability properties of the error distribution to obtain parsimonious standard errors for regression parameters.

1. Introduction
Researchers are often interested in how relations between
pairs of actors are related to observable covariates, such
as demographic, sociological and geographic factors. For
example, Ward & Hoff (2007) examine political and institutional effects on international trade and find that the
domestic political framework of the exporter and importer
are important factors of the trade; Aker (2010) explores the
impact of mobile phones on the price difference of grain
between a pair of markets and find that the introduction of
mobile phone service explains a reduction in grain price
dispersion; Fafchamps & Gubert (2007) explore the role
of geographic proximity on risk sharing among agriculture
workers in the Philippines and find that intra-village mutual
insurance links are largely determined by social and geographical proximity, potentially since personal/geographical
closeness facilitates enforcement.
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook, Seattle, Washington, USA
Department of Statistics and Department of Sociology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 3 Department of
Statistics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Correspondence to: Mengjie Pan < panmj0221@gmail.com>,
Tyler H. McCormick <tylermc@uw.edu>, Bailey Fosdick <bailey.fosdick@colostate.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this work, we focus on a case where continuous relations
between pairs of actors are modeled as a linear function
of observable covariates. Continuous, pairwise relations
can be represented as a network with directed, weighted
edges. We assume a set of observed covariates for the actors and dyads (ordered actor pairs) and wish to study the
association between the relational response and covariates.
Efficient inference for the effect of the covariates on the
relations requires accurate modeling of the dependence between the regression errors. Our main contribution is a novel
non-parametric block-exchangeability assumption on the
covariance structure of the error vector suitable for when
there is excess hidden block variation in the network beyond
that accounted for by the covariates. When the underlying
error structure of data satisfies the model assumptions, we
show that our inference procedures have correct confidence
interval coverage. We present algorithms to both estimate
the latent block structure and estimate the corresponding
standard errors of the regression coefficients. Our goal in the
paper is to provide a new approach to model and estimate
the dependence between residual relations, which bridges
the gap between the existing non-parametric estimators.
Let n be the observed number of individuals, yij be the
directed relational response from actor i to actor j, and
X ij = [1, X1,ij , · · ·, X(p−1),ij ]T be a (p × 1) vector of
covariates. We assume there is no relation from an actor i
to itself. The regression model can be expressed
yij = β T X ij + ξij , i, j ∈ {1, ..., n}, i 6= j.

(1)

We model the error vector Ξ = [ξ21 , ξ31 , · · ·, ξn1 , · · ·, ξ1n , · ·
·, ξ(n−1)n ]T ∼ N (0, Ω), where Ω = Var(Ξ) is a n(n − 1)
by n(n − 1) symmetric matrix. For example, if we are
interested in how geographical and demographic factors
affect number of mobile calls between actors,, then yij is
the number of mobile calls from actor i to actor j and Xij
may include the actors’ geographical distances and their
mobile plans. Making inference on β then provides insights
into how a change in geographical distance or mobile plans
is associated with a change in the number of mobile calls.
In order to get accurate estimation of the standard error of
β and thus a confidence interval with the correct coverage,
we need to pose assumptions on the error structure that
is satisfied by the data. The challenge in modeling Ω =
Var(Ξ) is that ξij and ξkl are likely correlated whenever the

