Addressing Catastrophic Forgetting in Few-Shot Problems

Pauching Yap 1 Hippolyt Ritter 1 David Barber 1 2

Abstract
Neural networks are known to suffer from catastrophic forgetting when trained on sequential
datasets. While there have been numerous attempts to solve this problem in large-scale supervised classification, little has been done to overcome catastrophic forgetting in few-shot classification problems. We demonstrate that the popular gradient-based model-agnostic meta-learning
algorithm (MAML) indeed suffers from catastrophic forgetting and introduce a Bayesian online
meta-learning framework that tackles this problem. Our framework utilises Bayesian online
learning and meta-learning along with Laplace
approximation and variational inference to overcome catastrophic forgetting in few-shot classification problems. The experimental evaluations
demonstrate that our framework can effectively
achieve this goal in comparison with various baselines. As an additional utility, we also demonstrate empirically that our framework is capable
of meta-learning on sequentially arriving few-shot
tasks from a stationary task distribution.

classes is called the meta-training stage, and the evaluation
process that reports the few-shot performance on the novel
classes is known as the meta-evaluation stage.
Despite being a promising solution to few-shot classification problems, meta-learning methods suffer from a
limitation where a meta-learned model loses its few-shot
classification ability on previous datasets as new ones arrive subsequently for meta-training. Some popular examples of the few-shot classification datasets are Omniglot
(Lake et al., 2011), CIFAR-FS (Bertinetto et al., 2019) and
miniImageNet (Vinyals et al., 2016). A meta-learned model
is restricted to perform few-shot classification on a specific
dataset, in the sense that the base and novel classes have to
originate from the same dataset distribution. The current
practice to few-shot classify the novel classes from different
datasets is to meta-learn a model for each dataset separately
(Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Bertinetto et al.,
2019). This paper considers meta-learning a single model
for few-shot classification on multiple datasets with evident
distributional shift that arrive sequentially for meta-training.
Figure 1 gives an example of the sequential few-shot classification setting of concern.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification (Miller et al., 2000; Li et al., 2004;
Lake et al., 2011) focuses on learning to adapt to unseen
classes (known as novel classes) with very few labelled
examples from each class. Recent works show that metalearning provides promising approaches to few-shot classification problems (Santoro et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017;
Ravi & Larochelle, 2017). Meta-learning or learning-tolearn (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998) takes the
learning process a level deeper – instead of learning from
the labelled examples in the training classes (known as base
classes), meta-learning learns the example-learning process.
The training process in meta-learning that utilises the base
1

Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Pauching Yap
<p.yap@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example of the sequential few-shot classification
problems with evident dataset distributional shift:
Omniglot → CIFAR-FS → miniImageNet.

We introduce a recursive framework to train a model that
is applicable to a broader scope of few-shot classification
datasets by overcoming catastrophic forgetting. Bayesian
online learning (BOL) (Opper, 1998) provides a principled framework for the posterior of the model parameters, while model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn
et al., 2017) finds a good model parameter initialisation
(called meta-parameters) that can quickly few-shot adapt
to novel classes. Our framework incorporates BOL and
meta-learning to give a recursive formula for the posterior of
the meta-parameters as new few-shot datasets arrive. Taking
a MAP estimate in implementation leads to Laplace approx-

