Path Planning using Neural A* Search

Ryo Yonetani * 1 Tatsunori Taniai * 1 Mohammadamin Barekatain 1 2 Mai Nishimura 1 Asako Kanezaki 3

Abstract
We present Neural A*, a novel data-driven search
method for path planning problems. Despite the
recent increasing attention to data-driven path
planning, machine learning approaches to searchbased planning are still challenging due to the
discrete nature of search algorithms. In this work,
we reformulate a canonical A* search algorithm
to be differentiable and couple it with a convolutional encoder to form an end-to-end trainable
neural network planner. Neural A* solves a path
planning problem by encoding a problem instance
to a guidance map and then performing the differentiable A* search with the guidance map. By
learning to match the search results with groundtruth paths provided by experts, Neural A* can
produce a path consistent with the ground truth
accurately and efficiently. Our extensive experiments confirmed that Neural A* outperformed
state-of-the-art data-driven planners in terms of
the search optimality and efficiency trade-off. Furthermore, Neural A* successfully predicted realistic human trajectories by directly performing
search-based planning on natural image inputs1 .

1. Introduction
Path planning refers to the problem of finding a valid lowcost path from start to goal points in an environmental map.
Search-based planning, including the popular A* search
(Hart et al., 1968), is a common approach to path planning problems and has been used in a wide range of applications such as autonomous vehicle navigation (Paden
et al., 2016), robot arm manipulation (Smith et al., 2012),
and game AI (Abd Algfoor et al., 2015). Compared to
other planning approaches such as sampling-based plan*

Equal contribution 1 OMRON SINIC X, Tokyo, Japan
Now at DeepMind, London, UK. 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ryo Yonetani
<ryo.yonetani@sinicx.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Project page: https://omron-sinicx.github.io/
neural-astar/.

(a) Input

A*

Neural A*

Human trajectory

Neural A*

Goal

Start

(b) Input

Figure 1. Two Scenarios of Path Planning with Neural A*.
(a) Point-to-point shortest path search: finding a near-optimal
path (red) with fewer node explorations (green) for an input map.
(b) Path planning on raw image inputs: accurately predicting a
human trajectory (red) on a natural image.

ning (González et al., 2015) and reactive planning (Tamar
et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018), search-based planning is guaranteed to find a solution path, if one exists, by incrementally
and extensively exploring the map.
Learning how to plan from expert demonstrations is gathering attention as promising extensions to classical path
planners. Recent work has demonstrated major advantages of such data-driven path planning in two scenarios:
(1) finding near-optimal paths more efficiently than classical heuristic planners in point-to-point shortest path search
problems (Choudhury et al., 2018; Qureshi et al., 2019;
Takahashi et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Ichter et al., 2020)
and (2) enabling path planning on raw image inputs (Tamar
et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018; Ichter & Pavone, 2019; Vlastelica et al., 2020), which is hard for classical planners unless
semantic pixel-wise labeling of the environment is given.
In this study, we address both of these separately studied
scenarios in a principled fashion, as highlighted in Fig. 1.
In contrast to most of the existing data-driven methods that
extend either sampling-based or reactive planning, we pursue a search-based approach to data-driven planning with
the intrinsic advantage of guaranteed planning success.
Studies in this direction so far are largely limited due to

