A Bit More Bayesian: Domain-Invariant Learning with Uncertainty

Zehao Xiao 1 * Jiayi Shen 1 * Xiantong Zhen 1 2 Ling Shao 2 Cees G. M. Snoek 1

Abstract
Domain generalization is challenging due to the
domain shift and the uncertainty caused by the
inaccessibility of target domain data. In this paper, we address both challenges with a probabilistic framework based on variational Bayesian inference, by incorporating uncertainty into neural network weights. We couple domain invariance in a probabilistic formula with the variational Bayesian inference. This enables us to explore domain-invariant learning in a principled
way. Specifically, we derive domain-invariant representations and classifiers, which are jointly established in a two-layer Bayesian neural network.
We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposal on four widely used cross-domain
visual recognition benchmarks. Ablation studies
validate the synergistic benefits of our Bayesian
treatment when jointly learning domain-invariant
representations and classifiers for domain generalization. Further, our method consistently delivers
state-of-the-art mean accuracy on all benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Learning to improve the generalization of deep neural networks to data out of their training distribution remains a
fundamental yet challenging problem for machine learning
(Wang et al., 2018; Bengio et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2020).
Domain generalization (Muandet et al., 2013) aims to train
a model on several source domains and have it generalize
well to unseen target domains. The main challenge stems
from the large shift of distributions between the source and
target domains, which is further complicated by the prediction uncertainty (Malinin & Gales, 2018) introduced by
the inaccessibility to data from the target domains during
training. Established approaches learn domain-invariant
features by dedicated loss functions (Muandet et al., 2013;
*

Equal contribution 1 AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
UAE. Correspondence to: Z. Xiao <z.xiao@uva.nl>, X. Zhen
<x.zhen@uva.l>, C. Snoek <C.G.M.Snoek@uva.nl>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Li et al., 2018a) or specific architectures (Li et al., 2017;
D’Innocente & Caputo, 2018). The state-of-the-art relies
on advanced deep neural network backbones, known to degenerate when the test samples are out of the training data
distribution (Nguyen et al., 2015; Ilse et al., 2019), due to
their poorly calibrated behavior (Guo et al., 2017; Kristiadi
et al., 2020).
Domain generalization is susceptible to uncertainty as the
domain shift from the source to the target domain is unknown a priori. Hence, uncertainty should be taken into
account during domain-invariant learning. As deep neural
networks are commonly trained by maximum likelihood
estimation, they fail to effectively capture model uncertainty.
This tends to make the models overconfident in their predictions, especially on out-of-distribution data (Daxberger
& Hernández-Lobato, 2019). As a possible solution, approximate Bayesian inference offers a natural framework
to represent prediction uncertainty (Kristiadi et al., 2020;
MacKay, 1992). It possesses better generalizability to outof-distribution examples (Louizos & Welling, 2017) and provides an elegant formulation to transfer knowledge across
different datasets (Nguyen et al., 2018). Moreover, the prediction uncertainty can be improved, even when Bayesian
approximation is only applied to the last network layer (Kristiadi et al., 2020; Atanov et al., 2019). These properties
make it appealing to introduce Bayesian learning into the
challenging and, as of yet, unexplored scenario of domain
generalization.
In this paper, we address domain generalization under
a probabilistic framework1 . To better explore domaininvariant learning, we introduce weight uncertainty to the
model by leveraging variational Bayesian inference. To
this end, we introduce the principle of domain invariance
in a probabilistic formulation and incorporate it into the
variational Bayesian inference framework. This enables
us to explore domain invariance in a principled way to
achieve domain-invariant feature representations and classifiers jointly. To better handle the domain shifts between seen
and unseen domains, we explore our method under the metalearning framework (Du et al., 2020; Balaji et al., 2018; Li
& Malik, 2017). The meta-learning setting is utilized to
1

Source code is publicly available at https://github.
com/zzzx1224/A-Bit-More-Bayesian.git.

