Exponential Lower Bounds for Batch Reinforcement Learning:
Batch RL can be Exponentially Harder than Online RL
Andrea Zanette 1

Abstract
Several practical applications of reinforcement
learning involve an agent learning from past data
without the possibility of further exploration. Often these applications require us to 1) identify a
near optimal policy or to 2) estimate the value
of a target policy. For both tasks we derive exponential information-theoretic lower bounds in
discounted infinite horizon MDPs with a linear
function representation for the action value function even if 1) realizability holds, 2) the batch
algorithm observes the exact reward and transition functions, and 3) the batch algorithm is given
the best a priori data distribution for the problem
class. Our work introduces a new ‘oracle + batch
algorithm’ framework to prove lower bounds that
hold for every distribution. The work shows an
exponential separation between batch and online
reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
While the grand goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to
design fully autonomous agents capable of improving their
performance over time by learning from past mistakes, oftentimes a batch approach — which predicts some quantity
of interest using past observations only — is preferable.
For example, past data may be available in large quantities and should not be disregarded by adopting a purely
online method. In other applications, safety concerns require that the dataset be collected by a carefully monitored
procedure, involving a human or a safe controller. In addition, batch algorithms are key tools to build complex online
procedures.
These considerations motivate us to investigate whether
there exists any fundamental limitation to using a batch approach for RL compared to online learning. Concretely,
1
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Andrea
Zanette <zanette@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

we consider two classical batch RL problems: 1) the offpolicy evaluation (OPE) problem, where the batch algorithm needs to predict the performance of a target policy
and 2) the best policy identification (BPI) problem, where
the batch algorithm needs to identify a near optimal policy.
Linear function approximation As many applications
of RL require very large state and action spaces, the hope
is that by leveraging strong prior knowledge, for example
on the form of the optimal solution, we can learn the critical
features of a Markov decision process (MDP) to solve the
task at hand without probing the full state-action space. For
the OPE problem, we assume that the action-value function
Qπ of the target policy π can be written at any state action
pair (s, a) as an inner product φ(s, a)⊤ θ between a known
feature extractor φ and an unknown parameter θ that the
learner seeks to identify. For the BPI problem, this representation condition applies to the action-value function Q"
of an optimal policy.
Quality of the dataset and assumptions Batch algorithms are limited by the quality and quantity of the available data: for example, in a tabular MDP, without adequate
coverage of the area of the MDP that the optimal policy
tends to visit, there is little hope that we can identify such
policy or even predict its performance. However, given
enough samples in each state-action pairs, it becomes easy
to identify the optimal policy (Azar et al., 2012) or to evaluate the value of another (Yin et al., 2020). In addition,
without any prior knowledge about the problem or information about the target policy, a uniform distribution over
the state-action space is a priori optimal.
Very recently, some authors have derived exponential lower
bounds for the off-policy evaluation problem with linear
function approximations (Wang et al., 2020a; Amortila
et al., 2020). They discover that even if a sampling distribution induces the best-conditioned covariance matrix,
at least exponentially many samples are needed to estimate
the value of a target policy reasonably well. As their hard
instances are tabular MDPs (i.e., with small state-action
spaces), certainly there exists a better batch distribution
for their setting: the OPE problem in tabular MDPs is easily solvable by using a uniform distribution over the state-

