Variational Data Assimilation with a Learned Inverse Observation Operator

Thomas Frerix 1 2 Dmitrii Kochkov 1 Jamie A. Smith 1 Daniel Cremers 2
Michael P. Brenner 1 3 Stephan Hoyer 1

Variational data assimilation optimizes for an initial state of a dynamical system such that its evolution fits observational data. The physical model
can subsequently be evolved into the future to
make predictions. This principle is a cornerstone
of large scale forecasting applications such as numerical weather prediction. As such, it is implemented in current operational systems of weather
forecasting agencies across the globe. However,
finding a good initial state poses a difficult optimization problem in part due to the non-invertible
relationship between physical states and their corresponding observations. We learn a mapping
from observational data to physical states and
show how it can be used to improve optimizability.
We employ this mapping in two ways: to better
initialize the non-convex optimization problem,
and to reformulate the objective function in better behaved physics space instead of observation
space. Our experimental results for the Lorenz96
model and a two-dimensional turbulent fluid flow
demonstrate that this procedure significantly improves forecast quality for chaotic systems.

1. Introduction
Variational data assimilation provides the basis for numerical weather prediction (ECMWF, 2019), integrating the
non-linear partial differential equations describing the atmosphere. The core algorithm is an optimization problem for
the initial state of the system, such that when the equations
of motion are evolved over time, the resulting trajectories
are close to the measurements. Continuing to evolve the
physical system into the future then yields a forecast (Figure 1a). Over the last decades, these algorithms have led
to a steady improvement in forecast quality, though further
1

Google Research 2 Technical University of Munich
3
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Thomas Frerix
<thomas.frerix@tum.de>, Stephan Hoyer <shoyer@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a)

measurements

initial
state
assimilation window

(b)

forecast

transform objective function
better initialization

Abstract

(c)

ground truth

proposed

baseline

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method. (a) The principle
of variational data assimilation. The goal is to optimize for an
initial state (large blue dot) of a physical system such that the
evolution over an assimilation window (solid line) is close to
measurements (small gray dots). The model is subsequently used
to make predictions into the future (dashed line). (b) Improving
optimizability of variational data assimilation. We use a learned
inverse observation operator to better initialize the optimization
problem (red dots) and to transform the non-convex objective
function to be better behaved. (c) Data assimilation results of the
proposed method compared with a traditional algorithm. Depicted
is a vorticity prediction of a two-dimensional turbulent fluid flow.
The proposed method more accurately captures vorticity features
(yellow squares).

improvements are limited by computational resources. Data
assimilation accounts for a significant fraction of the computational cost for numerical weather prediction. This restricts
the amount of data that can be assimilated and only a small
volume of available satellite data is utilized for operational
forecasts (Bauer et al., 2015; Gustafsson et al., 2018).

