Towards Domain-Agnostic Contrastive Learning
Vikas Verma 1 2 Minh-Thang Luong 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 3 Hieu Pham 1 Quoc V. Le 1

Abstract
Despite recent successes, most contrastive selfsupervised learning methods are domain-specific,
relying heavily on data augmentation techniques
that require knowledge about a particular domain,
such as image cropping and rotation. To overcome
such limitation, we propose a domain-agnostic
approach to contrastive learning, named DACL,
that is applicable to problems where domainspecific data augmentations are not readily available. Key to our approach is the use of Mixup
noise to create similar and dissimilar examples
by mixing data samples differently either at the
input or hidden-state levels. We theoretically
analyze our method and show advantages over
the Gaussian-noise based contrastive learning
approach. To demonstrate the effectiveness of
DACL, we conduct experiments across various
domains such as tabular data, images, and graphs.
Our results show that DACL not only outperforms other domain-agnostic noising methods,
such as Gaussian-noise, but also combines well
with domain-specific methods, such as SimCLR,
to improve self-supervised visual representation
learning.

1. Introduction
One of the core objectives of deep learning is to discover
useful representations from the raw input signals without
explicit labels provided by human annotators. Recently, selfsupervised learning methods have emerged as one of the
most promising classes of methods to accomplish this objective with strong performances across various domains such
as computer vision (Oord et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020b; Grill et al., 2020), natural language processing
*

1
Equal contribution
Google Research, Brain Team.
3
Aalto University, Finland.
Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Vikas Verma <vikas.verma@aalto.fi>,
Minh-Thang Luong <thangluong@google.com>,
Kenji
Kawaguchi <kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu>, Hieu Pham
<hyhieu@google.com>, Quoc V. Le <qvl@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Dai & Le, 2015; Howard & Ruder, 2018; Peters et al., 2018;
Radford et al., 2019; Clark et al., 2020), and speech recognition (Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020). These
self-supervised methods learn useful representations without explicit annotations by reformulating the unsupervised
representation learning problem into a supervised learning
problem. This reformulation is done by defining a pretext
task. The pretext tasks defined in these methods are based
on certain domain-specific regularities and would generally
differ from domain to domain (more discussion about this
is in the related work, Section 6).

Figure 1. For a given sample A, we create a positive sample by
mixing it with another random sample B. The mixing function can
be either of the form of Equation 3 (Linear-Mixup), 5 (GeometricMixup) or 6 (Binary-Mixup), and the mixing coefficient is chosen
in such a way that the mixed sample is closer to A than B. Using another randomly chosen sample C, the contrastive learning formulation tries to satisfy the condition sim(hA , hmix ) > sim(hA , hC ),
where sim is a measure of similarity between two vectors.

Among various pretext tasks defined for self-supervised
learning, contrastive learning, e.g. (Chopra et al., 2005;
Hadsell et al., 2006; Oord et al., 2018; Hénaff et al., 2019;
He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Tian et al., 2020; Cai
et al., 2020; Wang & Isola, 2020), is perhaps the most popular approach that learns to distinguish semantically similar
examples over dissimilar ones. Despite its general applicability, contrastive learning requires a way, often by means of
data augmentations, to create semantically similar and dissimilar examples in the domain of interest for it to work. For

