Towards Practical Mean Bounds for Small Samples

My Phan 1 Philip S. Thomas 1 Erik Learned-Miller 1

Abstract
Historically, to bound the mean for small sample sizes, practitioners have had to choose between using methods with unrealistic assumptions
about the unknown distribution (e.g., Gaussianity) and methods like Hoeffding’s inequality that
use weaker assumptions but produce much looser
(wider) intervals. In 1969, Anderson (1969a) proposed a mean confidence interval strictly better
than or equal to Hoeffding’s whose only assumption is that the distribution’s support is contained
in an interval [a, b]. For the first time since then,
we present a new family of bounds that compares favorably to Anderson’s. We prove that
each bound in the family has guaranteed coverage, i.e., it holds with probability at least 1 − α
for all distributions on an interval [a, b]. Furthermore, one of the bounds is tighter than or equal
to Anderson’s for all samples. In simulations, we
show that for many distributions, the gain over
Anderson’s bound is substantial.

1. Introduction
In this work, we revisit the classic statistical problem of
defining a confidence interval on the mean µ of an unknown distribution with CDF F from an i.i.d. sample
X = X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn , and the closely related problems
of producing upper or lower confidence bounds on the
mean. For simplicity, we focus on upper confidence bounds
(UCBs), but the development for lower confidence bounds
and confidence intervals is similar.
To produce a non-trivial UCB, one must make assumptions
about F , such as finite variance, sub-Gaussianity, or that
its support is contained on a known interval [a, b]. We
adopt this last assumption, working with distributions whose
support is known to fall in an interval [a, b]. For UCBs, we
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence to: My Phan
<myphan@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

refer to two separate settings, the one-ended support setting,
in which the distribution is known to fall in the interval
[−∞, b], and the two-ended support setting, in which the
distribution is known to fall in an interval [a, b], where a >
−∞ and b < ∞.
A UCB has guaranteed coverage for a set of distributions F
if, for all sample sizes 1 ≤ n ≤ ∞, for all confidence levels
1 − α ∈ (0, 1), and for all distributions F ∈ F, the bound
µ1−α
upper satisfies
P robF [µ ≤ µ1−α
upper (X1 , X2 , ..., Xn )] ≥ 1 − α,

(1)

where µ is the mean of the unknown distribution F .
Among bounds with guaranteed coverage for distributions
on an interval [a, b], our interest is in bounds with good
performance on small sample sizes. The reason is that, for
‘large enough’ sample sizes, excellent bounds and confidence intervals already exist. In particular, the confidence
intervals based on Student’s t−statistic (Student, 1908) are
satisfactory in terms of coverage and accuracy for most
practitioners, given that the sample size is greater than some
threshold.1
The validity of the Student’s t method depends upon the
Gaussianity of the sample mean, which, strictly speaking
does not hold for any finite sample size unless the original
distribution itself is Gaussian. However, for many applications, the sample mean becomes close enough to Gaussian
as the sample size grows (due to the effects described by the
central limit theorem), that the resulting bounds hold with
probabilities close to the confidence level. Such results vary
depending upon the unknown distribution, but it is generally
accepted that a large enough sample size can be defined to
cover any distributions that might occur in a given situation.2 The question is what to do when the sample size is
smaller than such a threshold.
Establishing good confidence intervals on the mean for
small samples is an important but often overlooked problem.
The t-test is widely used in medical and social sciences.
1
An adequate sample size for the Student’s t method depends
upon the setting, but a common rule is n > 30.
2
An example in which the sample mean is still visibly skewed
(and hence inappropriate for use with Student’s t) even after
n = 80 samples is given for log-normal distributions in the supplementary material.

