Guided Exploration with Proximal Policy Optimization using a Single
Demonstration
Gabriele Libardi 1 Sebastian Dittert 1 Gianni De Fabritiis 1 2

Abstract
Solving sparse reward tasks through exploration
is one of the major challenges in deep reinforcement learning, especially in three-dimensional,
partially-observable environments. Critically, the
algorithm proposed in this article is capable of
using a single human demonstration to solve hardexploration problems. We train an agent on a combination of demonstrations and own experience
to solve problems with variable initial conditions
and we integrate it with proximal policy optimization (PPO). The agent is also able to increase
its performance and to tackle harder problems
by replaying its own past trajectories prioritizing
them based on the obtained reward and the maximum value of the trajectory. We finally compare
variations of this algorithm to different imitation
learning algorithms on a set of hard-exploration
tasks in the Animal-AI Olympics environment.
To the best of our knowledge, learning a task in a
three-dimensional environment with comparable
difficulty has never been considered before using
only one human demonstration.

1. Introduction
Exploration is one of the most challenging problems in reinforcement learning. Although significant progress has been
made in solving this problem in recent years (Badia et al.,
2020a;b; Burda et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2017; Ecoffet
et al., 2019), many of the solutions rely on very strong assumptions such as access to the agent position and deterministic, fully observable or low dimensional environments. For
three-dimensional, partially observable stochastic environments with no access to the agent position the exploration
problem still remains unsolved.
1

Computational Science Laboratory, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF) 2 ICREA . Correspondence to: Gabriele
Libardi <gabrielelibardi@yahoo.it>, Gianni De Fabritiis <gianni.defabritiis@upf.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Learning from demonstrations allows to directly bypass
this problem but it only works under specific conditions,
e.g. large number of demonstration trajectories or access to
an expert to query for optimal actions (Ross et al., 2011).
Furthermore, a policy learned from demonstrations in this
way will only be optimal in the vicinity of the demonstrator
trajectories and only for the initial conditions of such trajectories. Our work is at the intersection of these two classes
of solutions, exploration and imitation, in that we use only
one trajectory from the demonstrator per problem to solve
hard-exploration tasks 1,2 .
This approach has been investigated before by Paine et al.
(2019) (for a thorough comparison see Section 5.2). We
propose the first implementation based on on-policy algorithms, in particular PPO. Henceforth we refer to the version
of the algorithm we put forward as PPO + Demonstrations
(PPO+D). Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. In our approach, we treat the demonstrations trajectories as if they were the result of lucky actions taken
by the agent in the real environment. We can do this
because in PPO the policy only specifies a distribution
over the action space. We force the actions of the policy to equal the demonstration actions instead of sampling from the policy distribution and in this way we
accelerate the exploration phase. We use importance
sampling to account for sampling from a distribution
different than the policy. The frequency with which the
demonstrations are sampled depends on an adjustable
hyperparameter ρ, as described in Paine et al. (2019).
2. Our algorithm includes the successful trajectories in
the replay buffer during training and treats them as
demonstrations.
3. The non-successful trajectories are ranked according
to their maximum estimated value and are stored in a
different replay buffer.
1

A video showing the experimental results is available at https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=
PLBeSdcnDP2WFQWLBrLGSkwtitneOelcm2
The code is available here: https://github.com/
compsciencelab/ppo_D

