Approximation Theory of Convolutional Architectures for Time Series
Modelling

Haotian Jiang 1 Zhong Li 2 Qianxiao Li 1 3

Abstract
We study the approximation properties of convolutional architectures applied to time series modelling, which can be formulated mathematically
as a functional approximation problem. In the
recurrent setting, recent results reveal an intricate
connection between approximation efficiency and
memory structures in the data generation process.
In this paper, we derive parallel results for convolutional architectures, with WaveNet being a
prime example. Our results reveal that in this
new setting, approximation efficiency is not only
characterised by memory, but also additional fine
structures in the target relationship. This leads
to a novel definition of spectrum-based regularity
that measures the complexity of temporal relationships under the convolutional approximation
scheme. These analyses provide a foundation to
understand the differences between architectural
choices for time series modelling and can give
theoretically grounded guidance for practical applications.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has evolved to be a powerful tool to
model temporal relationships, the choice of architectures
significantly affects performance. Classical recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) and recent adaptation of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to time series data represent two
popular classes of architectural choices. Empirical works
show that depending on the application setting, either one
can have an advantage over the other (Yin et al., 2017; Bai
et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2019). However, a concrete theoretical understanding of how such differences arise remains
largely unexplored.
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
School of Mathematical Science, Peking University 3 Institute of
High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: Qianxiao Li <qianxiao@nus.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The recent work of Li et al. (2021) formulated the temporal modelling task into a functional analysis problem, and
uncovered relationships between approximation efficiency
of RNNs and memory structures of the target relationship.
In this paper, we develop parallel results for CNNs in the
functional approximation setting. On the one hand, these results provide approximation guarantees and rate estimations
for CNNs applied to time series modelling. On the other
hand, they allow us to concretely understand the differences
between CNNs and RNNs in terms of their approximation
capabilities for temporal relationships, serving as a starting
point to bridge theories and applications.
Our main contributions are:
1. We develop universal approximation results for CNNs
when applied to model temporal relationships in the
linear setting, which shows that the approximation efficiency is characterised by both memory structures
and a certain spectrum-based regularity of the target
relationship.
2. We make rigorous comparisons between CNNs and
RNNs in the approximation setting, where we show
that the targets that can be easily approximated are
completely different for these two architectures. This
provides a theoretical foundation for building principled model selection strategies for deep learning in
dynamical settings.
The paper is organised as follows. We discuss related work
in Section 2. In Section 3, we formulate the approximation
problem precisely and introduce the RNN and CNN hypothesis spaces under this formulation. The approximation
results of CNNs are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we
make a concrete comparison between CNNs and RNNs in
terms of approximation capabilities for different classes of
target temporal relationships. The proofs of all presented
results are found in the appendix.
1.1. Notations and definitions.
We use boldface letters x to denote discrete temporal sequences, and x(t) to denote the vector/scalar value of the

