Provably Correct Optimization and Exploration with Non-linear Policies

Fei Feng 1 Wotao Yin 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Lin Yang 3

Abstract
Policy optimization methods remain a powerful
workhorse in empirical Reinforcement Learning
(RL), with a focus on neural policies that can
easily reason over complex and continuous state
and/or action spaces. Theoretical understanding
of strategic exploration in policy-based methods
with non-linear function approximation, however,
is largely missing. In this paper, we address
this question by designing ENIAC, an actor-critic
method that allows non-linear function approximation in the critic. We show that under certain
assumptions, e.g., a bounded eluder dimension
d for the critic class, the learner finds to a neare
optimal policy in O(poly(d))
exploration rounds.
The method is robust to model misspecification
and strictly extends existing works on linear function approximation. We also develop some computational optimizations of our approach with
slightly worse statistical guarantees, and an empirical adaptation building on existing deep RL
tools. We empirically evaluate this adaptation,
and show that it outperforms prior heuristics inspired by linear methods, establishing the value in
correctly reasoning about the agent’s uncertainty
under non-linear function approximation.

1. Introduction
The success of reinforcement learning (RL) in many empirical domains largely relies on developing policy gradient
methods with deep neural networks (Schulman et al., 2015;
2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018). The techniques have a long
history in RL (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999; Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 2000). A number of theoretical results study their
convergence properties (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Scher1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond,
WA, USA. 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Alekh Agarwal <alekha@microsoft.com>,
Lin Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rer & Geist, 2014; Geist et al., 2019; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2019; Agarwal et al., 2020c; Bhandari & Russo, 2019) when
the agent has access to a distribution over states which is
sufficiently exploratory, such as in a generative model. However, unlike their value- or model-based counterparts, the
number of policy-based approaches which actively explore
and provably find a near-optimal policy remains relatively
limited, and restricted to tabular (Shani et al., 2020) and
linear function approximation (Cai et al., 2020; Agarwal
et al., 2020a) settings. Given this gap between theory and
the empirical literature, it is natural to ask how we can design provably sample-efficient policy-based methods for RL
that allow the use of general function approximation, such
as via neural networks.
In this paper we design an actor-critic method with general
non-linear function approximation: Exploratory Non-linear
Incremental Actor Critic (ENIAC). Our method follows a
similar high-level framework as Agarwal et al. (2020a), but
with a very different bonus function in order to reason about
the uncertainty of our non-linear critic. In each iteration, we
use the bonus to learn an optimistic critic, so that optimizing
the actor with it results in exploration of the previously
unseen parts of the environment. Unlike Agarwal et al.
(2020a), we allow non-linear function approximation in
the critic, which further parameterizes a non-linear policy
class through Soft Policy Iteration (SPI) (Even-Dar et al.,
2009; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Geist et al., 2019; AbbasiYadkori et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2020a) or Natural Policy
Gradient (NPG) (Kakade, 2001; Peters & Schaal, 2008;
Agarwal et al., 2020c) updates. Theoretically, we show that
if the critic function class has a bounded eluder dimension
(Russo & Van Roy, 2013) d, then our algorithm outputs a
near-optimal policy in poly(d) number of interactions, with
high probability, for both SPI and NPG methods.
Following the recent work on non-linear value-based methods by Wang et al. (2020), the bonus function is based on the
range of values (or the width function) predicted at a particular state-action pair by the critic function which accurately
predicts the observed returns. Hence, this function characterizes how uncertain we are about a state-action pair given the
past observations. The value-based method in Wang et al.
(2020) relies on solving the value iteration problem using
the experience, which introduces dependence issues across
different stages of the algorithm. But, we directly use the

