Regularized Submodular Maximization at Scale

Ehsan Kazemi 1 Shervin Minaee 2 Moran Feldman 3 Amin Karbasi 4

Abstract
In this paper, we propose scalable methods for
maximizing a regularized submodular function
f , expressed as the difference between a monotone submodular function g and a modular function `. Submodularity is related to the notions
of diversity, coverage, and representativeness. In
particular, finding the mode (most likely configuration) of many popular probabilistic models of
diversity, such as determinantal point processes
and strongly log-concave distributions, involves
maximization of (regularized) submodular functions. Since a regularized function can potentially
take on negative values, the classic theory of submodular maximization, which heavily relies on a
non-negativity assumption, is not applicable. We
avoid this issue by developing the first one-pass
streaming algorithm for maximizing a regularized
submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint. Furthermore, we give the first distributed
algorithm that (roughly) reproduces the guarantees of state-of-the-art centralized algorithms for
the problem using only O(1/ε) rounds of MapReduce. We highlight that our result, even for the
unregularized case where the modular term ` is
zero, improves over the memory and communication complexity of the state-of-the-art by a factor
of O(1/ε). We also empirically study the performance of our scalable methods on real-life applications, including finding the mode of negatively
correlated distributions, vertex cover of social networks, and several data summarization tasks.

1. Introduction
Finding a diverse set of items, also known as data summarization, is one of the central tasks in machine learning. It
usually involves either maximizing a utility function that
1

Google, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Snap Inc 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa, Israel 4 Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University. Correspondence to: Ehsan Kazemi
<ehsankazemi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

promotes coverage and representativeness (Wei et al., 2015)
(we call this an optimization perspective) or sampling from
discrete probabilistic models that promote negative correlations and show repulsive behaviors (Gotovos et al., 2015)
(we call this a sampling perspective). Celebrated examples
of probabilistic models that encourage negative dependency
include determinantal point processes (Kulesza & Taskar,
2012), strongly Rayleigh measures (Borcea et al., 2009)
strongly log-concave distributions (Gurvits, 2009), and probabilistic submodular models (Djolonga & Krause, 2014; Iyer
& Bilmes, 2015). In fact, the two above views are related
in the sense that often the mode (most likely configuration)
of a diversity promoting distribution is a simple variant of
a (regularized) submodular function. For instance, determinantal point processes are log-submodular. Or, as we show
later, a strongly log-concave distribution is a regularized
log-submodular plus a log quadratic term. This paper aims
to show how such optimization tasks can be done at scale.
From the optimization perspective, to effectively select a
diverse subset of items, we need to define a measure that
captures the representativeness that lies within a selected
subset. Often, such a measure naturally has the diminishing
returns property, and thus, is formally captured by submodularity. Given a finite ground set N of size n, consider a
set function g : 2N → R assigning a utility g(A) to every
subset A ⊆ N . We say that g is submodular if for any
pair of subsets A ⊆ B ⊆ N and element u 6∈ B, we have
g(A∪{u})−g(A) ≥ g(B ∪{u})−g(B), which intuitively
means that the increase in “representativeness” following
the addition of u to a set is smaller when u is added to a
larger set. For shorthand, we write the marginal gain of an
element as g(e | S) , g(S ∪ {e}) − g(S) and the marginal
gain of adding an entire set as g(A | S) , g(S ∪ A) − g(S).
Additionally, a set function is said to be monotone if
g(A) ≤ g(B) for all A ⊆ B ⊆ N ; that is, adding more
data can only increase the representativeness. Many of the
previous works in data summarization and diverse subset
selection that take an optimization perspective simply aim to
maximize a monotone submodular function (Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2013). Monotonicity has the advantage of promoting
coverage, but it also enhances the danger of over-fitting to
the data as adding more elements can never decrease the
utility. To address this issue, as is often done in machine
learning, we need to add a simple penalty, or a regular-

