Unsupervised Representation Learning via Neural Activation Coding

Yookoon Park 1 Sangho Lee 2 Gunhee Kim 2 David M. Blei 1

Abstract
We present neural activation coding (NAC) as a
novel approach for learning deep representations
from unlabeled data for downstream applications.
We argue that the deep encoder should maximize
its nonlinear expressivity on the data for downstream predictors to take full advantage of its representation power. To this end, NAC maximizes
the mutual information between activation patterns of the encoder and the data over a noisy communication channel. We show that learning for
a noise-robust activation code increases the number of distinct linear regions of ReLU encoders,
hence the maximum nonlinear expressivity. More
interestingly, NAC learns both continuous and
discrete representations of data, which we respectively evaluate on two downstream tasks: (i) linear classification on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-1K
and (ii) nearest neighbor retrieval on CIFAR-10
and FLICKR-25K. Empirical results show that
NAC attains better or comparable performance on
both tasks over recent baselines including SimCLR and DistillHash. In addition, NAC pretraining provides significant benefits to the training of
deep generative models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yookoon/nac.

1. Introduction
High dimensional data pose fundamental challenges for
machine learning such as the curse of dimensionality, and
thus often require tailored domain-specific architectures
with a large amount of supervision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Vaswani et al., 2017). A good representation alleviates such
challenges by providing a low-dimensional view of the data
that captures high-level semantics and by rendering such information more easily accessible to downstream predictors
1

Computer Science Department, Columbia University, New
York, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: David M. Blei <david.blei@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) At initialization

(b) After NAC training

Figure 1. Distinct linear regions of a simple ReLU network with 2
layers of width 4 on 2D toy data. The lines represent the activation
boundaries that divide the input space into distinct linear regions.
NAC maximizes the number of linear regions of the network on
the data, hence the maximum nonlinear expressivity.

(Bengio et al., 2013). Especially, unsupervised representation learning possesses a great potential since it provides a
means of exploiting abundant unlabeled data for enhancing
the performance on downstream applications (Devlin et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2020a), even with limited amounts of
labels (Chen et al., 2020b).
We focus on the problem of learning deep representations
from unlabeled data for downstream predictors, a popular
scenario in unsupervised representation learning literature
(Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a). In
this setting, the deep encoder network is pretrained on an
unlabeled dataset. The learned representation is then fed
into subsequent predictors for downstream tasks such as
classification. Most often, simple linear models are chosen
as the predictors (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020a) and the quality of the representation is evaluated by how well these models perform on the downstream
applications. This evaluation protocol encodes the belief
that a good representation should disentangle complex highlevel semantics of the data and deliver them in a linearly
accessible way. The key question here is: how can we learn
the deep encoder to benefit the downstream predictors?
Self-supervised learning introduces pretext tasks with artificially generated pseudo-labels from unlabeled data (Doersch
et al., 2015; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018) to
train the encoder, expecting that the encoder would learn useful structures of the data to better solve such tasks. Recently,

