Asymptotic Normality and Confidence Intervals for Prediction
Risk of the Min-norm Least Squares Estimator

Zeng Li 1 Chuanlong Xie 2 Qinwen Wang 3

Abstract
This paper quantifies the uncertainty of prediction
risk for the min-norm least squares estimator in
high-dimensional linear regression models. We
establish the asymptotic normality of prediction
risk when both the sample size and the number of
features tend to infinity. Based on the newly established central limit theorems (CLTs), we derive
the confidence intervals of the prediction risk under various scenarios. Our results demonstrate the
sample-wise non-monotonicity of the prediction
risk and confirm “more data hurt” phenomenon.
Furthermore, the width of confidence intervals indicates that over-parameterization would enlarge
the randomness of prediction performance.

1. Introduction
One major surprise of deep learning models is their accurate
predictive performance while achieving zero training error
(Zhang et al., 2016). This observation contradicts with the
common wisdom of bias-variance trade-off when model
complexity increases (Van der Vaart, 2000; Friedman et al.,
2001). The theory of over-parameterization is a rapidly
growing area, which makes attempts to explain the empirical success of large scale models in deep learning. Quite
a few papers are trying to understand over-parameterized
models from generalization perspective, e.g. Advani & Saxe
(2017); Belkin et al. (2018; 2019a;b); Geiger et al. (2019);
Spigler et al. (2019); Bartlett et al. (2020); Muthukumar
et al. (2020).
As model capacity increases, the generalization error first
decreases and then increases, and decreases again. Such a
phenomenon has been summarized in the “double descent”
curve, i.e. Fig 1B. in Belkin et al. (2019a). It subsumes the
1
First author, Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, China 2 Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab, Hong Kong 3 Corresponding author, School of Data Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Qinwen Wang
<wqw@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

classical bias-variance trade-off, a U-shape curve, and further shows that the prediction error exhibits a second drop
when the model capacity exceeds the interpolation threshold, which is the so-called over-parameterized settings. The
second drop has been broadly quantified for certain parametric and non-parametric models, including linear model,
nearest neighbours algorithm, random-feature model and
one-hidden-layer neural network (Hastie et al., 2019; Xing
et al., 2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019; Ba et al., 2019). However, the existing theoretical studies mostly focus on the
first-order limit of prediction risk. The randomness caused
by sampling remains unclear. On the other hand, the finitesample results, e.g. Dereziński et al. (2019), only consider
the expectation of the risk while ignoring the variance. In
summary, the current existing results can capture the global
trend of the prediction risk in terms of first-order limit and
expectation. However, there is no information provided on
the fluctuation or randomness around this limit. In the finite
sample situations, how far away the empirical prediction
risk is from its limit remains a mystery.
To fill this gap, this paper makes the first step toward the uncertainty quantification for the prediction risk, especially in
the widely concerned over-parameterized settings. We consider a linear regression task with n data points, p features
and develop CLTs for the prediction risk as n, p → +∞
and p/n → c ∈ (0, ∞). The main goal of this paper is
to study the second-order asymptotic behaviors or CLTs
of two different types of conditional prediction risk for the
min-morn least squares estimator. One is RX,β (β̂, β) given
both the training data X and regression coefficient β while
the other is RX (β̂, β) given the training data X only. We
summarize our main results as follows:
(1) The regression coefficient is assumed to be either random or nonrandom to cover more cases. Asymptotic
normality and limiting distributions of prediction risk
are proved and derived under various scenarios.
(2) Finite-sample distributions of the conditional prediction risk given both the training data and regression coefficient are derived and characterized in Theorem 4.2
and 4.5. Under certain assumptions, the “more data
hurt” phenomenon can be confirmed by comparing the

