Unsupervised Learning of Visual 3D Keypoints for Control

Boyuan Chen 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Deepak Pathak 2

Abstract
Learning sensorimotor control policies from highdimensional images crucially relies on the quality
of the underlying visual representations. Prior
works show that structured latent space such as
visual keypoints often outperforms unstructured
representations for robotic control. However,
most of these representations, whether structured
or unstructured are learned in a 2D space even
though the control tasks are usually performed
in a 3D environment. In this work, we propose
a framework to learn such a 3D geometric
structure directly from images in an end-toend unsupervised manner. The input images
are embedded into latent 3D keypoints via
a differentiable encoder which is trained to
optimize both a multi-view consistency loss and
downstream task objective. These discovered
3D keypoints tend to meaningfully capture
robot joints as well as object movements in
a consistent manner across both time and 3D
space. The proposed approach outperforms
prior state-of-art methods across a variety of
reinforcement learning benchmarks. Code and
videos at https://buoyancy99.github.
io/unsup-3d-keypoints/.

1. Introduction
Learning to act from raw, high-dimensional observations
like images is arguably the only viable way to scale sensorimotor control to complex real-world setups. However,
the main challenge lies in figuring out the representation of
these observations upon which the agent’s policy is to be
learned. The conventional wisdom today is to learn these
representations either via task supervision in an end-to-end
manner (Mnih et al., 2015a; Lillicrap et al., 2016) or via
auxiliary loss functions (Jaderberg et al., 2016; Pathak et al.,
2017; Laskin et al., 2020b). Although such representation
1

UC Berkelely 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Deepak Pathak <dpathak@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We propose an end-to-end framework for unsupervised
learning of 3D keypoints from multi-view images. These keypoints
are discovered to jointly optimize both multi-view reconstruction
and downstream task performance. Our learned keypoints are
consistent across 3D space as well as time.

learning paradigms are successful in vision (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012), speech (Oord et al., 2016) or language (Devlin et al., 2018), they suffer from two key issues in case
of robot learning. First, the representations tend to become
specific to both the task and the visual environment, thus,
any change in the visual input affects the generalization of
the learned representations as well as policy. Second, these
latent features do not capture the fine-grained location and
orientation of objects or robot joints which is indispensable
for robotic control in complex scenarios. This is in contrast
to sensorimotor representations in humans which have explicit notions of objects, their relationships, 3D reasoning,
and geometry (Spelke & Kinzler, 2007).
Motivated by the need to capture fine-grained abstractions
from visual data, a popular approach is to use keypointbased representations. Keypoints are represented in Euclidean coordinates and provide a natural way to represent
the kinematic structure of both the agent and the environment. Furthermore, keypoint- or particle-based representation provides an ideal way to represent deformable objects
like cloth for precise robotic manipulation (Clegg et al.,
2017; Sundaresan et al., 2020) but these keypoints are often
hand-selected by human labelers which is expensive and
hinders scalability. Some prior methods try to alleviate this
problem (Minderer et al., 2019; Kulkarni et al., 2019) by

