ADOM: Accelerated Decentralized Optimization Method
for Time-Varying Networks

Dmitry Kovalev 1 Egor Shulgin 1 Peter Richtárik 1 Alexander Rogozin 2 3 Alexander Gasnikov 2 3

Abstract
We propose ADOM – an accelerated method for
smooth and strongly convex decentralized optimization over time-varying networks. ADOM
uses a dual oracle, i.e., we assume access to the
gradient of the Fenchel conjugate of the individual loss functions. Up to a constant factor, which
depends on the network structure only, its communication complexity is the same as that of accelerated Nesterov gradient method (Nesterov, 2003).
To the best of our knowledge, only the algorithm
of Rogozin et al. (2019) has a convergence rate
with similar properties. However, their algorithm
converges under the very restrictive assumption
that the number of network changes can not be
greater than a tiny percentage of the number of
iterations. This assumption is hard to satisfy in
practice, as the network topology changes usually
can not be controlled. In contrast, ADOM merely
requires the network to stay connected throughout
time.

⇒

Figure 1. A sample time-varying network with n = 20 nodes.

(Gorbunov et al., 2020b), and arise in many applications, incluyding estimation by sensor networks (Rabbat & Nowak,
2004), network resource allocation (Beck et al., 2014), cooperative control (Giselsson et al., 2013), distributed spectrum sensing (Bazerque & Giannakis, 2009), power system
control (Gan et al., 2012) and federated learning (Li et al.,
2020a; Kovalev et al., 2021). When the network is not
allowed to change in time, a lower communication complexity bound has been established by Scaman et al. (2017).
This bound is tight as there is a matching upper bound both
in the case when a dual oracle is assumed (Scaman et al.,
2017), which means that we have access to the gradient of
the Fenchel conjugate of the functions fi (x), and also in
the case when a primal oracle is assumed (Kovalev et al.,
2020b), which means that we have access to the gradient of
the functions fi (x) themselves.

1. Introduction
We study the decentralized optimization problem
min

x∈Rd

n
P

fi (x),

⇒

(1)

i=1

where each function fi : Rd → R is stored on a compute
node i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}. We assume that the nodes
are connected through a communication network defined by
an undirected connected graph. Each node can perform computations based on its local state and data, and can directly
communicate with its neighbors only. Further, we assume
the functions fi to be smooth and strongly convex. Such decentralized optimization problems have been studied heavily
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia 3 Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Dmitry Kovalev <dakovalev1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1.1. Time-varying networks
In this work, we study the situation when the links in the
communication network are allowed to change over time
(for an illustration, see Figure 1). Such time-varying networks (Zadeh, 1961; Kolar et al., 2010) are ubiquitous in
many complex systems and practical applications. In sensor
networks, for example, changes in the link structure occur
when the sensors are in motion, and due to other disturbances in the wireless signal connecting pairs of nodes. We
envisage that a similar regime will be supported in futuregeneration federated learning systems (Konečný et al., 2016;
McMahan et al., 2017; Kovalev et al., 2021), where the communication pattern among pairs of mobile devices or mobile
devices and edge servers will be dictated by their physical
proximity, which naturally changes over time. Our work
can be partially understood as an attempt to contribute to
the algorithmic foundations of this nascent field.

