Learning Optimal Auctions with Correlated Valuations from Samples

Chunxue Yang 1 Xiaohui Bei 1

Abstract
In single-item auction design, it is well known due
to Crémer and McLean that when bidders’ valuations are drawn from a correlated prior distribution, the auctioneer can extract full social surplus
as revenue. However, in most real-world applications, the prior is usually unknown and can only
be learned from historical data. In this work, we
investigate the robustness of the optimal auction
with correlated valuations via sample complexity
analysis. We prove upper and lower bounds on
the number of samples from the unknown prior
required to learn a (1 − )-approximately optimal
auction. Our results reinforce the common belief that optimal correlated auctions are sensitive
to the distribution parameters and hard to learn
unless the prior distribution is well-behaved.

1. Introduction
As a means to facilitate efficient resource allocation, auctions are a fundamental tool in the modern economy and
play a pivotal role in mechanism design theory. The classical auction design problems in economics usually assume
a Bayesian setting (Myerson, 1981; Crémer & McLean,
1985), in which participants’ valuations (types) are drawn
from some prior probability distribution that is also common
knowledge known to the auction designer. This prior distribution plays a vital role in the analysis of optimal auctions.
In the case of single-item auction design, Myerson (1981)
gives precise characterization of the revenue-maximizing
auction when bidders’ private types are drawn from independent prior distributions. The Myerson auction assumes
that the prior distributions of all bidders are known to the
auctioneer. However, in most applications, the prior distributions are unknown and can only be learned from past
data. This raises an intriguing question of how much data is
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to:
Chunxue Yang <chunxue001@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Xiaohui Bei <xhbei@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sufficient and necessary to guarantee near-optimal expected
revenue. Consequently, one active line of research applies
a principled approach of designing auctions as a function
of several samples drawn from an unknown distribution,
with the goal of obtaining high revenue with future reports
that are drawn from the same distribution. The number of
samples required to approximate the optimal auction with
regard to an unknown distribution is known as the sample
complexity of the problem. The sample complexity of the
Myerson auction was first studied by Cole & Roughgarden
(2014). With a long line of follow-up works (Gonczarowski
& Nisan, 2017; Syrgkanis, 2017; Huang et al., 2018), it was
recently settled by Guo et al. (2019) with matching upper
and lower bounds up to a poly-logarithmic factor.
There is another major limitation of the Myerson auction.
The assumption that bidders’ private values are drawn from
independent prior distributions, as Myerson himself points
out, is strong and does not hold in many real-world applications. For the general case of joint and possibly correlated
prior distributions, a much stronger result than Myerson’s
is possible. More specifically, Crémer & McLean (1985;
1988) show that the auctioneer can extract full social surplus
as revenue if the joint prior distribution satisfies a mild condition. However, this Crémer-McLean result is considered
to be non-applicable in many practical settings, mainly due
to its strong dependence on the common prior assumption.
Therefore, it is important to understand how optimal auction
design is sensitive to the errors in the Bayesian beliefs and
to provide a robustness analysis for the single-item auction
design problem with correlated prior distributions.
1.1. Our Results
In this work, we investigate the sample complexity of
Crémer-McLean optimal auctions for bidders with correlated distributions. Our goal is to understand how many
samples from a prior distribution are sufficient and necessary to learn an auction with revenue at least (1 − ) of the
total social surplus. We provide upper and lower bounds for
this sample complexity problem, which are summarized in
Table 1.
Different from the Myerson auction, whose sample complexity is only a function of the number of bidders n and
 under the regularity assumption, we find that the sample

