AutoAttend: Automated Attention Representation Search

Chaoyu Guan 1 Xin Wang 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract
Self-attention mechanisms have been widely
adopted in many machine learning areas, including Natural Language Processing (NLP) and
Graph Representation Learning (GRL), etc. However, existing works heavily rely on hand-crafted
design to obtain customized attention mechanisms. In this paper, we automate Key, Query
and Value representation design, which is one
of the most important steps to obtain effective self-attentions. We propose an automated
self-attention representation model, AutoAttend,
which can automatically search powerful attention
representations for downstream tasks leveraging
Neural Architecture Search (NAS). In particular,
we design a tailored search space for attention
representation automation, which is flexible to
produce effective attention representation designs.
Based on the design prior obtained from attention representations in previous works, we further
regularize our search space to reduce the space
complexity without the loss of expressivity. Moreover, we propose a novel context-aware parameter
sharing mechanism considering special characteristics of each sub-architecture to provide more
accurate architecture estimations when conducting parameter sharing in our tailored search space.
Experiments show the superiority of our proposed
AutoAttend model over previous state-of-the-arts
on eight text classification tasks in NLP and four
node classification tasks in GRL.

1. Introduction
Self-attention mechanisms have become more and more
popular in the design of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
to achieve good performance. With the ability to help
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University .
Correspondence to: Xin
Wang
<xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Wenwu
Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Output

Output

Attention Computation

Attention Computation
Query

Key

Value

Query

Hand-crafted

Input data

Key

Value

Automated

Input data

(a) hand-crafted attention representation (b) automated attention representation

Figure 1. An illustration of attention representation design in selfattention. (a) Traditional hand-crafted attention representation,
where the computation paths are manually designed to derive Key,
Query, and Value. (b) Our automated attention representation,
where the computation paths from the input to Key, Query and
Value are automatically searched leveraging NAS.

deep models selectively focus on useful information, selfattention has been proved powerful and widely used in all
kinds of research directions, including Natural Language
Processing (NLP) (Mittal et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020),
Graph Representation Learning (GRL) (Sankar et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020), Computer Vision (CV) (Li et al., 2020;
Sun et al., 2020), etc.
Typical self-attention can be regarded as extracting useful information in Value according to Key and Query, where Key,
Query, and Value are different representations of the input
data. Proper self-attention representations (Key, Query, and
Value) can greatly boost the model performance (Daniluk
et al., 2017; Niu et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2019). However, as
shown in Figure 1(a), all previous works rely solely on manual design to obtain self-attention representations, where
various functional components such as CNN, RNN, GAT,
and GCN are manually stacked or combined to derive Key,
Query, and Value from the input data (Lin et al., 2017;
Vaswani et al., 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018). These handcrafted representation designs cost huge trail-and-error human labors to derive and are sub-optimal because of human
bias, thus making them hard to fit in real-world applications.
To solve this problem, we propose to automate self-attention
representation through neural architecture search (NAS) in
this paper (Figure 1(b)). However, directly applying the

