Sparse within Sparse Gaussian Processes using Neighbor Information

Gia-Lac Tran 1 2 Dimitrios Milios 1 Pietro Michiardi 1 Maurizio Filippone 1

Abstract
Approximations to Gaussian processes (GPs)
based on inducing variables, combined with variational inference techniques, enable state-of-the-art
sparse approaches to infer GPs at scale through
mini-batch based learning. In this work, we further push the limits of scalability of sparse GPs
by allowing large number of inducing variables
without imposing a special structure on the inducing inputs. In particular, we introduce a novel
hierarchical prior, which imposes sparsity on the
set of inducing variables. We treat our model
variationally, and we experimentally show considerable computational gains compared to standard
sparse GPs when sparsity on the inducing variables is realized considering the nearest inducing
inputs of a random mini-batch of the data. We
perform an extensive experimental validation that
demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach
compared to the state-of-the-art. Our approach
enables the possibility to use sparse GPs using a
large number of inducing points without incurring
a prohibitive computational cost.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
offer a powerful framework to perform inference over functions; being Bayesian, GPs provide rigorous uncertainty
quantification and prevent overfitting. However, the applicability of GPs on large datasets is hindered by their
computational complexity of O N 3 , where N is the training size. This issue has fuelled a considerable amount of
research towards scalable GP methodologies that operate
on a set of inducing variables (Quiñonero Candela & Rasmussen, 2005). In the literature, there is a plethora of approaches that offer different treatments of the inducing variables (Lawrence et al., 2002; Seeger et al., 2003; Snelson
1
Department of Data Science, Eurecom, France 2 Department of
Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Gia-Lac Tran <tranlac@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

& Ghahramani, 2005; Naish-Guzman & Holden, 2007; Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013; Wilson & Nickisch, 2015;
Hensman et al., 2015). Some of the more recent approaches,
such as Scalable Variational Gaussian Processes (SVGPs)
(Hensman et al., 2015), allow for the application of GPs to
problems with millions of data-points. In most applications
of scalable GPs, these are approximated using M inducing
points, which results in a complexity of O M 3 . It has
been shown recently by Burt et al. (2019) that it is possible
to obtain an arbitrarily good approximation for a certain
class of GP models (i.e. conjugate likelihoods, concentrated
distribution for the training data) with M growing more
slowly than N . However, the general case remains elusive
and it is still possible that the required value for M may exceed a certain computational budget. Our result contributes
to strengthen our belief that sparsity does not only enjoy
desirable theoretical properties, but it also constitutes an
extremely computationally efficient method in practice.
In this work, we push the limits of scalability and effectiveness of sparse GPs enabling a further reduction in complexity, which can be translated to higher accuracy by considering a larger set of inducing variables. The idea is to
operate on a subset of H inducing points during training and
prediction, with H  M , while maintaining a sparse approximation with M inducing variables. We formalize our
strategy by imposing a sparsity-inducing structure on the
prior over the inducing variables and by carrying out a variational formulation of this model. This extends the original
SVGP framework and enables mini-batch based optimization
for the variational objective. We then consider ways to select
the set of H inducing points based on neighbor information;
at training time, for a given mini-batch, we activate H out
of M inducing variables considering the nearest inducing
inputs to the samples in the mini-batch, whereas at test time
we select inducing variables corresponding to the inducing
inputs which are nearest to the test data-points. We name
our proposal Sparse within a Sparse GP (SWSGP). SWSGP
is characterized by a number of attractive features: (i) it
improves significantly the prediction quality using a small
number of neighboring inducing inputs, and (ii) it accelerates the training phase, especially when the total number
of inducing points becomes large. We extensively validate
these properties on a variety of regression and classification
tasks. We also showcase SWSGP on a large scale classifica-

