Optimal Streaming Algorithms for Multi-Armed Bandits

Tianyuan Jin 1 Keke Huang 1 Jing Tang 2 Xiaokui Xiao 1

Abstract
This paper studies two variants of the best arm
identification (BAI) problem under the streaming
model, where we have a stream of n arms with
reward distributions supported on [0, 1] with unknown means. The arms in the stream are arriving
one by one, and the algorithm cannot access an
arm unless it is stored in a limited size memory.
We first study the streaming ε-top-k arms identification problem, which asks for k arms whose
reward means are lower than that of the k-th
best arm by at most ε with probability at least
1 − δ. For general ε ∈ (0, 1), the existing solution for this problem assumes k = 1 and achieves
the optimal sample complexity O( εn2 log 1δ ) using
O(log∗ (n)) 1 memory and a single pass of the
stream. We propose an algorithm that works for
any k and achieves the optimal sample complexity O( εn2 log kδ ) using a single-arm memory and a
single pass of the stream.
Second, we study the streaming BAI problem,
where the objective is to identify the arm with the
maximum reward mean with at least 1 − δ probability, using a single-arm memory and as few
passes of the input stream as possible. We present
a single-arm-memory algorithm that achieves a
near instance-dependent optimal sample complexity within O(log ∆−1
2 ) passes, where ∆2 is the
gap between the mean of the best arm and that of
the second best arm.

1. Introduction
Best arm identification (BAI) is a classic decision problem
with numerous applications such as medical trials (Thomp-

son, 1933), online advertisement (Bertsimas & Mersereau,
2007), and crowdsourcing (Zhou et al., 2014). It typically
considers a bandit with a set of arms, each of which has a
reward distribution with an unknown mean. The objective
is to identify the best arm with the maximum reward mean.
Due to applications with massive data, the BAI problem has
been recently studied under the streaming model in the literature (Assadi & Wang, 2020; Falahatgar et al., 2020; Maiti
et al., 2020), where only a limited size of memory is available for storing arms. In addition, BAI under the streaming
model also avoids a large amount of time/money on switching alternatives and thus finds numerous applications. For
example, in recruitment, employers aim to select the most
qualified employee among all candidates with high probability. For this purpose, they could query each candidate
with sufficient number of questions to acquire an accurate
evaluation with confidence. The more questions they ask,
the more confidence they have on the candidate’s evaluation.
Once the interview ends, usually, the candidate will not be
asked for further evaluation. In manufacturing, switching
alternatives might require reassembling the production line,
which could incur excessive costs.
Motivated by above observations, in this paper, we study
two problems, i.e., streaming ε-top-k arms identification
(ε-KAI) and streaming BAI.
(Problem 1) Streaming ε-KAI. In streaming ε-KAI, we
have a stream of n arms, such that each armi is associated
with an unknown reward distribution supported on [0, 1]
with an unknown mean µarmi . The arms in the stream are
arriving one by one, and we can pull an arm only when it is
stored in the memory. Given parameters ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), the
task is to identify k arms whose reward means are lower
than that of the k-th best arm by at most ε with probability
at least 1 − δ. The ultimate goal in this paper is to minimize
the sample complexity using a single-arm memory and a
single pass over the stream.

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Data Science and Analytics Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Xiaokui Xiao <xkxiao@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
log∗ (n) equals the number of times that we need to apply the
logarithm function on n before the results is no more than 1.

(Problem 2) Streaming BAI. In streaming BAI, the task
is to identify the optimal arm with the largest mean with
probability at least 1−δ, using a single-arm memory, assuming that there exists a unique optimal arm. Streaming BAI
can be regarded as a special case of ε-KAI with ε = 0 and
k = 1, Again, we aim to minimize the sample complexity
using a single-arm memory and as few passes of the input

