Learning Deep Neural Networks under Agnostic Corrupted Supervision

Boyang Liu 1 Mengying Sun 1 Ding Wang 1 Pang-Ning Tan 1 Jiayu Zhou 1

Abstract
Training deep neural network models in the presence of corrupted supervision is challenging as
the corrupted data points may significantly impact generalization performance. To alleviate
this problem, we present an efficient robust algorithm that achieves strong guarantees without
any assumption on the type of corruption and provides a unified framework for both classification
and regression problems. Unlike many existing
approaches that quantify the quality of the data
points (e.g., based on their individual loss values), and filter them accordingly, the proposed
algorithm focuses on controlling the collective
impact of data points on the average gradient.
Even when a corrupted data point failed to be excluded by our algorithm, the data point will have
a very limited impact on the overall loss, as compared with state-of-the-art filtering methods based
on loss values. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets have demonstrated the
robustness of our algorithm under different types
of corruption. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/illidanlab/PRL.

1. Introduction
Corrupted supervision is a common issue in real-world
learning tasks, where the target variables are potentially
noisy due to errors in the data collection or labeling process.
Such corruptions can have severe consequences especially
in deep learning models, whose large degree-of-freedom
makes them easier to memorize the corrupted examples, and
thus, susceptible to overfitting (Zhang et al., 2016).
There have been extensive efforts to achieve robustness
against corrupted supervision. A natural approach to deal
with corrupted supervision in deep neural networks (DNNs)
is to reduce the model exposure to corrupted data points
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, USA. Correspondence to: Boyang Liu <liuboya2@msu.edu>, Jiayu Zhou <jiayuz@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

during training. By detecting and filtering (or re-weighting)
the possible corrupted samples, the learning algorithm is
expected to deliver a model that is similar to the one trained
on clean (uncorrupted) data (Han et al., 2018; Zheng et al.,
2020). There are various criteria designed to identify the corrupted samples in training. For example, Han et al. (2018);
Jiang et al. (2018) leveraged the loss function values of the
data points; Zheng et al. (2020) considered prediction uncertainty for filtering data; Malach & Shalev-Shwartz (2017)
used the disagreement between two deep networks; while
Reed et al. (2014) utilized the prediction consistency of
neighboring iterations. The success of these methods highly
depends on the effectiveness of the detection criteria in correctly identifying the corrupted data points. Since the actual
corrupted points remain unknown throughout the learning
process, such “unsupervised” methods may not be effective,
either lacking in theoretical guarantees of robustness (Han
et al., 2018; Reed et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017) or providing
guarantees only under the assumption that prior knowledge
is available about the type of corruption present (Zheng
et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020; Malach & Shalev-Shwartz,
2017; Patrini et al., 2017; Yi & Wu, 2019). Most existing
theoretical guarantees under agnostic corruption during optimization are focused on convex losses (Prasad et al., 2018)
or linear models (Bhatia et al., 2015; 2017), and thus cannot
be directly applied to DNNs. Diakonikolas et al. (2019)
developed a generalized non-convex optimization algorithm
against agnostic corruptions. However, it is not optimized
for the label/supervision corruption problem and has a high
space complexity, which is prohibitively costly when applied to typical DNNs with a large amount of parameters.
Furthermore, many existing approaches are exclusively designed for classification problems (e.g., Malach & ShalevShwartz (2017); Reed et al. (2014); Menon et al. (2019);
Zheng et al. (2020)); extending them to solving regression
problems is not straightforward.
To tackle these challenges, this paper presents a unified optimization framework with robustness guarantees, without
any assumptions on how supervisions are corrupted, and is
applicable to both classification and regression problems.
Instead of designing a criterion for accurate detection of corrupted samples, we focus on limiting the collective impact
of corrupted samples during the learning process through
robust mean estimation of the gradients. Specifically, if our

