Kernel Continual Learning

Mohammad Mahdi Derakhshani 1 Xiantong Zhen 1 2 Ling Shao 2 Cees G. M. Snoek 1

Abstract
This paper introduces kernel continual learning, a
simple but effective variant of continual learning
that leverages the non-parametric nature of kernel methods to tackle catastrophic forgetting. We
deploy an episodic memory unit that stores a subset of samples for each task to learn task-specific
classifiers based on kernel ridge regression. This
does not require memory replay and systematically avoids task interference in the classifiers.
We further introduce variational random features
to learn a data-driven kernel for each task. To do
so, we formulate kernel continual learning as a
variational inference problem, where a random
Fourier basis is incorporated as the latent variable.
The variational posterior distribution over the random Fourier basis is inferred from the coreset of
each task. In this way, we are able to generate
more informative kernels specific to each task,
and, more importantly, the coreset size can be
reduced to achieve more compact memory, resulting in more efficient continual learning based on
episodic memory. Extensive evaluation on four
benchmarks demonstrates the effectiveness and
promise of kernels for continual learning.

1. Introduction
Despite the promise of artificially intelligent agents (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015), they are known to
suffer from catastrophic forgetting when learning over nonstationary data distributions (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Goodfellow et al., 2014). Continual learning (Ring, 1998;
Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018), also
known as life-long learning, was introduced to deal with
catastrophic forgetting. In this framework, agent continually learns to solve a sequence of non-stationary tasks by
accommodating new information, while remaining able to
1

AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE. Correspondence to: M. Derakhshani <m.m.derakhshani@uva.nl>, X. Zhen
<x.zhen@uva.nl>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

complete previously experienced tasks with minimal performance degradation. The fundamental challenge in continual
learning is catastrophic forgetting, which is caused by the
interference among tasks from heterogeneous data distributions (Lange et al., 2019).
Task interference is almost unavoidable when model parameters, like the feature extractor and the classifier, are
shared by all tasks. At the same time, it is practically infeasible to keep a separate set of model parameters for each
individual task when learning with an arbitrarily long sequence of tasks (Hadsell et al., 2020). Moreover, knowledge
tends to be shared and transferred across tasks more in the
lower layers than higher layers of deep neural networks (Ramasesh et al., 2021). This has motivated the development
of non-parametric classifiers that automatically avoid task
interference without sharing any parameters across tasks.
Kernel methods (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002) provide a wellsuited tool for this due to their non-parametric nature, and
have proven to be a powerful technique in machine learning (Cristianini et al., 2000; Smola & Schölkopf, 2004;
Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Sinha & Duchi, 2016). Kernels have
been shown to be effective for incremental and multi-task
learning with support vector machines (Diehl & Cauwenberghs, 2003; Pentina & Ben-David, 2015). Recently, they
have also been demonstrated to be strong learners in tandem
with deep neural networks (Wilson et al., 2016a;b; Tossou
et al., 2019), especially when learning from limited data
(Zhen et al., 2020; Patacchiola et al., 2020). Inspired by
the success of kernels in machine learning, we introduce
task-specific classifiers based on kernels by decoupling the
feature extractor from the classifier for continual learning.
In this paper, we propose kernel continual learning to deal
with catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. Specifically, we propose to learn non-parametric classifiers based
on kernel ridge regression. To do so, we deploy an episodic
memory unit to store a subset of samples from the training
data for each task, which we refer to as ‘the coreset’, and
learn the classifier based on the kernel ridge regression. Kernels provide several benefits. First, the direct interference
of classifiers is naturally avoided as kernels are established
in a non-parametric way for each task and no classifier parameters are shared across tasks. Moreover, in contrast to
existing memory replay methods, e.g., (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019a), our kernel continual learning

