Adapting to Delays and Data in Adversarial Multi-Armed Bandits

András György 1 Pooria Joulani 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

We consider the adversarial multi-armed bandit
problem under delayed feedback. We analyze
variants of the Exp3 algorithm that tune their
step size using only information (about the losses
and delays) available at the time of the decisions, and obtain regret guarantees that adapt
to the observed (rather than the worst-case) sequences of delays and/or losses. First, through
a remarkably simple proof technique, we show
that with proper tuning of the step size, the algorithm achieves an optimal
(up to logarithmic
p
factors) regret of order log(K)(T K + D) both
in expectation and in high probability, where K
is the number of arms, T is the time horizon, and
D is the cumulative delay. The high-probability
version of the bound, which is the first highprobability delay-adaptive bound in the literature,
crucially depends on the use of implicit exploration in estimating the losses. Then, following
Zimmert and Seldin (2019), we extend these results so that the algorithm can “skip” rounds with
large
in regret bounds of order
p delays, resulting p
T K log(K) + |R| + DR̄ log(K), where R is
an arbitrary set of rounds (which are skipped) and
DR̄ is the cumulative delay of the feedback for
other rounds. Finally, we present another, dataadaptive (AdaGrad-style) version of the algorithm
for which the regret adapts to the observed (delayed) losses instead of only adapting to the cumulative delay (this algorithm requires an a priori
upper bound on the maximum delay, or the advance knowledge of the delay for each decision
when it is made). The resulting bound can be
orders of magnitude smaller on benign problems,
and it can be shown that the delay only affects the
regret through the loss of the best arm.
1
DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to:
György
<agyorgy@deepmind.com>,
Pooria
<pjoulani@deepmind.com>.

András
Joulani

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The multi-armed bandit problem is a canonical model for
sequential decision making with limited feedback. In this
model a learner makes a sequence of actions. After every action, the learner immediately observes the loss corresponding to its action. On the other hand, in many practical
applications of bandit algorithms, the loss feedback to the
algorithm may be severely delayed. For example, in recommender systems, including display advertisement, content
optimization for websites, or content recommendation for
paid services, often several new recommendations need to
be made before a user can even react to the recommendation they received, not to mention the time often needed to
propagate the feedback (observation) to the decision making
system (Li et al., 2010; Dudik et al., 2011; Chapelle, 2014),
or the performance metrics may be delayed by design (e.g.,
user engagement in a week, see, e.g., Mann et al., 2019;
Vernade et al., 2020). Other types of applications include interactive multi-agent learning systems (Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2019), where the feedback is not immediately available due
to communication delays, or distributed optimization, where
gradient computations are performed with various delays
(Agarwal and Duchi, 2011), to mention a few.
In this paper we consider the adversarial version of the
bandit problem with delayed feedback and an oblivious adversary. Given a set of K actions and a time horizon T ,
it is well known that the worst-case regret achievable
by a
√
learner in the non-delayed setting is of order KT (Audibert and Bubeck, 2009). The delayed setting was perhaps
first considered by Neu et al. (2010; 2014), who showed
that in case every feedback is delayed by a constant d, the
Exp3
p algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) achieves a regret of
O( dKT log(K)). This result was extended to the general partial monitoring setting by Joulani et al. (2013). The
next important step was made by Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2019),
who showed that the effect of the delay and the number of
arms is in fact not intertwined:√
they proved
p that the worstcase regret is at least Ω(max{ KT , dT log(K)}) (for
d ≤ T / log K), and that the Exp3 algorithm achieves this
(up to a logarithmic factor). These bounds show that, at
least in the case of fixed delays, it is possible to achieve a
regret that scales with the cumulative delay D = dT . In the
full information case, Quanrud and Khashabi (2015) were
the first to show that it is possible to achieve a regret that

