Debiasing Model Updates for Improving Personalized Federated Training

Durmus Alp Emre Acar 1 Yue Zhao 2 Ruizhao Zhu 1
Ramon Matas Navarro 2 Matthew Mattina 2 Paul N. Whatmough 2
Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We propose a novel method for federated learning that is customized specifically to the objective
of a given edge device. In our proposed method,
a server trains a global meta-model by collaborating with devices without actually sharing data.
The trained global meta-model is then personalized locally by each device to meet its specific
objective. Different from the conventional federated learning setting, training customized models
for each device is hindered by both the inherent
data biases of the various devices, as well as the
requirements imposed by the federated architecture. We propose gradient correction methods
leveraging prior works, and explicitly de-bias the
meta-model in the distributed heterogeneous data
setting to learn personalized device models. We
present convergence guarantees of our method
for strongly convex, convex and nonconvex meta
objectives. We empirically evaluate the performance of our method on benchmark datasets and
demonstrate significant communication savings.

of devices participating in any round, must be small on account of limited connectivity and available communication
bandwidth.
Additionally, data stored on the edge devices is statistically
heterogeneous, namely, different devices/users have different data. As a result, naively fusing independently trained
device models can result in significant bias and poor performance. While a number of previous works (see (Karimireddy et al., 2019)) have proposed methods to overcome the
effects of statistical heterogeneity, the goal of these works
have remained the same, namely, to realize a single model
at termination time, which works as well as a learner with
centralized test data. In particular, the performance is measured with respect to the combined test data of all of the
devices.

1. Introduction

Personalizing Federated Learning to an Edge-Device.
While FL optimizes centralized performance, this metric
may not be meaningful from the user’s perspective. An
end user, after all, will have personal objectives and interests. Therefore, a more suitable metric is to measure
model performance against the user’s custom test data1 .
Variability in user objectives include assigning increased
importance to specific classes, variability in user tasks (word
completion for native vs. foreign speakers), and requiring
privacy/anonymity of class predictions.

Federated learning (FL) introduced by McMahan et al.
(2017), proposes to leverage local data stored across massively distributed edge devices to train a prediction model
that matches the performance of a learner with centralized
data. An FL system is composed of a server that coordinates
interactions with edge devices, and refines its model over
several rounds of communication. FL is challenging because it imposes at least two fundamental constraints during
training. Firstly, the local data itself cannot be shared or
transmitted due to privacy concerns. Secondly, the number
of rounds of server-device interaction, as well as the number

In this paper, we propose a novel federated training approach
based on meta-learning, which allows for sample-efficient
customization of a centralized model to suit an end user’s
objectives. That meta-learning approaches are well-suited
for our customization scenario is not surprising, and has
been leveraged in prior works (Chen et al., 2018; Jiang et al.,
2019; Fallah et al., 2020). Indeed, in our setup, each user
is associated with a different task, and our goal, as in metalearning, is to train a meta-model on a variety of tasks, such
that this model can be rapidly re-purposed to solve new or
existing tasks using only a few training examples.

1
Boston University, Boston, MA 2 Arm ML Research Lab,
Boston, MA. Correspondence to: Durmus Alp Emre Acar <alpacar@bu.edu>, Venkatesh Saligrama <srv@bu.edu>.

Challenges.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1

Personalized Federated Learning (PFL)

As a case in point consider two users, one whose experiences
involve wild animals, while the other is primarily interested in
domestic pets.

