Optimal Counterfactual Explanations in Tree Ensembles

Axel Parmentier 1 Thibaut Vidal 2 3

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations are usually generated
through heuristics that are sensitive to the search’s
initial conditions. The absence of guarantees of
performance and robustness hinders trustworthiness. In this paper, we take a disciplined approach
towards counterfactual explanations for tree ensembles. We advocate for a model-based search
aiming at “optimal” explanations and propose efficient mixed-integer programming approaches.
We show that isolation forests can be modeled
within our framework to focus the search on plausible explanations with a low outlier score. We
provide comprehensive coverage of additional
constraints that model important objectives, heterogeneous data types, structural constraints on
the feature space, along with resource and actionability restrictions. Our experimental analyses
demonstrate that the proposed search approach
requires a computational effort that is orders of
magnitude smaller than previous mathematical
programming algorithms. It scales up to large
data sets and tree ensembles, where it provides,
within seconds, systematic explanations grounded
on well-defined models solved to optimality.

1. Introduction
Accountability in machine learning is quickly rising as a major concern as learning algorithms take over tasks that have
a major impact on human lives. With the increasing use of
profiling and automated decision-making systems, new legal
provisions are being set up to protect rights to transparency.
The recent interpretation of the EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) by Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (2017) refers to a “right to explanations” and has
1

C ERMICS, École des Ponts Paristech; 2 CIRRELT & SCALEAI Chair in Data-Driven Supply Chains, Department of Mathematics and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montreal, Canada;
3
Department of Computer Science, Pontifical Catholic University
of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Brazil. Correspondence to: Thibaut
Vidal <thibaut.vidal@cirrelt.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

triggered extensive research on algorithmic recourse and
counterfactual explanations (see, e.g., Wachter et al., 2018;
Karimi et al., 2020b; Verma et al., 2020).
Counterfactual explanations are contrastive arguments of
the type: “To obtain this loan, you need $40,000 of annual
revenue instead of the current $30,000”. They correspond to
small perturbations of an example that permit to modify the
classification outcome, in a similar fashion as adversarial examples, though typically restricted by additional constraints
ensuring actionability and plausibility (Barocas et al., 2020;
Venkatasubramanian & Alfano, 2020).
Despite their conceptual simplicity, counterfactual explanations pose significant challenges related to data protection,
intellectual property, ethics, along with fundamental computational tractability issues. Indeed, the scale of machine
learning models has tremendously increased over a few
decades. Even when restricted to the vicinity of an example, a systematic inspection of all possible explanations is
intractable, and therefore most studies on counterfactual
explanations rely on ad-hoc algorithms or heuristics (e.g.,
gradient descent in a non-convex space in Wachter et al.
2018). This poses at least three main issues:
(a) Heuristics can fail to identify the most natural and
insightful explanation, and therefore do not necessarily
give a trustworthy cause (Karimi et al., 2020a). This is
especially true when the search involves combinatorial
spaces (e.g., tree ensembles) with binary or integer
features bound together by plausibility constraints.
(b) They can be sensitive to the initial conditions of the
search, leading to unstable results —even for the same
subject.
(c) Finally, these methods are not readily extensible to include additional constraints and domain knowledge regarding actionability and plausibility. A small change
of problem formulation due to a specific application domain can very well require significant methodological
adaptations.
To circumvent these issues, we advocate for a disciplined
analysis of counterfactual explanations through mathematical programming lenses. We focus on tree ensembles (including random forests and gradient boosting), a popular

