Efficient Message Passing for 0–1 ILPs with Binary Decision Diagrams

Jan-Hendrik Lange 1 Paul Swoboda 2

Abstract
We present a message passing method for 0–1
integer linear programs. Our algorithm is based
on a decomposition of the original problem into
subproblems that are represented as binary decision diagrams. The resulting Lagrangean dual
is solved iteratively by a series of efficient block
coordinate ascent steps. Our method has linear
iteration complexity in the size of the decomposition and can be effectively parallelized. The characteristics of our approach are desirable towards
solving ever larger problems arising in structured
prediction. We present experimental results on
combinatorial problems from MAP inference for
Markov Random Fields, quadratic assignment,
discrete tomography and cell tracking for developmental biology and show promising performance.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction tasks in machine learning commonly
require solving relaxations of NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems that are formulated as integer linear programs (ILPs). Examples include discrete graphical models (Werner, 2007), graph partitioning (Bansal
et al., 2004), graph matchings (Torresani et al., 2008) and
tracking problems (Luo et al., 2014). Commercial ILP
solvers like Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2020) or
CPLEX (Cplex, IBM ILOG, 2019) rely on standard linear
programming algorithms, such as the simplex and barrier
method. These methods require matrix factorization and
hence have super-linear complexity, which diminishes their
competitiveness for very large problems that arise in structured prediction. Therefore, considerable research effort has
been invested into efficient dedicated solvers for specific
problem classes. Some of the most scalable methods exploit problem decompositions in order to solve Lagrangean
relaxations. This family of algorithms includes subgradi1
University of Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for
Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Paul
Swoboda <pswoboda@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ent, Frank-Wolfe and dual block coordinate ascent (DBCA)
methods. The DBCA approach, also called message passing in the literature, exhibits very good performance for
certain classes of combinatorial problems such as inference in Markov Random Fields, significantly outperforming
general-purpose ILP solvers (Kappes et al., 2015). The
drawback of DBCA solvers, however, is that they are only
applicable to their dedicated problem class. In order to solve
other problem classes, new specialized DBCA algorithms
have to be developed. This hinders application of structured
prediction in machine learning, since algorithm design is
challenging and implementation time-consuming.
In this work we propose an efficient message passing
method for solving relaxations of 0–1 ILPs. Our method
(i) has linear iteration complexity unlike LP solvers, (ii) is
not restricted to a narrow subclass of problems unlike specialized solvers and (iii) can be effectively parallelized and
shows significant parallelization speedups. We demonstrate
the potential of our method on a wide variety of structured
prediction tasks.
Our algorithm works by decomposing any given 0–1 ILP
into smaller subproblems represented by binary decision
diagrams (BDDs) (Bryant, 1986). In the basic version we
generate a BDD for each row of the constraint matrix. While
general linear constraints may lead to BDDs of intractable
sizes (e.g. for the NP-hard Knapsack problem), many inequalities commonly encountered in practice admit tractable
BDD representations (Knuth, 2011; Wegener, 2000). Inequalities that do not admit a small BDD representation
can be represented as multiple BDDs (Abı́o et al., 2012)
efficiently. Hence, our BDD-representation can always be
chosen bounded by the size of the original problem description. We combine the BDD subproblems via Lagrangean
dual variables in order to obtain a convex relaxation for
the ILP. The algorithm then updates dual variables iteratively by an operation called min-marginal averaging, which
maximally improves the objective w.r.t. the current set of
dual variables. Hence, our method belongs to the family of
DBCA algorithms. Based on the computed dual solution,
we compute a primal one via depth-first exploration of the
search space. Our primal heuristic uses dual costs to guide
the search towards high-quality solutions and individual
subproblems inform the search so that feasible solutions are
found fast and are of high quality. We show how BDDs

