HardCoRe-NAS: Hard Constrained diffeRentiable
Neural Architecture Search
Niv Nayman * 1 Yonathan Aflalo * 1 Asaf Noy 1 Lihi Zelnik-Manor 1

78

Realistic use of neural networks often requires adhering to multiple constraints on latency, energy
and memory among others. A popular approach
to find fitting networks is through constrained
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), however, previous methods enforce the constraint only softly.
Therefore, the resulting networks do not exactly
adhere to the resource constraint and their accuracy is harmed. In this work we resolve this by
introducing Hard Constrained diffeRentiable NAS
(HardCoRe-NAS), that is based on an accurate
formulation of the expected resource requirement
and a scalable search method that satisfies the hard
constraint throughout the search. Our experiments
show that HardCoRe-NAS generates state-of-theart architectures, surpassing other NAS methods,
while strictly satisfying the hard resource constraints without any tuning required.

77.5

1. Introduction
With the rise in popularity of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), the need for neural networks with fast inference speed and high accuracy, has been growing continuously. At first, manually designed architectures, such
as VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) or ResNet (He
et al., 2015), targeted powerful GPUs as those were the common computing platform for deep CNNs. Many variants
of those architectures were the golden standard until the
need for deployment on edge devices and standard CPUs
emerged. These are more limited computing platforms, requiring lighter architectures that for practical scenarios have
to comply with hard constraints on the real time latency or
power consumption. This has spawned a line of research
aimed at finding architectures with both high performance
*

Equal contribution, Author ordering determined by unbiased
coin flip. 1 Alibaba Group, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence
to: Yonathan Aflalo <johnaflalo@gmail.com>, Niv Nayman
<niv.nayman@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Abstract

Ours from scratch
Ours fine-tune:400+15N

77

FairNAS-C

76.5

TF-NAS-CPU A

76

FB-NET-C

75.5
75
74.5

MobileNet V3

MNAS-NET-A1

TF-NAS-CPU B
SPNAS-NET
MNAS-NET-B1

37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61
Latency (milliseconds)
Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy on Imagenet vs Latency measured on
Intel Xeon CPU for a batch size of 1. HardCoreNAS can generate
a network for any given latency, with accuracy according to the
red curve, which is higher than all previous methods.

and bounded resource demand.
The main approaches to solve this evolved from Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph & Le, 2016; Liu et al.,
2018; Cai et al., 2018), while adding a constraint on the
target latency over various platforms, e.g., TPU, CPU, EdgeGPU, FPGA, etc. The constrained-NAS methods can be
grouped into two categories: (i) Reward based methods
such as Reinforcement-Learning (RL) or Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) (Cai et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2019; Tan & Le,
2019; Howard et al., 2019), where the search is performed
by sampling networks and predicting their final accuracy
and resource demands by evaluation over some validation
set. The predictors are expensive to acquire and oftentimes
inaccurate. (ii) Resource-aware gradient based methods (Hu
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019) formulate a differentiable loss
function consisting of a trade-off between an accuracy term
and a proxy soft penalty term. Therefore, the architecture
can be directly optimized using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) (Bottou, 1998), however, it is hard to tune the tradeoff between accuracy and resources, which deteriorates the
network accuracy and fails to fully meet the resource re-

