Implicit Rate-Constrained Optimization of Non-decomposable Objectives

Abhishek Kumar 1 Harikrishna Narasimhan 1 Andrew Cotter 1

Abstract
We consider a popular family of constrained optimization problems arising in machine learning
that involve optimizing a non-decomposable evaluation metric with a certain thresholded form,
while constraining another metric of interest. Examples of such problems include optimizing the
false negative rate at a fixed false positive rate, optimizing precision at a fixed recall, optimizing the
area under the precision-recall or ROC curves, etc.
Our key idea is to formulate a rate-constrained
optimization that expresses the threshold parameter as a function of the model parameters via the
Implicit Function theorem. We show how the resulting optimization problem can be solved using
standard gradient based methods. Experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method over existing state-of-theart approaches for these problems.

1. Introduction
In many modern machine learning applications, the performance of a model is evaluated using metrics that are
complex and nuanced. For example, in retrieval systems,
it is common to evaluate a scoring model based the area
under the precision-recall curve, or the ROC curve, or on
its precision at a certain recall value (Eban et al., 2017).
Similarly, in many medical diagnostic applications, a model
is required to yield low false positive rates while restricting
its false negatives rate to be within an allowed limit (Rao
et al., 2008), while in machine learning fairness applications
one might be interested in imposing the “80% rule”, which
requires a positive prediction rate of at least 80% on the
minority class (Biddle, 2006; Zafar et al., 2017).
The above problems cannot be directly solved by minimizing a standard classification loss. In fact, prior work has
found that doing so can result in inferior model performance
(Joachims, 2005; Koyejo et al., 2014; Kar et al., 2014; Eban
1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Abhishek Kumar <abhishk@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2017; Cotter et al., 2019a). Moreover, many of the
metrics that we are interested in have a non-decomposable
structure, i.e., they cannot be expressed directly in terms of
an average over individual data points, making them hard
to optimize using standard optimization tools. Much prior
work has sought to address this problem, resulting in a range
of methods targeting different classes of non-decomposable
metrics (Yue et al., 2007; Narasimhan & Agarwal, 2013b;
Kar et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2018).
In this paper, we consider a popular family of nondecomposable objectives that have a certain thresholded
form. This includes metrics like the false negative rate
(FNR) at a certain fixed false positive rate (FPR), precision
at a fixed recall, precision@K, AUC-PR, and AUC-ROC, as
well as more recent threshold-based fairness metrics (Hardt
et al., 2016). The task of optimizing these metrics can
naturally be written as a constrained optimization problem,
wherein one seeks to optimize a quantity such as the model’s
precision or false positive rate at one or more thresholds, subject to the model satisfying a set of rate constraints at those
thresholds. The dominant approach for solving such rateconstrained problems has been to relax the constraints with
surrogate losses, and to formulate an equivalent Lagrangianbased primal-dual problem (Eban et al., 2017). Follow-up
work has improved upon this approach by using the surrogate relaxations only for the primal updates, but not the dual
(Cotter et al., 2019b; Narasimhan et al., 2019a).
Our proposed optimization strategy departs significantly
from the prior Lagrangian-based methods, and avoids explicitly solving the constrained optimization problem. Instead,
we express the threshold variables in the optimization problem as an implicit function of the model parameters, and
thus re-formulate the problem as an unconstrained optimization over the model parameters. By appealing to the Implicit
Function Theorem (Tu, 2011), we show how to compute the
gradients for the resulting unconstrained objective, despite
not knowing the form of the implicit function, and then use
them to perform standard gradient-based optimization (see
Section 3). Although the Implicit Function Theorem makes
a local statement about the existence of the implicit function
(i.e., valid in a small neighborhood around current model
parameters), we can still effectively use the theorem to make
local gradient updates towards optimizing the objective.

