Amortized Conditional Normalized Maximum Likelihood: Reliable Out of
Distribution Uncertainty Estimation

Aurick Zhou 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
While deep neural networks provide good performance for a range of challenging tasks, calibration and uncertainty estimation remain major challenges, especially under distribution shift.
In this paper, we propose the amortized conditional normalized maximum likelihood (ACNML)
method as a scalable general-purpose approach
for uncertainty estimation, calibration, and out-ofdistribution robustness with deep networks. Our
algorithm builds on the conditional normalized
maximum likelihood (CNML) coding scheme,
which has minimax optimal properties according to the minimum description length principle,
but is computationally intractable to evaluate exactly for all but the simplest of model classes. We
propose to use approximate Bayesian inference
technqiues to produce a tractable approximation
to the CNML distribution. Our approach can be
combined with any approximate inference algorithm that provides tractable posterior densities
over model parameters. We demonstrate that ACNML compares favorably to a number of prior
techniques for uncertainty estimation in terms of
calibration when faced with distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Current machine learning methods provide unprecedented
accuracy across a range of domains, from computer vision to
natural language processing. However, in many high-stakes
applications, such as medical diagnosis or autonomous driving, rare mistakes can be extremely costly. Thus, effective
deployment of learned models requires not only high accuracy, but also a way to measure the certainty in a model’s
predictions in order to assess risk and allow the model to
abstain from making decisions when there is low confidence
in the prediction. While deep networks offer excellent pre1

EECS, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Aurick Zhou <aurick@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

diction accuracy, they generally do not provide the means
to accurately quantify their uncertainty. This is especially
true on out-of-distribution inputs, where deep networks tend
to make overconfident incorrect predictions (Ovadia et al.,
2019). In this paper, we tackle the problem of obtaining
reliable uncertainty estimates under distribution shift, with
the aim of producing models that can reliably report their
uncertainty even when presented with unexpected inputs.
Most prior work approaches the problem of uncertainty estimation from the standpoint of Bayesian inference. By
treating parameters as random variables with some prior
distribution, Bayesian inference can compute posterior distributions that capture a notion of epistemic uncertainty and
allow us to quantitatively reason about uncertainty in model
predictions. However, computing accurate posterior distributions becomes intractable as we use very complex models
like deep neural nets, and current approaches require highly
approximate inference methods that fall short of the promise
of full Bayesian modeling in practice.
Bayesian methods also have a deep connection with the
minimum description length (MDL) principle, a formalization of Occam’s razor that casts learning as performing
efficient data compression and has been widely used as a
motivation for model selection techniques. Codes corresponding to maximum-a-posteriori estimators and Bayes
marginalization have been commonly used within the MDL
framework. However, other coding schemes have been proposed in MDL centered around achieving different notions
of minimax optimality. Interpreting coding schemes as
predictive distributions, such methods can directly inspire
prediction strategies that give conservative predictions and
do not suffer from excessive overconfidence due to their
minimax formulation.
One such predictive distribution is the conditional normalized maximum likelihood (CNML) (Grünwald, 2007; Rissanen and Roos, 2007; Roos et al., 2008) model, also known
as sequential NML or predictive NML (Fogel and Feder,
2018b). To make a prediction on a new input, CNML considers every possible label and finds the model that best
explains that label for the query point together with the
training set. It then uses that corresponding model to assign probabilities for each input and normalizes to obtain a

