1-bit Adam: Communication Efficient Large-Scale Training with Adam’s
Convergence Speed
Hanlin Tang 1 2 Shaoduo Gan 3 Ammar Ahmad Awan 1 Samyam Rajbhandari 1 Conglong Li 1 Xiangru Lian 2
Ji Liu 2 Ce Zhang 3 Yuxiong He 1

Abstract
Scalable training of large models (like BERT
and GPT-3) requires careful optimization rooted
in model design, architecture, and system capabilities. From a system standpoint, communication has become a major bottleneck, especially on commodity systems with standard TCP
interconnects that offer limited network bandwidth. Communication compression is an important technique to reduce training time on such
systems. One of the most effective methods is
error-compensated compression, which offers robust convergence speed even under 1-bit compression. However, state-of-the-art error compensation techniques only work with basic optimizers like SGD and Momentum SGD, which
are linearly dependent on the gradients. They
do not work with non-linear gradient-based optimizers like Adam, which offer state-of-the-art
convergence efficiency and accuracy for models like BERT. In this paper, we propose 1-bit
Adam that reduces the communication volume
by up to 5⇥, offers much better scalability, and
provides the same convergence speed as uncompressed Adam. Our key finding is that Adam’s
variance (non-linear term) becomes stable during
training, hence we can run Adam in the beginning
(warmup phase) and use it as a precondition for
Momentum SGD during the rest of the training
(compression phase). Experiments on up to 256
GPUs show that 1-bit Adam enables up to 3.3⇥
higher throughput for BERT-Large pre-training
and up to 2.9⇥ higher throughput for SQuAD
fine-tuning. In addition, we provide theoretical
analysis for our proposed work.
1
Microsoft 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Rochester 3 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Yuxiong He <yuxhe@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Modern advancement of machine learning is heavily driven
by the advancement of computational power and techniques.
Nowadays, it is not unusual to train a single model using
hundreds of computational devices such as GPUs. As a result, scaling up training algorithms in the distributed setting
has attracted intensive interests over the years. One important direction is communication efficient distributed training, which enhances the scalability of the training system by
reducing the communication cost. Example techniques include quantization (Zhang et al., 2017; Wangni et al., 2018),
decentralization (Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova* et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2018), and asynchronous communication (Zheng
et al., 2016; Chaturapruek et al., 2015).
One widely used strategy for alleviating the communication
overhead is gradient compression. Before communication,
the original gradient g will be compressed into C! [g], where
C! [·] is the compress operator1 . As a result the communication volume could be greatly reduced. However, this
gradient compression could slow down the convergence
speed because important information might get lost during
the compression. To recover this information lost, errorcompensated compression strategy was proposed: Instead of
compressing the gradient at t-th iteration directly, we would
first add back the compression error from the last step and
then do the compression. Recent studies (Stich et al., 2018)
observed that by using error-compensated compression, the
asymptotic convergence speed remains unchanged for SGD
even using 1-bit compression.
On the other hand, many state-of-the-art models have to be
trained using a more complicated variant, Adam (Kingma
and Ba, 2014). For example, to train models such as BERT,
one has to resort to the Adam optimizer, since training it
with vanilla/momentum SGD has been shown to be less
effective. Unfortunately, we find that error-compensated
compression does not work for Adam, because Adam is
non-linearly dependent on the gradient which affects the
error compensation mechanism (see Section 3.2 and 4.2 for
more details).
1

C! [·] could also include randomness.

