Equivariant Message Passing for the Prediction of Tensorial Properties and
Molecular Spectra

Kristof T. Schütt 1 2 Oliver T. Unke 1 2 Michael Gastegger 1 3

Abstract
Message passing neural networks have become a
method of choice for learning on graphs, in particular the prediction of chemical properties and
the acceleration of molecular dynamics studies.
While they readily scale to large training data sets,
previous approaches have proven to be less data
efficient than kernel methods. We identify limitations of invariant representations as a major
reason and extend the message passing formulation to rotationally equivariant representations.
On this basis, we propose the polarizable atom
interaction neural network (PAI NN) and improve
on common molecule benchmarks over previous
networks, while reducing model size and inference time. We leverage the equivariant atomwise
representations obtained by PAI NN for the prediction of tensorial properties. Finally, we apply this
to the simulation of molecular spectra, achieving
speedups of 4-5 orders of magnitude compared to
the electronic structure reference.

1. Introduction
Studying dynamics of chemical systems allows insight into
processes such as reactions or the folding of proteins, and
constitutes a fundamental challenge in computational chemistry. Since the motion of atoms is governed by the laws of
quantum mechanics, accurate ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulations may require solving the Schrödinger
equation for millions of time steps. While the exact solution
is infeasible to compute for all but the smallest systems,
even fast approximations such as density functional the1

Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin,
10587 Berlin, Germany 2 Berlin Institute for the Foundations
of Learning and Data, 10587 Berlin, Germany 3 BASLEARN
– TU Berlin / BASF Joint Lab for Machine Learning,
10587 Berlin, Germany.
Correspondence to: Kristof
T. Schütt <kristof.schuett@tu-berlin.de>, Michael Gastegger
<michael.gastegger@tu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ory quickly become prohibitive for large systems and the
prediction of accurate spectra.
Recently, machine learning potentials (Behler, 2016; Unke
et al., 2020; von Lilienfeld et al., 2020) have gained popularity for studying systems ranging from small molecules
at high levels of theory (Chmiela et al., 2018; Westermayr et al., 2020) to systems with thousands or millions
of atoms (Morawietz et al., 2016; Bartók et al., 2018; Lu
et al., 2020). In particular, message-passing neural networks (Gilmer et al., 2017) (MPNNs) yield accurate predictions for chemical properties across chemical compound
space and can handle large amounts of training data. Albeit
MPNNs have significantly increased in accuracy over the
years (as well as in computational cost), kernel methods
with manually crafted features (Chmiela et al., 2017; Christensen et al., 2020; Bartók et al., 2010) have still proven to
perform better when only small training sets are available.
While molecules are often represented as graphs, they are
in fact interacting particles in a continuous 3d space. Consequently, SchNet (Schütt et al., 2017) modeled message
passes as continuous-filter convolutions over that space, albeit with rotationally invariant filters. As Miller et al. (2020)
pointed out, this leads to a loss of relevant directional, equivariant information. Klicpera et al. (2020a) have introduced
directional message-passing, the angular information here is
restricted to the messages while the representation of nodes
(atoms) remains rotationally invariant. While equivariant
convolutions have been successfully applied in computer
vision (Cohen & Welling, 2017; Weiler et al., 2018b; Worrall & Brostow, 2018), previous approaches to molecular
prediction (Thomas et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2019) have
not reached the accuracy of their rotationally invariant counterparts.
In this work, we propose rotationally equivariant message
passing and the polarizable atom interaction neural network
(PAI NN) architecture as one instance of it. We examine the
limited capability of rotation-invariant representations to
propagate directional information and show that equivariant
representations do not suffer from this issue. PAI NN outperforms invariant message passing networks on common
molecular benchmarks and performs at small sample sizes
on par with kernel methods that have been deemed to be

