Learning Under Delayed Feedback: Implicitly Adapting to Gradient Delays

Rotem Zamir Aviv 1 Ido Hakimi 2 Assaf Schuster 2 Kfir Y. Levy 1 3

Abstract
We consider stochastic convex optimization
problems, where several machines act asynchronously in parallel while sharing a common
memory. We propose a robust training method
for the constrained setting and derive non asymptotic convergence guarantees that do not depend
on prior knowledge of update delays, objective
smoothness, and gradient variance. Conversely,
existing methods for this setting crucially rely on
this prior knowledge, which render them unsuitable for essentially all shared-resources computational environments, such as clouds and data
centers. Concretely, existing approaches are
unable to accommodate changes in the delays
which result from dynamic allocation of the machines, while our method implicitly adapts to
such changes.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a wide adoption of machine
learning (ML) techniques in various fields. However, the
underlying model complexity and the vast amount of data
required to train modern ML models may lead to impractical prolonged training time. Parallelizing the learning process has the potential to greatly decrease the learning duration, by exploiting more computation power at every step.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants are
amongst the most popular training methods in ML, and are
known to work well even for modern large scale problems.
However, due to the sequential nature of SGD, extending
its usage for distributed learning is not straightforward.
Distributed learning methods with parameter-servercan be
divided into synchronous Vs. asynchronous approaches.
In the synchronous setting, all of the machines communicate at the same time and depend on one another to pro1

Viterby Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Taub Faculty of Computer Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 A Viterbi Fellow. Correspondence to: Rotem
Zamir Aviv <ratume@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ceed. Such methods are easier to analyze, yet their performance depends on the slowest machine and they require
large communication overheads. Conversely, in the asynchronous case, machines may communicate independently
of other machines, which allows more flexibility and reduces communication. It is well known that the performance of asynchronous methods degrades due to the staleness of the gradient updates, i.e., the delay between the
current model, and the (outdated) model for which the gradient feedback is computed.
The asynchronous setting was extensively investigated in
the context of stochastic convex optimization, which captures fundamental learning problems like linear regression,
logistic regression and SVMs. It was shown that if the
learning objective is non-smooth, delays in the computed
gradient feedback necessarily degrade the performance of
SGD compared to the non-delayed setting, see e.g. (Joulani
et al., 2013; Nedić et al., 2001).
Nevertheless, it was recently shown that the latter does not
apply for smooth objectives. Arjevani et al. (2020) were
the first to obtain the optimal rates for SGD with delays
in the smooth convex case. They have provided a version
of delayed SGD that incurs no degradation compared to the
non-delayed case as √
long as the maximal delay τmax is small
enough: τmax ≤ O( T ), where T is the total number of
SGD updates. In the strongly-convex case they have shown
that there is no degradation as long as τmax ≤ O(T / log T ).
While the result of Arjevani et al. (2020) was limited to
quadratic objectives, in a very recent work, Stich & Karimireddy (2020) have generalized their result for the general convex smooth case, while obtaining the same optimal
guarantees.
Unfortunately, the optimal methods of Arjevani et al.
(2020) and Stich & Karimireddy (2020) (i) do not hold
for constrained problems, (ii) degrade with the maximal
delay, which might be substantially higher than the average delay, and are not able to accommodate changes in
the delays throughout the training process, and (iii) require
prior knowledge of the maximal delay and smoothness parameter. In practice, when working with shared resources
computational systems, delays might vary with time due
to dynamic allocation of machines. Such scalable systems
are central to the entire discipline of distributed learning,

