Differentiable Dynamic Quantization with Mixed Precision and
Adaptive Resolution

Zhang Zhaoyang 1 Shao Wenqi 1 Gu Jinwei 2 3 Wang Xiaogang 1 Luo Ping 4

Abstract
Model quantization is challenging due to many
tedious hyper-parameters such as precision
(bitwidth), dynamic range (minimum and maximum discrete values) and stepsize (interval between discrete values). Unlike prior arts that carefully tune these values, we present a fully differentiable approach to learn all of them, named Differentiable Dynamic Quantization (DDQ), which
has several benefits. (1) DDQ is able to quantize challenging lightweight architectures like MobileNets, where different layers prefer different
quantization parameters. (2) DDQ is hardwarefriendly and can be easily implemented using lowprecision matrix-vector multiplication, making
it capable in many hardware such as ARM. (3)
DDQ reduces training runtime by 25% compared
to state-of-the-arts. Extensive experiments show
that DDQ outperforms prior arts on many networks and benchmarks, especially when models
are already efficient and compact. e.g. DDQ is the
first approach that achieves lossless 4-bit quantization for MobileNetV2 on ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have made significant
progress in many applications. However, large memory and
computations impede deployment of DNNs on portable devices. Model quantization (Courbariaux et al., 2015; 2016;
Zhu et al., 2017) that discretizes the weights and activations
of a DNN becomes an important topic, but it is challenging because of two aspects. Firstly, different network architectures allocate different memory and computational
complexity in different layers, making quantization suboptimal when the quantization parameters such as bitwidth,
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseBrain, Ltd
Shanghai AI Lab 4 Hong Kong University. Correspondence to:
Zhaoyang Zhang <zhaoyangzhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

dynamic range and stepsize are freezed in each layer. Secondly, gradient-based training of low-bitwidth models is
difficult (Bengio et al., 2013), because the gradient of previous quantization function may vanish, i.e. back-propagation
through a quantized DNN may return zero gradients.
Previous approaches typically use the round operation with
predefined quantization parameters, which can be summarized below. Let x and xq be values before and after quantization, we have xq = sign(x) · d · F(b|x|/d + 0.5e), where
| · | denotes the absolute value, sign(·) returns the sign of
x, d is the stepsize (i.e. the interval between two adjacent
discrete values after quantization), and b·e denotes the round
function2 . Moreover, F(·) is a function that maps a rounded
value to a desired quantization level (i.e. a desired discrete
value). For instance, the above equation would represent
a uniform quantizer3 when F is an identity mapping, or
it would represent a power-of-two (nonuniform) quantizer
(Miyashita et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017; Liss et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018a; Li et al., 2020) when F is a function of
power of two.
Although using the round function is simple, model accuracy
would drop when applying it on lightweight architectures
such as MobileNets (Howard et al., 2019; Sandler et al.,
2018) as observed by (Jain et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2019),
because such models that are already efficient and compact
do not have much room for quantization. As shown in Fig.1,
small model is highly optimized for both efficiency and accuracy, making different layers prefer different quantization
parameters. Applying predefined quantizers to them will
result in large quantization errors (i.e. kx − xq k2 ), which
significantly decreases model accuracy compared to their
full-precision counterparts even after finetuning the network
weights.
To improve model accuracy, recent quantizers reduce ||x −
xq ||2 . For example, TensorRT (Migacz, 2017), FAQ (McKinstry et al., 2018), PACT (Choi, 2018) and TQT (Jain et al.,
2019) optimize an additional parameter that represents the
2

The round function returns the closest discrete value given a
continuous value.
3
A uniform quantizer has uniform quantization levels, which
means the stepsizes between any two adjacent discrete values are
the same.

