A Sharp Analysis of Model-based Reinforcement Learning with Self-Play

Qinghua Liu 1 Tiancheng Yu 2 Yu Bai 3 Chi Jin 1

Abstract
Model-based algorithms—algorithms that explore
the environment through building and utilizing an
estimated model—are widely used in reinforcement learning practice and theoretically shown
to achieve optimal sample efficiency for singleagent reinforcement learning in Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). However, for multi-agent reinforcement learning in Markov games, the current
best known sample complexity for model-based
algorithms is rather suboptimal and compares unfavorably against recent model-free approaches.
In this paper, we present a sharp analysis of
model-based self-play algorithms for multi-agent
Markov games. We design an algorithm Optimistic Nash Value Iteration (Nash-VI) for twoplayer zero-sum Markov games that is able
to output an -approximate Nash policy in
Õ(H 3 SAB/2 ) episodes of game playing, where
S is the number of states, A, B are the number
of actions for the two players respectively, and
H is the horizon length. This significantly improves over the best known model-based guarantee of Õ(H 4 S 2 AB/2 ), and is the first that
matches the information-theoretic lower bound
Ω(H 3 S(A + B)/2 ) except for a min {A, B}
factor. In addition, our guarantee compares favorably against the best known model-free algorithm if min {A, B} = o(H 3 ), and outputs a single Markov policy while existing sample-efficient
model-free algorithms output a nested mixture of
Markov policies that is in general non-Markov
and rather inconvenient to store and execute. We
further adapt our analysis to designing a provably efficient task-agnostic algorithm for zerosum Markov games, and designing the first line
of provably sample-efficient algorithms for multiplayer general-sum Markov games.
1
Princeton University, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3 Salesforce Research. Correspondence to: Qinghua Liu
<qinghual@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with the problem of multi-agent
reinforcement learning (multi-agent RL), in which multiple
agents learn to make decisions in an unknown environment
in order to maximize their (own) cumulative rewards. Multiagent RL has achieved significant recent success in traditionally hard AI challenges including large-scale strategy games
(such as GO) (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), real-time video
games involving team play such as Starcraft and Dota2 (OpenAI, 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019), as well as behavior learning
in complex social scenarios (Baker et al., 2020). Achieving
human-like (or super-human) performance in these games
using multi-agent RL typically requires a large number of
samples (steps of game playing) due to the necessity of
exploration, and how to improve the sample complexity of
multi-agent RL has been an important research question.
One prevalent approach towards solving multi-agent RL
is model-based methods, that is, to use the existing visitation data to build an estimate of the model (i.e. transition
dynamics and rewards), run an offline planning algorithm
on the estimated model to obtain the policy, and play the
policy in the environment. Such a principle underlies some
of the earliest single-agent online RL algorithms such as
E3 (Kearns & Singh, 2002) and RMax (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002), and is conceptually appealing for multi-agent
RL too since the multi-agent structure does not add complexity onto the model estimation part and only requires an
appropriate multi-agent planning algorithm (such as value
iteration for games (Shapley, 1953)) in a black-box fashion. On the other hand, model-free methods do not directly
build estimates of the model, but instead directly estimate
the value functions or action-value (Q) functions of the
problem at the optimal/equilibrium policies, and play the
greedy policies with respect to the estimated value functions.
Model-free algorithms have also been well developed for
multi-agent RL such as friend-or-foe Q-Learning (Littman,
2001) and Nash Q-Learning (Hu & Wellman, 2003).
While both model-based and model-free algorithms have
been shown to be provably efficient in multi-agent RL in a recent line of work (Bai & Jin, 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Bai et al.,
2020), a more precise understanding of the optimal sample
complexities within these two types of algorithms (respectively) is still lacking. In the specific setting of two-player

