Streaming Bayesian Deep Tensor Factorization

Shikai Fang 1 Zheng Wang 1 Zhimeng Pan 1 Ji Liu 2 3 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Despite the success of existing tensor factorization methods, most of them conduct a multilinear decomposition, and rarely exploit powerful
modeling frameworks, like deep neural networks,
to capture a variety of complicated interactions
in data. More important, for highly expressive,
deep factorization, we lack an effective approach
to handle streaming data, which are ubiquitous
in real-world applications. To address these issues, we propose SBDT, a Streaming Bayesian
Deep Tensor factorization method. We first use
Bayesian neural networks (NNs) to build a deep
tensor factorization model. We assign a spikeand-slab prior over each NN weight to encourage
sparsity and to prevent overfitting. We then use
the multivariate delta method and moment matching to approximate the posterior of the NN output
and calculate the running model evidence, based
on which we develop an efficient streaming posterior inference algorithm in the assumed-densityfiltering and expectation propagation framework.
Our algorithm provides responsive incremental
updates for the posterior of the latent factors and
NN weights upon receiving newly observed tensor
entries, and meanwhile identify and inhibit redundant/useless weights. We show the advantages of
our approach in four real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Tensor factorization is a fundamental tool for multiway data
analysis. While many tensor factorization methods have
been developed (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu &
Ghahramani, 2009; Kang et al., 2012; Choi & Vishwanathan,
2014), most of them conduct a mutilinear decomposition
and are incapable of capturing complex, nonlinear relationships in data. Deep neural networks (NNs) are a class of
very flexible and powerful modeling framework, known to
1

University of Uath 2 Kwai Inc 3 University of Rochester. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe < zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

be able to estimate all kinds of complicated (e.g., highly
nonlinear) mappings. The most recent work (Liu et al.,
2018; 2019) have attempted to incorporate NNs into tensor
factorization and shown a promotion of the performance,
in spite of the risk of overfitting the tensor data that are
typically sparse.
Nonetheless, one critical bottleneck for NN based factorization is the lack of effective approaches for streaming data.
In practice, many applications produce huge volumes of
data at a fast pace (Du et al., 2018). It is extremely costly
to run the factorization from scratch every time when we
receive a new set of entries. Some privacy-demanding applications (e.g., SnapChat) even forbid us from revisiting
the previously seen data. Hence, given new data, we need
an effective and efficient way to incrementally update the
model.
A general and popular approach is streaming variational
Bayes (SVB) (Broderick et al., 2013), which integrates the
current posterior with the new data, and then estimates a variational approximation as the updated posterior. Although
SVB has been successfully used to develop the state-ofthe-art multilinear streaming tensor factorization (Du et al.,
2018), it does not perform well for deep NN based factorization. Due to the nested nonlinear coupling of the latent
factors and NN weights, the variational model evidence
lower bound (ELBO) that SVB maximizes is analytically
intractable and we have to seek for stochastic optimization,
which is unstable and hard to diagnose the convergence. We
cannot use common tricks, e.g., cross-validation and early
stopping, to alleviate the issue, because we cannot store or
revisit the data in the streaming scenario. Consequently, the
posterior updates are often unreliable and inferior, which in
turn hurt the subsequent updates and tend to result in a poor
final model estimation.
To address these issues, we propose SBDT, a streaming
Bayesian deep tensor factorization method that not only
exploits NNs’ expressive power to capture intricate relationships, but also provides efficient, high-quality posterior updates for streaming data. Specifically, we first use Bayesian
neural networks to build a deep tensor factorization model,
where the input is the concatenation of the factors associated with each tensor entry and the NN output predicts
the entry value. To reduce the risk of overfitting, we place

