Towards Better Laplacian Representation in Reinforcement Learning with
Generalized Graph Drawing

Kaixin Wang * 1 Kuangqi Zhou * 1 Qixin Zhang 2 Jie Shao 3 Bryan Hooi 1 Jiashi Feng 1

Abstract
The Laplacian representation recently gains increasing attention for reinforcement learning as it
provides succinct and informative representation
for states, by taking the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix of the state-transition graph as state
embeddings. Such representation captures the
geometry of the underlying state space and is beneficial to RL tasks such as option discovery and
reward shaping. To approximate the Laplacian
representation in large (or even continuous) state
spaces, recent works propose to minimize a spectral graph drawing objective, which however has
infinitely many global minimizers other than the
eigenvectors. As a result, their learned Laplacian
representation may differ from the ground truth.
To solve this problem, we reformulate the graph
drawing objective into a generalized form and derive a new learning objective, which is proved to
have eigenvectors as its unique global minimizer.
It enables learning high-quality Laplacian representations that faithfully approximate the ground
truth. We validate this via comprehensive experiments on a set of gridworld and continuous control environments. Moreover, we show that our
learned Laplacian representations lead to more
exploratory options and better reward shaping.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to train an agent that
can take proper sequential actions based on the perceived
states from the environments (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Thus
the quality of state representations is important to the agent
performance by benefiting its generalization ability (Zhang
et al., 2018; Stooke et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021), ex*

Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore 2 City
University of Hong Kong 3 ByteDance AI lab. Correspondence
to: Kaixin Wang <kaixin.wang@u.nus.edu>, Kuangqi Zhou
<kzhou@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Visualization of environment and Laplacian state representations (2nd dimension). (a) Top view of a continuous control
navigation environment. (b) Ground-truth Laplacian representation. It encodes geometry of the environment: nearby states have
similar values while distant states have dissimilar values. (c) Our
learned representation. It can be seen that our result is very similar
to ground truth. (d) Representation learned by spectral graph drawing (Wu et al., 2019). It significantly diverges from ground truth
and fails to capture geometric information about the state space.
Best viewed in color.

ploration ability (Pathak et al., 2017; Machado et al., 2017;
2020), and learning efficiency (Dubey et al., 2018; Wu et al.,
2019), etc. Recently, the Laplacian representation receives
increasing attention (Mahadevan, 2005; Machado et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2019; Jinnai et al., 2019). It views the states
and transitions in an RL environment as nodes and edges
in a graph, and forms a d-dimension state representation
with d smallest eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian. Such
representations can capture the geometry of the underlying
state space, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), which greatly benefits
RL in option discovery (Machado et al., 2017; Jinnai et al.,
2019) and reward shaping (Wu et al., 2019).
However, to compute the exact Laplacian representation is
very challenging, as directly computing eigendecomposition
of the graph Laplacian requires access to the environment
transition dynamics and involves expensive matrix operation. Hence it is largely limited to small finite state spaces.
To deal with large (or even continuous) state spaces, previous works resort to approximation methods (Machado et al.,
2017; 2018; Wu et al., 2019). A most efficient one is (Wu
et al., 2019), which minimizes a spectral graph drawing
objective (Koren, 2005). However, this objective has infinitely many other global minimizers besides the ground
truth Laplacian representation (i.e., d smallest eigenvectors),
as it is invariant to an arbitrary orthogonal transformation
over the optimization variables. The resulted representa-

