Generalizable Episodic Memory for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Hao Hu 1 Jianing Ye 2 Guangxiang Zhu 1 Zhizhou Ren 3 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
Discrete Episodic Memory

Episodic memory-based methods can rapidly
latch onto past successful strategies by a nonparametric memory and improve sample efficiency of traditional reinforcement learning. However, little effort is put into the continuous domain, where a state is never visited twice, and
previous episodic methods fail to efficiently aggregate experience across trajectories. To address
this problem, we propose Generalizable Episodic
Memory (GEM), which effectively organizes the
state-action values of episodic memory in a generalizable manner and supports implicit planning on
memorized trajectories. GEM utilizes a double estimator to reduce the overestimation bias induced
by value propagation in the planning process. Empirical evaluation shows that our method significantly outperforms existing trajectory-based methods on various MuJoCo continuous control tasks.
To further show the general applicability, we evaluate our method on Atari games with discrete
action space, which also shows a significant improvement over baseline algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been tremendously
successful in various domains, like classic games (Silver
et al., 2016), video games (Mnih et al., 2015), and robotics
(Lillicrap et al., 2016). However, it still suffers from high
sample complexity, especially compared to human learning (Tsividis et al., 2017). One significant deficit comes
from gradient-based bootstrapping, which is incremental
and usually very slow (Botvinick et al., 2019).
1
The Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Peking University, Beijing, China 3 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Chongjie Zhang
<chongjiezhang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Key

Value

Memory Table
𝑄𝜃 ( )
Similar States
Value Propagation

Key

𝑄𝜃 : Value
Distribution

Value
𝑄𝜃 ( )
𝑄𝜃 ( )
𝑄𝜃 ( )
𝑄𝜃 ( ) 𝑄𝜃 ( )
𝑄𝜃 ( )

Generalizable Episodic Memory (GEM)
Figure 1. Illustration of our basic idea. Conventional episodic
memory usually uses a non-parametric schema to store every stateaction pairs and updates their values when re-encountering the
same events. Instead, generalizable episodic memory stores the
Q-values for each event by a parametric network Mθ so that every
single event can generalize to their neighborhoods. We further
perform value propagation along adjacent states to encourage information exchange between related events.

Inspired by psychobiological studies of human episodic
memory (Sutherland & Rudy, 1989; Marr et al., 1991;
Lengyel & Dayan, 2007) and instance-based decision theory (Gilboa & Schmeidler, 1995), episodic reinforcement
learning (Blundell et al., 2016; Pritzel et al., 2017; Lin
et al., 2018; Hansen et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2020) presents
a non-parametric or semi-parametric framework that fast
retrieves past successful strategies to improve sample efficiency. Episodic memory stores past best returns, and
the agents can act accordingly to repeat the best outcomes
without gradient-based learning.

