DAGs with No Curl: An Efficient DAG Structure Learning Approach

Yue Yu 1 Tian Gao 2 Naiyu Yin 3 Qiang Ji 3

Abstract
Recently directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure
learning is formulated as a constrained continuous
optimization problem with continuous acyclicity constraints and was solved iteratively through
subproblem optimization. To further improve efficiency, we propose a novel learning framework to
model and learn the weighted adjacency matrices
in the DAG space directly. Specifically, we first
show that the set of weighted adjacency matrices
of DAGs are equivalent to the set of weighted
gradients of graph potential functions, and one
may perform structure learning by searching in
this equivalent set of DAGs. To instantiate this
idea, we propose a new algorithm, DAG-NoCurl,
which solves the optimization problem efficiently
with a two-step procedure: 1) first we find an initial cyclic solution to the optimization problem,
and 2) then we employ the Hodge decomposition
of graphs and learn an acyclic graph by projecting
the cyclic graph to the gradient of a potential function. Experimental studies on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method provides comparable accuracy but better efficiency than baseline
DAG structure learning methods on both linear
and generalized structural equation models, often
by more than one order of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Networks (BN) have been widely used in various
machine learning applications (Ott et al., 2004; Spirtes et al.,
1999). Efficient structure learning of BN remains an active
area of research. The structure takes the form of a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) and plays a vital part in other machine
learning sub-areas such as causal inference (Pearl, 1988).
1
Department of Mathematics, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA. 2 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY. 3 Department
of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY.. Correspondence to: Yue Yu
<yuy214@lehigh.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, DAG learning is proven to be NP-hard (Chickering et al., 2004) and scalability becomes a major issue.
Conventional DAG learning methods usually use independence tests (Spirtes et al., 2000b; Tsamardinos et al., 2006b)
or perform score-and-search for discrete variables, with different scoring functions (Huang et al., 2018) or search procedures (Silander and Myllymaki, 2006; Chickering, 2002;
Cussens, 2011). Learning DAG structures for continuous
variables is often limited to Gaussian models (Yuan and Lin,
2007; Foygel and Drton, 2010; Schmidt et al., 2007; Mohan
et al., 2012; Mohammadi et al., 2015). Recently, a fully
continuous optimization formulation is proposed (Zheng
et al., 2018), which transforms the discrete DAG constraint
into a continuous equality constraint. This approach enables
a suite of continuous optimization techniques such as gradient descent to be used, and has been extend to a more
general parameter class with various neural methods (Yu
et al., 2019; Lachapelle et al., 2019; Zhu and Chen, 2019;
Ng et al., 2019).
In this work, we take a step further and investigate if we
could directly optimize in the DAG space, hence resulting
in a structure learning approach without any explicit DAG
constraint. To this end, we propose a continuous optimization framework for DAG structure learning, which implicitly
enforces the acyclicity of the learned graph. Varando (2020)
and Ng et al. (2020) have studied the usage of empirical correlation and covariance matrices for similar purposes. Different from their works, we propose a new graph-exteriorcalculus-based framework of DAG such that one can directly optimize in the DAG space. To solve the resultant
unconstrained optimization problem, we further propose
an efficient algorithm, DAG-NoCurl, developed based on
the graph Hodge theory (Jiang et al., 2011). Hodge theory
(Hodge, 1989), along with the related Helmholtz-Hodge Decomposition (Bhatia et al., 2012) on vector fields, describes
the decomposition of a vector field into divergence-free and
curl-free components. Hodge theory on graphs (Lim, 2015)
shows that a DAG is a sum of three components: a curl-free,
a divergence-free, and a harmonic component, where the
curl-free component is an acyclic graph and hence motivates
the naming of our algorithm.
DAG-NoCurl relies on the key step of mapping the adjacency weighted matrix of a directed graph onto its curl-free

