Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits with Unrestricted Delay Distributions

Tal Lancewicki * 1 Shahar Segal * 1 Tomer Koren 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract
We study the stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem with random delays in the
feedback received by the algorithm. We consider
two settings: the reward-dependent delay setting,
where realized delays may depend on the stochastic rewards, and the reward-independent delay
setting. Our main contribution is algorithms that
achieve near-optimal regret in each of the settings,
with an additional additive dependence on the
quantiles of the delay distribution. Our results
do not make any assumptions on the delay distributions: in particular, we do not assume they
come from any parametric family of distributions
and allow for unbounded support and expectation; we further allow for infinite delays where
the algorithm might occasionally not observe any
feedback.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Multi-armed Bandit problem (MAB) is a theoretical framework for studying sequential decision making.
Most of the literature on MAB assumes that the agent observes feedback immediately after taking an action. However, in many real world applications, the feedback might
be available only after a period of time. For instance, in clinical trials, the observed effect of a medical treatment often
comes in delay, that may vary between different treatments.
Another example is in targeted advertising on the web: when
a user clicks a display ad the feedback is immediate, but if
a user decides not to click, then the algorithm will become
aware to that only when the user left the website or enough
time has elapsed.
In this paper, we study the stochastic MAB problem with
randomized delays (Joulani et al., 2013). The reward of
the chosen action at time t is sampled from some distribu*

Equal contribution 1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Tal Lancewicki <lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il>, Shahar
Segal <shaharsegal1@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion, like in the classic stochastic MAB problem. However,
the reward is observed only at time t + dt , where dt is a
random variable denoting the delay at step t. This problem has been studied extensively in the literature (Joulani
et al., 2013; Vernade et al., 2017; Pike-Burke et al., 2018;
Gael et al., 2020) under an implicit assumption that the delays are reward-independent: namely, that dt is sampled
from an unknown delay distribution and may depend on the
chosen arm, but not on the stochastic rewards on the same
round. For example, Joulani et al. (2013); Pike-Burke et al.
(2018) show a regret bound of the form O(RMT AB + KE[D]).
Here RMT AB denotes the optimal instance-dependent T -round
regret bound for standard (non-delayed) MAB: RMT AB =
P
∆i >0 log(T )/∆i , where ∆i is the sub-optimality gap for
arm i. In the second term, K is the number of arms and
E[D] is the expected delay.
A significantly more challenging setting, that to the best of
our knowledge was not explicitly addressed previously in
the literature,1 is that of reward-dependent delays. In this
setting, the random delay at each round may also depend on
the reward received on the same round (in other words, they
are drawn together from a joint distribution over rewards and
delays). This scenario is motivated by both of the examples
mentioned earlier: e.g., in targeted advertisement the delay
associated with a certain user is strongly correlated with the
reward she generates (i.e., click or no click); and in clinical
trials, the delay often depends on the effect of the applied
treatment as some side-effects take longer than others to
surface.
In contrast to the reward-independent case, with rewarddependent delays the observed feedback might give a biased
impression of the true rewards. Namely, the expectation of
the observed reward can be very different than the actual
expected reward. For example, consider Bernoulli rewards.
If the delays given reward 0 are shorter than the delays given
reward 1, then the observed reward will be biased towards 0.
Even worse, the direction of the bias can be opposite between different arms. Hence, as long as the fraction of
unobserved feedback is significant, the expected observed
reward of the optimal arm can be smaller than expected
1

Some of the results of Vernade et al. (2017); Gael et al. (2020)
can be viewed as having a specific form of reward-dependent
delays; we discuss this in more detail in the related work section.

