Collaborative Bayesian Optimization with Fair Regret

Rachael Hwee Ling Sim * 1 Yehong Zhang * 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 Patrick Jaillet 3

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular tool for
optimizing complex and costly-to-evaluate blackbox objective functions. To further reduce the
number of function evaluations, any party performing BO may be interested to collaborate
with others to optimize the same objective function concurrently. To do this, existing BO algorithms have considered optimizing a batch of input queries in parallel and provided theoretical
bounds on their cumulative regret reflecting inefficiency. However, when the objective function
values are correlated with real-world rewards (e.g.,
money), parties may be hesitant to collaborate if
they risk incurring larger cumulative regret (i.e.,
smaller real-world reward) than others. This paper
shows that fairness and efficiency are both necessary for the collaborative BO setting. Inspired by
social welfare concepts from economics, we propose a new notion of regret capturing these properties and a collaborative BO algorithm whose
convergence rate can be theoretically guaranteed
by bounding the new regret, both of which share
an adjustable parameter for trading off between
fairness vs. efficiency. We empirically demonstrate the benefits (e.g., increased fairness) of our
algorithm using synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Dai et al., 2019; 2020a;b; Ling
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019) is a popular tool for optimizing complex (e.g., possibly noisy, non-convex, and/or
with no closed-form expression/derivative) and costly-toevaluate black-box objective functions given a limited budget. BO algorithms can achieve competitive optimization
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore 2 Peng
Cheng Laboratory, People’s Republic of China 3 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang
Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

performance by sequentially selecting input queries for evaluating the objective function f to trade off between sampling
at or close to a likely maximizer (i.e., exploitation) vs. sampling in an unobserved input region (i.e., exploration). BO
has been used in a wide variety of real-world applications
such as hyperparameter tuning of machine learning (ML)
models (Shahriari et al., 2015), drug development, chemical/material design (Griffiths & Hernández-Lobato, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020), hotspot discovery via a mobility-ondemand (MoD) system with autonomous vehicles (AVs)
(Chen et al., 2013; 2015; Kharkovskii et al., 2020), among
others. In these applications, each function evaluation (e.g.,
evaluating molecular properties, MoD AV cruising to a location) is economically costly and/or time-consuming. Naturally, any party who performs BO would be interested in
reducing the number of function evaluations and hence the
cost/time needed. One appealing solution is collaborative
ML (Sim et al., 2020) which allows every party to share
data from function evaluations with the other parties optimizing the same f concurrently instead of evaluating the
expensive f on its own. The works of Cheng et al. (2020)
and Fitch (2018) have discussed the importance and benefits
of collaboration in drug discovery and precision agriculture.
At first glance, existing batch BO algorithms (Daxberger &
Low, 2017; Desautels et al., 2014; Wu & Frazier, 2016) may
seem like a suitable solution. In each iteration, these algorithms select a batch of input queries and each input query is
assigned to a collaborating party for evaluating f in parallel.
However, these batch BO algorithms do not optimize the
assignment of input queries to parties. Some parties may
be unintentionally assigned input queries to evaluate f with
only small values. This possibility discourages collaboration
and data sharing. Why is this so? Each party usually incurs
some cost to evaluate f and is particular about its value as it
is often correlated with some real-world reward. Any party
would not want to unfairly receive smaller real-world reward and less valuable information than other collaborating
parties. For example, when companies operating MoD AVs
collaborate to discover mobility demand hotspots, a party
evaluating at a location with a higher mobility demand is
more likely to pick up passengers and earn fares. So, any
MoD company would not want to solely evaluate at locations with low mobility demand and altruistically provide
information to the other parties. When farmers collaborate

