Robust Testing and Estimation under Manipulation Attacks

Jayadev Acharya * 1 Ziteng Sun * 1 Huanyu Zhang * 1

Abstract
We study robust testing and estimation of discrete
distributions in the strong contamination model.
We consider both the “centralized setting” and the
“distributed setting with information constraints”
including communication and local privacy (LDP)
constraints. Our technique relates the strength of
manipulation attacks to the earth-mover distance
using Hamming distance as the metric between
messages (samples) from the users. In the centralized setting, we provide optimal error bounds
for both learning and testing. Our lower bounds
under local information constraints build on the
recent lower bound methods in distributed inference. In the communication constrained setting,
we develop novel algorithms based on random
hashing and an `1 /`1 isometry.

challenges above exist simultaneously. Motivated by their
work, we further study manipulation attacks for inference
on discrete distributions both with and without information
constraints.
p

X1

X2

X3

...

Xn−2

Xn−1

Xn

W1

W2

W3

...

Wn−1

Wn−1

Wn

Y1

Y2

Y3

...

Yn−2

Yn−1

Yn

Y1

Y20

Y3

Adversary
...

0
Yn−2

Yn−1

Yn

Server

1. Introduction
Data from users form the backbone of modern distributed
learning systems such as federated learning (Kairouz et al.,
2019). Two of the key aspects of such large-scale distributed systems that make inference tasks challenging are
(i) information constraints at the users (e.g., preserving
privacy, bandwidth limitations), and
(ii) γ-manipulation attacks where an adversary has complete control over a γ fraction of the users.
An extreme example is when malicious users are deliberately injected to disrupt the system. Note that when there are
only manipulation attacks but no information constraints,
the setting is equivalent to the robust inference where a
fraction of the samples can be adversarially corrupted.
(Cheu et al., 2021) initiated the study of manipulation attacks under local differential privacy (LDP), thereby considering the practically important setting where both of the
*

Equal contribution 1 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA. Correspondence to: Jayadev Acharya
<acharya@cornell.edu>, Ziteng Sun <zs335@cornell.edu>,
Huanyu Zhang <hz388@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

output

Figure 1. The information-constrained distributed model with manipulation attack. The shaded messages are manipulated.

Problem setup. Let 4k be the simplex of all distributions
over a discrete domain X of size k (wlog let X = [k] :=
{1, . . . , k}), and X n := (X1 , . . . , Xn ) be n independent
samples from an unknown p ∈ 4k which are distributed
across n users. Each user i then sends a message Yi ∈ Y
based on Xi according to a pre-specified communication
protocol Π to the server.
An adversary has access to Π and observes the intended
messages Y n := (Y1 , . . . , Yn ). It then chooses a set
C ⊂ [n] with |C| ≤ m:=γn and performs an attack
MC : Y n → Y n as follows: for each i ∈ C, it can
change Yi to an arbitrary Yi0 . The output of this attack is
Z n :=(Z1 , . . . , Zn ) = MC (Y n ), which satisfies Zi = Yi if
i∈
/ C, and Zi = Yi0 if i ∈ C. We call this a γ-manipulation
attack. A central server observes Z n (and has no knowledge
about C or MC ) and has to solve an inference task on p.
See Figure 1 for an overview of the model.
Remark 1. A natural question to ask is what happens if
the adversary, in addition to Y n , can also observe original
samples X n . The algorithms proposed in this paper all
work with the same guarantee under this setting as well.

