Characterizing Structural Regularities of Labeled Data
in Overparameterized Models
Ziheng Jiang * 1 2 3 Chiyuan Zhang * 4 Kunal Talwar 4 5 Michael C. Mozer 4 6

Abstract
Humans are accustomed to environments that contain both regularities and exceptions. For example,
at most gas stations, one pays prior to pumping,
but the occasional rural station does not accept
payment in advance. Likewise, deep neural networks can generalize across instances that share
common patterns or structures, yet have the capacity to memorize rare or irregular forms. We
analyze how individual instances are treated by
a model via a consistency score. The score characterizes the expected accuracy for a held-out instance given training sets of varying size sampled
from the data distribution. We obtain empirical
estimates of this score for individual instances in
multiple data sets, and we show that the score
identifies out-of-distribution and mislabeled examples at one end of the continuum and strongly
regular examples at the other end. We identify
computationally inexpensive proxies to the consistency score using statistics collected during
training. We show examples of potential applications to the analysis of deep-learning systems.

1. Introduction
Human learning requires both inferring regular patterns
that generalize across many distinct examples and memorizing irregular examples. The boundary between regular and irregular examples can be fuzzy. For example,
in learning the past tense form of English verbs, there
are some verbs whose past tenses must simply be memorized (GO!WENT, EAT!ATE, HIT!HIT) and there are
many regular verbs that obey the rule of appending “ed”
*
Equal contribution 1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 2 OctoML.ai,
Seattle, WA, USA. 3 Work done while interning at Google. 4 Google
Research, Brain Team, Mountain View, CA, USA. 5 Presently at
Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA, USA. 6 Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.. Correspondence to: Chiyuan Zhang <chiyuan@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(KISS!KISSED, KICK!KICKED, BREW!BREWED, etc.).
Generalization to a novel word typically follows the “ed”
rule, for example, BINK!BINKED. Intermediate between
the exception verbs and regular verbs are subregularities—a
set of exception verbs that have consistent structure (e.g., the
mapping of SING!SANG, RING!RANG). Note that rulegoverned and exception cases can have very similar forms,
which increases the difficulty of learning each. Consider
one-syllable verbs containing ‘ee’, which include the regular cases NEED!NEEDED as well as exception cases like
SEEK ! SOUGHT . Generalization from the rule-governed
cases can hamper the learning of the exception cases and
vice-versa. For instance, children in an environment where
English is spoken over-regularize by mapping GO!GOED
early in the course of language learning. Neural nets show
the same interesting pattern for verbs over the course of
training (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986).
Intuitively, memorizing irregular examples is tantamount to
building a look-up table with the individual facts accessible for retrieval. Generalization requires the inference of
statistical regularities in the training environment, and the
application of procedures or rules for exploiting the regularities. In deep learning, memorization is often considered a
failure of a network because memorization implies no generalization. However, mastering a domain involves knowing
when to generalize and when not to generalize, because the
data manifolds are rarely unimodal.
Consider the two-class problem of chair vs non-chair with
training examples illustrated in Figure 1a. The iron throne
(lower left) forms a sparsely populated mode (sparse mode
for short) as there may not exist many similar cases in the
data environment. Generic chairs (lower right) lie in a region with a consistent labeling (a densely populated mode,
or dense mode) and thus seems to follow a strong regularity.
But there are many other cases in the continuum of the two
extreme. For example, the rocking chair (upper right) has a
few supporting neighbors but it lies in a distinct neighborhood from the majority of same-label instances (the generic
chairs).
In this article, we formalize this continuum of the structural
regularities of data sets in the context of training overparamn
eterized deep networks. Let D ⇠ P be an i.i.d. sample of

