Gradient Disaggregation: Breaking Privacy in Federated Learning by
Reconstructing the User Participant Matrix

Maximilian Lam 1 Gu-Yeon Wei 1 David Brooks 1 Vijay Janapa Reddi 1 Michael Mitzenmacher 1

Abstract
We show that aggregated model updates in federated learning may be insecure. An untrusted
central server may disaggregate user updates from
sums of updates across participants given repeated
observations, enabling the server to recover privileged information about individual users’ private
training data via traditional gradient inference attacks. Our method revolves around reconstructing participant information (e.g: which rounds
of training users participated in) from aggregated
model updates by leveraging summary information from device analytics commonly used to monitor, debug, and manage federated learning systems. Our attack is parallelizable and we successfully disaggregate user updates on settings
with up to thousands of participants. We quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate significant
improvements in the capability of various inference attacks on the disaggregated updates. Our
attack enables the attribution of learned properties to individual users, violating anonymity, and
shows that a determined central server may undermine the secure aggregation protocol to break
individual users’ data privacy in federated learning.

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a method for collaboratively learning
a shared model across multiple participants and enhances
privacy by limiting data sharing (McMahan & Ramage,
2017; Hard et al., 2018; Bonawitz et al., 2019; Konečný
et al., 2017; 2015). Participants’ data privacy is preserved
by sending model updates rather than raw data, which limits
the amount of information that is exposed to the central
server. In the context of applications, federated learning
participants are edge devices such as users’ smart phones
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Maximilian Lam <maxlam@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

or wearables, and maintaining the integrity of their data is a
critical issue. Already, federated learning has been deployed
by many major companies in various privacy sensitive applications including sentiment learning, next word prediction,
health monitoring, content suggestion, and item ranking
(Hard et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Bonawitz et al., 2019).
Guaranteeing data privacy in these scenarios is becoming
increasingly important as the topic of privacy becomes more
heavily scrutinized by the greater public and by government
regulations (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; McCabe, 2013;
FTC, 2019).
Recent research has shown that model updates may unintentionally leak information about their respective training
examples (Geiping et al., 2020; Melis et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2019). A central server that obtains participants’ model
updates may perform inference attacks to learn significant
information about participants’ training data, violating the
core privacy principles of the federated learning paradigm.
To address this critical privacy flaw, researchers have introduced methods leveraging secure multiparty computation
to limit the central server’s visibility into individual participants’ model updates. Notably, secure aggregation (Segal
et al., 2017; So et al., 2020) has emerged as a standard security protocol which ensures that the central server may
see only the final sum of model updates, rather than any
individual update by itself. Thus, information learned from
the aggregated model update may not be attributed to a specific user, which offers a layer of privacy against the central
server. Additionally, by aggregating updates over tens to
hundreds or thousands of users, updates are obfuscated to a
point where most inference attacks are rendered ineffectual
(Melis et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2019).
The secure aggregation protocol is secure only to the degree
that it hides individual participants’ model updates. A procedure that disaggregates individual participants’ updates
or gradients from their sum would undermine the secure
aggregation protocol and unveil the aforementioned privacy
vulnerability. In this work, we develop a method for gradient disaggregation, showing that secure aggregation offers
little privacy protection against an adversarial server seeking
to undermine individual users’ data privacy. Our key insight
is that participant information (e.g: which rounds of training

