Noise and Fluctuation of Finite Learning Rate Stochastic Gradient Descent

Kangqiao Liu * 1 Liu Ziyin * 1 Masahito Ueda 1 2 3

Abstract
In the vanishing learning rate regime, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is now relatively well
understood. In this work, we propose to study
the basic properties of SGD and its variants in
the non-vanishing learning rate regime. The focus is on deriving exactly solvable results and
discussing their implications. The main contributions of this work are to derive the stationary distribution for discrete-time SGD in a quadratic loss
function with and without momentum; in particular, one implication of our result is that the fluctuation caused by discrete-time dynamics takes a
distorted shape and is dramatically larger than a
continuous-time theory could predict. Examples
of applications of the proposed theory considered
in this work include the approximation error of
variants of SGD, the effect of minibatch noise, the
optimal Bayesian inference, the escape rate from
a sharp minimum, and the stationary covariance
of a few second-order methods including damped
Newton’s method, natural gradient descent, and
Adam.

1. Introduction
Behind the success of deep learning lies the simple optimization methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
(Bottou, 1998; Sutskever et al., 2013; Dieuleveut et al., 2020;
Mori and Ueda, 2020a) and its variants (Duchi et al., 2011;
Flammarion and Bach, 2015; Kingma and Ba, 2015), which
are used for neural network optimization. Despite the empirical efficiency of SGD, our theoretical understanding of
SGD is still limited. Two types of noises for SGD are studied. When the noise is white, the dynamics is governed by
the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) (Welling
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Physics, the University
of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN CEMS, Japan 3 Institute for Physics of
Intelligence, the University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Kangqiao Liu <kqliu@cat.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Liu Ziyin
<zliu@cat.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and Teh, 2011). When the noise is due to minibatch sampling, the noise is called the SGD noise or minibatch noise.
So far, nearly all the theoretical attempts at understanding the noise in SGD have adopted the continuous-time
approximation by assuming a vanishingly small learning
rate (Mandt et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Jastrzebski et al.,
2017; Chaudhari and Soatto, 2018; Zhu et al., 2019; Xie
et al., 2021). This amounts to making an analogy to the
diffusion theory in physics (Einstein, 1905; Van Kampen,
1992), and helps understand some properties of SGD and
deep learning such as the flatness of the minima selected
by training (Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Chaudhari and Soatto,
2018; Smith and Le, 2018; Xie et al., 2021). However, in reality, a large learning rate often leads to qualitatively distinct
behavior, including reduced training time and potentially
better generalization performance (Keskar et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2019). The present work is motivated by the fact
that the existing continuous theory is insufficient to describe
and predict the properties and phenomena of learning in
this large learning rate regime. In fact, we will show that
the prediction by continuous theory may deviate arbitrarily
from the experimental result.
In this work, we study the stationary-state solutions of
discrete-time update rules of SGD. The result can be utilized
to analyze SGD without invoking the unrealistic assumption of a vanishingly small learning rate. Specifically, our
contributions are:
• We exactly solve the discrete-time update rules for
SGD and its variants with momentum in a local minimum to obtain the analytic form of the covariance
matrix of the model parameters at asymptotic time.
• We apply our results to various settings that have been
studied in the continuous-time limit, such as finding
the optimal learning rate in a Bayesian setting, understanding the escape from a sharp minimum, and the
approximation error of various variants of SGD.
• Compared with the continuous-time theories, our work
requires fewer assumptions and finds significantly improved agreement with experimental results.
In section 2, we present the background of this work. Related works are discussed in section 3. In section 4, we
derive our main theoretical results for SGD and its momentum variant. In section 5, we verify our theoretical results

