An Algorithm for Stochastic and Adversarial Bandits with Switching Costs

Chloé Rouyer 1 Yevgeny Seldin 1 Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi 2

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for stochastic and
adversarial multiarmed bandits with switching
costs, where the algorithm pays a price λ every
time it switches the arm being played. Our algorithm is based on adaptation of the TsallisINF algorithm of Zimmert & Seldin (2021)
and requires no prior knowledge of the regime
or time horizon. In the oblivious adversarial
setting it achieves the minimax
regret
√ optimal

bound of O (λK)1/3 T 2/3 + KT , where T
is the time horizon and K is the number of
arms. In the stochastically constrained adversarial regime, which includes the stochastic regime
as a special case, it achieves a regret bound
of

P
−1
2/3 1/3
O (λK) T
+ ln T
, where
i6=i∗ ∆i
∆i are the suboptimality gaps and i∗ is a unique
optimal arm. In the special case of λ = 0 (no
switching costs), this bound is also minimax optimal within constants. We also explore variants
of the problem, where switching cost is allowed
to change over time. We provide experimental
evaluation showing competitiveness of our algorithm with the relevant baselines in the stochastic,
stochastically constrained adversarial, and adversarial regimes with fixed switching cost.

1. Introduction
Multiarmed bandits are the reference framework for the
study of a wide range of sequential decision-making problems, including recommendation, dynamic content optimization, digital auctions, clinical trials, and more. In this
framework the algorithm repeatedly picks actions, a.k.a.
arms, and, after each selection, observes the loss or reward
of the corresponding action. In many application domains,
algorithms have to pay a penalty λ > 0 each time they play
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark 2 DSRC & Dept. of Computer Science, Università degli
Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. Correspondence to: Chloé Rouyer
<chloe@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

an arm different from the one played in the previous round.
Such switching cost may occur in the form of a transaction cost in financial trading, or a reconfiguration cost in
industrial environments.
So far, the problem of bandits with switching costs has been
studied using algorithms whose optimality depends on the
nature of the source of losses (or, equivalently, rewards) for
the K arms. In the oblivious adversarial case, when losses
are generated by an arbitrary deterministic source, Dekel
et al. (2012) used a simple variant of the Exp3 algorithm
to

prove an upper bound of O (K ln K)1/3 T 2/3 for λ = 1
(i.e., unit switching cost) — see also (Blum & Mansour,
2007) for an earlier, slightly weaker result. A result by Dekel
et al. (2013) implies a lower bound of Ω (λK)1/3 T 2/3 +
√

KT for all λ ≥ 0. Note the phase transition: if λ > 0,
2/3
then
√ the regret asymptotically grows as T , as opposed to
T when there is no switching cost.
In the stochastic case, where losses of each arm are generated by an i.i.d. process, Gao et al. (2019) and Esfandiari et al. (2021) used arm elimination algorithms to prove
that O(ln T ) switches are sufficient to achieve

P the optimal
distribution-dependent regret of O (ln T ) i : ∆i >0 ∆−1
,
i
where ∆i is the suboptimality gap of arm i. Hence, in the
stochastic case the introduction of switching costs does not
lead to a qualitative change of the minimax regret rate.
In practical applications, it is desirable to have algorithms
that require no prior knowledge about the nature of the
loss generation process and maintain robustness in the adversarial regime simultaneously with the ability to achieve
lower regret in the stochastic case. A number of such algorithms have been developed for the standard multiarmed
bandits (Bubeck & Slivkins, 2012; Seldin & Slivkins, 2014;
Auer & Chiang, 2016; Seldin & Lugosi, 2017; Wei & Luo,
2018; Zimmert & Seldin, 2019; 2021; Masoudian & Seldin,
2021) and the ideas have been extended to several other
domains, including combinatorial bandits (Zimmert et al.,
2019), decoupled exploration and exploitation (Rouyer &
Seldin, 2020), and episodic MDPs (Jin & Luo, 2020). We
aim at designing algorithms with similar properties for bandits with switching costs.

