Deep Latent Graph Matching

Tianshu Yu 1 Runzhong Wang 2 Junchi Yan 2 Baoxin Li 1

Abstract
Deep learning for graph matching (GM) has
emerged as an important research topic due to
its superior performance over traditional methods
and insights it provides for solving other combinatorial problems on graph. While recent deep
methods for GM extensively investigated effective
node/edge feature learning or downstream GM
solvers given such learned features, there is little
existing work questioning if the fixed connectivity/topology typically constructed using heuristics
(e.g., Delaunay or k-nearest) is indeed suitable for
GM. From a learning perspective, we argue that
the fixed topology may restrict the model capacity
and thus potentially hinder the performance. To
address this, we propose to learn the (distribution
of) latent topology, which can better support the
downstream GM task. We devise two latent graph
generation procedures, one deterministic and one
generative. Particularly, the generative procedure
emphasizes the across-graph consistency and thus
can be viewed as a matching-guided co-generative
model. Our methods deliver superior performance
over previous state-of-the-arts on public benchmarks, hence supporting our hypothesis.

1. Introduction
With the strong learning ability of deep networks, recent
research on graph matching (GM) has migrated from traditional deterministic optimization (Schellewald & Schnörr,
2005; Cho et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2015) towards learningbased methods (Zanfir & Sminchisescu, 2018; Wang et al.,
2019; Yu et al., 2020). GM is a classic combinatorial and
NP-hard problem (Loiola et al., 2007). As the mathematical cornerstone for a series of real-world applications (e.g.,
image matching (Wang et al., 2018b), social mining (Chiasserini et al., 2018) and protein matching (Krissinel & Hen1
Arizona State University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Tianshu Yu <tianshuy@asu.edu>, Baoxin Li
<baoxin.li@asu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rick, 2004)), GM has received persistent attention from the
machine learning and optimization communities for many
years. Formally, for two graphs with n nodes each, graph
matching seeks to solve1 :
max z> Mz
z

s.t.

Z ∈ {0, 1}n×n ,
2

Hz = 1

(1)

2

where the affinity matrix M ∈ Rn+ ×n encodes node (diagonal elements) and edge (off-diagonal elements) affinities/similarities and z is the column-wise vectorization form
of the permutation matrix Z. H is a selection matrix ensuring each row and column of Z summing to 1. 1 is a column
vector filled with 1. Eq. (1) is the so-called quadratic assignment problem (QAP) (Cho et al., 2010). Maximizing
Eq. (1) amounts to maximizing the sum of the similarity
induced by the matching vector Z.
Recently, deep learning based GM solvers (Zanfir & Sminchisescu, 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020; Fey et al.,
2020; Rolı́nek et al., 2020) have enabled end-to-end training
of GM on high-quality human labelled datasets (e.g., Pascal
VOC (Everingham et al., 2010; Bourdev & Malik, 2009) and
SPair-71k (Min et al., 2019)), which greatly improved the
model capacity. Any of the aforementioned deep GM algorithms behaves as an integral framework, of which the main
parts cover topology construction2 , feature extraction and
differentiable GM solver. In this line of works, affinity M
(see Eq. (1)) is not obtained beforehand, but calculated using node/edge features from some feature backbones given
heuristically constructed connectivity, then fed to subsequent GM solvers. Therefore, recent investigation on deep
GM frameworks typically focuses on two essential parts: 1)
node/edge feature backbone (e.g., graph convolutional networks (Wang et al., 2019), channel-independent embedding
(Yu et al., 2020) and SplineCNN (Fey et al., 2018)); 2) GM
solvers (e.g., spectral (Zanfir & Sminchisescu, 2018), linear
(Wang et al., 2019) and black-box (Pogancic et al., 2020)).
In particular, since the feature backbones are variants of
1
Without loss of generality, we discuss graph matching under
the setting of equal number of nodes without outliers. The unequal
case can be readily handled by introducing extra constraints or
dummy nodes. Bipartite matching and graph isomorphism are
subsets of this quadratic formulation (Loiola et al., 2007).
2
Topology in some GM problems is pre-defined and needs to
be fixed, such as graph isomorphism. In this paper, we consider a
more generic case where topology construction is necessary.

