ActNN: Reducing Training Memory Footprint
via 2-Bit Activation Compressed Training

Abstract
The increasing size of neural network models has
been critical for improvements in their accuracy,
but device memory is not growing at the same
rate. This creates fundamental challenges for
training neural networks within limited memory
environments. In this work, we propose ActNN,
a memory-efficient training framework that stores
randomly quantized activations for back propagation. We prove the convergence of ActNN for general network architectures, and we characterize
the impact of quantization on the convergence via
an exact expression for the gradient variance. Using our theory, we propose novel mixed-precision
quantization strategies that exploit the activation’s
heterogeneity across feature dimensions, samples,
and layers. These techniques can be readily applied to existing dynamic graph frameworks, such
as PyTorch, simply by substituting the layers. We
evaluate ActNN on mainstream computer vision
models for classification, detection, and segmentation tasks. On all these tasks, ActNN compresses
the activation to 2 bits on average, with negligible accuracy loss. ActNN reduces the memory
footprint of the activation by 12×, and it enables
training with a 6.6× to 14× larger batch size.
We implement ActNN as a PyTorch library at
https://github.com/ucbrise/actnn.

1. Introduction
Within the last three years, state-of-the-art machine learning
models have become over 4,000 times larger (Devlin et al.,
2018; Fedus et al., 2021). On the other hand, the memory
capacity of GPUs has increased relatively slowly, remaining
on the order of tens of gigabytes. This creates a fundamental
*
1
Equal contribution
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence
to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@berkeley.edu>, Lianmin Zheng
<lmzheng@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Training Throughput

Jianfei Chen * 1 Lianmin Zheng * 1 Zhewei Yao 1 Dequan Wang 1
Ion Stoica 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1
60

L0 L1

L2

40

L3

L4

L5

20

DTR
BLPA
swap
ActNN

14.0×
0

0

200

400
600
Batch Size

800

Figure 1. Batch size vs. training throughput on ResNet-152. Red
cross mark means out-of-memory. The shaded yellow region
denotes the possible batch sizes with full precision training. ActNN
achieves significantly larger maximum batch size over other stateof-the-art systems and displays a nontrivial trade-off curve.

barrier to the development and training of neural networks.
Activation compressed training (ACT) is a promising approach to reduce the training memory footprint (Chakrabarti
& Moseley, 2019; Fu et al., 2020). During training, all
layers’ activations need to be kept in the memory for computing the gradients. ACT saves memory by compressing
activations to lower numerical precision via quantization.
It was proposed in BLPA (Chakrabarti & Moseley, 2019),
and it was later extended by TinyScript (Fu et al., 2020)
with non-uniform quantization strategies. These prior works
succeeded in training ResNet-50 with 4-bit activations.
However, applications of ACT are hindered by several drawbacks. First, the convergence behavior of ACT methods
is not well understood (except for an analysis for multilayer perceptrons (Fu et al., 2020), under strong mean-field
assumptions (Yang & Schoenholz, 2017)). Second, prior
works mostly focus on dedicated architectures, e.g., a customized version of the pre-activation ResNet (He et al.,
2016b), limiting their generality. Third, existing quantization strategies are not specifically designed for ACT, making
their compression ratio suboptimal.
In this work, we propose ActNN, a framework for ACT that
overcomes all the challenges. ActNN stores randomly quantized activations to compute the gradients. Theoretically, we
view the gradient computed by ActNN (“ActNN gradient”)
as a stochastic approximation of the gradient computed with
the full-precision activation (“FP gradient”). We show that
the ActNN gradient is an unbiased estimator of the FP gradi-

