An Information-Geometric Distance on the Space of Tasks

Yansong Gao 1 Pratik Chaudhari 2

Abstract
This paper prescribes a distance between learning
tasks modeled as joint distributions on data and
labels. Using tools in information geometry, the
distance is defined to be the length of the shortest
weight trajectory on a Riemannian manifold as
a classifier is fitted on an interpolated task. The
interpolated task evolves from the source to the
target task using an optimal transport formulation.
This distance, which we call the “coupled transfer
distance” can be compared across different classifier architectures. We develop an algorithm to
compute the distance which iteratively transports
the marginal on the data of the source task to that
of the target task while updating the weights of
the classifier to track this evolving data distribution. We develop theory to show that our distance
captures the intuitive idea that a good transfer trajectory is the one that keeps the generalization
gap small during transfer, in particular at the end
on the target task. We perform thorough empirical validation and analysis across diverse image
classification datasets to show that the coupled
transfer distance correlates strongly with the difficulty of fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
A part of the success of Deep Learning stems from the fact
that deep networks learn features that are discriminative
yet flexible. Models pre-trained on a particular task can be
easily adapted to perform well on other tasks. The transfer
learning literature forms an umbrella for such adaptation
techniques, and it works well, see for instance Mahajan
et al. (2018); Dhillon et al. (2020); Kolesnikov et al. (2019);
Joulin et al. (2016); Song et al. (2020) for image classification or Devlin et al. (2018) for language modeling, to
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Science,
University of Pennsylvania 2 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence
to: Yansong Gao <gaoyans@sas.upenn.edu>, Pratik Chaudhari
<pratikac@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Coupled transfer of the data and the conditional distribution. We solve an optimization problem that transports the
source data distribution ps (x) to the target distribution pt (x) as
τ → 1 while simultaneously updating the model using samples
from the interpolated distribution pτ (x). This modifies the conditional distribution pws (y|x) on the source task to the corresponding distribution on the target task pwt (y|x). The “coupled transfer
distance” between source and target tasks is the length of the shortest such weight trajectory under the Fisher Information Metric.

name a few large-scale studies. There are also situations
when transfer learning does not work well, e.g., a pre-trained
model on ImageNet is a poor representation to transfer to
MRI data (Merkow et al., 2017).
It stands to reason that if source and target tasks are “close”
to each other then we should expect transfer learning to
work well. It may be difficult to transfer across tasks that
are “far away”. We lack theoretical tools to characterize the
difficulty of adapting a model training on a source task to
the target task. While there are numerous candidates in the
literature (see Related Work in Sec. 6) for characterizing
the distance between tasks, a unified understanding of these
domain-specific methods is missing.
Desiderata. Our desiderata for a task distance are as follows.
First, it should be a distance between learning tasks, i.e.,
it should explicitly incorporate the hypothesis space of the
model that is being transferred and accurately reflect the
difficulty of transfer. For example, it is often observed in
practice that transferring larger models is easier, we would
like our task distance to capture this fact. Such a distance
is different than discrepancy measures on the input, or the
joint input-output space, which do not consider the model.

