Inverse Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Shehryar Malik * 1 Usman Anwar * 1 Alireza Aghasi 2 Ali Ahmed 1

Abstract
In real world settings, numerous constraints are
present which are hard to specify mathematically.
However, for the real world deployment of reinforcement learning (RL), it is critical that RL
agents are aware of these constraints, so that they
can act safely. In this work, we consider the problem of learning constraints from demonstrations
of a constraint-abiding agent’s behavior. We experimentally validate our approach and show that
our framework can successfully learn the most
likely constraints that the agent respects. We
further show that these learned constraints are
transferable to new agents that may have different morphologies and/or reward functions. Previous works in this regard have either mainly
been restricted to tabular (discrete) settings, specific types of constraints or assume the environment’s transition dynamics. In contrast, our framework is able to learn arbitrary Markovian constraints in high-dimensions in a completely modelfree setting. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/shehryar-malik/icrl.

1. Introduction
Reward functions are a critical component in reinforcement
learning settings. As such, it is important that reward functions are designed accurately and are well-aligned with the
intentions of the human designer. This is known as agent
(or value) alignment (see, e.g., Leike et al. (2018; 2017);
Amodei et al. (2016)). Misspecified rewards can lead to
unwanted and unsafe situations (see, e.g, Amodei & Clark
(2016)). However, designing accurate reward functions remains a challenging task. Human designers, for example,
tend to prefer simple reward functions that agree well with
their intuition and are easily interpretable. For example, a
human designer might choose a reward function that en*
Equal contribution 1 Information Technology University, Lahore, Pakistan 2 Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Usman Anwar <usman.anwar@itu.edu.pk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) Expert policy

(b) Nominal policy (c) Recovered policy

Figure 1. A simple visualization. The agent’s reward is proportional to how close it is to the goal at the bottom-left corner. However, the real world (right) has a lion occupying the lower bridge.
The expert is aware of this and so takes the upper bridge. However,
the lion is not present in the simulator (middle and left). In a bid to
maximize its reward the nominal policy chooses to take the lower
bridge. Clearly, such a policy will result in the agent being eaten
up by the lion in the real world. Our method, on the other hand,
tries to reconcile the reward function in the simulator with the
expert’s behavior, and ultimately learns to avoid the lower bridge.

courages an RL agent driving a car to minimize its traveling
time to a certain destination. Clearly, such a reward function
makes sense in the case of a human driver since inter-human
communication is contextualized within a framework of unwritten and unspoken constraints, often colloquially termed
as ‘common-sense’. That is, while a human driver will try
to minimize their traveling time, they will be careful not to
break traffic rules, take actions that endanger passersby, and
so on. However, we cannot assume such behaviors from RL
agents since they are are not imbued with common-sense
constraints.
Constrained reinforcement learning provides a natural
framework for maximizing a reward function subject to
some constraints (we refer the reader to Ray et al. (2019)
for a brief overview of the field). However, in many cases,
these constraints are hard to specify explicitly in the form of
mathematical functions. One way to address this issue is to
automatically extract constraints by observing the behavior
of a constraint-abiding agent. Consider, for example, the
cartoon in Figure 1. Agents start at the bottom-left corner
and are rewarded according to how quickly they reach the
goal at the bottom-right corner. However, what this reward
scheme misses out is that in the real world the lower bridge
is occupied by a lion which attacks any agents attempting

