Learning Node Representations Using Stationary Flow Prediction on Large
Payment and Cash Transaction Networks

Ciwan Ceylan * 1 2 Salla Franzén 2 Florian T. Pokorny 1

Abstract
Banks are required to analyse large transaction
datasets as a part of the fight against financial
crime. Today, this analysis is either performed
manually by domain experts or using expensive
feature engineering. Gradient flow analysis
allows for basic representation learning as node
potentials can be inferred directly from network
transaction data. However, the gradient model has
a fundamental limitation: it cannot represent all
types of of network flows. Furthermore, standard
methods for learning the gradient flow are not
appropriate for flow signals that span multiple
orders of magnitude and contain outliers, i.e.
transaction data. In this work, the gradient model
is extended to a gated version and we prove
that it, unlike the gradient model, is a universal
approximator for flows on graphs. To tackle
the mentioned challenges of transaction data,
we propose a multi-scale and outlier robust loss
function based on the Student-t log-likelihood.
Ethereum transaction data is used for evaluation
and the gradient models outperform MLP models
using hand-engineered and node2vec features
in terms of relative error. These results extend
to 60 synthetic datasets, with experiments also
showing that the gated gradient model learns
qualitative information about the underlying
synthetic generative flow distributions.

1. Introduction
A bank will typically have millions of transactions flowing
through its systems on a daily basis, and the need to further
develop tools to monitor the flows for anomalous behaviours
has become a crucial activity. It is estimated that global
money laundering activities comprise 2 - 5% of global
1
RPL, EECS, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden 2 SEB Group, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to:
Ciwan Ceylan <ciwan@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

annual GDP (United Nations office on drugs and crime,
2011), and transaction service providers, such as SEB
Group, are required by EU and national regulations to
report suspected money-laundering activity to the public
authorities (European Parliament and Council, 2018).
A large portion of everyday transactions are payments and
cash transactions, e.g. using bank transfers, mobile services
or cryptocurrencies. These transactions can be viewed as a
dynamic flow on the edges of a network where nodes are
accounts of individuals, companies, organisations etc.
Transaction network datasets available for research,
however, are scarce due to bank laws and client
confidentiality, and machine learning research to aid antimoney laundry (AML) efforts has consequently been
impeded. A review of the literature shows a prevalent
use of feature engineering, a process which is both
time consuming and performance restrictive. Moreover,
difficulties in obtaining labelled AML data limits application
of supervised deep learning.
In this work, we propose a method to learn representations
automatically from network transaction data using a gated
extension to the gradient flow model from the literature
(Lim, 2020). To automatically learn the representations, we
formulate a stationary flow prediction task that provides both
a well-defined optimisation objective, which we formalise
into an outlier robust, multi-scale loss function fit for the
properties of cash transaction data, and a performance
measure for objective comparison of our gated gradient
model to baselines. To adhere to confidentiality regulation,
we here focus on publicly available ethereum transactions
which exhibit similar statistical properties to commercial
cash and payment transactions (Fig. 1).
The contributions of this work are 1) a gated extension
to the gradient flow model capable of learning node
representations automatically from network flow data, 2)
a proof that this gated model is a universal approximator
for flows on graphs, 3) a robust, multi-scale loss function
to be used for training flow prediction models on large
transactions datasets and 4) empirical evidence using
ethereum transactions and synthetic data that our model
learns representation with better flow prediction properties
than available engineered and learned feature baselines.

