Bayesian Optimistic Optimisation with Exponentially Decaying Regret

Hung Tran-The 1 Sunil Gupta 1 Santu Rana 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation (BO) is a well-known efficient algorithm for finding the global optimum
of expensive, black-box functions. The current
practical BO algorithms have
regret bounds rang√
logN
− N
√
ing from O( N ) to O(e
), where N is the
number of evaluations. This paper explores the
possibility of improving the regret bound in the
noiseless setting by intertwining concepts from
BO and tree-based optimistic optimisation which
are based on partitioning the search space. We propose the BOO algorithm, a first practical approach
which can achieve√ an exponential regret bound
with order O(N − N ) under the assumption that
the objective function is sampled from a Gaussian
process with a Matérn kernel with smoothness
parameter ν > 4 + D
2 , where D is the number of
dimensions. We perform experiments on optimisation of various synthetic functions and machine
learning hyperparameter tuning tasks and show
that our algorithm outperforms baselines.

1. Introduction
We consider a global optimisation problem whose goal is
to maximise f (x) subject to x ∈ X ⊂ RD , where D is
the number of dimensions and f is an expensive blackbox functions that can only be evaluated point-wise. The
performance of a global optimisation algorithm is typically
evaluated using simple regret, which is given as
rN = supx∈X f (x) − max1≤i≤N f (xi )
where xi is the i-th sample, and N is the number of function
evaluations. In this paper, we consider the case that the
evaluation of f is noiseless.
Bayesian optimisation (BO) provides an efficient modelbased solution for global optimisation. The core idea is to
1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. Correspondence to: Hung Tran-The
<hung.tranthe@deakin.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

transform a global optimisation problem into a sequence
of auxiliary optimisation problems of a surrogate function
called the acquisition function. The acquisition function
is built using a model of the function through its limited
observations and recommends the next function evaluation
location. Regret analysis has been done for many existing
BO algorithms,
the regret is sub-linear followqand typically

logN
ing order O
(Srinivas et al., 2012; Russo et al.,
N
2018). More
(Vakili et al., 2020) have improved
 recently,

1
this to O √N under the noiseless setting. However, a limitation of BO is that performing such a sequence of auxiliary
optimisation problems is expensive.
De Freitas et al. (2012) introduced a Gaussian process (GP)
based scheme called δ-cover sampling as an alternative to
the acquisition function to trade-off exploration and exploitation. Their method samples the objective function using a
finite lattice within a feasible region and doubles the density
of points in the lattice at each iteration. However, even in
moderate dimensions, their algorithm is impractical since
the lattice quickly becomes too large to be sampled in a
reasonable amount of time (as pointed out by (Wang et al.,
2014; Kawaguchi et al., 2016)).
An alternative practical approach for global optimisation is
to consider tree-based optimistic optimisation as in (Munos,
2011; Floudas, 2005). These algorithms partition the search
space into finer regions by building a hierarchical tree. The
key is to have efficient strategies to identify a set of nodes
that may contain the global optimum and then to successively reduce and refine the search space to reach closer
to the optimum. As example, DIRECT algorithm (Jones
et al., 1993) partitions the search space assuming a global
Lipschitz constant. Simultaneous Optimistic Optimisation
(SOO) algorithm (Munos, 2011) generalises this by using
only local Lipschitz conditions. Under certain assumptions,
this algorithm shows the possibility √of achieving an exponentially diminishing regret O(e− N ). An additional
advantage of such algorithms is that we do not need to perform an auxiliary non-convex optimisation of the acquisition
functions as in BO which may be difficult in cases that are
high-dimensional (Kandasamy, 2015; Tran-The et al., 2020)
or have unbounded search spaces (Tran-The et al., 2020).
However, these optimistic algorithms are model-free, that

