Online Policy Gradient for Model Free
√Learning
of Linear Quadratic Regulators with T Regret

Asaf Cassel 1 Tomer Koren 1 2

Abstract
We consider the task of learning to control a linear dynamical system under fixed quadratic costs,
known as the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR)
problem. While model-free approaches are often
favorable in practice, thus far only model-based
methods, which rely on costly system identification, have been shown to achieve regret that
scales with the optimal dependence on the time
horizon T . We present the first model-free algorithm that achieves similar regret guarantees.
Our method relies on an efficient policy gradient
scheme, and a novel and tighter analysis of the
cost of exploration in policy space in this setting.

1. Introduction
Model-free, policy gradient algorithms have become a staple of Reinforcement Learning (RL) with both practical
successes (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018),
and strong theoretical guarantees in several settings (Sutton
et al., 1999; Silver et al., 2014). In this work we study the
design and analysis of such algorithms for the adaptive control of Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) systems, as seen
through the lens of regret minimization (Abbasi-Yadkori &
Szepesvári, 2011; Cohen et al., 2019; Mania et al., 2019).
In this continuous state and action reinforcement learning
setting, an agent chooses control actions ut and the system
state xt evolves according to the noisy linear dynamics
xt+1 = A? xt + B? ut + wt ,
where A? and B? are transition matrices and wt are i.i.d
zero-mean noise terms. The cost is a quadratic function of
the current state and action, and the regret is measured with
respect to the class of linear policies, which are known to
be optimal for this setting.
1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv.
Correspondence to:
Asaf Cassel <acassel@mail.tau.ac.il>, Tomer Koren <tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Model-based methods, which perform planning based on a
system identification procedure that estimates the transition
matrices, have been studied extensively in recent years. This
started with Abbasi-Yadkori
& Szepesvári (2011), which
√
established an O( T ) regret guarantee albeit with a computationally intractable method. More recently, Cohen et al.
(2019); Mania et al. (2019) complemented this result with
computationally efficient methods, and Simchowitz & Foster (2020); Plevrakis & Hazan (2020) respectively give
model-based algorithms with similar guarantees for the settings of strongly-convex adversarial costs, and general fixed
convex costs, which both encompass the quadratic setting.
Cassel et al. (2020); Simchowitz & Foster (2020) provided
lower bounds, showing that this rate is generally unavoidable, regardless of whether the algorithm is model free or
not, with Simchowitz & Foster (2020) also establishing a
near-optimal dependence on the dimension parameters. In
comparison, the best existing model-free algorithms are policy iteration procedures by Krauth et al. (2019) and Abbasie 2/3 ) and
Yadkori et al. (2019) that respectively achieve O(T
2/3+
e
O(T
) regret for  = Θ(1/ log T ).
Our main result is an efficient (in fact, linear
√ time per step)
e T ) regret, thus
policy gradient algorithm that achieves O(
closing the (theoretical) gap between model based and free
methods for the LQR model. An interesting feature of our
approach is that while the policies output by the algorithm
are clearly state dependent, the tuning of their parameters requires no such access. Instead, we only rely on observations
of the incurred cost, similar to bandit models (e.g., Cassel
& Koren, 2020). We note that our results focus strictly on
the time horizon parameter, and it remains open whether
model-free methods could also achieve dimension optimal
regret guarantees.
One of the main challenges of regret minimization in LQRs
(and more generally, in reinforcement learning) is that it
is generally infeasible to change policies as often as one
likes. Roughly, this is due to a burn-in period following a
policy change, during which the system converges to a new
steady distribution, and typically incurs an additional cost
proportional to the change in steady states, which is in turn
proportional to the distance between policies. There are
several ways to overcome this impediment. The simplest is

