Skill Discovery for Exploration and Planning using Deep Skill Graphs

Akhil Bagaria 1 Jason Senthil 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract
We introduce a new skill-discovery algorithm that
builds a discrete graph representation of large continuous MDPs, where nodes correspond to skill
subgoals and the edges to skill policies. The agent
constructs this graph during an unsupervised training phase where it interleaves discovering skills
and planning using them to gain coverage over
ever-increasing portions of the state-space. Given
a novel goal at test time, the agent plans with the
acquired skill graph to reach a nearby state, then
switches to learning to reach the goal. We show
that the resulting algorithm, Deep Skill Graphs,
outperforms both flat and existing hierarchical
reinforcement learning methods on four difficult
continuous control tasks.

1. Introduction
General-purpose agents operating in challenging domains
like robotics must cope with the reality of action and perception in high-dimensional spaces (Konidaris, 2019). Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) (Barto & Mahadevan,
2003), with its emphasis on building procedural action abstractions, is a promising starting point for scaling RL to
such problems.
The benefits of well-designed hierarchies have always been
clear (Sutton et al., 1999; Dietterich, 2000), but the task of
autonomously discovering them (known as skill discovery)
is a challenging open problem (Precup, 2001; Mcgovern,
2002; Ravindran, 2004; Konidaris, 2011; Bacon, 2018). Furthermore, previous works have studied skill discovery in
several different contexts—multi-task learning (Levy et al.,
2019), exploration (Machado et al., 2017; Jinnai et al., 2019)
and planning (Sharma et al., 2020)—but how these settings
culminate in a single algorithm remains unclear.
We propose an algorithm that discovers skills that aid explo1
Department of Computer Science, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA. Correspondence to: Akhil Bagaria
<akhil bagaria@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Deep Skill Graphs constructs a discrete graph-based abstraction (bottom) of a high-dimensional continuous control problem (top) during an unsupervised training phase. When given
test-time goals (stars), the agent finds the high-level solution trajectories on the graph, which are shown in red, green and blue (bottom). Then the high-level solutions are translated to joint torques
using discovered skills, which are shown as different colors (top).

ration, and which are subsequently useful for planning in
a multi-task context. Our algorithm learns a collection of
skills that form a graph, where the nodes are subgoals and
the edges are the policies that navigate between them. To
construct this graph, we first discover subgoal regions that
optimize for coverage of the state-space, using techniques
inspired by the robot motion-planning literature (LaValle,
1998) that causes the graph to grow towards large unexplored regions. These regions are subsequently connected
using Deep Skill Chaining (Bagaria & Konidaris, 2020;
Bagaria et al., 2021), resulting in a collection of skills that
enable the agent to reliably move between subgoals. The
chainability of the discovered skills, i.e, the property that
successful execution of one permits the execution of an-

