One-sided Frank-Wolfe algorithms for saddle problems

Vladimir Kolmogorov 1 Thomas Pock 2

Abstract

where X , Y are finite dimensional spaces, equipped with
an inner product h·, ·i and K : X → Y is a bounded
linear operator with operator norm LK = kKk. Usually
the underlying spaces are the standard Euclidean spaces
X = Rn and Y = Rm .

We study a class of convex-concave saddlepoint problems of the form minx maxy hKx, yi +
fP (x)−h∗ (y) where K is a linear operator, fP is
the sum of a convex function f with a Lipschitzcontinuous gradient and the indicator function of
a bounded convex polytope P, and h∗ is a convex
(possibly nonsmooth) function. Such problem
arises, for example, as a Lagrangian relaxation
of various discrete optimization problems. Our
main assumptions are the existence of an efficient
linear minimization oracle (lmo) for fP and an
efficient proximal map (prox) for h∗ which motivate the solution via a blend of proximal primaldual algorithms and Frank-Wolfe algorithms. In
case h∗ is the indicator function of a linear constraint and function f is quadratic, we show a
O(1/n2 ) convergence rate on the dual objective,
requiring O(n log n) calls of lmo. If the problem
comes from the constrained optimization problem
minx∈Rd {fP (x) | Ax − b = 0} then we additionally get bound O(1/n2 ) both on the primal gap
and on the infeasibility gap. In the most general
case, we show a O(1/n) convergence rate of the
primal-dual gap again requiring O(n log n) calls
of lmo. To the best of our knowledge, this improves on the known convergence rates for the
considered class of saddle-point problems. We
show applications to labeling problems frequently
appearing in machine learning and computer vision.

The functions fP (x) and h∗ are convex, lower semicontinuous functions.
For a differentiable convex function f we say that it has
a Lipschitz continuous gradient if there exists a constant
Lf ≥ 0 such that
k∇f (x) − ∇f (y)k ≤ Lf kx − yk,

Moreover, the function f is called strongly convex with
strong convexity parameter µf > 0 if f (y) ≥ f (x) +
µ
h∇f (x), y − xi + 2f ky − xk2 for all x, y ∈ X .
We make the following important structural assumptions on
the functions fP (x) and h∗ :
• The function fP (x) has the following composite form
fP (x) = f (x) + δP (x),
where f is a convex function with a Lf -Lipschitz continuous gradient and δP is the indicator function of a convex
polytope P ⊂ X . For this polytope, we assume the existence of an efficient linear minimization oracle (lmo),
which means that for any a ∈ X ∗ , one can efficiently
solve
lmoP (a) ∈ arg minha, xi.
x∈P

This is for example the case if P is the polytope arising
from LP relaxations of MAP-MRF problems in a treestructured graph, where the above problem can be solved
efficiently using dynamic programming.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the following class of saddle-point
problems:
min max L(x, y) := hKx, yi + fP (x) − h∗ (y)

x∈X y∈Y
1

∀x, y ∈ X .

(1)

2

Institute of Science and Technology Austria Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology. Correspondence to: Vladimir Kolmogorov <vnk@ist.ac.at>, Thomas
Pock <pock@icg.tugraz.at>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• The function h∗ is a convex function which allows to
efficiently compute its proximal map (prox), which for
any ȳ ∈ Y and τ > 0 is defined as
proxτ h∗ (ȳ) = arg min

1

y∈Y 2τ

ky − ȳk2 + h∗ (y).

Important examples of h∗ which allow for an efficient
proximal map include quadratic functions and various
norms. If h∗ = δC i.e. the indicator functions of some
convex set C the proximal map reduces the orthogonal
projection operator.

