Active Feature Acquisition with Generative Surrogate Models
Yang Li 1 Junier B. Oliva 1

Abstract
Many real-world situations allow for the acquisition of additional relevant information when making an assessment with limited or uncertain data.
However, traditional ML approaches either require all features to be acquired beforehand or
regard part of them as missing data that cannot
be acquired. In this work, we consider models
that perform active feature acquisition (AFA) and
query the environment for unobserved features
to improve the prediction assessments at evaluation time. Our work reformulates the Markov
decision process (MDP) that underlies the AFA
problem as a generative modeling task and optimizes a policy via a novel model-based approach.
We propose learning a generative surrogate model
(GSM) that captures the dependencies among input features to assess potential information gain
from acquisitions. The GSM is leveraged to provide intermediate rewards and auxiliary information to aid the agent navigate a complicated highdimensional action space and sparse rewards. Furthermore, we extend AFA in a task we coin active
instance recognition (AIR) for the unsupervised
case where the target variables are the unobserved
features themselves and the goal is to collect information for a particular instance in a cost-efﬁcient
way. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach achieves considerably better performance
than previous state of the art methods on both
supervised and unsupervised tasks.

1. Introduction
A typical machine learning paradigm for discriminative
tasks is to learn the distribution of an output, y given a
complete set of features, x ∈ Rd : p(y | x). Although this
1

Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chaple Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Correspondence
to: Yang Li <yangli95@cs.unc.edu>, Junier B. Oliva <joliva@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

paradigm is successful in a multitude of domains, it is incongruous with the expectations of many real-world intelligent
systems in two key ways: ﬁrst, it assumes that a complete set
of features has been observed; second, as a consequence, it
also assumes that no additional information (features) of an
instance may be obtained at evaluation time. These assumptions often do not hold; human agents routinely reason over
instances with incomplete data and decide when and what
additional information to obtain. For example, consider a
doctor diagnosing a patient. The doctor usually has not
observed all possible measurements (such as blood samples,
x-rays, etc.) for the patient. He/she is not forced to make
a diagnosis based on the observed measurements; instead,
he/she may dynamically decide to take more measurements
to help determine the diagnosis. Of course, the next measurement to make (feature to observe), if any, will depend
on the values of the already observed features; thus, the
doctor may determine a different set of features to observe
from patient to patient (instance to instance) depending on
the values of the features that were observed. Hence, each
patient will not have the same subset of features selected
(as would be the case with typical feature selection). Furthermore, acquiring features typically involves some cost
(in time, money and risk), and intelligent systems are expected to automatically balance the cost and improvement
on performance. In order to more closely match the needs of
many real-world applications, we propose an active feature
acquisition (AFA) model that not only makes predictions
with incomplete/missing features, but also determines the
next feature that would be the most valuable to obtain for a
particular instance.
As noted in (Shim et al., 2018), the active feature acquisition
problem may be formulated as a Markov decision process
(MDP), where the state is the set of currently observed features and the action is the next feature to acquire. A special
action indicates whether to stop the acquisition process and
make a ﬁnal prediction. After acquiring its value and paying
the acquisition cost, the newly acquired feature is added
to the observed subset and the agent proceeds to the next
acquisition step. Once the agent decides to terminate the
acquisition, it makes a ﬁnal prediction based on the features
acquired thus far. For example, in an image classiﬁcation
task (Fig. 1), the agent would dynamically acquire pixels
until it is certain of the image class. The goal of the agent is

