Scalable Optimal Transport in High Dimensions for Graph Distances,
Embedding Alignment, and More

Johannes Gasteiger 1 Marten Lienen 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
The current best practice for computing optimal transport (OT) is via entropy regularization
and Sinkhorn iterations. This algorithm runs in
quadratic time as it requires the full pairwise cost
matrix, which is prohibitively expensive for large
sets of objects. In this work we propose two
effective log-linear time approximations of the
cost matrix: First, a sparse approximation based
on locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) and, second, a Nyström approximation with LSH-based
sparse corrections, which we call locally corrected
Nyström (LCN). These approximations enable
general log-linear time algorithms for entropyregularized OT that perform well even for the
complex, high-dimensional spaces common in
deep learning. We analyse these approximations
theoretically and evaluate them experimentally
both directly and end-to-end as a component for
real-world applications. Using our approximations for unsupervised word embedding alignment
enables us to speed up a state-of-the-art method
by a factor of 3 while also improving the accuracy
by 3.1 percentage points without any additional
model changes. For graph distance regression
we propose the graph transport network (GTN),
which combines graph neural networks (GNNs)
with enhanced Sinkhorn. GTN outcompetes previous models by 48 % and still scales log-linearly
in the number of nodes.

1. Introduction
Measuring the distance between two distributions or sets
of objects is a central problem in machine learning. One
common method of solving this is optimal transport (OT).
OT is concerned with the problem of finding the transport
plan for moving a source distribution (e.g. a pile of earth) to
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence
to: Johannes Gasteiger <j.gasteiger@in.tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a sink distribution (e.g. a construction pit) with the cheapest
cost w.r.t. some pointwise cost function (e.g. the Euclidean
distance). The advantages of this method have been shown
numerous times, e.g. in generative modelling (Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Bousquet et al., 2017; Genevay et al., 2018),
loss functions (Frogner et al., 2015), set matching (Wang
et al., 2019), or domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017).
Motivated by this, many different methods for accelerating
OT have been proposed in recent years (Indyk & Thaper,
2003; Papadakis et al., 2014; Backurs et al., 2020). However,
most of these approaches are specialized methods that do
not generalize to modern deep learning models, which rely
on dynamically changing high-dimensional embeddings.
In this work we make OT computation for high-dimensional
point sets more scalable by introducing two fast and accurate
approximations of entropy-regularized optimal transport:
Sparse Sinkhorn and LCN-Sinkhorn, the latter relying on
our novel locally corrected Nyström (LCN) method. Sparse
Sinkhorn uses a sparse cost matrix to leverage the fact that
in entropy-regularized OT (also known as the Sinkhorn
distance) (Cuturi, 2013) often only each point’s nearest
neighbors influence the result. LCN-Sinkhorn extends this
approach by leveraging LCN, a general similarity matrix
approximation that fuses local (sparse) and global (lowrank) approximations, allowing us to simultaneously capture interactions between both close and far points. LCNSinkhorn thus fuses sparse Sinkhorn and Nyström-Sinkhorn
(Altschuler et al., 2019). Both sparse Sinkhorn and LCNSinkhorn run in log-linear time.
We theoretically analyze these approximations and show
that sparse corrections can lead to significant improvements
over the Nyström approximation. We furthermore validate
these approximations by showing that they are able to reproduce both the Sinkhorn distance and transport plan significantly better than previous methods across a wide range
of regularization parameters and computational budgets (as
e.g. demonstrated in Fig. 1). We then show the impact of
these improvements by employing Sinkhorn approximations
end-to-end in two high-impact machine learning tasks. First,
we incorporate them into Wasserstein Procrustes for word
embedding alignment (Grave et al., 2019). Without any
further model changes LCN-Sinkhorn improves upon the

