Finding the Stochastic Shortest Path with Low Regret:
The Adversarial Cost and Unknown Transition Case
Liyu Chen 1 Haipeng Luo 1

Abstract
We make significant progress toward the stochastic shortest path problem with adversarial costs
and unknown transition. Specifically,
we de√
velop algorithms that achieve Õ( S 2 ADT? K)
regret
√ for the full-information setting and
Õ( S 3 A2 DT? K) regret for the bandit feedback
setting, where D is the diameter, T? is the expected hitting time of the optimal policy, S is the
number of states, A is the number of actions, and
K is the number of episodes. Our work strictly improves (Rosenberg and Mansour, 2020) in the full
information setting, extends (Chen et al., 2020)
from known transition to unknown transition, and
is also the first to consider the most challenging
combination: bandit feedback with adversarial
costs and unknown transition. To remedy the
gap between our upper bounds and the current
best lower bounds constructed via a stochastically
oblivious adversary, we also propose algorithms
with near-optimal regret for this special case.

1. Introduction
We study the stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem, where
a learner aims to find the goal state with minimum total
cost. The environment dynamics are modeled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) with S states, A actions, and a
fixed and unknown transition function. The learning proceeds in K episodes, where in each episode, starting from a
fixed initial state, the learner sequentially selects an action,
incurs a cost, and transits to the next state sampled from
the transition function. The episode ends when the learner
reaches a fixed goal state. We focus on regret minimization
in SSP and measure the performance of the learner by the
difference between her total cost over the K episodes and
that of the best fixed policy in hindsight.
The special case of SSP where an episode is guaranteed to
1

University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Liyu
Chen <liyuc@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

end within a fixed number of steps is extensively studied
in recent years (often known as episodic finite-horizon reinforcement learning or loop-free SSP). The general (and
also the more practical) case, on the other hand, has only
been recently studied: Tarbouriech et al. (2020a) and Cohen et al. (2020) develop algorithms with sub-linear regret
for the case with fixed or i.i.d. costs. Adversarial costs is
later studied by Rosenberg and Mansour (2020) in the fullinformation setting (where the cost is revealed at the end
of each episode). The minimax regret for adversarial costs
and known transition is then fully characterized in a recent
work by Chen et al. (2020), in both the full-information
setting and the bandit feedback setting (where only the cost
of visited state-action pairs is revealed).
In this work, we further extend our understanding of general
SSP with adversarial costs and unknown transition, for both
the full-information setting and the bandit setting. More
specifically, our results are (see also Table 1):
• (Section 4) In the full-information
√ setting, we develop
an algorithm that achieves Õ( S 2 ADT? K) regret
with high probability, where D is the diameter of
the MDP and T? is the expected time for the optimal policy to reach the goal state. √This improves
1
over the best existing bound Õ( cmin
S 2 AD2 K) or
p
√
Õ( S 2 AT?2 K 3/4 + D2 K) from (Rosenberg and
Mansour, 2020), where cmin ∈ [0, 1] is a global lower
bound of the cost for any state-action pair (it can be
shown that T? ≤ D/cmin ).
• (Section 5) In the bandit setting,
we develop another
√
algorithm that achieves Õ( S 3 A2 DT? K) regret with
high probability, which, as far as we know, is the first
result for this most challenging setting (bandit feedback, adversarial costs, and unknown transition).
• (Section 6) By combining previous results, it can be
shown that the lower bound
√
√ for the full-information
and√the bandit setting√are Ω( DT? K+D SAK) and
Ω( SADT? K +D SAK) respectively, establishing
a gap from our upper bounds. Noting that these lower
bounds are constructed with a stochastically oblivious
adversary, we propose another algorithm for this special case with near-optimal regret bounds that are only

