Quantile Bandits for Best Arms Identification

Mengyan Zhang 1 2 Cheng Soon Ong 2 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) are sequential experimental
design problems where an agent adaptively chooses one
(or multiple) option(s) among a set of choices based on
certain policies. We refer to “options” as “arms” in MAB
problems. In contrast with full feedback online decisionmaking problems where sample rewards for all arms are
fully observable to agents in each round, in MAB tasks the
agent only observes the sample reward from the selected
arm in each round, with no information about other arms.
One of the key steps in the theoretical analysis for bandit
algorithms is concentration inequalities, which provides
bounds on how a random variable deviates from some statistical summary (typically its expected value). Inspired by the
approach in Boucheron & Thomas (2012), we propose in
Section 2 new concentration inequalities for order statistics
and quantiles of distributions with non-decreasing hazard
rates (Definition 1). Previous work derived concentration
bounds of quantiles via the empirical cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.). Our proof uses a new approach based
1

The Australian National University 2 Data61, CSIRO. Correspondence to: Cheng Soon Ong <chengsoon.ong@anu.edu.au>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Mean
3.50
4.00
B

0.5-Quantile
3.50
2.80
A

C
D
Gap

Mean
1.45
2.50
1.05

0.8-Quantile
2.33
4.00
1.67

Table 1. Summary statistics for toy example rewards
Toy Example 1

0.5

0.2

C
D

0.4
Frequency

0.3

0.1
0.0

Toy Example 2

0.5
A
B

0.4
Frequency

We consider a variant of the best arm identification task in stochastic multi-armed bandits. Motivated by risk-averse decision-making problems,
our goal is to identify a set of m arms with the
highest τ -quantile values within a fixed budget.
We prove asymmetric two-sided concentration
inequalities for order statistics and quantiles of
random variables that have non-decreasing hazard rate, which may be of independent interest.
With these inequalities, we analyse a quantile version of Successive Accepts and Rejects (Q-SAR).
We derive an upper bound for the probability of
arm misidentification, the first justification of a
quantile based algorithm for fixed budget multiple best arms identification. We show illustrative
experiments for best arm identification.

A
B
OptArm

0.3
0.2
0.1

0

5

10
Reward

15

20

0.0

0

5

10
Reward

15

20

Figure 1. Toy example reward histograms.

on the extended Exponential Efron-Stein inequality (Theorem 3), and non-trivially extends the concentration of order
statistics (Boucheron & Thomas, 2012). Our proposed concentration inequality can be useful for various applications,
for example, the multi-armed bandits problem as illustrated
in this work, learning theory, A/B-testing (Howard & Ramdas, 2019), and model selection (Massart, 2000).
We apply the proposed concentration inequality to the Best
Arm Identification (BAI) task with fixed budget (Audibert
et al., 2010; Bubeck et al., 2013). The goal of BAI is to
select the best arm (in our case the top m ≥ 1 arms) after
the exploration phase (i.e. budget has run out). The agent
can explore the environment and perform actions during
the exploration phase without penalty. In contrast to the
majority of previous work which identifies optimal arms
by summarising a distribution by its mean, we address riskaverse bandits by evaluating the quality of arms by a quantile
value of the reward distribution. We consider the bandit
problem of quantile based m best arms identification, where
the goal is to identify a set of m arms with the highest
τ -quantile values. To the best of our knowledge, existing
quantile work focuses on single optimal arm identification,
and we are the first work that addresses multiple best arms
identification for fixed budget setting with respect to the
τ -quantile. Our proposed algorithm is in Section 4.
Studying quantile concentrations and identifying arms with
optimal quantiles have been shown to be beneficial for many
cases, such as when the rewards are qualitative (Szörényi

