Learning Noise Transition Matrix from Only Noisy Labels
via Total Variation Regularization

Yivan Zhang 1 2 Gang Niu 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Many weakly supervised classification methods
employ a noise transition matrix to capture the
class-conditional label corruption. To estimate
the transition matrix from noisy data, existing
methods often need to estimate the noisy classposterior, which could be unreliable due to the
overconfidence of neural networks. In this work,
we propose a theoretically grounded method that
can estimate the noise transition matrix and learn
a classifier simultaneously, without relying on
the error-prone noisy class-posterior estimation.
Concretely, inspired by the characteristics of the
stochastic label corruption process, we propose
total variation regularization, which encourages
the predicted probabilities to be more distinguishable from each other. Under mild assumptions,
the proposed method yields a consistent estimator
of the transition matrix. We show the effectiveness of the proposed method through experiments
on benchmark and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Can we learn a correct classifier based on possibly incorrect
examples? The study of classification in the presence of
label noise has been of interest for decades (Angluin &
Laird, 1988) and is becoming more important in the era of
deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016). This issue can be
caused by the use of imperfect surrogates of clean labels
produced by annotation techniques for large-scale datasets
such as crowdsourcing and web crawling (Fergus et al.,
2005; Jiang et al., 2020). Unfortunately, without proper
regularization, deep models could be more vulnerable to
overfitting the label noise in the training data (Arpit et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2017), which affects the classification
performance adversely.
1

2

The University of Tokyo, Japan RIKEN AIP, Japan. Correspondence to: Yivan Zhang <yivanzhang@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Background. Early studies on learning from noisy labels
can be traced back to the random classification noise (RCN)
model for binary classification (Angluin & Laird, 1988;
Long & Servedio, 2010; Van Rooyen et al., 2015). Then,
RCN has been extended to the case where the noise rate
depends on the classes, called the class-conditional noise
(CCN) model (Natarajan et al., 2013). The multiclass case
is of central interest in recent years (Patrini et al., 2017;
Goldberger & Ben-Reuven, 2017; Han et al., 2018a; Xia
et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020), where multiclass labels Y flip
into other categories Ye according to probabilities described
by a fixed but unknown noise transition matrix T , where
Tij = p(Ye = j|Y = i). In this work, we focus on the
multiclass CCN model. Other noise models are discussed
in Appendix A.
Methodology. The unknown noise transition matrix in
CCN has become a hurdle. In this work, we focus on a line
of research that aims to estimate the transition matrix from
noisy data. With a consistently estimated transition matrix,
consistent estimation of the clean class-posterior is possible
(Patrini et al., 2017). To estimate the transition matrix,
earlier work mainly relies on a given set of anchor points
(Liu & Tao, 2015; Patrini et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018), i.e.,
instances belonging to the true class deterministically. With
anchor points, the transition matrix becomes identifiable
based on the noisy class-posterior. Further, recent work has
attempted to detect anchor points in noisy data to mitigate
the lack of anchor points in real-world settings (Xia et al.,
2019; Yao et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, even with a given anchor point set, these twostep methods of first estimating the transition matrix and
then using it in neural network training face an inevitable
problem — the estimation of the noisy class-posterior. The
estimation error could be high due to the overconfidence of
neural networks (Guo et al., 2017; Hein et al., 2019; Rahimi
et al., 2020) (see also Appendix B).
In this work, we present an alternative methodology that
does not rely on the error-prone estimation of the noisy classposterior. The key idea is as follows: Note the fact that the
noisy class-posterior vector pe is given by the product of
the noise transition matrix T and the clean class-posterior
vector p: pe = T T p. However, in the reverse direction, the

