Large Scale Private Learning via Low-rank Reparametrization

Da Yu 1 2 Huishuai Zhang 2 Wei Chen 2 Jian Yin 1 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
We propose a reparametrization scheme to address the challenges of applying differentially
private SGD on large neural networks, which
are 1) the huge memory cost of storing individual gradients, 2) the added noise suffering notorious dimensional dependence. Specifically,
we reparametrize each weight matrix with two
gradient-carrier matrices of small dimension and
a residual weight matrix. We argue that such
reparametrization keeps the forward/backward
process unchanged while enabling us to compute
the projected gradient without computing the gradient itself. To learn with differential privacy,
we design reparametrized gradient perturbation
(RGP) that perturbs the gradients on gradientcarrier matrices and reconstructs an update for
the original weight from the noisy gradients. Importantly, we use historical updates to find the
gradient-carrier matrices, whose optimality is rigorously justified under linear regression and empirically verified with deep learning tasks. RGP
significantly reduces the memory cost and improves the utility. For example, we are the first
able to apply differential privacy on the BERT
model and achieve an average accuracy of 83.9%
on four downstream tasks with ǫ = 8, which is
within 5% loss compared to the non-private baseline but enjoys much lower privacy leakage risk.

1. Introduction
A recent line of works (Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al.,
2019; 2020) have exposed the potential privacy risks of
trained models, e.g., data extraction from language model.
Theoretically, learning with differential privacy (Dwork
1

The School of Data and Computer Science & Guangdong
Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Sun Yatsen University, Guangdong, China. The work was done when
D. Yu was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia. 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Corresponding authors: Wei Chen
<wche@microsoft.com>, Jian Yin <issjyin@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The proposed reparametrization scheme. The residual
weight makes the reparametrized output the same as the normal
output and ∂L, ∂R naturally connected with the normal gradient.

et al., 2006) is guaranteed to prevent such information leakage because differential privacy imposes an upper bound on
the influence of any individual sample. Empirically, differential privacy also makes learning more resistant to attacks
(Rahman et al., 2018; Bernau et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019;
Carlini et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019; Lecuyer et al., 2019).
To learn with differential privacy, many algorithms have
been proposed under different settings over the past decade,
e.g., Chaudhuri & Monteleoni (2009); Song et al. (2013);
Agarwal et al. (2018); Wang & Gu (2019); Wang et al.
(2019a); Yu et al. (2020); Phan et al. (2020); Vietri et al.
(2020), to name a few. Among them, gradient perturbation is a popular choice because of its simplicity and wide
applicability (Abadi et al., 2016). In terms of simplicity,
gradient perturbation only makes two simple modifications
to the standard learning process. It first clips the gradients
of individual samples, referred to as individual gradients,
to bound the sensitivity and then perturbs the aggregated
gradient with random noise. In terms of wide applicability,
it does not assume the objective to be convex and hence
applies to deep neural networks.
Despite its advantages, there are two challenges when applying gradient perturbation to cutting-edge deep models. First,
one needs to compute and store individual gradients. Recent
works (Dangel et al., 2019; Opacus, 2020) have developed
toolkits to compute individual gradients for a mini-batch of
data through a single forward/backward pass, but storing
individual gradients consumes a huge amount of memory
as each individual gradient requires the same amount of
memory as the model itself. Second, both theoretical and

