Improved Corruption Robust Algorithms for Episodic Reinforcement Learning

Yifang Chen 1 Simon S. Du 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
We study episodic reinforcement learning under
unknown adversarial corruptions in both the rewards and the transition probabilities of the underlying system. We propose new algorithms which,
compared to the existing results in (Lykouris et al.,
2020), achieve strictly better regret bounds in
terms of total corruptions for the tabular setting.
To be specific, firstly, our regret bounds depend
on more precise numerical values of total rewards
corruptions and transition corruptions, instead of
only on the total number of corrupted episodes.
Secondly, our regret bounds are the first of their
kind in the reinforcement learning setting to have
the number of corruptions
show up additively
√
with respect to min{ T , PolicyGapComplexity}
rather than multiplicatively. Our results follow
from a general algorithmic framework that combines corruption-robust policy elimination metaalgorithms, and plug-in reward-free exploration
sub-algorithms. Replacing the meta-algorithm
or sub-algorithm may extend the framework to
address other corrupted settings with potentially
more structure.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem where
the learner interacts with the environment sequentially and
aims to improve its decision making strategy over time.
This problem has usually been modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with unknown transition functions.
In this paper, we consider the classical episodic reinforcement learning with a finite horizon. Within each episode,
the learner sequentially observes the current state at each
stage, plays an action, receives the reward according to the
current state-action pair, and then transitions to the next
*
Equal contribution 1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science & Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Yifang Chen <yifangc@cs.washington.edu>,
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>, Kevin Jamieson
<jamieson@cs.washington.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

stage according to the underlying transition function.
The majority of the literature in learning in MDPs studies
stationary environments, where the underlying unknown
transition function and reward function are fixed. The rewards and the next states are independently and identically
distributed given the current state and the learner’s chosen
action. Under this setting, the goal is to minimize the regret,
which is the difference between the learner’s cumulative
rewards and the total rewards of the optimal policy (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018;
Ok et al., 2018; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Simchowitz
& Jamieson, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). However, these
techniques are vulnerable to corruptions on the rewards or
the transitions. Recently, Rosenberg & Mansour (2019);
Jin et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2020) gave provably efficient
algorithms for the setting of adversarial rewards and fixed
unknown transitions. Although their algorithms are robust
to corruptions on rewards, they heavily rely on the assumption that the transitions are not corrupted.
The most relevant work is by Lykouris et al. (2020) who gave
the first set of results on episodic reinforcement learning
that achieve robustness to corruptions on both the rewards
and the transition functions. Their regret is defined as the
difference between the learner’s accumulated rewards and
the total rewards of the optimal fixed policy with respect to
the uncorrupted underlying rewards and transition functions.
Their algorithm is efficient and works for tabular RL and its
linear variants. Unfortunately, their algorithm is not optimal
in terms of the corruption level. Firstly, their corruption
level C is defined as the total number of corrupted episodes.
Ideally, we would like the regret to depend on more finegrained characterizations of corruptions such as the total
magnitude of corruptions on the rewards (C r ) and transip
tion
(C
 functions
 ). Secondly, their regret bound scales
√
2
Õ C T + C in the worst case, where the corruption
level C appears both additively and multiplicatively. They
state in the paper that it is unclear whether one can obtain
additive dependence alone in tabular RL. In this paper, we
address this open problem.

Our contribution: To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work for the episodic tabular RL setting that obtains
a regret bound that scales only additively with respect to the

