Phase Transitions, Distance Functions, and Implicit Neural Representations

Yaron Lipman 1 2

Abstract
Representing surfaces as zero level sets of neural
networks recently emerged as a powerful modeling paradigm, named Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), serving numerous downstream
applications in geometric deep learning and 3D vision. Training INRs previously required choosing
between occupancy and distance function representation and different losses with unknown limit
behavior and/or bias. In this paper we draw inspiration from the theory of phase transitions of fluids and suggest a loss for training INRs that learns
a density function that converges to a proper occupancy function, while its log transform converges
to a distance function. Furthermore, we analyze
the limit minimizer of this loss showing it satisfies
the reconstruction constraints and has minimal
surface perimeter, a desirable inductive bias for
surface reconstruction. Training INRs with this
new loss leads to state-of-the-art reconstructions
on a standard benchmark.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Implicit neural representations learned with the novel
PHASE loss. This new loss unifies occupancy and signed distance
representations, and minimizes the perimeter of the reconstructed
surface.

Niemeyer et al., 2020; 2019; Gropp et al., 2020; Jiang et al.,
2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Yariv et al., 2020; Tancik et al.,
2020).
Still, the problem of training an implicit neural representation from raw data X ⊂ Rd such as a point-cloud or a
triangle soup1 is not fully solved.

Recent works have demonstrated the benefits of this representation (Mescheder et al., 2019; Chen & Zhang, 2019;
Park et al., 2019; Atzmon et al., 2019), including: the flexibility and expressive power of neural networks f , their
favorable inductive bias / implicit regularization properties,
and the facilitation of downstream learning applications
involving 3D shapes. Indeed, implicit neural representations find more and more applications in machine learning,
computer vision, and computer graphics (Saito et al., 2019;

Some previous works reduce the problem to a supervised regression problem (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019;
Chen & Zhang, 2019; Duan et al., 2020; Chabra et al., 2020).
That is, compute an implicit representation to the geometry
fˆ, and then, optimize the network f to approximate fˆ. Other
works consider the unsupervised version where only the raw
input geometry is provided as input X ⊂ Rd (Atzmon &
Lipman, 2020a; Gropp et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020;
Tancik et al., 2020; Williams et al., 2020). Two limitations
of previous approaches are: First, the limit behavior and/or
inductive bias of their loss/representation is often not clear,
sometimes leading to undesired artifacts in the reconstructed
geometry. Second, they require choosing between different
implicit representations such as Signed Distance Functions
(SDF) or occupancy functions.

1
Facebook AI Research 2 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to: Yaron Lipman <ylipman@fb.com,
yaron.lipman@weizmann.ac.il>.

The goal of this paper is to design a new loss for training
INRs from raw data, unifying the occupancy and SDF representations. This new loss, called PHASE, introduces a

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
A triangle soup is a collection of triangles, not necessarily
consistently oriented or defining a 2-manifold.

Implicit neural representation (INR) refers to representing
a surface in R3 , or more generally a hyper-surface in Rd , as
a zero level-set of a neural network f with parameters θ:

Sθ = x ∈ Rd | f (x; θ) = 0 .
(1)

