Self-Damaging Contrastive Learning

Ziyu Jiang 1 Tianlong Chen 2 Bobak Mortazavi 1 Zhangyang Wang 2

Abstract
The recent breakthrough achieved by contrastive
learning accelerates the pace for deploying unsupervised training on real-world data applications.
However, unlabeled data in reality is commonly
imbalanced and shows a long-tail distribution, and
it is unclear how robustly the latest contrastive
learning methods could perform in the practical
scenario. This paper proposes to explicitly tackle
this challenge, via a principled framework called
Self-Damaging Contrastive Learning (SDCLR),
to automatically balance the representation learning without knowing the classes. Our main inspiration is drawn from the recent finding that deep
models have difficult-to-memorize samples, and
those may be exposed through network pruning
(Hooker et al., 2020). It is further natural to hypothesize that long-tail samples are also tougher
for the model to learn well due to insufficient examples. Hence, the key innovation in SDCLR
is to create a dynamic self-competitor model to
contrast with the target model, which is a pruned
version of the latter. During training, contrasting
the two models will lead to adaptive online mining
of the most easily forgotten samples for the current target model, and implicitly emphasize them
more in the contrastive loss. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets and imbalance settings show that SDCLR significantly improves not
only overall accuracies but also balancedness, in
terms of linear evaluation on the full-shot and fewshot settings. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/SDCLR.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Research Gaps
Contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020;
Grill et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; You et al., 2020) recently prevails for deep neural networks (DNNs) to learn
1

Texas A&M University 2 University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

powerful visual representations from unlabeled data. The
state-of-the-art contrastive learning frameworks consistently
benefit from using bigger models and training on more taskagnostic unlabeled data (Chen et al., 2020b). The predominant promise implied by those successes is to leverage contrastive learning techniques to pre-train strong and transferable representations from internet-scale sources of unlabeled
data. However, going from the controlled benchmark data
to uncontrolled real-world data will run into several gaps.
For example, most natural image and language data exhibit
a Zipf long-tail distribution where various feature attributes
have very different occurrence frequencies (Zhu et al., 2014;
Feldman, 2020). Broadly speaking, such imbalance is not
only limited to the standard single-label classification with
majority versus minority class (Liu et al., 2019), but also
can extend to multi-label problems along many attribute
dimensions (Sarafianos et al., 2018). That naturally questions whether contrastive learning can still generalize well
in those long-tail scenarios.
We are not the first to ask this important question. Earlier
works (Yang & Xu, 2020; Kang et al., 2021) pointed out that
when the data is imbalanced by class, contrastive learning
can learn more balanced feature space than its supervised
counterpart. Despite those preliminary successes, we find
that the state-of-the-art contrastive learning methods remain
certain vulnerability to the long-tailed data (even indeed improving over vanilla supervised learning), after digging into
more experiments and imbalance settings (see Sec 4). Such
vulnerability is reflected on the linear separability of pretrained features (the instance-rich classes has much more
separable features than instance-scarce classes), and affects
downstream tuning or transfer performance. To conquer this
challenge further, the main hurdle lies in the absence of class
information; therefore, existing approaches for supervised
learning, such as re-sampling the data distribution (Shen
et al., 2016; Mahajan et al., 2018) or re-balancing the loss
for each class (Khan et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2019; Cao et al.,
2019), cannot be straightforwardly made to work here.
1.2. Rationale and Contributions
Our overall goal is to find a bold push to extend the loss
re-balancing and cost-sensitive learning ideas (Khan et al.,
2017; Cui et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2019) into an unsupervised setting. The initial hypothesis arises from the recent

