Deep Coherent Exploration for Continuous Control

Yijie Zhang 1 Herke van Hoof 2

Abstract
In policy search methods for reinforcement learning (RL), exploration is often performed by injecting noise either in action space at each step
independently or in parameter space over each
full trajectory. In prior work, it has been shown
that with linear policies, a more balanced tradeoff between these two exploration strategies is
beneficial. However, that method did not scale
to policies using deep neural networks. In this
paper, we introduce deep coherent exploration, a
general and scalable exploration framework for
deep RL algorithms for continuous control, that
generalizes step-based and trajectory-based exploration. This framework models the last layer
parameters of the policy network as latent variables and uses a recursive inference step within
the policy update to handle these latent variables
in a scalable manner. We find that deep coherent exploration improves the speed and stability
of learning of A2C, PPO, and SAC on several
continuous control tasks.

1. Introduction
The balance of exploration and exploitation (Kearns &
Singh, 2002; Jaksch et al., 2010) is a longstanding challenge
in reinforcement learning (RL). With insufficient exploration, states and actions with high rewards can be missed,
resulting in policies prematurely converging to bad local
optima. In contrast, with too much exploration, agents could
waste their resources trying suboptimal states and actions,
without leveraging their experiences efficiently. To learn
successful strategies, this trade-off between exploration and
exploitation must be balanced well, and this is known as the
exploration vs. exploitation dilemma.
At a high level, exploration can be divided into directed
1

University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark (work done
while YZ was a master student at the University of Amsterdam)
2
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Yijie Zhang <yizh@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

strategies and undirected strategies (Thrun, 1992; Plappert
et al., 2018). While directed strategies aim to extract useful information from existing experiences for better exploration, undirected strategies rely on injecting randomness
into the agent’s decision-making. Over the years, many
sophisticated directed exploration strategies have been proposed (Tang et al., 2017; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Houthooft
et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017). However, since these
strategies still require lower-level exploration to collect the
experiences, or are either complicated or computationally
intensive, they are usually only used for ‘hard exploration’
problems where rewards are sparse, delayed, or deceptive.
Except for those ‘hard exploration’ tasks, undirected exploration strategies are commonly used in practice and in RL
literature, where some well-known examples are -greedy
(Sutton, 1995) for discrete action space and additive Gaussian noise for continuous action space (Williams, 1992).
Such strategies explore by randomly perturbing agents’ actions at different steps independently and hence are referred
to as performing step-based exploration in action space
(Deisenroth et al., 2013).
As an alternative to those exploration strategies in action
space, exploration by perturbing the weights of linear policies has been proposed (Rückstieß et al., 2010; Sehnke et al.,
2010; Kober & Peters, 2008). Since these strategies in parameter space naturally explore conditioned on the states
and are usually trajectory-based, they have the advantages
of being more consistent, structured, and global (Deisenroth
et al., 2013). Later, van Hoof et al. (2017) proposed a generalized exploration (GE) scheme, bridging the gap between
step-based and trajectory-based exploration in parameter
space. With the advance of deep RL, NoisyNet (Fortunato et al., 2018) and parameter space noise for exploration
(PSNE) (Plappert et al., 2018) were introduced, extending
parameter-space exploration strategies for policies using
deep neural networks.
Although GE (van Hoof et al., 2017), NoisyNet (Fortunato
et al., 2018), and PSNE (Plappert et al., 2018) improved the
vanilla exploration strategies in parameter space and were
shown leading to more global and consistent exploration,
they still suffer from several limitations. Our contribution
consists of a new exploration scheme to overcome these
limitations. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first
scheme that combines the following characteristics:

