Delving into Deep Imbalanced Regression

Yuzhe Yang 1 Kaiwen Zha 1 Ying-Cong Chen 1 Hao Wang 2 Dina Katabi 1
Deep Imbalanced Regression

Real-world data often exhibit imbalanced distributions, where certain target values have significantly fewer observations. Existing techniques
for dealing with imbalanced data focus on targets with categorical indices, i.e., different classes.
However, many tasks involve continuous targets,
where hard boundaries between classes do not
exist. We define Deep Imbalanced Regression
(DIR) as learning from such imbalanced data with
continuous targets, dealing with potential missing
data for certain target values, and generalizing to
the entire target range. Motivated by the intrinsic
difference between categorical and continuous label space, we propose distribution smoothing for
both labels and features, which explicitly acknowledges the effects of nearby targets, and calibrates
both label and learned feature distributions. We
curate and benchmark large-scale DIR datasets
from common real-world tasks in computer vision, natural language processing, and healthcare
domains. Extensive experiments verify the superior performance of our strategies. Our work fills
the gap in benchmarks and techniques for practical imbalanced regression problems. Code and
data are available at: https://github.com/
YyzHarry/imbalanced-regression.

1. Introduction
Data imbalance is ubiquitous and inherent in the real world.
Rather than preserving an ideal uniform distribution over
each category, the data often exhibit skewed distributions
with a long tail (Buda et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019), where
certain target values have significantly fewer observations.
This phenomenon poses great challenges for deep recognition models, and has motivated many prior techniques for
addressing data imbalance (Cao et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2019;
Huang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2020).
1
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Yuzhe Yang <yuzhe@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Number of samples

Abstract

Imbalanced distribution

Missing data

Continuous target value

Figure 1. Deep Imbalanced Regression (DIR) aims to learn from
imbalanced data with continuous targets, tackle potential missing
data for certain regions, and generalize to the entire target range.

Existing solutions for learning from imbalanced data, however, focus on targets with categorical indices, i.e., the targets are different classes. However, many real-world tasks
involve continuous and even infinite target values. For example, in vision applications, one needs to infer the age of
different people based on their visual appearances, where
age is a continuous target and can be highly imbalanced.
Treating different ages as distinct classes is unlikely to yield
the best results because it does not take advantage of the
similarity between people with nearby ages. Similar issues
happen in medical applications since many health metrics
including heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation,
are continuous and often have skewed distributions across
patient populations.
In this work, we systematically investigate Deep Imbalanced
Regression (DIR) arising in real-world settings (see Fig. 1).
We define DIR as learning continuous targets from natural
imbalanced data, dealing with potentially missing data for
certain target values, and generalizing to a test set that is
balanced over the entire range of continuous target values.
This definition is analogous to the class imbalance problem
(Liu et al., 2019), but focuses on the continuous setting.
DIR brings new challenges distinct from its classification
counterpart. First, given continuous (potentially infinite)
target values, the hard boundaries between classes no longer
exist, causing ambiguity when directly applying traditional
imbalanced classification methods such as re-sampling and
re-weighting. Moreover, continuous labels inherently possess a meaningful distance between targets, which has im-

