Conformal Prediction Interval for Dynamic Time-Series

Chen Xu 1 Yao Xie 1

Abstract
We develop a method to construct distributionfree prediction intervals for dynamic time-series,
called EnbPI that wraps around any bootstrap
ensemble estimator to construct sequential prediction intervals. EnbPI is closely related to
the conformal prediction (CP) framework but
does not require data exchangeability. Theoretically, these intervals attain finite-sample, approximately valid marginal coverage for broad
classes of regression functions and time-series
with strongly mixing stochastic errors. Computationally, EnbPI avoids overfitting and requires
neither data-splitting nor training multiple ensemble estimators; it efficiently aggregates bootstrap
estimators that have been trained. In general,
EnbPI is easy to implement, scalable to producing arbitrarily many prediction intervals sequentially, and well-suited to a wide range of regression functions. We perform extensive real-data
analyses to demonstrate its effectiveness.

namic time series. For instance, as outlined in the NERL
report (Cochran et al., 2015), solar and wind power generation data are often non-stationary and highly stochastic,
with significant variations and spatial-temporal correlations
across different regions. To tackle such problems, we often use regression functions for prediction, such as random
forest (Breiman, 2001) and various deep neural network
structures (Lathuilière et al., 2019), which can be arbitrarily
complex. Multiple regression functions are often combined
into an ensemble estimator to increase accuracy and decrease variance (Breiman, 1996). However, after making
predictions, existing theories and methods usually do not
efficiently construct prediction intervals, especially for such
complex regression models and time-series, unless restrictive assumptions on the underlying time-series distribution
are in place.
Contribution. This paper directly addresses the challenges
above by building distribution-free prediction intervals for
dynamic time-series data with marginal coverage guarantee.
In particular, we efficiently build prediction intervals for
point estimates from ensemble estimators that have been
trained without refitting any more ensemble models. We
summarize the main contributions as follows:

1. Introduction
In many modern applications, including energy and supply
chains (Cochran et al., 2015), we need sequential prediction with uncertainty quantification for dynamic time-series
observations that are spatially and temporally correlated.
Time-series are dynamic as they can be non-stationary with
highly complex spatio-temporal dependency. The uncertainty quantification is often in the form of prediction intervals, whose constriction is a fundamental problem in
statistics and machine learning. For example, to incorporate
renewable energy into existing power systems, it is crucial
to accurately predict energy levels from wind farms and
solar roof panels using data collected from solar sensors or
wind turbines and construct prediction intervals.
However, this task is highly challenging, especially for dy1
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Chen Xu <cxu310@gatech.edu>,
Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• We present a robust and computationally efficient predictive inference method around ensemble estimators,
called EnbPI, which constructs multiple/a batch of
prediction intervals at once and do so sequentially. It
requires no data splitting and works well for smallsample problems.
• Theoretically, we show that EnbPI prediction intervals enjoy approximately valid marginal coverage under mild assumptions on time-series’ stochastic errors
and regression estimators. In particular, the method is
suitable for non-stationary time-series and may attain
conditional validity. Approximately valid coverage
means we can upper bound the non-coverage at each
sample size T by a real sequence τT → 0, where τT
depends on the underlying assumptions on data and
estimators.
• Empirically, we extensively study the performance of
EnbPI on the renewable energy estimation application, using solar and wind data. We show that EnbPI
maintains coverage when competing methods fail to do

