Safe Reinforcement Learning Using Advantage-Based Intervention

Nolan Wagener 1 Byron Boots 2 Ching-An Cheng 3

Abstract
Many sequential decision problems involve
finding a policy that maximizes total reward
while obeying safety constraints. Although much
recent research has focused on the development
of safe reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
that produce a safe policy after training, ensuring
safety during training as well remains an open
problem. A fundamental challenge is performing
exploration while still satisfying constraints in
an unknown Markov decision process (MDP). In
this work, we address this problem for the chanceconstrained setting. We propose a new algorithm,
SAILR, that uses an intervention mechanism
based on advantage functions to keep the agent
safe throughout training and optimizes the agent’s
policy using off-the-shelf RL algorithms designed
for unconstrained MDPs. Our method comes
with strong guarantees on safety during both
training and deployment (i.e., after training and
without the intervention mechanism) and policy
performance compared to the optimal safetyconstrained policy. In our experiments, we show
that SAILR violates constraints far less during
training than standard safe RL and constrained
MDP approaches and converges to a wellperforming policy that can be deployed safely
without intervention. Our code is available at
https://github.com/nolanwagener/safe_rl.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) enables an agent to learn good behaviors with high returns
through interactions with an environment of interest. However, in many settings, we want the agent not only to find a
1

Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 2 Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Nolan Wagener
<nolan.wagener@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Advantage-based intervention of SAILR and construcf In M, whenever the policy π
tion of the surrogate MDP M.
proposes an action a which is disadvantageous (w.r.t. a backup
policy µ) in terms of safety, µ intervenes and guides the agent to
safety (green path). From the perspective of π, it transitions to an
absorbing state s† and receives a penalizing reward of −1.

high-return policy but also avoid undesirable states as much
as possible, even during training. For example, in a bipedal
locomotion task, we do not want the robot to fall over and
risk damaging itself either during training or deployment.
Maintaining safety while exploring an unknown environment is challenging, because venturing into new regions of
the state space may carry a chance of a costly failure.
Safe reinforcement learning (García & Fernández, 2015;
Amodei et al., 2016) studies the problem of designing learning agents for sequential decision-making with this challenge in mind. Most safe RL approaches tackle the safety
requirement either by framing the problem as a constrained
Markov decision process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999) or by
using control-theoretic tools to restrict the actions that the
learner can take. However, due to the natural conflict between learning, maximizing long-term reward, and satisfying safety constraints, these approaches make different
performance trade-offs.
CMDP-based approaches (Borkar, 2005; Achiam et al.,
2017; Le et al., 2019) take inspiration from existing constrained optimization algorithms for non-sequential problems, notably the Lagrangian method (Bertsekas, 2014).
The most prominent examples (Chow et al., 2017; Tessler
et al., 2018) rely on first-order primal-dual optimization to
solve a stochastic nonconvex saddle-point problem. Though
they eventually produce a safe policy, such approaches have
no guarantees on policy safety during training. Other safe

