Train simultaneously, generalize better:
Stability of gradient-based minimax learners

Farzan Farnia 1 Asuman Ozdaglar 1

Abstract
The success of minimax learning problems of
generative adversarial networks (GANs) has been
observed to depend on the minimax optimization
algorithm used for their training. This dependence
is commonly attributed to the convergence speed
and robustness properties of the underlying optimization algorithm. In this paper, we show that
the optimization algorithm also plays a key role
in the generalization performance of the trained
minimax model. To this end, we analyze the generalization properties of standard gradient descent
ascent (GDA) and proximal point method (PPM)
algorithms through the lens of algorithmic stability as defined by Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002
under both convex concave and non-convex nonconcave minimax settings. While the GDA algorithm is not guaranteed to have a vanishing
excess risk in convex concave problems, we show
the PPM algorithm enjoys a bounded excess risk
in the same setup. For non-convex non-concave
problems, we compare the generalization performance of stochastic GDA and GDmax algorithms
where the latter fully solves the maximization
subproblem at every iteration. Our generalization
analysis suggests the superiority of GDA provided
that the minimization and maximization subproblems are solved simultaneously with similar learning rates. We discuss several numerical results
indicating the role of optimization algorithms in
the generalization of learned minimax models.

1. Introduction
In recent years, minimax learning frameworks including
generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
1

Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA. Correspondence to: Farzan Farnia <farnia@mit.edu>,
Asuman Ozdaglar <asuman@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2014) and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017) have
achieved great success over a wide array of learning tasks.
In these approaches, the learning problem is modeled as a
zero-sum game between two ”min” and ”max” players that
is commonly solved by a minimax optimization algorithm.
The minimax optimization problem of these learning frameworks is typically formulated using deep neural networks,
which greatly complicates the theoretical and numerical
analysis of the optimization problem. Current studies in
the machine learning literature focus on fundamental understanding of general minimax problems with emphasis on
convergence speed and optimality.
The primary focus of optimization-related studies of minimax learning problems has been on the convergence speed
and robustness properties of minimax optimization algorithms. Several recently proposed algorithms have been
shown to achieve faster convergence rates and more robust
behavior around local solutions. However, training speed
and robustness are not the only factors required for the success of a minimax optimization algorithm in a learning task.
In this work, we aim to show that the generalization performance of the learned minimax model is another key property
that is influenced by the underlying optimization algorithm.
To this end, we present theoretical and numerical results
demonstrating that:
Different minimax optimization algorithms can learn models with different generalization properties.
In order to analyze the generalization behavior of minimax
optimization algorithms, we use the algorithmic stability
framework as defined by (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002) for
general learning problems and applied by (Hardt et al., 2016)
for analyzing stochastic gradient descent. Our extension of
(Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002)’s stability approach to minimax settings allows us to analyze and compare the generalization properties of standard gradient descent ascent (GDA)
and proximal point method (PPM) algorithms. Furthermore,
we compare the generalization performance between the
following two types of minimax optimization algorithms: 1)
simultaneous optimization algorithms such as GDA where
the minimization and maximization subproblems are solved
simultaneously, and 2) non-simultaneous optimization algo-

