Improved OOD Generalization via Adversarial Training and Pre-training

Mingyang Yi 1 2 † Lu Hou 3 Jiacheng Sun 3 Lifeng Shang 3 Xin Jiang 3 Qun Liu 3 Zhi-Ming Ma 1 2

Abstract
Recently, learning a model that generalizes well
on out-of-distribution (OOD) data has attracted
great attention in the machine learning community. In this paper, after defining OOD generalization via Wasserstein distance, we theoretically
show that a model robust to input perturbation
generalizes well on OOD data. Inspired by previous findings that adversarial training helps improve input-robustness, we theoretically show that
adversarially trained models have converged excess risk on OOD data, and empirically verify it
on both image classification and natural language
understanding tasks. Besides, in the paradigm of
first pre-training and then fine-tuning, we theoretically show that a pre-trained model that is more
robust to input perturbation provides a better initialization for generalization on downstream OOD
data. Empirically, after fine-tuning, this betterinitialized model from adversarial pre-training
also has better OOD generalization.

1. Introduction
In the machine learning community, the training and test
distributions are often not identically distributed. Due to this
mismatching, it is desired to learn a model that generalizes
well on out-of-distribution (OOD) data though only trained
on data from one certain distribution. OOD generalization is
empirically studied in (Hendrycks et al., 2019; 2020a;b) by
evaluating the performance of the model on the test set that
is close to the original training samples. However, the theoretical understanding of these empirical OOD generalization
behaviors remains unclear.
Intuitively, the OOD generalization measures the perfor*

Equal contribution 1 University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence
to: Mingyang Yi <yimingyang17@mails.ucas.edu.cn>, Lu Hou
<houlu3@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

mance of the model on the data from a shifted distribution
around the original training distribution (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018). This is equivalent to the distributional robustness (Namkoong, 2019; Shapiro, 2017) which measures the
model’s robustness to perturbations the distribution of training data. Inspired by this, we study the OOD generalization
by utilizing the Wasserstein distance to measure the shift
between distributions (Definition 1). We theoretically find
that if a model is robust to input perturbation on training
samples (namely, input-robust model), it also generalizes
well on OOD data.
The connection of input-robustness and OOD generalization
inspires us to find an input-robust model since it generalizes
well on OOD data. Thus we consider adversarial training
(AT) (Madry et al., 2018) as Athalye et al. (2018) show that
a model is input-robust if it defends adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013). Mathematically, AT can be
formulated as a minimax optimization problem and solved
by the multi-step SGD algorithm (Nouiehed et al., 2019).
Under mild assumptions, we prove that the convergence
rate of this multi-step SGD for AT is Õ(1/T ) both in expectation and in high probability, where T is the number
of training steps and Õ(·) is defined in the paragraph of
notations. Then, combining the convergence result with the
relationship between input-robustness and OOD generalization, we theoretically show that for the model adversarially
trained with n training samples for T steps, its√excess risk
on the OOD data is upper bounded by Õ(1/ n + 1/T ),
which guarantees its performance on the OOD data.
Besides models trained from scratch, we also study the
OOD generalization on downstream tasks of pre-trained
models, as the paradigm of first pre-training on a largescale dataset and then fine-tuning on downstream tasks has
achieved remarkable performance in both computer vision
(CV) (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Kornblith et al., 2019) and
natural language processing (NLP) domains (Devlin et al.,
2019) recently. Given the aforementioned relationship of
input-robustness and OOD generalization, we theoretically
show that a pre-trained model more robust to input perturbation also provides a better initialization for generalization
on downstream OOD data. Thus, we suggest conducting adversarial pre-training like (Salman et al., 2020a; Hendrycks
et al., 2019; Utrera et al., 2021), to improve the OOD generalization in downstream tasks.

