A General Framework For Detecting Anomalous Inputs to DNN Classifiers

Jayaram Raghuram * 1 Varun Chandrasekaran * 1 Somesh Jha 1 2 Suman Banerjee 1

Abstract
Detecting anomalous inputs, such as adversarial
and out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, is critical
for classifiers (including deep neural networks
or DNNs) deployed in real-world applications.
While prior works have proposed various methods to detect such anomalous samples using information from the internal layer representations
of a DNN, there is a lack of consensus on a principled approach for the different components of
such a detection method. As a result, often heuristic and one-off methods are applied for different
aspects of this problem. We propose an unsupervised anomaly detection framework based on the
internal DNN layer representations in the form of
a meta-algorithm with configurable components.
We proceed to propose specific instantiations for
each component of the meta-algorithm based on
ideas grounded in statistical testing and anomaly
detection. We evaluate the proposed methods
on well-known image classification datasets with
strong adversarial attacks and OOD inputs, including an adaptive attack that uses the internal
layer representations of the DNN (often not considered in prior work). Comparisons with five
recently-proposed competing detection methods
demonstrates the effectiveness of our method in
detecting adversarial and OOD inputs.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
performance on a variety of challenging machine learning (ML) problems such as image classification, object detection, speech recognition, and natural language processing (He et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2017). However, it is
well-known that DNN classifiers can be highly inaccurate
(sometimes with high confidence) on test inputs from out*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, USA. 2 XaiPient Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Jayaram Raghuram <jayaramr@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

side the training distribution (Nguyen et al., 2015; Szegedy
et al., 2014; Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hein et al., 2019).
Such anomalous inputs can arise in real-world settings either
unintentionally due to external factors, or due to malicious
adversaries that intend to cause prediction errors in the DNN
and disrupt the system (Barreno et al., 2006; Biggio & Roli,
2018). Therefore, it is critical to have a defense mechanism
that can detect such anomalous inputs, and take suitable
corrective action (e.g., abstain from predicting (Tax & Duin,
2008) or provide a more reliable class prediction).
In this work, we propose JTLA (Joint statistical Testing
across DNN Layers for Anomalies), a general unsupervised
framework for detecting anomalous inputs (including adversarial and OOD) to a DNN classifier using its layer representations. JTLA utilizes the rich information at the intermediate layer representations of a DNN to obtain a better
understanding of the patterns produced by anomalous inputs
for detection. Our method is unsupervised, i.e., it does not
utilize any specific class(es) of known anomalous samples
for learning or tuning its parameters. While a number of
prior works have addressed the problem of adversarial and
OOD detection (Feinman et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Li &
Li, 2017; Lee et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018; Roth et al., 2019),
including ones that utilize intermediate layer representations
of a DNN (Li & Li, 2017; Meng & Chen, 2017; Xu et al.,
2018; Lee et al., 2018; Zheng & Hong, 2018; Ma et al.,
2018; Papernot & McDaniel, 2018; Miller et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2020; Sastry & Oore, 2020), some key limitations
persist, that we propose to address in this work.
Limitations of prior work. First, a number of existing detection methods (Feinman et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2018; Ma
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020) being supervised, have to be
presented with a broad sampling of known anomalous samples for training (e.g., different adversarial attacks of varying
strength). Such methods typically also need to configure
hyper-parameters based on the known anomalous samples
from the training set (e.g., using cross-validation). As a
result, they often do not generalize well to unknown anomalies (e.g., novel or adaptive attacks). It has been shown that
a majority of the current detection methods fail to handle
unseen and adaptive adversaries that are aware of the defense mechanism (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a; Tramèr et al.,
2020). Second, detection methods that use only the input,
output (pre-softmax), or a specific DNN layer (Roth et al.,

