Budgeted Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Estimation

Tian Qin 1 Tian-Zuo Wang 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) estimation
is receiving increasing interest due to its important applications in fields such as healthcare, economics, and education. Current HTE estimation
methods generally assume the existence of abundant observational data, though the acquisition of
such data can be costly. In some real scenarios, it
is easy to access the pre-treatment covariates and
treatment assignments, but expensive to obtain the
factual outcomes. To make HTE estimation more
practical, in this paper, we examine the problem
of estimating HTEs with a budget constraint on
observational data, aiming to obtain accurate HTE
estimates with limited costs. By deriving an informative generalization bound and connecting to
active learning, we propose an effective and efficient method which is validated both theoretically
and empirically.

1. Introduction
Treatment effect estimation is of great importance in many
applications, such as advertising (Sun et al., 2015; Wang
et al., 2015), recommendation (Schnabel et al., 2016), and
healthcare (Shalit, 2019). It aims to estimate the effects of
a treatment T (e.g., a kind of drug) on an outcome Y (e.g.,
whether the patient recovers) based on some pre-treatment
variables X (e.g., demographic characteristics). Among different levels of treatment effects, we focus on heterogeneous
treatment effects (HTEs), which captures treatment effects
at a subgroup level and therefore is useful for personalizing
treatment plans.
When the treatment is binary (e.g., taking a drug or not), the
group of individuals that receives the treatment is called the
treated group, and others the control group. Ideally, analysts can design and conduct randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) to estimate treatment effects. In RCTs, the treat1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua
Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ment assignment is randomized, so the estimates can be
readily obtained. However, RCTs are often costly to run,
and sometimes they are even unethical or illegal. To overcome this issue, researchers resort to observational data,
which is usually easy to access. Observational data mainly
consists of past pre-treatment variables, treatments, and outcomes. Since the generating process of observational data
is uncontrolled, there exists a gap between the treated distribution and the control distribution, which hinders accurate
estimation of treatment effects. In light of this, methods that
try to balance the two distributions were proposed and have
achieved impressive performance (Johansson et al., 2016;
Shalit et al., 2017; Kallus, 2020).
In some scenarios, however, observational data can be expensive to collect. E.g., to fight against COVID-19, each
individual can choose to receive free injection of vaccines
provided by the government. Now, the medical department
needs to collect factual data such as the antibody level, by
providing expensive medical tests, to evaluate the effectiveness of the vaccines. In this case, the amount of potential
observational data is huge, but the cost of collecting all factuals is unacceptable. It would be better to obtain accurate
HTE estimates by using only a limited amount of factual
observational data. Therefore, we focus on estimating HTE
with a budget constraint on observational data.
In this problem, given a pool of observational data without
factual outcomes, we allow an algorithm to select a limited
subset of it and pay some costs to obtain the corresponding
outcomes, then use them as training data to estimate HTEs.
To obtain as accurate estimates as possible using limited
training data, we bring in active learning, which is a classical
machine learning paradigm. The key idea behind active
learning is that a machine learning algorithm can achieve
greater accuracy with fewer training labels if it is allowed to
select the data from which it learns (Settles, 2012), which
fits in our setting and thus can be helpful.
However, unlike supervised learning tasks, true HTEs are
not easily available due to unobserved counterfactuals. As a
result, it is impractical to directly apply active learning that
mainly focuses on supervised learning tasks. In light of this,
we need a criterion that measures the goodness of estimates
and also guides the selection of training data. Therefore, we
derive a generalization bound for HTE using the concept of

