Temporal Predictive Coding For Model-Based Planning In Latent Space

Tung Nguyen * 1 Rui Shu * 2 Tuan Pham * 1 Hung Bui 1 Stefano Ermon 2

Abstract
High-dimensional observations are a major challenge in the application of model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) to real-world environments. To handle high-dimensional sensory inputs, existing approaches use representation learning to map high-dimensional observations into
a lower-dimensional latent space that is more
amenable to dynamics estimation and planning.
In this work, we present an information-theoretic
approach that employs temporal predictive coding to encode elements in the environment that
can be predicted across time. Since this approach
focuses on encoding temporally-predictable information, we implicitly prioritize the encoding
of task-relevant components over nuisance information within the environment that are provably
task-irrelevant. By learning this representation in
conjunction with a recurrent state space model,
we can then perform planning in latent space. We
evaluate our model on a challenging modification of standard DMControl tasks where the background is replaced with natural videos that contain
complex but irrelevant information to the planning task. Our experiments show that our model
is superior to existing methods in the challenging complex-background setting while remaining
competitive with current state-of-the-art models
in the standard setting.

1. Introduction
Learning to control from high dimensional observations has
been made possible due to the advancements in reinforcement learning (RL) and deep learning. These advancements
have enabled notable successes such as solving video games
(Mnih et al., 2015; Lample & Chaplot, 2017) and continuous
control problems (Lillicrap et al., 2016) from pixels. How*
Equal contribution 1 VinAI Research 2 Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Tung Nguyen <v.tungnd13@vinai.io>, Rui
Shu <ruishu@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ever, it is well known that performing RL directly in the
high-dimensional observation space is sample-inefficient
and may require a large amount of training data (Lake et al.,
2017). This is a critical problem, especially for real-world
applications. Recent model-based RL works (Kaiser et al.,
2020; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020) proposed to tackle this
problem by learning a world model in the latent space, and
then applying RL algorithms in the latent world model.
The existing MBRL methods that learn a latent world model
typically do so via reconstruction-based objectives, which
are likely to encode task-irrelevant information, such as of
the background. In this work, we take inspiration from the
success of contrastive learning and propose a model that
employs temporal predictive coding for planning from pixels. The use of temporal predictive coding circumvents the
need for reconstruction-based objectives and prioritizes the
encoding of temporally-predictable components of the environment, thus making our model robust to environments
dominated by nuisance information. Our primary contributions are as follows:
• We propose a temporal predictive coding approach for
planning from high-dimensional observations and theoretically analyze its ability to prioritize the encoding
of task-relevant information.
• We show experimentally that temporal predicting coding allows our model to outperform existing state-ofthe-art models when dealing with complex environments dominated by task-irrelevant information, while
remaining competitive on standard DeepMind control
(DMC) tasks. Additionally, we conduct detailed ablation analyses to characterize the behavior of our model.

2. Motivation
The motivation and design of our model are largely based on
two previous works (Shu et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2020).
In this section, we briefly go over the relevant concepts in
each work as well as how they motivate our paper. Shu et al.
(2020) proposed PC3, an information-theoretic approach
that uses contrastive predictive coding (CPC) to learn a
latent space amenable to locally-linear control. Their framework uses a CPC objective between the latent states of two

