Fast active learning for pure exploration
in reinforcement learning
Pierre Ménard 1 Omar Darwiche Domingues 2 Emilie Kaufmann 2 3 Anders Jonsson 4 Edouard Leurent 2
Michal Valko 2 3 5

Abstract
Realistic environments often provide agents with
very limited feedback. When the environment
is initially unknown, the feedback, in the beginning, can be completely absent, and the agents
may first choose to devote all their effort on
exploring efficiently. The exploration remains
a challenge while it has been addressed with
many hand-tuned heuristics with different levels
of generality on one side, and a few theoreticallybacked exploration strategies on the other. Many
of them are incarnated by intrinsic motivation
and in particular explorations
√ bonuses. A common choice is to use 1/ n bonus, where n
is a number of times this particular state-action
pair was visited. We show that, surprisingly,
for a pure-exploration objective of reward-free
exploration, bonuses that scale with 1/n bring
faster learning rates, improving the known upper bounds with respect to the dependence on the
horizon H. Furthermore, we show that with an
improved analysis of the stopping time, we can
improve by a factor H the sample complexity in
the best-policy identification setting, which is another pure-exploration objective, where the environment provides rewards but the agent is not
penalized for its behavior during the exploration
phase.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent learns how to act
by interacting with an environment, which provides feedback in the form of reward signals. The agent’s objective
is to maximize the sum of rewards. In this work, we study
1

Otto von Guericke University 2 Inria 3 Université de Lille
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 5 DeepMind Paris. Correspondence
to: Pierre Ménard <pierre.menard@ovgu.de>, Omar Darwiche
Domingues <omar.darwiche-domingues@inria.fr>.
4

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

how to explore efficiently. In particular we wish to compute near-optimal policies using the least possible amount
of interactions with the environment (in the form of observed transitions). In general, we may be either interested
in the performance of the agent during the learning phase
or we may only care for the performance of the learned
policy. In the first setting, we can measure the performance
of the agent by its cumulative regret which is the difference between the total reward collected by an optimal policy and the total reward collected by the agent during the
learning. Therefore, the agent is encouraged to explore new
policies but also exploit its current knowledge (Bartlett &
Tewari, 2009; Jaksch et al., 2010). Another performance
measure related to the regret consists in counting the number of times during the learning that the value of the policy
used by the agent is ε far from the optimal one. The minimization of this count is formalized in the PAC-MDP setting introduced by Kakade (2003), see also Dann & Brunskill (2015) and Dann et al. (2017). The second setting and
our central focus in this paper is called pure-exploration
where the agent is free to make mistakes during the learning and explore more vigorously (Fiechter, 1994; Kearns &
Singh, 1998; Even-Dar et al., 2006). We provide results for
two pure-exploration settings when the environment is an
episodic Markov decision process (MDP): the reward-free
exploration (RFE) and the best-policy identification (BPI).
Best-policy identification In BPI, an agent interacts with
the MDP, observing transitions and rewards, to output an
ε-optimal policy with probability at least 1 − δ (Fiechter,
1994). Most of the work on BPI assumes that the agent
has access to a generative model (oracle, Kearns & Singh,
1998). Having an oracle access means that the agent can
simulate a transition from any sate-action pair. In particular, Azar et al. (2013) show that the optimal rate of the
sample complexity, defined in this case as the number n of
oracle calls for getting an ε-optimal policy with probability

e H 4 SA log(1/δ)/ε2 where S
at least 1 − δ is of order1 O
1
Azar et al. (2012), express both the upper and the lower
bounds in the total number of calls to the generative model
(instead of trajectories) and prove them for the γ-discounted infinite horizon. They are of order SA(1 − γ)−3 ε−2 log(1/δ). We

