Combinatorial Blocking Bandits with Stochastic Delays
Alexia Atsidakou * 1 Orestis Papadigenopoulos * 2 Soumya Basu 3 Constantine Caramanis 1 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
Recent work has considered natural variations of
the multi-armed bandit problem, where the reward distribution of each arm is a special function
of the time passed since its last pulling. In this
direction, a simple (yet widely applicable) model
is that of blocking bandits, where an arm becomes
unavailable for a deterministic number of rounds
after each play. In this work, we extend the above
model in two directions: (i) We consider the general combinatorial setting where more than one
arms can be played at each round, subject to feasibility constraints. (ii) We allow the blocking
time of each arm to be stochastic. We first study
the computational/unconditional hardness of the
above setting and identify the necessary conditions for the problem to become tractable (even
in an approximate sense). Based on these conditions, we provide a tight analysis of the approximation guarantee of a natural greedy heuristic
that always plays the maximum expected reward
feasible subset among the available (non-blocked)
arms. When the arms’ expected rewards are unknown, we adapt the above heuristic into a bandit
algorithm, based on UCB, for which we provide
sublinear (approximate) regret guarantees, matching the theoretical lower bounds in the limiting
case of absence of delays.

1. Introduction
It is only recently that researchers have focused their attention on variants of the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problem where the mean reward of each arm is a specific
function of the time passed since its last pulling (Kleinberg & Immorlica, 2018; Pike-Burke & Grünewälder, 2019;
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, USA
3
Google, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Alexia Atsidakou <atsidakou@utexas.edu>, Orestis Papadigenopoulos <papadig@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Cella & Cesa-Bianchi, 2019). These variants capture applications where the mean outcome of an action temporarily
decreases or fluctuates after each use. A simple yet very
expressive model in this direction is that of blocking bandits (Basu et al., 2019), where each arm becomes blocked
(i.e., it cannot be played again) for a deterministic number
of subsequent rounds after each play, known as the delay.
In this paper, we generalize blocking bandits to model
two important and well-motivated properties: (i) Stochastic
blocking, where the delay of each arm is randomly sampled
from a distribution after each pull, and (ii) Combinatorial
actions, where more than one arm can be pulled at each
round, subject to general feasibility constraints.
Our model can accommodate a variety of settings where
arm pulling is subject to combinatorial constraints, while
the repeated selection of a certain arm is undesirable or even
infeasible. For example, in ride sharing platforms, where
the users are matched with rides, the allocation of resources
imposes matching constraints, while the transit times of
rides give rise to stochastic blocking of resources (Dickerson et al., 2018). Matching constraints are also natural in
task assignment in the cloud, and combinatorial network
optimization where the processing/serving times of tasks
can be modeled as stochastic blocking. Further, knapsack
constraints emerge inherently in ad placement (multiple ad
slots in a webpage) (Chen et al., 2016b), and movie/song
recommendation (multiple recommendation slots) (Kveton
et al., 2015b); while repetitive ads and recommendations
should be avoided for user satisfaction by introducing (possibly) random delays. Whereas these varied applications
naturally are within the scope of our results, to the best of
our knowledge, they are beyond the reach of prior works,
and in particular (Basu et al., 2019; 2021; Papadigenopoulos
& Caramanis, 2021; Bishop et al., 2020).
1.1. Central Challenges and Main Contributions
Model. A player is given a set of arms, each corresponding
to an unknown reward-delay distribution. At each round,
the player plays a subset of the available arms, subject to
feasibility constraints, and collects, for each arm played,
the realized reward of the round. Additionally, each of the
selected arms becomes unavailable for a random duration
equal to the realized delay of the round. The player has

