Sample-Optimal PAC Learning of Halfspaces with Malicious Noise

Jie Shen 1

Abstract
We study efficient PAC learning of homogeneous
halfspaces in Rd in the presence of malicious
noise of Valiant (1985). This is a challenging
noise model and only until recently has nearoptimal noise tolerance bound been established
under the mild condition that the unlabeled data
distribution is isotropic log-concave. However,
it remains unsettled how to obtain the optimal
sample complexity simultaneously. In this work,
we present a new analysis for the algorithm of
Awasthi et al. (2017) and show that it essentially achieves the near-optimal sample complexity bound of Õ(d), improving the best known
result of Õ(d2 ). Our main ingredient is a novel
incorporation of a matrix Chernoff-type inequality to bound the spectrum of an empirical covariance matrix for well-behaved distributions, in conjunction with a careful exploration of the localization schemes of Awasthi et al. (2017). We
further extend the algorithm and analysis to the
more general and stronger nasty noise model of
Bshouty et al. (2002), showing that it is still possible to achieve near-optimal noise tolerance and
sample complexity in polynomial time.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study computationally efficient PAC learning of homogeneous halfspaces – arguably one of the most
important problems in machine learning (Valiant, 1984). In
the absence of noise, the problem is well understood and
can be efficiently solved by linear programming (Maass &
Turán, 1994) or the Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958). However, when the unlabeled data1 or the labels are corrupted, it
becomes subtle to develop polynomial-time algorithms that
are resilient to the noise (Valiant, 1985; Angluin & Laird,
1988; Kearns & Li, 1988; Kearns et al., 1992).
1

Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.
Correspondence to: Jie Shen <jie.shen@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
We will also refer to unlabeled data as instances in this paper,
and refer to labeled data as samples.

Generally speaking, a large body of existing works study the
problem of learning halfspaces under label noise. This includes early works on random classification noise where the
label of each instance is independently flipped with a fixed
probability (Blum et al., 1996), a more general model termed
Massart noise where the probability of flipping a given label
may vary from instance to instance but is bounded away
from 12 (Sloan, 1988; Massart & Nédélec, 2006), the Tybakov noise where the flipping probability can be arbitrarily
close to 12 for a fraction of samples (Tsybakov, 2004), and
the much stronger adversarial (i.e. agnostic) noise where
the adversary may choose an arbitrary joint distribution over
the instance and label spaces (Haussler, 1992; Kearns et al.,
1992; Kalai et al., 2005; Daniely, 2015). When only the labels are corrupted, significant progress towards establishing
near-optimal performance guarantees has been witnessed in
recent years; see, e.g. Awasthi et al. (2017); Diakonikolas
et al. (2019; 2020a;b;c); Zhang et al. (2020); Shen (2020).
Compared to the fruitful set of positive results on efficient
learning of halfspaces under label noise, less is known for
the significantly more challenging regime where both instances and labels are corrupted. Specifically, one of such
strong noise models that has played a crucial role in learning theory is the malicious noise model of Valiant (1985);
Kearns & Li (1988), defined as follows:
Definition 1 (Malicious noise). Let X = Rd and Y =
{−1, 1} be the instance and label space, respectively. Let
D be an unknown distribution over X , and w∗ ∈ Rd be an
unknown halfspace. Each time the learner requests a sample,
with probability 1 − η, the adversary draws x from D and
returns the clean sample (x, sign (w∗ · x)); with probability
η, it may return an arbitrary pair (x, y) ∈ X × Y called dirty
sample. The parameter η ∈ [0, 12 ) is termed noise rate.
Notably, when the adversary is allowed to search for dirty
samples, it is assumed to have unlimited computational
power and can construct the sample based on the state of
the learning algorithm and the history of its outputs. Since
this is a much more demanding noise model (compared to
label-only noise), even the achievability of optimal noise
tolerance by efficient algorithms remained unsettled for
decades. For example, the early work of Kearns & Li (1988)
presented a general analysis showing that even without any
distributional assumptions, it is possible to tolerate the malicious noise at a rate of Ω(/d), but a noise rate greater

