Learning a Universal Template for Few-shot Dataset Generalization
Eleni Triantafillou 1 2 3 Hugo Larochelle 2 Richard Zemel 1 Vincent Dumoulin 2

Abstract
Few-shot dataset generalization is a challenging
variant of the well-studied few-shot classification
problem where a diverse training set of several
datasets is given, for the purpose of training an
adaptable model that can then learn classes from
new datasets using only a few examples. To this
end, we propose to utilize the diverse training
set to construct a universal template: a partial
model that can define a wide array of datasetspecialized models, by plugging in appropriate
components. For each new few-shot classification
problem, our approach therefore only requires inferring a small number of parameters to insert
into the universal template. We design a separate
network that produces an initialization of those
parameters for each given task, and we then finetune its proposed initialization via a few steps of
gradient descent. Our approach is more parameterefficient, scalable and adaptable compared to previous methods, and achieves the state-of-the-art
on the challenging Meta-Dataset benchmark.

1. Introduction
While deep learning approaches have recently driven remarkable progress on many important applications, their
ability to rapidly learn new concepts from small datasets is
significantly lacking. This observation has inspired research
towards creating more flexible and adaptable methods. A
well-studied problem in this direction is few-shot classification: the problem of utilizing a (possibly large) labeled
training set to create an adaptable model that is then capable
of learning new classes from few examples. Concretely, a
few-shot learning model is evaluated on test tasks, each of
which poses a classification problem between previouslyunseen classes, given only a few examples of each.
Departing from early benchmarks for this problem, recent
1

University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 Google Research,
Brain Team 3 Work done at Google.. Correspondence to: Eleni
Triantafillou <eleni@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

work is shifting towards a more challenging instance of
few-shot classification across datasets (Chen et al., 2019;
Tseng et al., 2020; Triantafillou et al., 2020; Requeima et al.,
2019; Bateni et al., 2020; Bronskill et al., 2020; Saikia et al.,
2020; Dvornik et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). Similarly,
we consider the challenging problem of few-shot dataset
generalization, where the training set is comprised of classes
originating from multiple diverse datasets, like ImageNet,
Omniglot, Aircraft, and so on, and the aim is to utilize this
diverse data towards building a model that can solve new
classification tasks between classes of previously-unseen
datasets at test time, using only a few examples.
Few-shot dataset generalization exhibits the same challenge
of data scarcity as its traditional (single-dataset) few-shot
classification counterpart, but it also presents two additional
difficulties. Firstly, the heterogeneous nature of the training dataset is reminiscent of multi-task learning (Caruana,
1997), where care must be taken to avoid interference when
training jointly for different objectives, or different datasets
in this case. Secondly, the fact that the test-time tasks are
composed of classes from previously-unseen datasets breaks
the i.i.d. assumption, resembling the problem of domain
generalization (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020). In a nutshell then, to succeed in few-shot dataset generalization, a
method must 1) ingest diverse information without interference, and 2) define a mechanism to appropriately re-purpose
that acquired knowledge in order to accommodate extensively different data at test time, using few examples.
In this work, we propose to tackle this problem by learning a
universal template: a partially-parameterized model trained
on multiple datasets in parallel that can be used to define a
wide array of dataset-specialized models by providing values for the remaining parameters. We posit that this design
incorporates a useful inductive bias for few-shot dataset
generalization: in addition to benefiting from knowledge
acquired on diverse data, it also reflects the requirement that
the template should be flexible enough to serve as the basis
to parameterize a diverse set of task-solving networks.
To this end, we propose to train a feature extractor jointly
across diverse datasets using FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) in
the form of conditional batch normalization: we share the
parameters of the convolutional layers across datasets, but
allocate a separate set of batch normalization parameters for

