Sparse Bayesian Learning via Stepwise Regression

Sebastian Ament 1

Abstract
Sparse Bayesian Learning (SBL) is a powerful
framework for attaining sparsity in probabilistic
models. Herein, we propose a coordinate ascent
algorithm for SBL termed Relevance Matching
Pursuit (RMP) and show that, as its noise variance
parameter goes to zero, RMP exhibits a surprising
connection to Stepwise Regression. Further, we
derive novel guarantees for Stepwise Regression
algorithms, which also shed light on RMP. Our
guarantees for Forward Regression improve on
deterministic and probabilistic results for Orthogonal Matching Pursuit with noise. Our analysis of
Backward Regression on determined systems culminates in a bound on the residual of the optimal
solution to the subset selection problem that, if satisfied, guarantees the optimality of the result. To
our knowledge, this bound is the first that can be
computed in polynomial time and depends chiefly
on the smallest singular value of the matrix. We
report numerical experiments using a variety of
feature selection algorithms. Notably, RMP and
its limiting variant are both efficient and maintain
strong performance with correlated features.

1. Introduction
Finding a sparse solution to underdetermined linear systems
is a fundamental problem in a diverse array of domains
and applications, like network systems (Haupt et al., 2008),
materials science (Szameit et al., 2012), medical imaging
(Lustig et al., 2007), and more. The problem can be formalized as
min kxk0 s.t. Φx = y,
(1.1)
n×m

where Φ ∈ R
is a matrix with potentially more columns
than rows, y is the observation we are trying to represent
using an unknown sparse vector x, and kxk0 stands for the
number of non-zero elements in x. A column ϕi of Φ is
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Sebastian Ament
<ament@cs.cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Carla Gomes 1
variously referred to as a feature or an atom. This problem
has been studied extensively, resulting in myriad existing
methods and algorithms.
In the present work, we study two seemingly disparate
techniques for solving problem (1.1): Sparse Bayesian
Learning (SBL) and Stepwise Regression. SBL is based
on the Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) framework (MacKay, 1992a;b) and is concerned with a generative
model of the form
Φx = y + ,

(1.2)

where Φ is a deterministic matrix, i ∼ N (0, σ) are independent noise variables, and the prior distribution over the
coefficients is xi ∼ N (0, γi ) (Tipping, 2001). Each coefficient has an independent prior variance γi , the defining
characteristic of the ARD prior. Sparse Bayesian models are
usually trained via type-II maximum likelihood estimation,
which is the maximization of the marginal likelihood with
respect to γ. The logarithm of the marginal likelihood is
Z
def
L(γ) = log p(y|x)p(x|γ)dx
(1.3)
∗ −1
= −y C y − log |C| − n log(2π),
def

def

where C = (σ 2 I + ΦΓΦ∗ ), and Γ = diag(γ). Since every coefficient has its own prior variance, the optimization
effectively prunes extraneous features of Φ if their prior
variances approache zero. Since this provably happens frequently (Wipf and Rao, 2005), ARD and SBL are powerful
tools for promoting sparsity in a variety of applications.
Stepwise Regression, on the other hand, is a class of wellknown greedy algorithms that add and delete features from
a candidate solution based on two rules:
arg min krA∪i k2 ,
i6∈A

and

arg min krA\i k2 , (1.4)
i∈A

where rA is the least-squares residual using only features indexed by A. The intuitive appeal and practical performance
of these greedy heuristics have led separate communities
to rediscover the same algorithms, leading to a bewildering
number of names. The algorithm that selects features based
on the left side of (1.4) is known as Forward Regression, Forward Selection (Miller, 2002), Order-Recursive Matching
Pursuit (ORMP) (Cotter et al., 1999), Optimized Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (Rebollo-Neira and Lowe, 2002), and

