Learning Representations by Humans, for Humans
Sophie Hilgard 1 * Nir Rosenfeld 2 * Mahzarin Banaji 3 Jack Cao 3 David C. Parkes 1

Abstract
When machine predictors can achieve higher performance than the human decision-makers they
support, improving the performance of human
decision-makers is often conflated with improving
machine accuracy. Here we propose a framework
to directly support human decision-making, in
which the role of machines is to reframe problems
rather than to prescribe actions through prediction. Inspired by the success of representation
learning in improving performance of machine
predictors, our framework learns human-facing
representations optimized for human performance.
This “Mind Composed with Machine” framework
incorporates a human decision-making model directly into the representation learning paradigm
and is trained with a novel human-in-the-loop
training procedure. We empirically demonstrate
the successful application of the framework to
various tasks and representational forms.

1. Introduction
“No one ever made a decision because of a number.
They need a story.”
— Daniel Kahneman
Advancements in machine learning algorithms, as well as
increased data availability and computational power, have
led to the rise of predictive machines that outperform human experts in controlled experiments (Esteva et al., 2017;
Nickerson & Rogers, 2014; Tabibian et al., 2019). However,
human involvement remains important in many domains,
(Liu et al., 2019), especially those in which safety and equity
are important considerations (Parikh et al., 2019; Barabas
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology 3 Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Sophie Hilgard <ash798@g.harvard.edu>, Nir Rosenfeld
<nirr@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2017) and where users have external information or
want to exercise agency and use their own judgment. In
these settings, humans are the final arbiters, and the goal of
algorithms is to produce useful decision aids.
Given that learning algorithms excel at prediction, previous efforts in this space have largely focused on providing
predictions as decision aids. This has led to a large body
of work on how to make predictions accessible to decision makers, whether through models that are interpretable
(Lakkaraju et al., 2016), or through explainable machine
learning, in which machine outputs (and so human inputs)
are assumed to be predictions and are augmented with explanations (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017). We
see two main drawbacks to these approaches. First, setting
the role of machines to ‘predict, then explain’ reduces humans to auditors of the ‘expert’ machines (Lai & Tan, 2018).
With loss of agency, people are reluctant to adopt predictions and even inclined to go against them (Bandura, 1989;
2010; Yeomans et al., 2017; Dietvorst et al., 2016; Yin et al.,
2019; Green & Chen, 2019b). This leads to a degradation
in performance of the human-machine pipeline over time
(Elmalech et al., 2015; Dietvorst et al., 2015; Logg, 2017;
Stevenson & Doleac, 2018). More importantly, these methods cannot adapt to the ways in which predictions are used,
and so are unable to adjust for systematic human errors or
to make use of human capabilities.
Moving beyond predictions, in this paper we advocate for
broader forms of learnable advice and capitalize on a different strength of machine learning: the ability to learn useful
representations. Inspired by the success of representation
learning, in which deep neural networks learn data representations that enable ‘simple’ (i.e., linear) predictors to
perform well (Bengio et al., 2013), we leverage neural architectures to learn representations that best support human
decision-makers (Kahneman, 2011; Miller, 1956). Consider
a multi-layered neural network N = f ◦ φ composed of
a high-dimensional representation mapping φ and a predictor f . Our key proposal is to remove the predictor and
instead plug the human decision function h into the learning
framework to obtain h ◦ φ, allowing us to optimize the representation mapping to directly improve human performance.
Our framework for optimizing h ◦ φ, which we refer to as
‘Mind Composed with Machine’ (M◦M) contributes to work

