Thinking Like Transformers

Gail Weiss 1 Yoav Goldberg 2 3 Eran Yahav 1

Abstract
What is the computational model behind a Transformer? Where recurrent neural networks have
direct parallels in finite state machines, allowing clear discussion and thought around architecture variants or trained models, Transformers
have no such familiar parallel. In this paper we
aim to change that, proposing a computational
model for the transformer-encoder in the form
of a programming language. We map the basic
components of a transformer-encoder—attention
and feed-forward computation—into simple primitives, around which we form a programming language: the Restricted Access Sequence Processing Language (RASP). We show how RASP can
be used to program solutions to tasks that could
conceivably be learned by a Transformer, and how
a Transformer can be trained to mimic a RASP solution. In particular, we provide RASP programs
for histograms, sorting, and Dyck-languages. We
further use our model to relate their difficulty in
terms of the number of required layers and attention heads: analyzing a RASP program implies a
maximum number of heads and layers necessary
to encode a task in a transformer. Finally, we see
how insights gained from our abstraction might be
used to explain phenomena seen in recent works.

1. Introduction
We present a computational model for the transformer architecture in the form of a simple language which we dub
RASP (Restricted Access Sequence Processing Language).
Much as the token-by-token processing of RNNs can be
conceptualized as finite state automata (Cleeremans et al.,
1989), our language captures the unique information-flow
constraints under which a transformer operates as it processes input sequences. Our model helps reason about how
1
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel 3 Allen Institute for AI. Correspondence to: Gail Weiss
<sgailw@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a transformer operates at a higher-level of abstraction, reasoning in terms of a composition of sequence operations
rather than neural network primitives.
We are inspired by the use of automata as an abstract computational model for recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Using
automata as an abstraction for RNNs has enabled a long line
of work, including extraction of automata from RNNs (Omlin & Giles, 1996; Weiss et al., 2018b; Ayache et al., 2018),
analysis of RNNs’ practical expressive power in terms of automata (Weiss et al., 2018a; Rabusseau et al., 2019; Merrill,
2019; Merrill et al., 2020b), and even augmentations based
on automata variants (Joulin & Mikolov, 2015). Previous
work on transformers explores their computational power,
but does not provide a computational model (Yun et al.,
2020; Hahn, 2020; Pérez et al., 2021).
Thinking in terms of the RASP model can help derive computational results. Bhattamishra et al. (2020) and Ebrahimi
et al. (2020) explore the ability of transformers to recognize
Dyck-k languages, with Bhattamishra et al. providing a
construction by which Transformer-encoders can recognize
a simplified variant of Dyck-k. Using RASP, we succinctly
express the construction of (Bhattamishra et al., 2020) as a
short program, and further improve it to show, for the first
time, that transformers can fully recognize Dyck-k for all k.
Scaling up the complexity, Clark et al. (2020) showed empirically that transformer networks can learn to perform
multi-step logical reasoning over first order logical formulas
provided as input, resulting in “soft theorem provers”. For
this task, the mechanism of the computation remained elusive: how does a transformer perform even non-soft theorem
proving? As the famous saying by Richard Feynman goes,
“what I cannot create, I do not understand”: using RASP, we
were able to write a program that performs similar logical
inferences over input expressions, and then “compile” it to
the transformer hardware, defining a sequence of attention
and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) operations.
Considering computation problems and their implementations in RASP allows us to “think like a transformer” while
abstracting away the technical details of a neural network
in favor of symbolic programs. Recognizing that a task
is representable in a transformer is as simple as finding a
RASP program for it, and communicating this solution—
previously done by presenting a hand-crafted transformer

