Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision

Alec Radford * 1 Jong Wook Kim * 1 Chris Hallacy 1 Aditya Ramesh 1 Gabriel Goh 1 Sandhini Agarwal 1
Girish Sastry 1 Amanda Askell 1 Pamela Mishkin 1 Jack Clark 1 Gretchen Krueger 1 Ilya Sutskever 1

Abstract
SOTA computer vision systems are trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined object categories.
This restricted form of supervision limits their
generality and usability since additional labeled
data is needed to specify any other visual concept. Learning directly from raw text about images is a promising alternative which leverages a
much broader source of supervision. We demonstrate that the simple pre-training task of predicting which caption goes with which image is an
efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA image
representations from scratch on a dataset of 400
million (image, text) pairs collected from the internet. After pre-training, natural language is used to
reference learned visual concepts (or describe new
ones) enabling zero-shot transfer of the model to
downstream tasks. We study performance on over
30 different computer vision datasets, spanning
tasks such as OCR, action recognition in videos,
geo-localization, and many types of fine-grained
object classification. The model transfers nontrivially to most tasks and is often competitive
with a fully supervised baseline without the need
for any dataset specific training. For instance, we
match the accuracy of the original ResNet50 on
ImageNet zero-shot without needing to use any of
the 1.28 million training examples it was trained
on. We release our code and pre-trained model
weights at https://github.com/OpenAI/CLIP.

1. Introduction and Motivating Work
Pre-training methods which learn directly from raw text
have revolutionized NLP over the last few years (Dai & Le,
2015; Peters et al., 2018; Howard & Ruder, 2018; Radford
et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2019). The
development of “text-to-text” as a standardized input-output
*

Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA.
Correspondence to: <{alec, jongwook}@openai.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

interface (McCann et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2019) has enabled task-agnostic architectures to zeroshot transfer to downstream datasets. Flagship systems like
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) are now competitive across
many tasks with bespoke models while requiring little to no
dataset specific training data.
These results suggest that the aggregate supervision accessible to modern pre-training methods within web-scale collections of text surpasses that of high-quality crowd-labeled
NLP datasets. However, in other fields such as computer
vision it is still standard practice to pre-train models on
crowd-labeled datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
Could scalable pre-training methods which learn directly
from web text result in a similar breakthrough in computer
vision? Prior work is encouraging.
Joulin et al. (2016) demonstrated that CNNs trained to predict words in image captions can learn representations competitive with ImageNet training. Li et al. (2017) then extended this approach to predicting phrase n-grams in addition to individual words and demonstrated the ability of
their system to zero-shot transfer to other image classification datasets. Adopting more recent architectures and
pre-training approaches, VirTex (Desai & Johnson, 2020),
ICMLM (Bulent Sariyildiz et al., 2020), and ConVIRT
(Zhang et al., 2020) have recently demonstrated the potential of transformer-based language modeling, masked
language modeling, and contrastive objectives to learn image representations from text.
However, the aforementioned models still under-perform
current SOTA computer vision models such as Big Transfer (Kolesnikov et al., 2019) and the weakly supervised
ResNeXt (Mahajan et al., 2018). A crucial difference is
scale. While Mahajan et al. (2018) and Kolesnikov et al.
(2019) trained for accelerator years on millions to billions
of images, VirTex, ICMLM, and ConVIRT trained for accelerator days on one to two hundred thousand images. We
close this gap and study the behaviors of image models
trained from natural language supervision at large scale. We
demonstrate that a simplified version of ConVIRT trained
from scratch, which we call CLIP, for Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-training, is an efficient and scalable method of
learning from natural language supervision. We find that

