On the Inherent Regularization Effects of
Noise Injection During Training

Oussama Dhifallah 1 Yue M. Lu 1

Abstract
Randomly perturbing networks during the training process is a commonly used approach to improving generalization performance. In this paper,
we present a theoretical study of one particular
way of random perturbation, which corresponds
to injecting artificial noise to the training data. We
provide a precise asymptotic characterization of
the training and generalization errors of such randomly perturbed learning problems on a random
feature model. Our analysis shows that Gaussian
noise injection in the training process is equivalent to introducing a weighted ridge regularization, when the number of noise injections tends
to infinity. The explicit form of the regularization is also given. Numerical results corroborate
our asymptotic predictions, showing that they are
accurate even in moderate problem dimensions.
Our theoretical predictions are based on a new
correlated Gaussian equivalence conjecture that
generalizes recent results in the study of random
feature models.

1. Introduction
A popular approach to improving the generalization performance is to randomly perturb the network during the
training process (Srivastava et al., 2014; Bishop, 1995; Gulcehre et al., 2016; LeJeune et al., 2020; Kobak et al., 2020).
Such random perturbations are widely used as an implicit
regularization to the learning problem. One way that random
perturbation has been used as a regularization is by injecting it to the input data before starting the learning process
(Gong et al., 2020; Rakin et al., 2018; Poole et al., 2014). In
this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of such learning
procedure on a random feature model (Rahimi & Recht,
1

2008) under Gaussian input and perturbation vectors. Our
analysis particularly shows that Gaussian noise injection
introduces a weighted ridge regularization, asymptotically.
First, we describe the models for our theoretical analysis.
We are given a collection of training data {(yi , ai )}ni=1 ,
where ai ∈ Rp is referred to as the input vector and yi ∈ R
is referred to as the label corresponding to ai . In this paper,
we shall assume that the labels are generated according to
the standard teacher–student model, i.e.
yi = ϕ(a>
i ξ), ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n},

(1)

where ξ ∈ Rp is an unknown teacher weight vector, and
ϕ(·) is a scalar deterministic or probabilistic function. Here,
we use the random feature model (Rahimi & Recht, 2008)
to learn the model described in (1). The random feature
model considers the following class of functions
n
o
FRF (a) = gw (a) = w> σ(F > a), w ∈ Rk ,
(2)
where a ∈ Rp is an input vector, F ∈ Rp×k is a random
matrix referred to as the feature matrix, and σ(·) is a scalar
function referred to as the activation function. This model
assumes that F is fixed during the training. Note that the
family in (2) can be viewed as a two–layer neural network
where the first layer weights are fixed, i.e. F is fixed.
1.1. Learning Formulation
Before starting the learning process, ` independent perturbation vectors are injected to each ai . This procedure forms
the augmented family {ai + ∆z ij }`j=1 for each ai , where
{z ij }`j=1 are independent random perturbations and ∆ ≥ 0
denotes the noise variance. In this paper, we study the effects of such perturbation method on an average loss and
a random feature model. Specifically, we analyze formulations of the following form
n
`
2
1 XX
yi − w> σ F > [ai + ∆z ij ]
2n` i=1 j=1

O. Dhifallah and Y. M. Lu are with the John A. Paulson
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.. Correspondence to: Oussama
Dhifallah <oussama dhifallah@g.harvard.edu>.

b = argmin
w

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where λ > 0 denotes the regularization parameter. Note that
the problem in (3) is a standard feature formulation when

w∈Rk

+ λ2 kwk2 ,

(3)

