Local Correlation Clustering with Asymmetric Classification Errors

Jafar Jafarov * 1 Sanchit Kalhan * 2 Konstantin Makarychev * 2 Yury Makarychev * 3

Abstract
In the Correlation Clustering problem, we are
given a complete weighted graph G with its edges
labeled as “similar” and “dissimilar” by a noisy
binary classifier. For a clustering C of graph G, a
similar edge is in disagreement with C, if its endpoints belong to distinct clusters; and a dissimilar
edge is in disagreement with C if its endpoints
belong to the same cluster. The disagreements
vector, dis, is a vector indexed by the vertices
of G such that the v-th coordinate disv equals
the weight of all disagreeing edges incident on
v. The goal is to produce a clustering that minimizes the `p norm of the disagreements vector for
p ≥ 1. We study the `p objective in Correlation
Clustering under the following assumption: Every
similar edge has weight in the range of [αw, w]
and every dissimilar edge has weight at least αw
(where α ≤ 1 and w > 0 is a scaling parameter).
We give an O (1/α)1/2−1/2p · log 1/α approximation algorithm for this problem. Furthermore, we
show an almost matching convex programming
integrality gap.

1. Introduction
Grouping objects based on the similarity between them is
a ubiquitous and important task in machine learning. This
similarity information between objects can be represented
in many ways, some of them being pairwise distances between objects (objects which are closer are more similar)
or the degree of similarity between pairs of objects (objects
which are more similar have a higher degree of similarity).
Bansal, Blum, and Chawla (2004) introduced the Correlation Clustering problem, a versatile model that elegantly
captures this task of grouping objects based on similarity
information. Since its introduction, the correlation clus*

Equal contribution 1 University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 3 TTIC, Chicago, IL,
USA. Correspondence to: Jafar Jafarov <jafarov@uchicago.edu>,
Sanchit Kalhan <skalhan@u.northwestern.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tering problem has found use in a variety of applications,
such as co-reference resolution (see e.g., Cohen and Richman (2001; 2002)), spam detection (see e.g., Ramachandran
et al. (2007), Bonchi et al. (2014)), image segmentation
(see e.g., Wirth (2010)) and multi-person tracking (see e.g.,
Tang et al. (2016; 2017)). In the Correlation Clustering
problem, we are given a set of objects with pairwise similarity information. Our goal is to partition the objects into
clusters that agree with this information as much as possible.
The pairwise similarity information is given as a weighted
graph G with edges labeled as either “positive/similar” or
as “negative/dissimilar” by a noisy binary classifier. For a
clustering C, a positive edge is in disagreement with C, if its
endpoints belong to distinct clusters; and a negative edge is
in disagreement with C if its endpoints belong to the same
cluster.
To ascertain the quality of the clustering produced, Bansal
et al. (2004) studied the Correlation Clustering problem
under two complimentary objectives. Over the years, the
objective that has received the most attention is to find a clustering that minimizes the total weight of edges in disagreement. For the case of complete unweighted graphs, Bansal
et al. (2004) gave a constant factor approximation algorithm
for this objective. Ailon, Charikar, and Newman (2008) improved the approximation ratio to 3 by presenting a simpleyet-elegant combinatorial algorithm. They also presented
a 2.5-approximation algorithm based on Linear Programming (LP) rounding which was later derandomized without any loss in approximation ratio by van Zuylen, Hegde,
Jain, and Williamson (2007). Finally, Chawla, Makarychev,
Schramm, and Yaroslavtsev (2015) gave an LP rounding
algorithm which improved the approximation ratio to 2.06.
The standard LP was shown to have an integrality gap of 2 by
Charikar, Guruswami, and Wirth (2003) for the case of complete unweighted graphs. For the case of general weighted
graphs, Charikar et al. (2003) and Demaine, Emanuel, Fiat,
and Immorlica (2006) gave an O(log n)-approximation algorithm.
Define the disagreements vector to be a vector indexed by
the vertices of G. Given a clustering P, dis(P, E + , E − ) ∈
RV is a |V |-dimensional vector where the u-th coordinate is equal to the weight of disagreementsP
at u with
respect to P. That is, disu (P, E + , E − ) =
wuv ·
(u,v)∈E

