A Practical Method for Constructing Equivariant Multilayer Perceptrons for
Arbitrary Matrix Groups

Marc Finzi 1 Max Welling 2 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
As machine learning has expanded to cover more areas, the
kinds of structures and data types we must accommodate
grows ever larger. While translation equivariance may have
been sufficient for working with narrowly defined sequences
and images, with the expanding scope to sets, graphs, point
clouds, meshes, hierarchies, tables, proteins, RF signals,
games, PDEs, dynamical systems, and particle jets, we require new techniques to exploit the structure and symmetries
in the data.
In this work we propose a general formulation for equivariant multilayer perceptrons (EMLP). Given a set of inputs
and outputs which transform according to finite dimensional
representations of a symmetry group, we characterize all linear layers that map from one space to the other, and provide
1
New York University 2 University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Marc Finzi <maf820@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Type

ℤ2n

T1 → T1
T1 → T0
T1 → T1
Tk → Tℓ
T1 → T1

Sn
D4 ⋉ℤ2n
O(n) O(1,3)
Sp(n) SU(n)

+

Our Constraint
Solving Algorithm

+

=

Equivariant
Linear Layer
Convolution
Avg Pooling
Deep Set
Invariant GN
GCNN

Any
Finite Dimensional
Representations

EMLP

Symmetries and equivariance are fundamental to
the generalization of neural networks on domains
such as images, graphs, and point clouds. Existing work has primarily focused on a small number
of groups, such as the translation, rotation, and
permutation groups. In this work we provide a
completely general algorithm for solving for the
equivariant layers of matrix groups. In addition to
recovering solutions from other works as special
cases, we construct multilayer perceptrons equivariant to multiple groups that have never been
tackled before, including O(1, 3), O(5), Sp(n),
and the Rubik’s cube group. Our approach outperforms non-equivariant baselines, with applications including particle physics and dynamical
systems. We release our software library to enable researchers to construct equivariant layers
for arbitrary matrix groups.

Group

New

Figure 1. We provide a general and efficient method for solving
equivariance constaints. For particular symmetry groups and type
signatures, we recover other well known equivariant layers while
also enabling application to new groups and representations.

a polynomial time algorithm for computing them. We release our library, along with documentation, and examples.
Figure 1 illustrates how the convolutional layers of a CNN
(LeCun et al., 1989), the permutation equivariant deep sets
(Zaheer et al., 2017), graph layers (Maron et al., 2018), and
layers for networks equivariant to point clouds (Thomas
et al., 2018), all arise as special cases of our more general
algorithm.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We prove that the conditions for equivariance to matrix groups with arbitrary linear representations can be
reduced to a set of M + D constraints, where M is the
number of discrete generators and D is the dimension
of the group.
• We provide a polynomial time algorithm for solving
these constraints for finite dimensional representations,
and we show that the approach can be accelerated by
exploiting structure and recasting it as an optimization
problem.
• With the addition of a bilinear layer, we develop the
Equivariant MultiLayer Perceptron (EMLP), a general
equivariant architecture that can be applied to a new
group by specifying the group generators.

