Generating images with sparse representations

Charlie Nash 1 Jacob Menick 1 Sander Dieleman 1 Peter Battaglia 1

Abstract
The high dimensionality of images presents architecture and sampling-efficiency challenges for
likelihood-based generative models. Previous approaches such as VQ-VAE use deep autoencoders
to obtain compact representations, which are more
practical as inputs for likelihood-based models.
We present an alternative approach, inspired by
common image compression methods like JPEG,
and convert images to quantized discrete cosine
transform (DCT) blocks, which are represented
sparsely as a sequence of DCT channel, spatial
location, and DCT coefficient triples. We propose
a Transformer-based autoregressive architecture,
which is trained to sequentially predict the conditional distribution of the next element in such
sequences, and which scales effectively to high
resolution images. On a range of image datasets,
we demonstrate that our approach can generate
high quality, diverse images, with sample metric
scores competitive with state of the art methods.
We additionally show that simple modifications
to our method yield effective image colorization
and super-resolution models.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models of images are neural networks
trained to output synthetic imagery. Current models generate sample images that are difficult for humans to distinguish from real images, and have found applications in
image super-resolution (NVIDIA), colorization (Antic), and
text-guided generation (Ramesh et al.). Such models fall
broadly into three categories: generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al. 2014), likelihood-based
models, and energy-based models. GANs use discriminator networks that are trained to distinguish samples from
generator networks and real examples. Likelihood-based
models, including variational autoencoders (VAEs, Kingma
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Charlie Nash <charlienash@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Images often have sparse structure, with salient content
distributed unevenly across locations. Our model DCTransformer
predicts where to place content, as well as what content to add.
(left) Images generated by DCTransformer, and (right) associated
heatmaps of image locations selected in the generation process.

& Welling 2014; Rezende et al. 2014), normalizing flows
(Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), and autoregressive models (Van Oord et al., 2016), directly optimize the model
log-likelihood or the evidence lower bound. Energy-based
models estimate a scalar energy for each example that corresponds to an unnormalized log-probability, and can be
trained with a variety of objectives (Du & Mordatch, 2019).
Likelihood-based models offer several important advantages. The training objective incentivizes learning the full
data distribution, rather than only a subset of the modes
(termed “mode-dropping”), which is a common downside
of GANs. Likelihood-based training tends to be more stable than adversarial alternatives, and the objective can be
used to detect overfitting using a held-out set. The dramatic
recent advances in modelling natural language made by

