Sparse Feature Selection Makes Batch Reinforcement Learning More Sample
Efficient
Botao Hao 1 Yaqi Duan 2 Tor Lattimore 1 Csaba Szepesvári 1 3 Mengdi Wang 2 1

Abstract
This paper provides a statistical analysis of highdimensional batch reinforcement learning (RL)
using sparse linear function approximation. When
there is a large number of candidate features, our
result sheds light on the fact that sparsity-aware
methods can make batch RL more sample efficient. We first consider the off-policy evaluation
problem. To evaluate a new target policy, we
analyze a Lasso fitted Q-evaluation method and
establish a finite-sample error bound that has no
polynomial dependence on the ambient dimension. To reduce the Lasso bias, we further propose
a post model-selection estimator that applies fitted
Q-evaluation to the features selected via group
Lasso. Under an additional signal strength assumption, we derive a sharper instance-dependent
error bound that depends on a divergence function
measuring the distribution mismatch between the
data distribution and occupancy measure of the
target policy. Further, we study the Lasso fitted
Q-iteration for batch policy optimization and establish a finite-sample error bound depending on
the ratio between the number of relevant features
and restricted minimal eigenvalue of the data’s
covariance. In the end, we complement the results with minimax lower bounds for batch-data
policy evaluation/optimization that nearly match
our upper bounds. The results suggest that having
well-conditioned data is crucial for sparse batch
policy learning.

1. Introduction
We consider batch reinforcement learning (RL), where the
problem is to evaluate a target policy or to learn a good
policy based on a given dataset (Szepesvári, 2010; Lange
et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020). While in online RL the
central question is how to sequentially interact with the environment to balance exploration and exploitation, in batch
RL the dataset is given a priori and the focus is typically on
learning a near-optimal policy or evaluating a given target
policy.
To handle RL systems with large or even infinite state spaces,
we focus on the use of linear function approximation (Bellman et al., 1963; Schweitzer and Seidmann, 1985; Bertsekas
and Tsitsiklis, 1996), that is, using a weighted linear combination of available features (aka basis functions) to represent
high-dimensional transition/value functions. Results from
the supervised learning literature show that the sample size
needed to get accurate policy evaluations or near-optimal
policies must scale at least linearly with d, the number of
features (e.g., Example 15.14 of Wainwright, 2019).
We leverage the idea of sparse approximation and focus
on situations when a smaller number of unknown relevant
features is sufficient for solving the RL problem. Sparse
regression has proved to be a powerful method for highdimensional statistical learning with limited data (Tibshirani, 1996; Chen et al., 2001; Bunea et al., 2007; Bickel
et al., 2009; Rish and Grabarnik, 2014), and we will borrow
techniques from the sparse learning literature to improve
the sample efficiency of batch RL, an idea with a considerable history in RL as witnessed by our literature review that
follows below.
Contribution. We make several contributions:

1
Deepmind 2 Princeton University 3 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Botao Hao <haobotao000@gmail.com>, Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• First, we consider the problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE). To promote sparse solutions, we iteratively
fits state-action value functions using linear regression
with `1 -regularization which we call this procedure
as Lasso fitted Q-evaluation (Algorithm 1). We estab-

