Zoo-Tuning: Adaptive Transfer from a Zoo of Models

Yang Shu * 1 Zhi Kou * 1 Zhangjie Cao 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract
With the development of deep networks on various large-scale datasets, a large zoo of pretrained
models are available. When transferring from a
model zoo, applying classic single-model-based
transfer learning methods to each source model
suffers from high computational cost and cannot
fully utilize the rich knowledge in the zoo. We
propose Zoo-Tuning to address these challenges,
which learns to adaptively transfer the parameters
of pretrained models to the target task. With the
learnable channel alignment layer and adaptive
aggregation layer, Zoo-Tuning adaptively aggregates channel aligned pretrained parameters to
derive the target model, which simultaneously
promotes knowledge transfer and adapts source
models to downstream tasks. The adaptive aggregation substantially reduces the computation
cost at both training and inference. We further
propose lite Zoo-Tuning with the temporal ensemble of batch average gating values to reduce
the storage cost at the inference time. We evaluate our approach on a variety of tasks, including reinforcement learning, image classification,
and facial landmark detection. Experiment results
demonstrate that the proposed adaptive transfer
learning approach can more effectively and efficiently transfer knowledge from a zoo of models.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning leverages knowledge from existing
datasets to improve the learning on the target task (Pan
& Yang, 2009). With deep learning achieving state-of-theart performance on various machine learning tasks (LeCun
et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016), deep transfer learning has attracted more attention in recent years (Tan et al.,
2018). A standard deep transfer learning paradigm is to
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. E-mail: Yang Shu (shuy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn). Correspondence to: Mingsheng
Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

leverage models pretrained on large-scale datasets (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and fine-tune the model on the target
task (Yosinski et al., 2014), which is demonstrated to be a
simple and effective solution in real-world applications and
empirical studies (Kornblith et al., 2019).
However, most of the existing fine-tuning approaches only
transfer from a single pretrained deep network to the target
task (Xuhong et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019).
With the increasing number of large-scale datasets in various fields, we usually have access to a zoo of deep models
pretrained on various datasets with different methods such
as supervised learning (He et al., 2016), self-supervised
learning (Dosovitskiy et al., 2014) and unsupervised learning (Chen et al., 2020). Therefore, the large diverse model
zoo calls for a new problem setting, Transfer Learning from
a Zoo of Models, which aims to transfer knowledge from a
model zoo to promote the learning of the target task.
The new problem setting introduces new challenges: (1)
How to decide the extent of knowledge transfer from different pretrained models? The different pretrained models
contain a diverse range of knowledge. Some pretrained
models are more related to the target tasks, while some models are unrelated to or even negatively influence the target
learning. For example, although it is common to initialize models with parameters trained on ImageNet, empirical
evidence has shown that this practice offers little benefit
to applications in medical imaging (Raghu et al., 2019).
Therefore, it is important to decide the correct models to
transfer from. (2) How to aggregate the knowledge from
different pretrained models? The diverse pretrained models
can be complementary to each other, which serve as a more
complete knowledge base for the target task. Thus, a model
aggregating mechanism is required to integrate knowledge
from multiple pretrained models, which further improves
the target task. Directly transferring each model to the target
and assembling the networks may aggregate knowledge but
suffers from the large training and inference cost linearly
increasing with the size of the model zoo.
In this paper, we propose Zoo-Tuning, an effective and efficient solution that enables adaptive transfer from a zoo of
models to downstream tasks. We decide to transfer model
parameters to avoid the high computation burden of forwarding data through all the pretrained models. We first

