Think Global and Act Local: Bayesian Optimisation over High-Dimensional
Categorical and Mixed Search Spaces

Xingchen Wan 1 Vu Nguyen 2 Huong Ha 3 Binxin Ru 1 Cong Lu 1 Michael A. Osborne 1

Abstract
High-dimensional black-box optimisation remains an important yet notoriously challenging
problem. Despite the success of Bayesian optimisation methods on continuous domains, domains
that are categorical, or that mix continuous and
categorical variables, remain challenging. We
propose a novel solution – we combine local optimisation with a tailored kernel design, effectively handling high-dimensional categorical and
mixed search spaces, whilst retaining sample efficiency. We further derive convergence guarantee
for the proposed approach. Finally, we demonstrate empirically that our method outperforms
the current baselines on a variety of synthetic and
real-world tasks in terms of performance, computational costs, or both.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) (Jones et al., 1998; Brochu
et al., 2010; Shahriari et al., 2016), which features expressive surrogate model(s) and sample efficiency, has found
many applications in black-box optimisation, particularly
when each evaluation is expensive. Such applications include but not limited to selection of chemical compounds
(Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017), reinforcement learning
(Parker-Holder et al., 2020), hyperparameter optimisation
of machine learning algorithms (Snoek et al., 2012), and
neural architecture search (Kandasamy et al., 2018; Nguyen
et al., 2021; Ru et al., 2021)
Despite its impressive performance, various challenges still
remain for BO. The popular surrogate choice, vanilla Gaussian Process (GP) models, is limited to problems of modest dimensionality defined in a continuous space. However, real-world optimisation problems are often neither
1

Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK 2 Amazon, Adelaide, Australia 3 RMIT University,
Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Xingchen Wan
<xwan@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

low-dimensional nor continuous: many large-scale practical problems exhibit complex interactions among highdimensional input variables, and are often categorical in
nature or involve a mixture of both continuous and categorical input variables. An example of the former is the
maximum satisfiability problem, whose exact solution is
NP-hard (Creignou et al., 2001), and an example for the latter is the hyperparameter tuning for a deep neural network:
the optimisation scope comprise both continuous hyperparameters, e.g., learning rate and momentum, and categorical
ones, e.g., optimiser type {SGD, Adam, ...} and learning rate
scheduler type {step decay, cosine annealing}.
These problems are challenging for a number of reasons:
first, categorical variables do not have a natural ordering
similar to continuous ones for which GPs are well-suited.
Second, the search space grows exponentially with the dimension and the mixed spaces are usually high-dimensional,
making the objective function highly multimodal, often heterogeneous, and thus difficult to be modelled by a good,
global surrogate (Rana et al., 2017; Eriksson et al., 2019).
Partially due to these difficulties, only very few prior works
(Hutter et al., 2011; Gopakumar et al., 2018; Nguyen et al.,
2020; Ru et al., 2020a) have focused on developing BO
strategies for such problems, and, to the best of our knowledge, achieving promising performance, easy applicability
for high-dimensional inputs and reasonable computing costs
simultaneously is still an open question.
To tackle these challenging yet important problems, we propose a novel yet conceptually simple method. It not only
fully preserves the merits of GP-based BO approaches, such
as expressiveness and sample efficiency, but also demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in high-dimensional optimisation problems, involving categorical or mixed search
spaces. Specifically, we make the following contributions:
• Propose a new GP-based BO approach which designs tailored GP kernels and harnesses the concept of local trust
region to effectively handle high-dimensional optimisation
over categorical and mixed search spaces.
• Derive convergence analysis to show that our proposed
method converges to the global maximum of the objective
function in both categorical and mixed space settings, under
some assumptions.

