Privacy-Preserving Video Classification with Convolutional Neural Networks

Sikha Pentyala 1 Rafael Dowsley 2 Martine De Cock 1 3

Abstract
Many video classification applications require access to personal data, thereby posing an invasive
security risk to the users’ privacy. We propose
a privacy-preserving implementation of singleframe method based video classification with convolutional neural networks that allows a party to
infer a label from a video without necessitating
the video owner to disclose their video to other
entities in an unencrypted manner. Similarly, our
approach removes the requirement of the classifier owner from revealing their model parameters
to outside entities in plaintext. To this end, we
combine existing Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC) protocols for private image classification with our novel MPC protocols for oblivious
single-frame selection and secure label aggregation across frames. The result is an end-to-end
privacy-preserving video classification pipeline.
We evaluate our proposed solution in an application for private human emotion recognition. Our
results across a variety of security settings, spanning honest and dishonest majority configurations
of the computing parties, and for both passive and
active adversaries, demonstrate that videos can
be classified with state-of-the-art accuracy, and
without leaking sensitive user information.

1. Introduction
Deep learning based video classification is extensively used
in a growing variety of applications, such as facial recognition, activity recognition, gesture analysis, behavioral
analysis, eye gaze estimation, and emotion recognition
in empathy-based AI systems (Ali et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020b; Manna et al., 2020;
1
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, USA 2 Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University, Clayton, Australia 3 Dept. of Appl. Math.,
Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Correspondence to: Sikha Pentyala <sikha@uw.edu>,
Rafael Dowsley <rafael.dowsley@monash.edu>, Martine De
Cock <mdecock@uw.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Meinich-Bache et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2020; Shah et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2019). Many existing and envisioned applications of video classification rely on personal data, rendering these applications invasive of privacy. This applies
among other tasks to video surveillance and home monitoring systems. Similarly, empathy-based AI systems expose
personal emotions, which are most private to a user, to the
service provider. Video classification systems deployed in
commercial applications commonly require user videos to
be shared with the service provider or sent to the cloud.
These videos may remain publicly available on the Internet.
Users have no control over the deletion of the videos, and the
data may be available for scraping, as done for instance by
Clearview AI (Hill, 2020). The need to protect the privacy
of individuals is widely acknowledged (National Science
and Technology Council, 2016). Concerns regarding privacy of user data are giving rise to new laws and regulations
such as the European GDPR and the California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA), as well as a perceived tension between
the desire to protect data privacy on one hand, and to promote an economy based on free-flowing data on the other
hand (Kalman, 2019). The E.U. is for instance considering a
three-to-five-year moratorium on face recognition in public
places, given its significant potential for misuse.
A seemingly straightforward technique to keep user videos
private is to deploy the deep learning models of the service
providers at the user-end instead of transferring user data
to the cloud. This is not a viable solution for several reasons. First, owners of proprietary models are concerned
about shielding their model, especially when it constitutes
a competitive advantage. Second, in security applications
such as facial recognition, or deepfake detection, revealing
model details helps adversaries develop evasion strategies.
Furthermore, powerful deep learning models that memorize
their training examples are well known; one would not want
to expose those by revealing the model. Finally, deployment of large deep learning models at the user end may be
technically difficult or impossible due to limited computational resources. For these reasons, ML tasks such as video
classification are commonly outsourced to a set of efficient
cloud servers in a Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS)
architecture. Protecting the privacy of both the users’ and
the service provider’s data while performing outsourced ML
computations is an important challenge.
Privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML) has been

