Differentially Private Quantiles

Jennifer Gillenwater Matthew Joseph Alex Kulesza

Abstract
Quantiles are often used for summarizing and
understanding data. If that data is sensitive, it
may be necessary to compute quantiles in a way
that is differentially private, providing theoretical
guarantees that the result does not reveal private
information. However, when multiple quantiles
are needed, existing differentially private algorithms fare poorly: they either compute quantiles
individually, splitting the privacy budget, or summarize the entire distribution, wasting effort. In
either case the result is reduced accuracy. In this
work we propose an instance of the exponential
mechanism that simultaneously estimates exactly
m quantiles from n data points while guaranteeing differential privacy. The utility function is
carefully structured to allow for an efficient implementation that returns estimates of all m quantiles
in time O(mn log(n) + m2 n). Experiments show
that our method significantly outperforms the current state of the art on both real and synthetic data
while remaining efficient enough to be practical.

1. Introduction
Quantiles are a widespread method for understanding realworld data, with example applications ranging from income (Semega et al., 2020) to birth weight (CDC, 2001)
to standardized test scores (ETS, 2020). At the same time,
the individuals contributing data may require that these
quantiles not reveal too much information about individual
contributions. As a toy example, suppose that an individual
joins a company that has exactly two salaries, and half of
current employees have one salary and half have another. In
this case, publishing the exact median company salary will
reveal the new employee’s salary.
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) offers a solution
Equal contributions, all authors at Google Research New York.
Correspondence to: Jennifer Gillenwater <jengi@google.com>,
Matthew Joseph <mtjoseph@google.com>, Alex Kulesza
<kulesza@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to this problem. Informally, the distribution over a differentially private algorithm’s outputs must be relatively insensitive to the input of any single data contributor. Returning
to the salary example, a differentially private method for
computing the median company salary would have similarlooking output distributions regardless of which salary the
new employee receives. The resulting uncertainty about any
single contributor’s data makes the algorithm “private”.
In this work, we study differentially private estimation
of user-specified quantiles q1 , . . . , qm ∈ [0, 1] for a onedimensional dataset X of size n. The output quantile estimates consist of m values, which we denote o1 , . . . , om .
Ideally, the oj are as close to the dataset’s actual quantiles
as possible. For example, if qj = 0.5, then our goal is to
output oj close to the median of X.
Several algorithms for computing a single differentially private quantile exist (see Section 5). These naturally extend
to multiple quantiles using composition. Basic composition says that, if we estimate each of m quantiles via an
ε
m -differentially private algorithm, then we will obtain εdifferential privacy overall for the set of m quantiles. However, the cost of this generality is the smaller and more
ε
restrictive privacy budget m
(or roughly √εm for “advanced”
composition). As a result, this approach yields significantly
less accurate outcomes as m grows. This is unfortunate,
as many applications rely on multiple quantiles: returning
to the opening paragraph, the income statistics use m = 4
(quintiles), the birth weight statistics use m = 9 (deciles),
and the test score statistics use m > 30. Alternatively, there
exist methods for computing a differentially private summary of the entire distribution from which any quantile can
subsequently be estimated (see Section 1.2). However, unless m is very large, such summaries will usually contain
more information than needed, reducing accuracy.
1.1. Contributions
1. We give an instantiation of the exponential mechanism (McSherry & Talwar, 2007), JointExp, that produces an ε-differentially private collection of m quantile estimates in a single invocation (Section 3.1). This
mechanism uses a utility function that has sensitivity 2
no matter how many quantiles are requested, and does
not need to divide ε based on the number of quantiles.

