Differentially Private Densest Subgraph Detection

Dung Nguyen 1 2 Anil Vullikanti 1 2

Abstract
Densest subgraph detection is a fundamental
graph mining problem, with a large number of
applications. There has been a lot of work on
efficient algorithms for finding the densest subgraph in massive networks. However, in many
domains, the network is private, and returning a
densest subgraph can reveal information about the
network. Differential privacy is a powerful framework to handle such settings. We study the densest subgraph problem in the edge privacy model,
in which the edges of the graph are private. We
present the first sequential and parallel differentially private algorithms for this problem. We
show that our algorithms have an additive approximation guarantee. We evaluate our algorithms
on a large number of real-world networks, and
observe a good privacy-accuracy tradeoff when
the network has high density.

1. Introduction
Data privacy is a fundamental challenge in many real world
applications, e.g., healthcare, social networks, and finance,
where there is a risk of revealing private information through
adversarial queries. Differential privacy (defined in Section
2), developed through the work of a number of researchers,
e.g., (Dwork, 2011; Blum et al., 2005; Dwork et al., 2014;
Nissim et al., 2007), has proven to be a very powerful approach to support diverse kinds of computations with rigorous privacy guarantees (see (Zhu et al., 2017; Vadhan, 2017)
for extensive surveys on this topic). This framework allows
database owners to support queries with a very controlled
and rigorous loss of privacy. Differentially private algorithms have now been designed for a number of problems,
including supervised and unsupervised machine learning,
social network analysis and deep learning (Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2013; Blocki et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016; Abowd,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Virginia, USA 2 Biocomplexity Institute and Inintiative, University
of Virginia, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Dung Nguyen
<dungn@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018). However, network problems have been proven to
be much harder, and private algorithms for many problems
(e.g., in graph mining) remain poorly understood. For some
of the problems which have been studied, e.g., (Nguyen
et al., 2016), good accuracy bounds are not known. Further,
most private algorithms do not scale very well, especially
for network problems, e.g., (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2013;
Blocki et al., 2013), and there has been limited work on
parallel algorithms.
Here, we study the problem of finding the densest subgraph
in a graph G(V, E), which is a very basic subroutine in
graph mining, and has been used in diverse domains, including bioinformatics, network science, fraud detection,
and social network analysis, e.g., (Cadena et al., 2018; Hooi
et al., 2016; Khuller & Saha, 2009; Cadena et al., 2016;
Tsourakakis et al., 2013; Rozenshtein et al., 2014). There are
many notions of density (Cadena et al., 2018); here, we focus on the notion of average density ρ(S) of S ⊂ V , defined
as ρ(S) = (#edges with both end points in S)/|S|. The
goal is to find a densest subgraph S ∗ = argmaxS⊆V ρ(S);
we use ρ(G) = ρ(S ∗ ) to indicate the density of the the densest subgraph in G. This notion of density is one of the most
common studied ones, e.g., for anomaly detection in networked data (Cadena et al., 2018; Hooi et al., 2016), primarily because it can be computed very efficiently (Charikar,
2000; Asahiro et al., 2002; Khuller & Saha, 2009; Goldberg, 1984). In particular, the densest subgraph can be
computed optimally using linear programming (Goldberg,
1984; Charikar, 2000), and a simple iterative greedy algorithm gives a 12 -approximation (Charikar, 2000; Asahiro
et al., 2002). Highly scalable parallel algorithms have also
been developed, e.g., (Bahmani et al., 2012; Ghaffari et al.,
2019). However, private algorithms are not known for the
dense subgraph problem, which is the focus of this paper.
There are two standard approaches for privacy in networks—
edge privacy (in which the nodes are public and the edges
are private) and node privacy (in which the nodes are also
private). As we observe later, the maximum density value
has low sensitivity can be computed easily using the Laplace
mechanism. However, in graph mining settings, analysts are
interested in finding the actual densest subgraph (i.e., the
nodes in the subgraph), which is the focus of our paper, and
is a much harder problem. It only makes sense in the edge
privacy model. Our contributions are summarized below.

