Multi-Receiver Online Bayesian Persuasion

Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Andrea Celli 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract
Bayesian persuasion studies how an informed
sender should partially disclose information to
influence the behavior of a self-interested receiver.
Classical models make the stringent assumption
that the sender knows the receiver’s utility. This
can be relaxed by considering an online learning framework in which the sender repeatedly
faces a receiver of an unknown, adversarially selected type. We study, for the first time, an online Bayesian persuasion setting with multiple receivers. We focus on the case with no externalities
and binary actions, as customary in offline models. Our goal is to design no-regret algorithms
for the sender with polynomial per-iteration running time. First, we prove a negative result: for
any 0 < α ≤ 1, there is no polynomial-time
no-α-regret algorithm when the sender’s utility
function is supermodular or anonymous. Then,
we focus on the case of submodular sender’s utility functions and we show that, in this case, it is

possible to design a polynomial-time no- 1 − 1e regret algorithm. To do so, we introduce a general
online gradient descent scheme to handle online
learning problems with a finite number of possible
loss functions. This requires the existence of an
approximate projection oracle. We show that, in
our setting, there exists one such projection oracle
which can be implemented in polynomial time.

1. Introduction
Bayesian persuasion was originally introduced by Kamenica
& Gentzkow (2011) to model multi-agent settings where
an informed sender tries to influence the behavior of a selfinterested receiver through the strategic provision of payoffrelevant information. Agents’ payoffs are determined by
the receiver’s action and some exogenous parameters collectively termed the state of nature, whose value is drawn from
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Matteo Castiglioni <matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a common prior distribution and observed by the sender
only. Then, the sender decides how much of her/his private
information has to be revealed to the receiver, according to a
public randomized policy known as signaling scheme. From
the sender’s perspective, this begets a decision-making problem that is essentially about controlling “who gets to know
what”. This kind of problems are ubiquitous in application
domains such as auctions and online advertising (Bro Miltersen & Sheffet, 2012; Emek et al., 2014; Badanidiyuru
et al., 2018), voting (Alonso & Câmara, 2016; Cheng et al.,
2015; Castiglioni et al., 2020a; Castiglioni & Gatti, 2021),
traffic routing (Vasserman et al., 2015; Bhaskar et al., 2016;
Castiglioni et al., 2021), recommendation systems (Mansour et al., 2016), security (Rabinovich et al., 2015; Xu
et al., 2016), and product marketing (Babichenko & Barman, 2017; Candogan, 2019).1
The classical Bayesian persuasion model by Kamenica &
Gentzkow (2011) makes the stringent assumption that the
sender knows the receiver’s utility exactly. This is unreasonable in practice. Recently, Castiglioni et al. (2020b) propose
to relax the assumption by framing Bayesian persuasion
into an online learning framework, focusing on the basic
single-receiver problem.2 In their model, the sender repeatedly faces a receiver whose type during each iteration—
determining her/his utility function—is unknown and adversarially selected beforehand. In this work, we extend
the model by Castiglioni et al. (2020b) to multi-receiver
settings, where the (unknown) type of each receiver is adversarially selected before each iteration of the repeated
interaction. We consider the case in which the sender has
a private communication channel towards each receiver,
which is commonly studied in multi-receiver models (see,
e.g., (Babichenko & Barman, 2016)). Dealing with multiple
receivers introduces the additional challenge of correlating
information disclosure across them and requires different
1
Persuasion was famously attributed to a quarter of the GDP in
the United States by McCloskey & Klamer (1995), with a more
recent estimate placing this figure at 30% (Antioch et al., 2013).
2
A recent work by Babichenko et al. (2021) relaxes the assumption in the offline setting. In that work, the goal is minimizing
the sender’s regret over a single iteration, and the authors provide
positive results for the case in which the sender knows the ordinal
preferences of the receiver over states of nature. The authors study
the case of a single receiver with a binary action space, and an
arbitrary (unknown) utility function.

