Understanding Invariance via Feedforward Inversion
of Discriminatively Trained Classifiers

Piotr Teterwak 1 Chiyuan Zhang 2 Dilip Krishnan 2 Michael C. Mozer 2 3

Abstract
A discriminatively trained neural net classifier
can fit the training data perfectly if all information about its input other than class membership
has been discarded prior to the output layer. Surprisingly, past research has discovered that some
extraneous visual detail remains in the logit vector. This finding is based on inversion techniques
that map deep embeddings back to images. We
explore this phenomenon further using a novel
synthesis of methods, yielding a feedforward inversion model that produces remarkably high fidelity reconstructions, qualitatively superior to
those of past efforts. When applied to an adversarially robust classifier model, the reconstructions contain sufficient local detail and global
structure that they might be confused with the
original image in a quick glance, and the object category can clearly be gleaned from the
reconstruction. Our approach is based on BigGAN (Brock, 2019), with conditioning on logits
instead of one-hot class labels. We use our reconstruction model as a tool for exploring the
nature of representations, including: the influence of model architecture and training objectives
(specifically robust losses), the forms of invariance that networks achieve, representational differences between correctly and incorrectly classified images, and the effects of manipulating logits and images. We believe that our method can
inspire future investigations into the nature of information flow in a neural net and can provide
diagnostics for improving discriminative models.
We provide pre-trained models and visualizations
at https://sites.google.com/view/
understanding-invariance/home.
1

Presently at Boston University; work was begun while author was an AI Resident at Google Research 2 Google Research
3
University of Colorado, Boulder. Correspondence to: Piotr Teterwak <piotrt@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Discriminatively trained deep convolutional networks have
been enormously successful at classifying natural images.
During training, success is quantified by selecting the correct class label with maximum confidence. To the extent
that training succeeds by this criterion, the output must
be invariant to visual details of the class instance such as
brightness changes, object pose, background configurations
or small amounts of additive noise. Consequently, the net
is encouraged to discard information about the image other
than the class label. A dog is a dog whether the input image
contains a closeup of a black puppy in a field or an elegant
white poodle being walked on a city street.
The successive layers of a convolutional net detect increasingly abstract features with decreasing spatial specificity,
from pixels to edges to regions to local object components—
like eyes and legs—to objects—like dogs and cats (Zeiler
and Fergus, 2014). Is is commonly believed that this sequence of transformations filters out irrelevant visual detail
in favor of information critical to discriminating among
classes. This view is generally supported by methods that
have been developed to invert internal representations and
recover the visual information that is retained by the representation in a given layer (Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2015;
Dosovitskiy and Brox, 2016a;b; Zhang et al., 2016; Shocher
et al., 2020). Inversion of layers close to the input yield
accurate reconstructions, whereas inversion of deep layers
typically results in a loss of visual detail and coherence.
Attempts to determine what visual information remains in
the class output distribution, as expressed by the logits that
are passed into the final softmax layer, have not been particularly compelling. A notable attempt to invert the logits is
the work of Dosovitskiy and Brox (2016a), which recovered
colors, textures and the coarse arrangement of image elements from the logits. However, the reconstructions appear
distorted and unnatural, and in the eleven examples shown
in Dosovitskiy and Brox (2016a, Figure 5), only about half
of the object classes are identifiable to a human observer.
One would not confuse the reconstructions with natural images. Although many visual details are present, the essence
of the objects in the original image is often absent.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the logit vector of a

