Event Outlier Detection in Continuous Time
Siqi Liu 1 2 Milos Hauskrecht 1

Abstract
Continuous-time event sequences represent discrete events occurring in continuous time. Such
sequences arise frequently in real-life. Usually
we expect the sequences to follow some regular
pattern over time. However, sometimes these patterns may be interrupted by unexpected absence
or occurrences of events. Identification of these
unexpected cases can be very important as they
may point to abnormal situations that need human attention. In this work, we study and develop
methods for detecting outliers in continuous-time
event sequences, including unexpected absence
and unexpected occurrences of events. Since the
patterns that event sequences tend to follow may
change in different contexts, we develop outlier
detection methods based on point processes that
can take context information into account. Our
methods are based on Bayesian decision theory
and hypothesis testing with theoretical guarantees. To test the performance of the methods, we
conduct experiments on both synthetic data and
real-world clinical data and show the effectiveness
of the proposed methods.

or absence of events in event sequences in real-time. Outlier
detection is the basis of many critical real-world applications, such as fraud detection (Fawcett & Provost, 1997),
network intrusion surveillance (Garcia-Teodoro et al., 2009),
disease outbreak detection (Wong et al., 2003), and medical
error detection (Hauskrecht et al., 2013; 2016).
Two types of outliers may arise in continuous-time event
sequences. First, given the history and the recent absence of
the events, the event may be overdue. We refer to these as
omission outliers. Second, given the history, the event that
has just arrived is unexpected: it either arrived too early or
was not expected to occur at all given the context from the
history. We refer to these as commission outliers. Figure 1
shows some examples of these two types of outliers.

1. Introduction
Continuous-time event sequences are defined by occurrences of various types of events in time. Event sequences
may represent many real-world processes and observations
including, e.g., arrival of packets to servers in network systems, or administration of drugs to patients. Continuoustime event sequences are typically modeled as point processes (Daley & Vere-Jones, 2003). While many pointprocess models have been developed in the literature in
recent years, most works build and test models on event prediction tasks. The focus of this work is on outlier detection
in event sequences that aims to identify unusual occurrences
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Borealis AI, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Correspondence to: Siqi Liu <siqiliu@cs.pitt.edu>, Milos Hauskrecht
<milos@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of omission (top) and commission (bottom)
outliers. Each stem and rectangle / circle represent one event on
the horizontal time line. Different colors and shapes represent
different types of events. Red dashed boxes mark the outliers. Top:
A blue-circle event is expected but has not been observed. Bottom:
The second to last blue-circle event happened too early. The last
blue-circle event was not expected given the occurrence pattern.

Both types of outliers are often related to problems of practical importance. Take for example, a person suffering from
a disease and taking specific medications on a regular schedule to treat the disease. Given the history and the current
time, we may infer that the person has not taken the medication yet, and the medication is overdue (omission). The
detection of the overdue medication can be then used to generate a reminder alert. For commission, consider a patient
who takes a medication too early compared to the normal

