RRL: Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learning

Rutav Shah * 1 Vikash Kumar * 2

Abstract
The ability to autonomously learn behaviors via
direct interactions in uninstrumented environments can lead to generalist robots capable of enhancing productivity or providing care in unstructured settings like homes. Such uninstrumented
settings warrant operations only using the robot’s
proprioceptive sensor such as onboard cameras,
joint encoders, etc which can be challenging for
policy learning owing to the high dimensionality
and partial observability issues. We propose RRL:
Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learning – a straightforward yet effective approach that
can learn complex behaviors directly from proprioceptive inputs. RRL fuses features extracted
from pre-trained Resnet into the standard reinforcement learning pipeline and delivers results
comparable to learning directly from the state. In
a simulated dexterous manipulation benchmark,
where the state of the art methods fails to make
significant progress, RRL delivers contact rich
behaviors. The appeal of RRL lies in its simplicity in bringing together progress from the fields
of Representation Learning, Imitation Learning,
and Reinforcement Learning. Its effectiveness
in learning behaviors directly from visual inputs
with performance and sample efficiency matching
learning directly from the state, even in complex
high dimensional domains, is far from obvious.

1. Introduction
Recently, Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen tremendous momentum and progress (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Espeholt et al., 2018)
in learning complex behaviors from states (Schulman et al.,
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, India 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence
to: Rutav Shah <rutavms@gmail.com>, Vikash Kumar
<vikash@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Supervised Learning

Reinforcement
Learning

Figure 1. RRL Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learning takes a small step in bridging the gap between Representation
learning and Reinforcement learning. RRL pre-trains an encoder
on a wide variety of real world classes like ImageNet dataset using
a simple supervised classification objective. Since the encoder is
exposed to a much wider distribution of images while pretraining, it remains effective whatever distribution the policy might
induce during the training of the agent. This allows us to freeze
the encoder after pretraining without any additional efforts.

2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). Most
success stories, however, are limited to simulations or instrumented laboratory conditions as real world doesn’t provide
direct access to its internal state. Not only learning with
state-space, but visual observation spaces have also found
reasonable success (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; OpenAI et al.,
2019). However the sample complexity for methods that can
learn directly with visual inputs is far too extreme for direct
real-world training (Duan et al., 2016; Kaiser et al., 2020).
In order to deliver the promise presented by data-driven
techniques, we need efficient techniques that can learn unobtrusively without the need of environment instrumentation.
Learning without environment instrumentation, especially
in unstructured settings like homes, can be quite challenging (Zhu et al., 2020; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019; Ahn et al.,
2020). Challenges include – (a) Decision making with incomplete information owing to partial observability as the
agents must rely only on proprioceptive on-board sensors
(vision, touch, joint position encoders, etc) to perceive and
act. (b) The influx of sensory information makes the input
space quite high dimensional. (c) Information contamination due to sensory noise and task-irrelevant conditions like
lightning, shadows, etc. (d) Most importantly, the scene
being flushed with information irrelevant to the task (background, clutter, etc). Agents learning under these constraints
is forced to take a large number of samples simply to untan-

