Knowledge Enhanced Machine Learning Pipeline
against Diverse Adversarial Attacks
Nezihe Merve Gürel 1 * Xiangyu Qi 2 * Luka Rimanic 1 Ce Zhang 1 Bo Li 3

Abstract
Despite the great successes achieved by deep neural networks (DNNs), recent studies show that
they are vulnerable against adversarial examples,
which aim to mislead DNNs by adding small adversarial perturbations. Several defenses have
been proposed against such attacks, while many of
them have been adaptively attacked. In this work,
we aim to enhance the ML robustness from a
different perspective by leveraging domain knowledge: We propose a Knowledge Enhanced Machine Learning Pipeline (KEMLP) to integrate domain knowledge (i.e., logic relationships among
different predictions) into a probabilistic graphical model via first-order logic rules. In particular,
we develop KEMLP by integrating a diverse set
of weak auxiliary models based on their logical relationships to the main DNN model that performs
the target task. Theoretically, we provide convergence results and prove that, under mild conditions, the prediction of KEMLP is more robust
than that of the main DNN model. Empirically,
we take road sign recognition as an example and
leverage the relationships between road signs and
their shapes and contents as domain knowledge.
We show that compared with adversarial training and other baselines, KEMLP achieves higher
robustness against physical attacks, Lp bounded
attacks, unforeseen attacks, and natural corruptions under both whitebox and blackbox settings,
while still maintaining high clean accuracy.

*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Zhejiang University, China (work done during remote internship at UIUC) 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Nezihe Merve Gürel <nezihe.guerel@inf.ethz.ch>, Xiangyu Qi <unispac@zju.edu.cn>, Ce
Zhang <ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent studies show that machine learning (ML) models are
vulnerable to different types of adversarial examples, which
are adversarially manipulated inputs aiming to mislead ML
models to make arbitrarily incorrect predictions (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Bhattad et al., 2020;
Eykholt et al., 2018). Different defense strategies have
been proposed against such attacks, including adversarial
training (Shafahi et al., 2019; Madry et al., 2017), input
processing (Ross and Doshi-Velez, 2018), and approaches
with certified robustness against Lp bounded attacks (Cohen
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020a). However, these defenses
have either been adaptively attacked again (Carlini and Wagner, 2017a; Athalye et al., 2018) or can only certify the
robustness within a small `p perturbation radius. In addition,
when models are trained to be robust against one type of
attack, their robustness is typically not preserved against
other attacks (Schott et al., 2018; Kang et al., 2019). Thus,
despite the rapid recent progress on robust learning, it is still
challenging to provide robust ML models against a diverse
set of adversarial attacks in practice.
In this paper, we take a different perspective towards training robust ML models against diverse adversarial attacks by
integrating domain knowledge during prediction, given the
observation that human with knowledge is quite resilient
against these attacks. We will first take stop sign recognition as a simple example to illustrate the potential role of
knowledge in ML prediction. In this example, the main
task is to predict whether a stop sign appears in the input
image. Training a DNN model for this task is known to be
vulnerable against a range of adversarial attacks (Eykholt
et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2018a). However, upon such a
DNN model, if we could (1) build a detector for a different
auxiliary task, e.g., detecting whether an octagon appears
in the input by using other learning strategies such as traditional computer vision techniques, and (2) integrate the
domain knowledge such that “A stop sign should be of an
octagon shape”, it is possible that additional information
could enable the ML system to detect or defend against
attacks, which lead to conflicts between the DNN prediction
and domain knowledge. For instance, if a speed limit sign
with rectangle shape is misrecognized as a stop sign, the

