f -Domain-Adversarial Learning: Theory and Algorithms

David Acuna 1 2 3 Guojun Zhang 4 3 Marc T. Law 1 Sanja Fidler 1 2 3

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation is used in many
machine learning applications where, during training, a model has access to unlabeled data in the target domain, and a related labeled dataset. In this
paper, we introduce a novel and general domainadversarial framework. Specifically, we derive
a novel generalization bound for domain adaptation that exploits a new measure of discrepancy
between distributions based on a variational characterization of f -divergences. It recovers the theoretical results from Ben-David et al. (2010a) as
a special case, and supports divergences used in
practice. Based on this bound, we derive a new
algorithmic framework that introduces a key correction in the original adversarial training method
of Ganin et al. (2016). We show that many regularizers and ad-hoc objectives introduced over the
last years in this framework are then not required
to achieve performance comparable to (if not
better than) state-of-the-art domain-adversarial
methods. Experimental analysis conducted on
real world natural language and computer vision
datasets show that our framework outperforms existing baselines, and obtains the best results for
f -divergences that were not considered previously
in domain-adversarial learning.

1. Introduction
The ability to learn new concepts from general-purpose data
and transfer them to related but different contexts is critical
in many modern applications. One such prominent scenario
is called unsupervised domain adaptation. In domain adaptation, the learner has access to both a small (unlabeled)
dataset on its domain of interest, and to a larger labeled
dataset on a domain related to the target domain but with
different distribution. The model is trained with both the
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
University of Waterloo. Correspondence to: David Acuna
<davidj@cs.toronto.edu,dacunamarrer@nvidia.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

labeled and unlabeled datasets, and it is expected to generalize well to the target dataset if the gap between both
domains is not very significant.
The paramount importance of domain adaptation (DA) has
led to remarkable advances in the field. From a theoretical
point of view, (Ben-David et al., 2007; 2010a;b; Mansour
et al., 2009) provided generalization bounds for unsupervised DA based on discrepancy measures that are a reduction
of the Total Variation (TV). Zhang et al. (2019) recently proposed the Margin Disparity Discrepancy (MDD) with the
aim of closing the gap between theory and algorithms. Their
notion of discrepancy is tailored to margin losses and builds
on the observation of only taking a single supremum over
the class set to make optimization easier. Theories based
on weighted combination of hypotheses for multiple source
DA have also been developed (Hoffman et al., 2018a).
From an algorithmic perspective in the context of neural networks, Ganin & Lempitsky (2015); Ganin et al. (2016) proposed the idea of learning domain-invariant representations
as an adversarial game. This approach led to a plethora of
methods including state-of-the-art approaches such as Shu
et al. (2018); Long et al. (2018); Hoffman et al. (2018b);
Zhang et al. (2019). Although these methods were explained
with insights from the theory of Ben-David et al. (2010a),
and more recently through MDD (Zhang et al., 2019), both
the H∆H divergence (Ben-David et al., 2010a) and MDD
are hard to optimize with deep neural networks. Ad-hoc
objectives have thus been introduced to minimize the divergence between the source and target distributions in a
common representation space. This has led to a disconnect
between theory and the current SoTA practical methods.
Specifically, the domain-classifier from Ganin et al. (2016)
that gives rise to domain-adversarial training methods is inspired by the proxy A-distance from Ben-David et al. (2007)
which itself is an approximation of the empirical estimation
of the H∆H-divergence. It has been shown however that
the discrepancy being minimized in practice in this framework corresponds to the JS-divergence (Ganin & Lempitsky,
2015). Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, no clear
connection between the DA theory and the algorithms that
are typically employed has been made, i.e. generalization
bounds for DA with f -divergences have not been derived.
Contributions. In this paper, we derive a more general do-

