Heterogeneous Risk Minimization

Jiashuo Liu 1 Zheyuan Hu 1 Peng Cui 1 Bo Li 2 Zheyan Shen 1

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms with empirical risk
minimization usually suffer from poor generalization performance due to the greedy exploitation
of correlations among the training data, which
are not stable under distributional shifts. Recently, some invariant learning methods for outof-distribution (OOD) generalization have been
proposed by leveraging multiple training environments to find invariant relationships. However, modern datasets are frequently assembled
by merging data from multiple sources without explicit source labels. The resultant unobserved heterogeneity renders many invariant learning methods inapplicable. In this paper, we propose Heterogeneous Risk Minimization (HRM) framework
to achieve joint learning of latent heterogeneity
among the data and invariant relationship, which
leads to stable prediction despite distributional
shifts. We theoretically characterize the roles of
the environment labels in invariant learning and
justify our newly proposed HRM framework. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of our HRM framework.

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of machine learning algorithms with empirical risk minimization (ERM) relies on the assumption
that the testing and training data are identically drawn from
the same distribution, which is known as the IID hypothesis.
However, distributional shifts between testing and training data are usually inevitable due to data selection biases
or unobserved confounders that widely exist in real data.
Under such circumstances, machine learning algorithms
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University,
Beijing,
China;
Email:
{liujiashuo77, zyhu2001}@gmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn,
shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn. 2 School of Economics and
Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; Email:
libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn. Correspondence to: Peng Cui
<cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

with ERM usually suffer from poor generalization performance due to the greedy exploitation of correlations among
the training data, which are not stable under distributional
shifts. How to guarantee a machine learning algorithm with
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization ability and stable
performances under distributional shifts is of paramount
significance, especially in high-stake applications such as
medical diagnosis, criminal justice, and financial analysis
etc (Kukar, 2003; Berk et al., 2018; Rudin & Ustun, 2018).
There are mainly two branches of methods proposed to solve
the OOD generalization problem, namely distributionally
robust optimization (DRO) (Esfahani & Kuhn, 2018; Duchi
& Namkoong, 2018; Sinha et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2019)
and invariant learning (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Koyama &
Yamaguchi, 2020; Chang et al., 2020). DRO methods aim
to optimize the worst-performance over a distribution set
to ensure their OOD generalization performances. While
DRO is a powerful family of methods, it is often argued
for its over-pessimism problem when the distribution set is
large (Hu et al., 2018; Frogner et al., 2019). From another
perspective, invariant learning methods propose to exploit
the causally invariant correlations(rather than varying spurious correlations) across multiple training environments,
resulting in out-of-distribution (OOD) optimal predictors.
However, the effectiveness of such methods relies heavily
on the quality of training environments, and the intrinsic
role of environments in invariant learning remains vague in
theory. More importantly, modern big data are frequently
assembled by merging data from multiple sources without
explicit source labels. The resultant unobserved heterogeneity renders these invariant learning methods inapplicable.
In this paper, we propose Heterogeneous Risk Minimization (HRM), an optimization framework to achieve joint
learning of the latent heterogeneity among the data and
the invariant predictor, which leads to better generalization
ability despite distributional shifts. More specifically, we
theoretically characterize the roles of the environment labels in invariant learning, which motivates us to design two
modules in the framework corresponding to heterogeneity
identification and invariant learning respectively. We provide theoretical justification on the mutual promotion of
these two modules, which resonates the joint optimization
process in a reciprocal way. Extensive experiments in both
synthetic and real-world experiments datasets demonstrate

