Decentralized Riemannian Gradient Descent on the Stiefel Manifold
Shixiang Chen 1 Alfredo Garcia 1 Mingyi Hong 2 Shahin Shahrampour 1

Abstract

agent optimization problem

n

We consider distributed non-convex optimization
where a network of agents aims at minimizing a
global function over the Stiefel manifold. The
global function is represented as a finite sum of
smooth local functions, where each local function
is associated with one agent and agents communicate with each other over an undirected connected graph. The problem is non-convex as local
functions are possibly non-convex (but smooth)
and the Steifel manifold is a non-convex set. We
present a decentralized Riemannian stochastic gradient method
√ (DRSGD) with the convergence rate
of O(1/ K) to a stationary point. To have exact
convergence with constant stepsize, we also propose a decentralized Riemannian gradient tracking algorithm (DRGTA) with the convergence
rate of O(1/K) to a stationary point. We use
multi-step consensus to preserve the iteration in
the local consensus region. DRGTA is the first
decentralized algorithm with exact convergence
for distributed optimization on Stiefel manifold.

1. Introduction
Distributed optimization has received significant attention
in the past few years in machine learning, control and signal processing. There are mainly two scenarios where distributed algorithms are necessary: (i). the data is geographically distributed over networks and/or (ii). the computation
on a single (centralized) server is too expensive (large-scale
data setting). In this paper, we consider the following multi1
The Wm Michael Barnes ’64 Department of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843, USA. 2 The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Correspondence to: Shahin Shahrampour <shahin@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

min
s.t.

1X
fi (xi )
n i=1

x1 = x 2 = . . . = x n ,

(1.1)

xi ∈ M, ∀i = 1, . . . , n,

where fi has L−Lipschitz continuous gradient in Euclidean
space and M := St(d, r) = {x ∈ Rd×r : x> x = Ir } is the
Stiefel manifold. Unlike the Euclidean distributed setting,
problem (1.1) is defined on the Stiefel manifold, which is a
non-convex set. Many important applications can be written in the form (1.1), e.g., decentralized spectral analysis
(Kempe & McSherry, 2008; Gang & Bajwa, 2021), dictionary learning (Raja & Bajwa, 2015), eigenvalue estimation
of the covariance matrix (Penna & Stańczak, 2014) in wireless sensor networks, and deep neural networks with orthogonal constraint (Arjovsky et al., 2016; Vorontsov et al.,
2017; Huang et al., 2018).
Problem (1.1) can generally represent a risk minimization.
One approach to solving (1.1) is collecting all variables to
a central server and running a centralized algorithm. In
this work, however, we consider the decentralized setting.
Our motivations are two-fold: (i). In some applications,
the datasets are collected, stored and manipulated in a distributed manner. Due to privacy concerns and/or inability to
gather all data in a central node, centralized methods cannot
be implemented. In a decentralized implementation, local
parameter vectors (and not data) can be shared amongst
neighboring nodes. In this setting, prior to our work, it was
not clear how to design a converging decentralized algorithm
for problem (1.1), nor was it clear how such an algorithm
scales w.r.t the connectivity of the network. (ii). The other
popular reason to study decentralized setting is to accelerate
the computation for stochastic algorithms in modern computational architectures. (Lian et al., 2017) proved that the
decentralized SGD (D-PSGD) algorithm can achieve a linear speedup w.r.t n if the iteration number is large enough,
and the convergence rate is the same as centralized SGD
(C-PSGD). Due to the communication efficiency, D-PSGD
is more efficient than C-PSGD.

