LTL2Action: Generalizing LTL Instructions for Multi-Task RL
Pashootan Vaezipoor * 1 2 Andrew C. Li * 1 2 Rodrigo Toro Icarte 1 2 Sheila McIlraith 1 2 3

Abstract
We address the problem of teaching a deep reinforcement learning (RL) agent to follow instructions in multi-task environments. Instructions
are expressed in a well-known formal language
– linear temporal logic (LTL) – and can specify
a diversity of complex, temporally extended behaviours, including conditionals and alternative
realizations. Our proposed learning approach exploits the compositional syntax and the semantics of LTL, enabling our RL agent to learn taskconditioned policies that generalize to new instructions, not observed during training. To reduce the overhead of learning LTL semantics, we
introduce an environment-agnostic LTL pretraining scheme which improves sample-efficiency in
downstream environments. Experiments on discrete and continuous domains target combinatorial task sets of up to ⇠ 1039 unique tasks and
demonstrate the strength of our approach in learning to solve (unseen) tasks, given LTL instructions.

1. Introduction
A long-standing aspiration of artificial intelligence is to
build agents that can understand and follow human instructions to solve problems (McCarthy et al., 1960). Recent advances in deep and reinforcement learning (RL) have made
it possible to learn a policy that decides the next action conditioned on the current observation and a natural language
instruction. Given enough training data, the learned policy
will show some degree of generalization to unseen instructions (e.g., Hermann et al., 2017; Oh et al., 2017; Chaplot
et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Co-Reyes et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2019; Luketina et al., 2019). Unfortunately, such
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society.
Correspondence to:
Pashootan
Vaezipoor <pashootan@cs.toronto.edu>, Andrew Li <andrewli@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

approaches do not scale well because they require (for every
possible environment) manually building a large training
set comprised of natural language instructions with their
corresponding reward functions.
Motivated by this observation, recent works have explored
using structured or formal languages (instead of natural language) to instruct RL agents. Such languages offer several
desirable properties for RL, including unambiguous semantics, and compact compositional syntax that enables RL
practitioners to (automatically) generate massive training
data to teach RL agents to follow instructions. Examples
of such languages include policy sketches (Andreas et al.,
2017), task graphs (Sohn et al., 2018), procedural programs
(Sun et al., 2019), declarative programs (Denil et al., 2017),
reward machines (Toro Icarte et al., 2020), and temporal
logic (Leon et al., 2020). Many of these methods exploit
compositional syntax to decompose instructions into smaller
subtasks that are solved independently, without consideration for the subtasks that follow. This can lead to subtask
policies that are individually optimal, but when combined
are suboptimal with respect to the instructions as a whole.
We refer to these as myopic approaches.
In this work, we use linear temporal logic (LTL) (Pnueli,
1977) over a domain-specific vocabulary (e.g., have-coffee)
to instruct RL agents to learn policies that generalize well to
unseen instructions without compromising optimality guarantees – in contrast to typical myopic methods. LTL is an expressive formal language that combines temporal modalities
such as eventually, until, and always with binary predicates
that establish the truth or falsity of an event or property (e.g.,
have-coffee), composed via logical connectives to support
specification of goal sequences, partial-order tasks, safety
constraints, and much more. Our learning algorithm exploits a semantics-preserving rewriting operation, called
LTL progression, that allows the agent to identify aspects of
the original instructions that remain to be addressed in the
context of an evolving experience. This enables learning
policies in a non-myopic manner, all the while preserving
optimality guarantees and supporting generalization.
Our approach is realized in a deep RL setting, exploiting
event detectors to recognize domain vocabulary. We encode LTL instructions using an LSTM, GRU, or a Graph
Neural Network (GNN). To reduce the overhead of learning

