SGLB: Stochastic Gradient Langevin Boosting

Aleksei Ustimenko 1 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 1 2 3

Abstract
This paper introduces Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Boosting (SGLB) — a powerful and
efficient machine learning framework that may
deal with a wide range of loss functions and has
provable generalization guarantees. The method
is based on a special form of the Langevin diffusion equation specifically designed for gradient
boosting. This allows us to theoretically guarantee the global convergence even for multimodal
loss functions, while standard gradient boosting
algorithms can guarantee only local optimum. We
also empirically show that SGLB outperforms
classic gradient boosting when applied to classification tasks with 0-1 loss function, which is
known to be multimodal.

1. Introduction
Gradient boosting is a powerful machine-learning method
that iteratively combines weak models to obtain more accurate ones (Friedman, 2001). Nowadays, this technique
remains the primary method for web search, recommendation systems, weather forecasting, and many other problems with complex dependencies and heterogeneous data.
Combined with decision trees, gradient boosting underlies
such widely-used software libraries like XGBoost (Chen
& Guestrin, 2016), LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017), and CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018).
For convex loss functions and under some regularity assumptions, stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) converges to the
optimal solution (Zhou & Hooker, 2018). However, even
local optima cannot be guaranteed for general losses. We
fill this gap and build the first globally convergent gradient
boosting algorithm for convex and non-convex optimization with provable generalization guarantees. For this purpose, we combine gradient boosting with stochastic gradient
Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology, Moscow, Russia 3 HSE University, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Aleksei Ustimenko <austimenko@yandexteam.ru>.

Langevin dynamics (SGLD), which is a powerful iterative
optimization algorithm (Raginsky et al., 2017). It turns
out that gradient boosting can be easily modified to a globally converging method: at each step, one has to shrink the
currently built model and add a proper noise to stochastic
gradient estimates and to the weak learners’ selection algorithm. To prove the global convergence and generalization,
we develop a novel theoretical framework and show that the
dynamics of SGLB can be approximated by a special form
of the Langevin diffusion equation.
The proposed algorithm is implemented within the CatBoost open-source gradient boosting library (option
langevin=True) (CatBoost, 2020). Our experiments on
synthetic and real datasets show that SGLB outperforms
standard SGB and can optimize globally such non-convex
losses as 0-1 loss, which was previously claimed to be a
challenge (Nguyen & Sanner, 2013). Since the first version of this paper appeared online, SGLB has found its new
exciting applications in learning to rank and uncertainty estimation (Ustimenko & Prokhorenkova, 2020; Malinin et al.,
2021), see Section 8 for more details.
In the next section, we briefly discuss the related research
on gradient boosting convergence and 0-1 loss optimization.
Then, in Section 3, we give the necessary background on gradient boosting and stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics.
The proposed SLGB method is described in Algorithm 2
in Section 4. This approach is easy to implement, and it
is backed by strong theoretical guarantees. Our main results on the convergence of SGLB are given in Section 5:
convergence on the train set is given in Theorem 2, the generalization error is bounded in Theorem 3, and our results
are summarized in Corollary 1. The experiments comparing
SGLB with SGB on synthetic and real datasets are discussed
in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper, discusses further
applications of SGLB, and outlines promising directions for
future research.

2. Related Work

1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this section, we discuss related work on SGB convergence
and 0-1 loss optimization. Our work is also closely related
to stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, which we discuss
in Section 3.3.

