Whittle Networks: A Deep Likelihood Model for Time Series

Zhongjie Yu 1 Fabrizio Ventola 1 Kristian Kersting 1 2

Abstract
While probabilistic circuits have been extensively
explored for tabular data, less attention has been
paid to time series. Here, the goal is to estimate
joint densities among the entire time series and, in
turn, determining, for instance, conditional independence relations between them. To this end, we
propose the first probabilistic circuits (PCs) approach for modeling the joint distribution of multivariate time series, called Whittle sum-product
networks (WSPNs). WSPNs leverage the Whittle approximation, casting the likelihood in the
frequency domain, and place a complex-valued
sum-product network, the most prominent PC,
over the frequencies. The conditional independence relations among the time series can then
be determined efficiently in the spectral domain.
Moreover, WSPNs can naturally be placed into
the deep neural learning stack for time series, resulting in Whittle Networks, opening the likelihood toolbox for training deep neural models
and inspecting their behaviour. Our experiments
show that Whittle Networks can indeed capture
complex dependencies between time series and
provide a useful measure of uncertainty for neural
networks.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models specify joint densities compactly using conditional independencies between random
variables (RVs). When faced with time series, dynamic
Bayesian networks are commonly employed. In many applications, however, one instead often aims to infer the conditional independence relations between time series themselves, accounting for interactions at all possible lags, leading to time series graphical models (TGMs) (Tank et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt,
Germany 2 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, and Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI). Correspondence to: Zhongjie Yu
<yu@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2015). Consider, e.g., the stock price changes of industrial sectors shown in Fig. 1 (Left). The drop in late 2018
illustrates a critical need for new and fundamental understandings of the structure and dynamics of economic networks (Schweitzer et al., 2009).
Arguably, Dahlhaus (2000) introduced the first (undirected)
graphical model for stationary time series. Specifically, for
jointly Gaussian stationary time series, one transforms the
series to the frequency domain and estimates a Gaussian
graphical model in the resulting spectral representation. The
conditional independencies between time series are encoded
by zeros in the inverse spectral density matrix. Bach & Jordan (2004) leveraged the Whittle approximation (Whittle,
1953), casting the likelihood in the frequency domain, and
Tank et al. (2015) proposed a Bayesian extension, making
use of hyper complex inverse Wishart distribution priors.
Unfortunately, using graphical models for time series modeling has a number of important limitations. First, inference
is exponential in the worst case. Second, the sample size
required for accurate learning is worst-case exponential in
scope size, i.e. the subset of variables of each potential.
Third, learning requires inference as a subroutine, i.e. it can
take exponential time even with fixed scopes.
To overcome these limitations of TGMs and inspired by
the successes of deep probabilistic models for univariate
time series (Trapp et al., 2020; Melibari et al., 2016), we
introduce the first probabilistic circuit for modeling the joint
distribution of multivariate time series, called Whittle sumproduct network (WSPN). It also leverages the Whittle approximation but places a sum-product network (SPN) (Poon
& Domingos, 2011) over the frequencies. Using SPNs
in the frequency domain, however, requires different decomposition and conditioning operations for SPNs tailored
towards complex-valued RVs—our main technical contributions. The conditional independence relations among the
time series, even in a directed fashion, can then be determined efficiently in the spectral domain, see Fig. 1 (Middle).
While WSPNs feature efficient inference, learning their
structure—the structure of complex-valued SPNs—can still
be tedious and may not scale well to large number of RVs.
Therefore, we propose to “go down the deep neural road”
one step further by generating unspecialized random structures for the SPNs (Peharz et al., 2020b; Ventola et al.,

