Concentric Mixtures of Mallows Models for Top-k Rankings:
Sampling and Identifiability

Fabien Collas 1 Ekhine Irurozki 1 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study mixtures of two Mallows
models for top-k rankings with equal location parameters but with different scale parameters (a
mixture of concentric Mallows models). These
models arise when we have a heterogeneous population of voters formed by two populations, one
of which is a subpopulation of expert voters. We
show the identifiability of both components and
the learnability of their respective parameters.
These results are based upon, first, bounding the
sample complexity for the Borda algorithm with
top-k rankings. Second, we characterize the distances between rankings, showing that an off-theshelf clustering algorithm separates the rankings
by components with high probability -provided
the scales are well-separated.As a by-product, we
include an efficient sampling algorithm for Mallows top-k rankings. Finally, since the rank aggregation will suffer from a large amount of noise
introduced by the non-expert voters, we adapt the
Borda algorithm to be able to recover the ground
truth consensus ranking which is especially consistent with the expert rankings.

1. Introdution
Ranked data has been subject to study in different communities starting with Social Choice (Bartholdi et al., 1989),
Bioinformatics (Vitelli et al., 2018), and recently in Machine Learning (Busa-Fekete et al., 2014) since rankings
arise naturally when ordering items in order of preference.
Top-k rankings arise in practice when voters, human or software, see all the items but provide a ranking of their most
preferred k items. Examples of top-k rankings are the results displayed in a search engine, which contain just the
top 10 most relevant, related search results, out of possibly
1
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics, Bilbao, Spain.
LTCI, Telecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris. Correspondence to: Ekhine Irurozki <irurozki@telecom-paris.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

millions of results.
The Mallows model (MM) (Fligner & Verducci, 1986; Mallows, 1957) is one of the preferred distributions to model
rank data. It belongs to the location-scale family since it is
parametrized by a location parameter (a.k.a. central ranking)
σ0 and a non-negative scale (a.k.a. dispersion) parameter, θ.
The location parameter is the consensus ranking of the distribution. The probability of any other permutation decreases
exponentially with its distance to σ0 , where the distance for
rankings is, in general, the Kendall’s-τ distance. Finally,
the dispersion parameter controls the variance of this decay.
For other distances see (Irurozki et al., 2019).
Mixtures of MM populations are divided into different subpopulations, each of which can be modeled with a single
MM since each is consistent with noisy realizations of their
particular consensus ranking. In this paper, we study the
particular context of mixtures where all the location parameters are the same σ0 . We denote this situation as concentric
mixture.
Real world motivation In this work, we consider the following problem. There is a consensus ranking σ0 representing a complete ranking of a set of n alternatives, i.e.,
films that are ordered for the preferences, students that are
ranked according to their grades in a particular exam or highquality and low-quality rankings corresponding to different
sampling techniques. However, this consensus ranking is
unknown and must be estimated from the realization of rankings provided by a collection of m raters or voters. Each
voter has ranked his top k < n alternatives.
The population is heterogeneous: a number of them are
low-bias-low-variance rankings that will be close to the
consensus and the rest will provide low-bias-high-variance
rankings, which will be noisier. The population of rankings
is modeled as a mixture whose components are 2-concentric
MM: Both components will be centered at the same consensus ranking σ0 , but their spread parameter will be different.
Our goals are to show identifiability in this scenario by (1)
obtaining the consensus ranking with high probability and
(2) distinguishing the rankings from each subpopulation
with high probability.
This situation is motivated by general noisy settings.

