Clusterability as an Alternative to Anchor Points
When Learning with Noisy Labels

Zhaowei Zhu 1 Yiwen Song 2 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
The label noise transition matrix, characterizing the probabilities of a training instance being
wrongly annotated, is crucial to designing popular
solutions to learning with noisy labels. Existing
works heavily rely on finding “anchor points” or
their approximates, defined as instances belonging to a particular class almost surely. Nonetheless, finding anchor points remains a non-trivial
task, and the estimation accuracy is also often
throttled by the number of available anchor points.
In this paper, we propose an alternative option
to the above task. Our main contribution is the
discovery of an efficient estimation procedure
based on a clusterability condition. We prove that
with clusterable representations of features, using up to third-order consensuses of noisy labels
among neighbor representations is sufficient to estimate a unique transition matrix. Compared with
methods using anchor points, our approach uses
substantially more instances and benefits from a
much better sample complexity. We demonstrate
the estimation accuracy and advantages of our
estimates using both synthetic noisy labels (on
CIFAR-10/100) and real human-level noisy labels
(on Clothing1M and our self-collected humanannotated CIFAR-10). Our code and human-level
noisy CIFAR-10 labels are available at https:
//github.com/UCSC-REAL/HOC.

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) relies on the largescale labeled datasets while they often include a nonnegligible fraction of wrongly annotated instances. The
corrupted patterns tend to be memorized by the over1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA 2 Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Yang Liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

parameterized DNNs (Xia et al., 2021; Han et al., 2020),
and lead to unexpected and disparate impacts (Liu, 2021).
A variety of approaches were proposed to address the problem of learning with noisy labels. The implementations
of a major line of them, e.g., Patrini et al. (2017); Xiao
et al. (2015); Xia et al. (2020b); Berthon et al. (2021); Xia
et al. (2019); Yao et al. (2020b); Li et al. (2021), depend
on accurate knowledge of the noise transition matrix T ,
which characterizes the probabilities of a training example
being wrongly annotated. It has been show that (Liu & Tao,
2015; Patrini et al., 2017), with perfect knowledge of T ,
the minimizer of a corrected or reweighted expected risk
(loss) defined on the noisy distribution is the same as the
minimizer of the true expected risk (loss) of the clean distribution. These results clearly established the power and
benefits of knowing T .
Estimating T is challenging without accessing clean labels.
Existing works on estimating T often rely on finding a
number of high-quality anchor points (Scott, 2015; Liu &
Tao, 2015; Patrini et al., 2017), or approximate anchor points
(Xia et al., 2019), which are defined as the training examples
that belong to a particular class almost surely. To find the
anchor point, a model needs to be trained to accurately
characterize the noisy label distribution. This model will
help inform the selection of anchor points. Again relying on
this model, T is then estimated using posterior noisy label
distributions of the anchor points.
While the anchor point approach observes a significant
amount of successes, it suffers from several limitations:
1) accurately fitting noisy distributions is challenging when
the number of label classes is high; 2) the number of anchor points restricts the estimation accuracy; and 3) it lacks
the flexibility to extend to more complicated noise settings.
Other methods such as confident learning (Northcutt et al.,
2017; 2021) may not explicitly identify anchor points, but
they still need to fit the noisy distributions and find some
“confident points”, thus suffer from the above limitations.
In this paper, we provide an alternative to estimate T without resolving to anchor points. The only requirement we
need is clusterability, i.e., the two nearest-neighbor representations of a training example and the example itself

