Approximating a Distribution Using Weight Queries

Nadav Barak 1 Sivan Sabato 1

Abstract
We consider a novel challenge: approximating a
distribution without the ability to randomly sample from that distribution. We study how such
an approximation can be obtained using weight
queries. Given some data set of examples, a
weight query presents one of the examples to an
oracle, which returns the probability, according
to the target distribution, of observing examples
similar to the presented example. This oracle
can represent, for instance, counting queries to a
database of the target population, or an interface
to a search engine which returns the number of
results that match a given search.
We propose an interactive algorithm that iteratively selects data set examples and performs corresponding weight queries. The algorithm finds
a reweighting of the data set that approximates
the weights according to the target distribution,
using a limited number of weight queries. We
derive an approximation bound on the total variation distance between the reweighting found by
the algorithm and the best achievable reweighting.
Our algorithm takes inspiration from the UCB
approach common in multi-armed bandits problems, and combines it with a new discrepancy
estimator and a greedy iterative procedure. In
addition to our theoretical guarantees, we demonstrate in experiments the advantages of the proposed algorithm over several baselines. A python
implementation of the proposed algorithm and
of all the experiments can be found at https:
//github.com/Nadav-Barak/AWP

1. Introduction
A basic assumption in learning and estimation tasks is the
availability of a random sample from the distribution of
1

Department of Computer Science,
Ben Gurion University, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Nadav Barak <barakna@post.bgu.ac.il>,
Sivan Sabato
<sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

interest. However, in many cases, obtaining such a random sample is difficult or impossible. In this work, we
study a novel challenge: approximating a distribution without the ability to randomly sample from it. We consider a
scenario in which the only access to the distribution is via
weight queries. Given some data set of examples, a weight
query presents one of these examples to an oracle, which
returns the probability, according to the target distribution,
of observing examples which are similar to the presented example. For instance, the available data set may list patients
in a clinical trial, and the target distribution may represent
the population of patients in a specific hospital, which is
only accessible through certain database queries. In this
case, the weight query for a specific data set example can be
answered using a database counting query, which indicates
how many records with the same demographic properties
as the presented example exist in the database. A different
example of a relevant oracle is that of a search engine for
images or documents, which returns the number of objects
in its database that are similar to the searched object.
We study the possibility of using weight queries to find a
reweighting of the input data set that approximates the target
distribution. Importantly, we make no assumptions on the
relationship between the data set and the target distribution.
For instance, the data set could be sampled from a different distribution, or be collected via a non-random process.
Reweighting the data set to match the true target weights
would be easy if one simply queried the target weight of
all the data set examples. In contrast, our goal in this work
is to study whether a good approximated weighting can be
found using a number of weight queries that is independent
of the data set size. A data set reweighted to closely match
a distribution is often used as a proxy to a random sample in learning and statistical estimation tasks, as done, for
instance, in domain adaptation settings (e.g., Bickel et al.
2007; Sugiyama et al. 2008; Bickel et al. 2009).
We consider a reweighting scheme in which the weights are
fully defined by some partition of the data set to a small
number of subsets. Given the partition, the weights of examples in each subset of the partition are uniform, and are
set so that the total weight of the subset is equal to its true
target weight. An algorithm for finding a good reweighting
should thus search for a partition such that within each of its
subsets, the true example weights are as close to uniform as

