Fairness and Bias in Online Selection
José Correa 1 Andrés Cristi 1 Paul Dütting 2 Ashkan Norouzi-Fard 2

Abstract
There is growing awareness and concern about
fairness in machine learning and algorithm design. This is particularly true in online selection
problems where decisions are often biased, for
example, when assessing credit risks or hiring
staff. We address the issues of fairness and bias
in online selection by introducing multi-color versions of the classic secretary and prophet problem.
Interestingly, existing algorithms for these problems are either very unfair or very inefficient, so
we develop optimal fair algorithms for these new
problems and provide tight bounds on their competitiveness. We validate our theoretical findings
on real-world data.

1. Introduction
The sharp growth in data availability that characterizes modern society challenges our processing capabilities, not only
because of its massiveness, but also because of the increasing strict social norms that society seeks in the algorithms
processing it. For instance, machine learning algorithms
are now used to make credit and lending decisions, to estimate the success of a kidney transplant, to inform hiring
decisions, to recommend schools to pupils, among others.
Therefore there is a funded concern over the use of algorithms that may violate social norms. Two basic such norms,
that are receiving significant attention are fairness and privacy, and while a formalization of the latter is relatively
well established through the notion of differential privacy
(Dwork et al., 2006), the former is much more unexplored
from an algorithmic perspective (Kearns & Roth, 2019).
In this paper we are particularly interested in the study of
fairness in machine learning algorithms in the context of
sequential decision making under stochastic input. Not only
the area has seen many recent theoretical developments, but
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. 2 Google Research,
Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Andrés Cristi <andres.cristi@ing.uchile.cl>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

also it naturally encompasses many real-world decision making processes where biased evaluations should be avoided,
such as those mentioned earlier.
Specifically we consider the basic single item selection models given by the secretary and prophet problems in which
items are classified into different groups. In our secretary
model, two candidates from different groups are incomparable, while in our prophet problem the decision maker is
constrained to pick from each group with a prespecified
probability. A precursor of the study of fairness in the
secretary problem is the work of Buchbinder et al. (2014)
who studied, among other things, an incentive compatible
version of the secretary problem in which the selection probability does not depend on the arrival position of a candidate.
More recently, Gupta & Salem (2020) have studied machine
learning algorithms for biased versions of the secretary problem, whereas Cayci et al. (2020) studies similar issues from
the perspective of online learning. The fairness term has
been used for various concepts in machine learning community. We adopt here the common notion used in various
previous works Halabi et al. (2020); Celis et al. (2018a;b;c);
Chierichetti et al. (2019; 2017), where we ask that the solution obtained is balanced with respect to some sensitive
attribute (e.g., race, gender).
1.1. Our Results
We consider two fundamental problems in fair online selection, both concerned with selecting a single candidate.
Candidates are partitioned into different groups or colors.
The candidates arrive sequentially and upon arrival of a candidate we have to irrevocably decide whether we want to
select the candidate or not. In the first problem we consider,
which we call the multi-color secretary problem, candidates
arrive in uniform random order and we can rank candidates
within a group, but we cannot compare candidates across
groups. There is also a prior probability that the best candidate from a group is the best candidate overall. The problem
models situations in which different qualities of the candidates make them largely incomparable (this could arise in
some form due to gender, race, social origin, type of education, etc.). The goal is to maximize the probability with
which we stop at the best overall candidate and compare it
with that for the offline optimum. Note that here the offline
optimum simply picks the best candidate from the group

