Imitation by Predicting Observations

Andrew Jaegle 1 Yury Sulsky 1 Arun Ahuja 1 Jake Bruce 1 Rob Fergus 1 Greg Wayne 1

Abstract
Imitation learning enables agents to reuse and
adapt the hard-won expertise of others, offering
a solution to several key challenges in learning
behavior. Although it is easy to observe behavior in the real-world, the underlying actions may
not be accessible. We present a new method for
imitation solely from observations that achieves
comparable performance to experts on challenging continuous control tasks while also exhibiting
robustness in the presence of observations unrelated to the task. Our method, which we call
FORM (for “Future Observation Reward Model”)
is derived from an inverse RL objective and imitates using a model of expert behavior learned
by generative modelling of the expert’s observations, without needing ground truth actions. We
show that FORM performs comparably to a strong
baseline IRL method (GAIL) on the DeepMind
Control Suite benchmark, while outperforming
GAIL in the presence of task-irrelevant features.

1. Introduction
The goal of imitation is to learn to produce behavior that
matches that of an expert on unseen data, given demonstrations of the expert’s behavior (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Osa et al.,
2018). The field of imitation learning offers tools for learning behavior when programmed rewards cannot be provided,
or when rewards can only be partially or sparsely specified.
Imitation learning has been at the heart of several breakthroughs in building AI agents (Pomerleau, 1989; Abbeel
et al., 2010; Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019; OpenAI
et al., 2019), allowing agents to learn even when faced with
hard exploration problems (Gulcehre et al., 2020).
There is widespread evidence that imitation (among other
forms of social learning) is a core mechanism by which humans and other animals learn to acquire a sophisticated behavioral repertoire (Tomasello, 1996; Laland, 2008; Byrne,
1

DeepMind. Correspondence to: Andrew Jaegle <drewjaegle@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2009; Huber et al., 2009). While most algorithms for imitation learning assume that demonstrations contain the actions
the expert executed, animals must imitate without directly
observing what actions the expert took (i.e. without knowing exactly what commands were issued to produce the
observable changes). In the context of machine learning,
solving the problem of imitation from observation is a key
step towards the tantalizing possibility of learning behavior
from unlabeled and easy to collect data, such as raw video
footage of human activity. Many recent algorithms for imitation have focused on addressing the problem of imitation
in very small data regimes, but the challenge in imitating
from these abundant sources of data is not primarily one of
quantity. The challenge is rather how to learn models for
imitation that are general enough to learn and generalize
from data that depicts a rich (and unknown) reward structure.
In this work, we show how predictive generative models can
be used to learn a general reward model from observations
alone.
Current state-of-the-art approaches to imitation (including
from observation) pose learning as an adversarial game: a
classifier estimates the probability that a state is visited by
the expert or imitator, and the policy seeks to maximize
the classifier error (Merel et al., 2017; Torabi et al., 2019a).
Because these methods are based on matching the expert’s
occupancy using a fixed dataset of demonstrations, they tend
to be very sensitive to the precise details of the demonstrations and to the representation used. This property makes
learning with adversarial methods difficult when using raw,
noisy observations without extensive tuning and careful
use of strong forms of regularization (Peng et al., 2019),
domain or task knowledge (Zolna et al., 2020), or a combination of behavioral cloning and careful representation
design (Abramson et al., 2020).
In this work, we introduce the future observation reward
model (FORM) (see Figure 1), which address the problem
of imitation from observation while exhibiting both (1) generality and expressiveness by coupling predictive generative
models with inverse RL (IRL) and (2) improved robustness
by foregoing an adversarial formulation. In FORM, the imitator tries to match the probability of observation sequences
in the expert data. It does so using a learned generative
model of expert observation sequences and a learned generative model of its own observation sequences. In other words,

