Asymptotics of Ridge Regression in Convolutional Models

Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan 1 2 Tung Mai 3 Anup Rao 3 Ryan Rossi 3 Sundeep Rangan 4 Alyson K. Fletcher 1 2

Abstract
Understanding generalization and estimation error of estimators for simple models such as linear
and generalized linear models has attracted a lot
of attention recently. This is in part due to an
interesting observation made in machine learning
community that highly over-parameterized neural
networks achieve zero training error, and yet they
are able to generalize well over the test samples.
This phenomenon is captured by the so called
double descent curve, where the generalization error starts decreasing again after the interpolation
threshold. A series of recent works tried to explain such phenomenon for simple models. In this
work, we analyze the asymptotics of estimation
error in ridge estimators for convolutional linear
models. These convolutional inverse problems,
also known as deconvolution, naturally arise in
different fields such as seismology, imaging, and
acoustics among others. Our results hold for a
large class of input distributions that include i.i.d.
features as a special case. We derive exact formulae for estimation error of ridge estimators that
hold in a certain high-dimensional regime. We
show the double descent phenomenon in our experiments for convolutional models and show that
our theoretical results match the experiments.

1. Introduction
Increasingly powerful hardware along with deep learning
libraries that efficiently use these computational resources
have allowed us to train ever larger neural networks. Modern
neural networks are so over-parameterized that they can perfectly fit random noise (Zhang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020).
With enough over-parameterization, they can also achieve
zero loss over training data with their parameters moving
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles 3 Adobe Research 4 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University. Correspondence to: Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan <msahraee@ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

only slightly away from the initialization (Allen-Zhu et al.,
2018; Soltanolkotabi et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018a;b; Li and
Liang, 2018; Zou et al., 2020). Yet, these models generalize
well on test data and are widely used in practice (Zhang
et al., 2016). In fact, some recent work suggest that it is best
practice to use as large a model as possible for the tasks in
hand (Huang et al., 2018). This seems contrary to our classical understanding of generalization where increasing the
complexity of the model space to the extent that the training
data can be easily interpolated indicates poor generalization. Most statistical approaches explain generalization by
controlling some notion of capacity of the hypothesis space,
such as VC dimension, Rademacher complexity, or metric
entropy (Anthony and Bartlett, 2009). Such approaches
that do not incorporate the implicit regularization effect of
the optimization algorithm fail to explain generalization of
over-parameterized deep networks (Kalimeris et al., 2019;
Oymak and Soltanolkotabi, 2019).
The so-called double descent curve where the test risk starts
decreasing again by over-parameterizing neural networks
beyond the interpolation threshold is widely known by now
(Belkin et al., 2019a; Nakkiran et al., 2019). Interestingly,
such phenomenon is not unique to neural networks and have
been observed even in linear models (Le Cun et al., 1991;
Dobriban et al., 2018; Advani et al., 2020). Recently, another line of work has also connected neural networks to
linear models. In (Jacot et al., 2018), the authors show that
infinitely wide neural networks trained by gradient descent
behave like their linearization with respect to the parameters around their initialization. The problem of training
such wide neural networks with square loss then turns into
a kernel regression problem in a RKHS associated to a fixed
kernel called the neural tangent kernel (NTK). The NTK
results were later extended to many other architectures such
as convolutional networks and recurrent neural networks (Li
et al., 2019; Alemohammad et al., 2020; Yang, 2020). Trying to understand the generalization in deep networks and
explaining such phenomenon as the double descent curve
has attracted a lot of attention to theoretical properties of
kernel methods as well as simple machine learning models.
Such models, despite their simplicity, can help us gain a
better understanding of machine learning models and algorithms that might be hard to achieve just by looking at deep
neural networks due their complex nature.

