UniSpeech: Unified Speech Representation Learning
with Labeled and Unlabeled Data
Chengyi Wang * 1 Yu Wu 2 Yao Qian 2 Kenichi Kumatani 2 Shujie Liu 2 Furu Wei 2 Michael Zeng 2
Xuedong Huang 2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a unified pre-training
approach called UniSpeech to learn speech representations with both labeled and unlabeled data,
in which supervised phonetic CTC learning and
phonetically-aware contrastive self-supervised
learning are conducted in a multitask learning
manner. The resultant representations can capture information more correlated with phonetic
structures and improve the generalization across
languages and domains. We evaluate the effectiveness of UniSpeech for cross-lingual representation learning on the public CommonVoice corpus. The results show that UniSpeech outperforms self-supervised pre-training and supervised
transfer learning for speech recognition by up to
13.4% and 26.9% relative phone error rate respectively (averaged over all testing languages). The
transferability of UniSpeech is also verified on
a domain-shift speech recognition task, demonstrating a relative word error rate reduction of 6%
against the previous approach 1 .

1. Introduction
In the past several decades, enormous progress has been
made by the speech recognition (SR) community. SR systems have achieved remarkable quality and even reach human parity in many domains (Watanabe et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2016; Chiu
et al., 2018). Unfortunately, the successful techniques require many thousands of hours of human-annotated speech
recordings for training, which is not available for the vast
Work done during internship at Microsoft.
Nankai University, Tianjin, China 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Chengyi Wang <cywang@mail.nankai.edu.cn>,
Yu Wu <yuwu1@microsoft.com>, Yao Qian <yaoqian@microsoft.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code and model are available at https://github.com/
cywang97/unispeech

majority of the nearly 7000 languages spoken worldwide
(Katzner & Miller, 2002). This poses a real challenge for
building an accurate and robust SR system for low-resource
languages. Even for the rich-resource languages, lack of
training data is also a serious problem for specific domains,
especially when the background noise and distortion conditions vary greatly from the general domain (Li et al., 2014).
Current works tackle the low-resource speech recognition
in either supervised or unsupervised manners. In the supervised case, transfer learning methods learn features on large,
high-resource datasets and directly use them in similar but
data-poor tasks (Ghoshal et al., 2013). Though effective, it
requires massive supervised corpora and neglects the large
scale unlabeled data. In contrast, the unsupervised method
attempts to learn powerful contextual representations from
audio alone and then fine-tune the model on labeled data.
For instance, wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020b) demonstrates a remarkable performance with 60k hours of unpaired
data and 1 hour labeled data on Librispeech. Conneau et al.
(2020) further extend the model to a multilingual setting
and reduce the phoneme error rate (PER) significantly. The
model jointly learns contextual speech representations and
a discrete codebook of latent representations, which serves
to train the model with a contrastive loss. However, the
self-supervised paradigm needs to be carefully designed and
such representations may be difficult to interpret. There
is no guarantee that the model learns “good” speech representations in terms of the most valuable information for
recognition.
In the most of cases, it is less challenging to obtain labeled
high-resource data and unlabeled low-resource data, while
the labeled low-resource data is hard to collect. Our goal is
to leverage all accessible data to learn robust representation
across different languages or domains, which is capable
of capturing SR-specific content, e.g. phoneme identities,
while being invariant to confounding details like the background noise. With such representation, limited amounts of
labeled data is sufficient to achieve acceptable performance.
In this work, we propose a unified approach, named UniSpeech, to learn phonetically-aware contextual representations. We follow the model structure of wav2vec2.0 which

