Self-Paced Context Evaluation for Contextual Reinforcement Learning

Theresa Eimer 1 André Biedenkapp 2 Frank Hutter 2 3 Marius Lindauer 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has made a lot of
advances for solving a single problem in a given
environment; but learning policies that generalize
to unseen variations of a problem remains challenging. To improve sample efficiency for learning on such instances of a problem domain, we
present Self-Paced Context Evaluation (SPACE).
Based on self-paced learning, SPACE automatically generates instance curricula online with little computational overhead. To this end, SPACE
leverages information contained in state values
during training to accelerate and improve training
performance as well as generalization capabilities
to new instances from the same problem domain.
Nevertheless, SPACE is independent of the problem domain at hand and can be applied on top of
any RL agent with state-value function approximation. We demonstrate SPACE’s ability to speed
up learning of different value-based RL agents on
two environments, showing better generalization
capabilities and up to 10× faster learning compared to naive approaches such as round robin or
SPDRL, as the closest state-of-the-art approach.

1. Introduction
Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) has performed impressively in settings like continuous control (Lillicrap et al.,
2016), robotics (OpenAI et al., 2019) and game playing (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019), their applicability is
often very limited. RL training on a given task takes a lot of
training samples, but the skills acquired do not necessarily
transfer to similar tasks as they do for humans. An agent
that is able to generalize across variations of a task, however,
can be applied more flexibly and has a lower chance of succeeding when presented with unseen inputs. Therefore im1
Information Processing Institute (tnt), Leibniz University
Hannover, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Germany 3 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany. Correspondence to: Theresa Eimer
<eimer@tnt.uni-hannover.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Example instances of the contextual PointMass
environment. The agent’s yellow starting point, the green
goal and floor friction (indicated by shading) are part of the
context and vary between instances.

proving generalization means improving sample efficiency
and robustness to unknown situations. We view these as
important qualities for real-world RL applications.
Curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009) aims to bridge
the gap between agent and human transfer capabilities by
training an agent the same way a human would learn: transferring experience from easy to hard variations of the same
task. It has been shown that generating such instances with
increasing difficulty to form a training curriculum can improve training as well generalization performance (Dendorfer et al., 2020; Matiisen et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020).
As information about instance difficulty is often not readily available, many approaches utilize the agent’s progress
markers, such as evaluation performance, confidence in its
policy or its value function to minimize the need for domain
knowledge (Wang et al., 2019; Klink et al., 2020). Because
the progression is dictated by the agent’s learning progress,
this is called Self-Paced Learning (Kumar et al., 2010).
Instances in a curriculum can vary from the core task in
different aspects, such as varying goals or movement speeds
(see Fig. 1). While only selecting different goals states as
instances is common for curriculum learning methods (Dendorfer et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), changing transition
dynamics are important considerations regarding the robustness of a policy. A dynamic change in robotics could for
example be caused by a broken joint that the agent now has
to adapt to. To allow these changes in the transition dynamics, in addition to goal changes in the instances, we consider
contextual RL instead.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. We propose SPACE, a new self-paced learning algorithm, to automatically generate instance curricula in a

