Optimal Non-Convex Exact Recovery in Stochastic Block Model
via Projected Power Method

Peng Wang 1 Huikang Liu 2 Zirui Zhou 3 Anthony Man-Cho So 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of exact community recovery in the symmetric stochastic block
model, where a graph of n vertices is randomly
generated by partitioning the vertices into K ≥ 2
equal-sized communities and then connecting
each pair of vertices with probability that depends
on their community memberships. Although the
maximum-likelihood formulation of this problem
is discrete and non-convex, we propose to tackle
it directly using projected power iterations with
an initialization that satisfies a partial recovery
condition. Such an initialization can be obtained
by a host of existing methods. We show that in
the logarithmic degree regime of the considered
problem, the proposed method can exactly recover
the underlying communities at the informationtheoretic limit. Moreover, with a qualified initialization, it runs in O(n log2 n/ log log n) time,
which is competitive with existing state-of-the-art
methods. We also present numerical results of the
proposed method to support and complement our
theoretical development.

1. Introduction
Community detection is a fundamental task in network analysis and has found wide applications in diverse fields, such
as social science (Girvan & Newman, 2002), physics (Newman & Girvan, 2004), and machine learning (Shi & Malik,
2000), just to name a few. As the study of community detection grows, a large variety of theories and algorithms
have been proposed in the past decades for addressing different tasks under different settings. To better validate and
compare these theories and algorithms, the stochastic block
1
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
Business School, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 3 Huawei Technologies Canada Co., Ltd., Burnaby, Canada.
Correspondence to: Huikang Liu <hkliu2014@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

model (SBM), which tends to generate graphs containing
underlying community structures, is widely used as a canonical model for studying community detection. In particular,
substantial advances have been made in recent years on understanding the fundamental limits of community detection
and developing algorithms for tackling different recovery
tasks in the SBM; see, e.g., Abbe (2017) and the references
therein.
In this work, we consider the problem of exactly recovering
the communities in the symmetric SBM. Specifically, given
n nodes that are partitioned into K ≥ 2 unknown communities of equal size, a random graph is generated by independently connecting each pair of vertices with probability p if
they belong to the same community and with probability q
otherwise. The goal is to recover the underlying communities exactly by only observing one realization of the graph.
In the logarithmic degree regime of the considered SBM, i.e.,
p = α log n/n and q = β log n/n for some α, β > 0, this
problem exhibits a sharp information-theoretic
threshold: it
√
√ √
is possible to achieve
exact
recovery
if
α−
β
>
K and
√
√
√
is impossible if α − β < K (Abbe & Sandon, 2015).
Then, it is of interest to design computationally tractable
methods that can achieve exact recovery under a condition
on α and β that meets the information-theoretic limit. In the
past years, many algorithms have been proposed to achieve
this task, such as spectral clustering (McSherry, 2001; Su
et al., 2019; Yun & Proutiere, 2014; 2016), SDP-based approach (Amini et al., 2018; Fei & Chen, 2018; 2020; Li
et al., 2018), and likelihood-based approach (Amini et al.,
2013; Gao et al., 2017; Zhang & Zhou, 2016; Zhou & Li,
2020). However, most of these algorithms have a time complexity that is at least quadratic in n, which usually does not
scale well to large-scale problems.
In the symmetric SBM, the maximum likelihood (ML) estimation problem is formulated as
max {hAH, Hi : H ∈ H} ,

(MLE)

where A is the adjacency matrix of the observed graph,

H = H ∈ Rn×K : H1K = 1n , H T 1n = m1K , (1)
H ∈ {0, 1}n×K

