Robust Asymmetric Learning in POMDPs

Andrew Warrington * 1 J. Wilder Lavington * 2 3 Adam ´Scibior 2 3 Mark Schmidt 2 4 Frank Wood 2 3 5

Abstract
Policies for partially observed Markov decision
processes can be efﬁciently learned by imitating
expert policies learned using asymmetric information. Unfortunately, existing approaches for
this kind of imitation learning have a serious ﬂaw:
the expert does not know what the trainee cannot see, and may therefore encourage actions that
are sub-optimal or unsafe under partial information. To address this ﬂaw, we derive an update
that, when applied iteratively to an expert, maximizes the expected reward of the trainee’s policy. Using this update, we construct a computationally efﬁcient algorithm, adaptive asymmetric
DAgger (A2D), that jointly trains the expert and
trainee policies. We then show that A2D allows
the trainee to safely imitate the modiﬁed expert,
and outperforms policies learned either by imitating a ﬁxed expert or direct reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Consider the stochastic shortest path problem (Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1991) where an agent learns to cross a frozen
lake while avoiding patches of weak ice. The agent can
either cross the ice directly, or take the longer, safer route
circumnavigating the lake. The agent is provided with aerial
images of the lake, which include color variations at patches
of weak ice. To cross the lake, the agent must learn to
identify its own position, goal position, and the location of
weak ice from the images. Even for this simple environment, high-dimensional inputs and sparse rewards can make
learning a suitable policy computationally expensive and
sample inefﬁcient. Therefore one might instead efﬁciently
learn, in simulation, an omniscient expert, conditioned on
a low-dimensional vector which fully describes the state of
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of British Columbia 3 Inverted AI 4 Alberta Machine Learning Intelligence Institute (AMII) 5 Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA). Correspondence to: Andrew Warrington <andreww@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the world, to complete the task. A trainee, observing only
images, can then learn to mimic the actions of the expert
using sample-efﬁcient online imitation learning (Ross et al.,
2011). This yields a high-performing trainee, conditioned
on images, learned with fewer environment interactions
overall compared to direct reinforcement learning (RL).
While appealing, this approach can fail in environments
where the expert has access to information unavailable to
the agent, referred to as asymmetric information. Consider
instead that the image of the lake does not indicate the location of the weak ice. The trainee now operates under
increased uncertainty. This results in a different optimal
partially observing policy, as the agent should now circumnavigate the lake. However, imitating the expert forces the
trainee to always cross the lake, despite being unable to
locate and avoid the weak ice. Even though the expert is
optimal under full information, the supervision provided to
the trainee through imitation learning is poor and yields a
policy that is not optimal under partial information. The
key insight is that the expert has no knowledge of what the
trainee does not know. Therefore, the expert cannot provide
suitable supervision, and proposes actions that are not robust
to the increased uncertainty under partial information. The
main algorithmic contribution we present follows from this
insight: the expert must be reﬁned based on the behavior of
the trainee imitating it.
Building on this insight, we present a new algorithm: adaptive asymmetric DAgger (A2D), illustrated in Figure 1. A2D
extends imitation learning by reﬁning the expert policy, such
that the resulting supervision moves the trainee policy closer
to the optimal partially observed policy. This allows us to
safely take advantage of asymmetric information in imitation learning. Crucially, A2D can be easily integrated with
a variety of different RL algorithms, does not require any
pretrained artifacts, policies or example trajectories, and
does not take computationally expensive and high-variance
RL steps in the trainee policy network.
We ﬁrst introduce asymmetric imitation learning (AIL). AIL
uses an expert, conditioned on full state information, to
supervise learning a trainee, conditioned on partial information. We show that the solution to the AIL objective is a
posterior inference over the true state; and provide sufﬁcient
conditions for when the expert is guaranteed to provide cor-

