Accuracy on the Line: On the Strong Correlation
Between Out-of-Distribution and In-Distribution Generalization
John Miller 1 Rohan Taori 2 Aditi Raghunathan 2 Shiori Sagawa 2 Pang Wei Koh 2 Vaishaal Shankar 1
Percy Liang 2 Yair Carmon 3 Ludwig Schmidt 4

Abstract
For machine learning systems to be reliable, we
must understand their performance in unseen, outof-distribution environments. In this paper, we
empirically show that out-of-distribution performance is strongly correlated with in-distribution
performance for a wide range of models and distribution shifts. Specifically, we demonstrate strong
correlations between in-distribution and out-ofdistribution performance on variants of CIFAR10 & ImageNet, a synthetic pose estimation task
derived from YCB objects, FMoW-WILDS satellite imagery classification, and wildlife classification in iWildCam-WILDS. The correlation
holds across model architectures, hyperparameters, training set size, and training duration, and
is more precise than what is expected from existing domain adaptation theory. To complete the
picture, we also investigate cases where the correlation is weaker, for instance some synthetic
distribution shifts from CIFAR-10-C and the tissue classification dataset Camelyon17-WILDS.
Finally, we provide a candidate theory based on a
Gaussian data model that shows how changes in
the data covariance arising from distribution shift
can affect the observed correlations.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models often need to generalize from
training data to new environments. A kitchen robot should
work reliably in different homes, autonomous vehicles
should drive reliably in different cities, and analysis software
for satellite imagery should still perform well next year. The
1
Department of Computer Science, UC Berkeley, CA, USA
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA 3 School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel 4 Toyota Research Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: John Miller <miller john@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

standard paradigm to measure generalization is to evaluate a
model on a single test set drawn from the same distribution
as the training set. But this paradigm provides only a narrow
in-distribution performance guarantee: a small test error
certifies future performance on new samples from exactly
the same distribution as the training set. In many scenarios,
it is hard or impossible to train a model on precisely the distribution it will be applied to. Hence a model will inevitably
encounter out-of-distribution data on which its performance
could vary widely compared to in-distribution performance.
Understanding the performance of models beyond the training distribution therefore raises the following fundamental
question: how does out-of-distribution performance relate
to in-distribution performance?
Classical theory for generalization across different distributions provides a partial answer (Mansour et al., 2009;
Ben-David et al., 2010). For a model f trained on a distribution D, known guarantees typically relate the in-distribution
test accuracy on D to the out-of-distribution test accuracy
on a new distribution D1 via inequalities of the form
|accD pf q ´ accD1 pf q| ď dpD, D1 q
where d is a distance between the distributions D and D1
such as the total variation distance. Qualitatively, these
bounds suggest that out-of-distribution accuracy may vary
widely as a function of in-distribution accuracy unless the
distribution distance d is small and the accuracies are therefore close (see Figure 1 (top-left) for an illustration). More
recently, empirical studies have shown that in some settings, models with similar in-distribution performance can
indeed have different out-of-distribution performance (McCoy et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; D’Amour et al., 2020).
In contrast to the aforementioned results, recent dataset reconstructions of the popular CIFAR-10, ImageNet, MNIST,
and SQuAD benchmarks showed a much more regular pattern (Recht et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2020; Yadav & Bottou,
2019; Lu et al., 2020). The reconstructions closely followed
the original dataset creation processes to assemble new test
sets, but small differences were still enough to cause substantial changes in the resulting model accuracies. Nevertheless,
the new out-of-distribution accuracies are almost perfectly

