Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Causal Feature Selection in Time Series
with Latent Common Causes
Atalanti A. Mastakouri 1 Bernhard, Schölkopf 1 2 Dominik, Janzing 1

Abstract
We study the identification of direct and indirect
causes on time series with latent variables, and
provide a constrained-based causal feature selection method, which we prove that is both sound
and complete under some graph constraints. Our
theory and estimation algorithm require only two
conditional independence tests for each observed
candidate time series to determine whether or not
it is a cause of an observed target time series. Furthermore, our selection of the conditioning set
is such that it improves signal to noise ratio. We
apply our method on real data, and on a wide
range of simulated experiments, which yield very
low false positive and relatively low false negative
rates.

1. Introduction
Causal feature selection in time series is a fundamental
problem in several fields (i.e. biology, economics, climate
research (Runge et al., 2019a)). Often the causes of a target
time series need to be detected from a pool of candidate
causes with latent confounders.
While Granger causality (Wiener, 1956; Granger, 1969;
1980) (see def. 3. in Appendix) has been the standard approach to causal analysis of time series since half a century,
several issues caused by violations of its assumptions (causal
sufficiency, no instantaneous effects) have been described
in the literature (Peters et al., 2017). Several approaches
addressing these problems have been proposed during the
last decades (Hung et al., 2014; Guo et al., 2008). Nevertheless, causal inference in time series is still challenging
without an efficient solution yet, despite the fact that the
time order of variables provide information about the direction of some edges (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 1993). The
1

Amazon Research Tuebingen, AWS Causality Group, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Empirical
Inference Department, Germany. Correspondence to: Atalanti A.
Mastakouri <atalanti@amazon.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

discovery of the causal graph from data is largely based on
the graphical criterion of d-separation formalizing the set
of conditional independences (CI) to be expected, based on
the causal Markov condition and causal faithfulness (Spirtes
et al., 1993) (See definitions in App. Sec. 3).
Several authors showed how to derive d-separation based
causal conclusions in time series beyond Granger’s work.
The majority of these works focuses on full graph discovery with conclusions up to Markov-equivalent classes. The
remaining works focus on the problem of causal feature
selection, which means the detection of direct and indirect
causes of a given target time series. In the former group
belong methods such as tsFCI (Entner & Hoyer, 2010) and
SVAR-FCI (Malinsky & Spirtes, 2018), which are inspired
by the FCI algorithm (Spirtes et al., 1993) and the work
from (Eichler, 2007) and (Moneta et al., 2011) (see also
(Runge, 2018; Runge et al., 2019a)). These methods do not
assume causal sufficiency, and as such they need extensive
CI testing. These methods are computationally intensive
with exhaustive searching over all lags and conditioning
sets. Another method of this first group is PCMCI ((Runge
et al., 2019b)), which although it reaches lower rates of false
positives compared to classical Granger causality, it still
relies on the assumption of causal sufficiency. The most
known method among those that focus on the causal feature
selection (latter group) is seqICP (Pfister et al., 2019). However, seqICP requires sufficient interventions in the dataset,
which should affect only the input and not the target. This
requirement is hard to be met in problems where only observational data are available. Moreover, in the presence of
hidden confounders, seqICP will detect only a subset of the
ancestors of the target time series.
Here, we focus on the problem of causal feature selection
in time series based on solely observational data, without
assuming causal sufficiency. Under some connectivity assumptions, we construct conditions, which we prove to be
sufficient for direct and indirect causes, and necessary for
direct unconfounded causes, even in the presence of latent
confounders. In contrast to other CI based methods, our
method directly constructs the right conditioning set, without searching over a large set of possible combinations. It
thus avoids statistical issues of multiple hypothesis testing.
In contrast to seqICP, given our assumptions, we prove that

