A Receptor Skeleton for Capsule Neural Networks

Jintai Chen 1 Hongyun Yu 1 Chengde Qian 2 Danny Z. Chen 3 Jian Wu 4

Abstract
In previous Capsule Neural Networks (CapsNets),
routing algorithms often performed clustering processes to assemble the child capsules’ representations into parent capsules. Such routing algorithms were typically implemented with iterative
processes and incurred high computing complexity. This paper presents a new capsule structure,
which contains a set of optimizable receptors and
a transmitter is devised on the capsule’s representation. Specifically, child capsules’ representations are sent to the parent capsules whose receptors match well the transmitters of the child capsules’ representations, avoiding applying computationally complex routing algorithms. To ensure
the receptors in a CapsNet work cooperatively,
we build a skeleton to organize the receptors in
different capsule layers in a CapsNet. The receptor skeleton assigns a share-out objective for each
receptor, making the CapsNet perform as a hierarchical agglomerative clustering process. Comprehensive experiments verify that our approach
facilitates efficient clustering processes, and CapsNets with our approach significantly outperform
CapsNets with previous routing algorithms on
image classification, affine transformation generalization, overlapped object recognition, and
representation semantic decoupling.

1. Introduction
Capsule Neural Networks (CapsNets) (Sabour et al., 2017;
Hinton et al., 2018; Hahn et al., 2019; Rajasegaran et al.,
2019; Tsai et al., 2020; Ribeiro et al., 2020b) offer effective
capabilities of assembling object part representations to syn1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; 2 School of Statistics and Data Science,
Nankai University, China; 3 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, USA; 4 The First Affiliated Hospital, and Department of
Public Health, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China;. Correspondence to: Jian Wu <wujian2000@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Senior Representations

routing
clustering
Primary Representations

(a)
agreement requesting

routing

…

(b)
parent-child capsule pair

(c)
capsule

receptor

transmitter

Figure 1. (a) The idea of CapsNets, which clusters low-level representations to synthesize higher-level representations. (b) The
typical routing algorithms (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018)
use iterative processes to implement clustering, requesting agreements between the parent and child capsules repeatedly. (c) In our
approach, we define receptors and transmitters for capsules, and
cluster the child capsules’ representations for the parent capsules
based on the matching between the parent capsules’ receptors and
the transmitters of the child capsules’ representations.

thesize object whole representations for better generalization and robustness (see Fig. 1(a)), thus performing well in
image classification (Tsai et al., 2020), affine transformation
generalization (Sabour et al., 2017), and occluded/ overlapped object (e.g., organs in an X-ray) recognition (Sabour
et al., 2017; LaLonde & Bagci, 2018; Bonheur et al., 2019).
In a typical CapsNet, several neurons are grouped as units,
called capsules, whose representations are convex combinations of (possibly some of) the child capsule representations
under the guidance of various routing algorithms.
It was pointed out (Malmgren, 2019) that typical routing
algorithms are in essence clustering algorithms, organizing
the capsules in different layers to hierarchically assemble
the representations of object parts into object wholes. For
example, Dynamic Routing (Sabour et al., 2017) was a soft
k-Means, and EM Routing (Hinton et al., 2018) was based
on the Gaussian mixture model (Reynolds, 2009). Clustering in such a routing algorithms is typically implemented by
iterative processes (see Fig. 1(b)), which repeatedly request
agreements between the representations of the parent and
child capsules before finalizing the clusters. Unlike a neural
layer (e.g., a fully connected layer) in which low-level representations are combined into high-level representations
with the parameter coefficients, those routing algorithms
assemble low-level representations to synthesize high-level

