Analyzing the tree-layer structure of Deep Forests
Ludovic Arnould 1 Claire Boyer 1 Erwan Scornet 2

Abstract
Random forests on the one hand, and neural networks on the other hand, have met great success
in the machine learning community for their predictive performance. Combinations of both have
been proposed in the literature, notably leading to
the so-called Deep Forests (DF) (Zhou & Feng,
2017). In this paper, our aim is not to benchmark
DF performances but to investigate instead their
underlying mechanisms. Additionally, DF architecture can be generally simplified into more simple and computationally efficient shallow forests
networks. Despite some instability, the latter may
outperform standard predictive tree-based methods. We exhibit a theoretical framework in which
a shallow tree network is shown to enhance the
performance of classical decision trees. In such
a setting, we provide tight theoretical lower and
upper bounds on its excess risk. These theoretical
results show the interest of tree-network architectures for well-structured data provided that the
first layer, acting as a data encoder, is rich enough.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are among the most widely
used machine learning algorithms. They are composed of
parameterized differentiable non-linear modules trained by
gradient-based methods, which rely on the backpropagation
procedure. Their performance mainly relies on layer-bylayer processing as well as feature transformation across
layers. Training neural networks usually requires complex
hyper-parameter tuning (Bergstra et al., 2011) and a huge
amount of data. Although DNNs recently achieved great
results in many areas, they remain very complex to handle
and unstable to input noise (Zheng et al., 2016).
Recently, several attempts have been made to consider networks with non-differentiable modules. Among them the
*
Equal contribution 1 LPSM, Sorbonne Universite 2 CMAP,
Ecole Polytechnique. Correspondence to: Ludovic Arnould
<ludovic.arnould@sorbonne-universite.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Deep Forest (DF) algorithm (Zhou & Feng, 2017), which
uses Random Forests (RF) (Breiman, 2001) as neurons, has
received a lot of attention in recent years in various applications such as hyperspectral image processing (Liu et al.,
2020), medical imaging (Sun et al., 2020), drug interactions
(Su et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020) or even fraud detection
(Zhang et al., 2019).
Since the DF procedure stacks multiple layers, each one
being composed of complex nonparametric RF estimators,
the rationale behind the procedure remains quite obscure.
However DF methods exhibit impressive performances in
practice, suggesting that stacking RFs and extracting features from these estimators at each layer is a promising way
to leverage on the RF performance in the neural network
framework. The goal of this paper is not an exhaustive empirical study of prediction performances of DF (see Zhou &
Feng, 2019) but rather to understand how stacking trees in a
network fashion may result in competitive infrastructure.
Related Works. Different manners of stacking trees exist
(see Ghods & Cook, 2020, for a general survey on stacking
methods), as the Forwarding Thinking Deep Random Forest
(FTDRF), proposed by (Miller et al., 2017), for which the
proposed network contains trees which directly transmit
their output to the next layer (contrary to Deep Forest in
which their output is first averaged before being passed
to the next layer). A different approach by (Feng et al.,
2018) consists in rewriting tree gradient boosting as a simple
neural network whose layers can be made arbitrary large
depending on the boosting tree structure. The resulting
estimator is more simple than DF but does not leverage on
the ensemble method properties of random forests.
In order to prevent overfitting and to lighten the model,
several ways to simplify DF architecture have been investigated. (Pang et al., 2018) considers RF whose complexity
varies through the network, and combines it with a confidence measure to pass high confidence instances directly to
the output layer. Other directions towards DF architecture
simplification are to play on the nature of the RF involved
(Berrouachedi et al., 2019a) (using Extra-Trees instead of
Breiman’s RF), on the number of RF per layer (Jeong et al.,
2020) (implementing layers of many forests with few trees),
or even on the number of features passed between two consecutive layers (Su et al., 2019) by relying on an importance

