CLOCS: Contrastive Learning of Cardiac Signals Across Space, Time, and
Patients
Dani Kiyasseh 1 Tingting Zhu 1 David A. Clifton 1 2

Abstract
The healthcare industry generates troves of unlabelled physiological data. This data can be exploited via contrastive learning, a self-supervised
pre-training method that encourages representations of instances to be similar to one another. We
propose a family of contrastive learning methods,
CLOCS, that encourages representations across
space, time, and patients to be similar to one another. We show that CLOCS consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, BYOL and
SimCLR, when performing a linear evaluation
of, and fine-tuning on, downstream tasks. We
also show that CLOCS achieves strong generalization performance with only 25% of labelled
training data. Furthermore, our training procedure naturally generates patient-specific representations that can be used to quantify patientsimilarity.

1. Introduction
At present, the healthcare system struggles to sufficiently
leverage the abundant, unlabelled datasets that it generates
on a daily basis. This is partially due to the dependence of
deep learning algorithms on high quality labels for strong
generalization performance. However, procuring such high
quality labels in a clinical setting, where physicians are
squeezed for time and attention, is practically infeasible.
Self-supervised methods offer a way to overcome such an
obstacle. For example, they can exploit unlabelled datasets
to formulate pretext tasks such as predicting the rotation
of images (Gidaris et al., 2018), their corresponding colourmap (Larsson et al., 2017), and the arrow of time (Wei
et al., 2018). More recently, contrastive learning was introduced as a way to learn representations of instances that
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Oxford-Suzhou Centre for Advanced
Research, Suzhou, China. Correspondence to: Dani Kiyasseh
<dani.kiyasseh@eng.ox.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

share some context. By capturing this high-level shared
context (e.g., medical diagnosis), representations become
invariant to the differences (e.g., input modalities) between
the instances.
Contrastive learning can be characterized by three main
components: 1) a positive and negative set of examples,
2) a set of transformation operators, and 3) a variant of the
noise contrastive estimation loss. Most research in this domain has focused on curating a positive set of examples by
exploiting data temporality (Oord et al., 2018), data augmentations (Chen et al., 2020), and multiple views of the
same data instance (Tian et al., 2019). These methods are
predominantly catered to the image-domain and central to
their implementation is the notion that shared context arises
from the same instance. We believe this precludes their
applicability to the medical domain where physiological
time-series are plentiful. Moreover, their interpretation of
shared context is limited to data from a common source,
where that source is the individual data instance. In medicine, however, shared context can occur at a higher level,
the patient level. This idea is central to our contributions
and will encourage the development of representations that
are patient-specific. Such representations have the potential to be used in tasks that exploit patient similarity such
as disease subgroup clustering and discovery. As a result
of the process, medical practitioners may receive more interpretable outputs from networks.
In this work, we leverage electrocardiogram (ECG) signals to learn patient-specific representations via contrastive
learning. In the process, we exploit both temporal and spatial information present in the ECG, with the latter referring
to projections of the same electrical signal of the heart onto
multiple axes, also known as leads.
Contributions. Our contributions are the following:
1. We propose a family of patient-specific contrastive
learning methods, entitled CLOCS, that exploit both
temporal and spatial information present in ECG signals.
2. We show that CLOCS outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, BYOL and SimCLR, when performing a linear evaluation of, and fine-tuning on, downstream tasks

