DeepWalking Backwards:
From Node Embeddings Back to Graphs

Sudhanshu Chanpuriya 1 Cameron Musco 1
Konstantinos Sotiropoulos 2 Charalampos E. Tsourakakis 2 3

Abstract
Low-dimensional node embeddings play a key
role in analyzing graph datasets. However, little
work studies exactly what information is encoded
by popular embedding methods, and how this
information correlates with performance in downstream learning tasks. We tackle this question by
studying whether embeddings can be inverted to
(approximately) recover the graph used to generate them. Focusing on a variant of the popular
DeepWalk method (Perozzi et al., 2014; Qiu et al.,
2018), we present algorithms for accurate embedding inversion – i.e., from the low-dimensional
embedding of a graph G, we can find a graph G̃
with a very similar embedding. We perform numerous experiments on real-world networks, observing that significant information about G, such
as specific edges and bulk properties like triangle
density, is often lost in G̃. However, community
structure is often preserved or even enhanced. Our
findings are a step towards a more rigorous understanding of exactly what information embeddings
encode about the input graph, and why this information is useful for learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Low-dimensional node embeddings are a primary tool in
graph mining and machine learning. They are used for node
classification, community detection, link prediction, and
graph generative models. Classic approaches like spectral
clustering (Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2002), Laplacian eigenmaps (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003), IsoMap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), and locally linear embeddings (Roweis &
1 College of Information and Computer Sciences, University
of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA. 2 Department of
Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. 3 ISI
Foundation, Turin, Italy. Correspondence to: Sudhanshu Chanpuriya <umass>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Saul, 2000) use spectral embeddings derived for the graph
Laplacian, adjacency matrix, or their variants. Recently,
neural-network and random-walk-based embeddings have
become popular due to their superior performance in many
settings. Examples include DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014),
node2vec (Grover & Leskovec, 2016), LINE (Tang et al.,
2015), NetMF (Qiu et al., 2018), and many others (Cao
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Wang et al., 2016). In
many cases, these methods can be viewed as variants on
classic spectral methods, producing an approximate lowdimensional factorization of an implicit matrix representing
graph structure (Qiu et al., 2018)
Problem definition. In this work we focus on the following
high-level question:
What graph properties are encoded in and can be
recovered from node embeddings? How do these
properties correlate with learning tasks?
We study the above question on undirected graphs with nonnegative edge weights. Let G denote the set of all such
graphs with n nodes. We formalize the question through
Problems 1 and 2 below.
Problem 1 (Embedding Inversion). Given an embedding
algorithm E : G → Rn×k and the embedding E (G) for some
G ∈ G , produce G̃ ∈ G with E (G̃) = E (G) or such that
kE (G̃) − E (G)k is small for some norm k · k.
We refer to k as the embedding dimension. A solution to
Problem 1 lets us approximately invert the embedding E (G)
to obtain a graph. It is natural to ask what structure is common between G, G̃. Using the same notation as Problem 1,
our second problem is as follows.
Problem 2 (Graph Recovery). Given G, G̃ such that
kE (G̃) − E (G)k is small for some matrix norm k · k, how
close are G, G̃ in terms of common edges, degree sequence,
triangle counts, and community structure?
Answering Problems 1 and 2 is an important step towards a
better understanding of a node embedding method E . In this
work, we focus on the popular DeepWalk method of Perozzi
et al. (2014). DeepWalk embedding can be interpreted as

