OmniNet: Omnidirectional Representations from Transformers

Yi Tay * 1 Mostafa Dehghani * 2 Vamsi Aribandi 1 3 Jai Gupta 1 Philip Pham 1
Zhen Qin 1 Dara Bahri 1 Da-Cheng Juan 1 Donald Metzler 1

Abstract
This paper proposes Omnidirectional Representations from Transformers (O MNI N ET). In
OmniNet, instead of maintaining a strictly horizontal receptive field, each token is allowed to attend
to all tokens in the entire network. This process
can also be interpreted as a form of extreme
or intensive attention mechanism that has the
receptive field of the entire width and depth of the
network. To this end, the omnidirectional attention
is learned via a meta-learner, which is essentially
another self-attention based model. In order to
mitigate the computationally expensive costs of
full receptive field attention, we leverage efficient
self-attention models such as kernel-based (Choromanski et al., 2020), low-rank attention (Wang
et al., 2020) and/or Big Bird (Zaheer et al., 2020)
as the meta-learner. Extensive experiments are
conducted on autoregressive language modeling
(LM1B, C4), Machine Translation, Long Range
Arena (LRA), and Image Recognition. The
experiments show that OmniNet achieves considerable improvements across these tasks, including
achieving state-of-the-art performance on LM1B,
WMT’14 En-De/En-Fr, and Long Range Arena.
Moreover, using omnidirectional representation
in Vision Transformers leads to significant
improvements on image recognition tasks on both
few-shot learning and fine-tuning setups.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), characterized by
stacked self-attention modules and feed-forward transformations, have become a staple in modern deep learning, natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2019)
and even computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). One
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Mountain View 2 Google
Brain Team, Amsterdam 3 Google AI Resident. Correspondence to: Yi Tay <yitay@google.com>, Mostafa Dehghani
<dehghani@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

key defining characteristics in the self-attention mechanism
is the global receptive field in which each token is accessible
to every other token in the sequence, serving as an enabler
for learning global contextual representations.
This paper proposes learning omnidirectional representations from transformers. The key idea is to move
beyond horizontally global receptive fields and explore the
possibility of omnidirectional receptive fields. In short,
we allow each token to not only attend to all other tokens
in the same layer, but also all token in all the layers of the
network. This global access enables tokens to have a full
view of the network and as a result access the knowledge
and intermediate representations of every token at each layer.
By modeling the relationships amongst tokens of different
hierarchical levels, we are also able to capture patterns
pertaining to the propagation of representations across time.
Finally, this approach can be also be interpreted as a form
of dense residual connection (Huang et al., 2017), which has
been shown to be beneficial by aiding gradient flow.
Learning omnidirectional receptive fields is non-trivial for
two key reasons. Firstly, given the quadratic complexity of
the scaled dot product attention, the complexity of designing
such a receptive field is increased from N 2 L to (N L)2 ,
where L is the depth of the network and N is the sequence
length. We postulate that this is one big challenge that has
prohibited this type of architecture from being explored
in the past. Secondly, simply enabling omnidirectional
attention from the get-go would easily cause a degeneration
of the transformer into a flat network, losing much of its
representational power that is enabled by sequentially
refining its representations across network layers.
To mitigate these issues, our omnidirectional attention is
implemented as a form of meta-learner that acts upon a
standard transformer model. The meta-learner is yet another
self-attention model that accepts all hidden representations
across all layers as an input and refines them based on all
the available information. In order to mitigate the prohibitive
memory and computational costs of omnidirectional attention, we explore and evaluate multiple efficient alternatives
of parameterizing the meta-learner, e.g., including fast
attention via generalizable kernel attention (Choromanski
et al., 2020), low-rank self-attention (Wang et al., 2020),

