A Hybrid Variance-Reduced Method for
Decentralized Stochastic Non-Convex Optimization

Ran Xin 1 Usman A. Khan 2 Soummya Kar 1

Abstract
This paper considers decentralized stochastic optimization over a network of n nodes, where each
node possesses a smooth non-convex local cost
function and the goal of the networked nodes is
to find an -accurate first-order stationary point of
the sum of the local costs. We focus on an online
setting, where each node accesses its local cost
only by means of a stochastic first-order oracle
that returns a noisy version of the exact gradient.
In this context, we propose a novel single-loop
decentralized hybrid variance-reduced stochastic
gradient method, called GT-HSGD, that outperforms the existing approaches in terms of both
the oracle complexity and practical implementation. The GT-HSGD algorithm implements specialized local hybrid stochastic gradient estimators that are fused over the network to track the
global gradient. Remarkably, GT-HSGD achieves
a network topology-independent oracle complexity of O(n−1 −3 ) when the required error tolerance  is small enough, leading to a linear speedup
with respect to the centralized optimal online
variance-reduced approaches that operate on a
single node. Numerical experiments are provided
to illustrate our main technical results.

1. Introduction
We consider n nodes, such as machines or edge devices,
communicating over a decentralized network described by
a directed graph G = (V, E), where V = {1, · · · , n} is the
set of node indices and E ⊆ V × V is the collection of
ordered pairs (i, j), i, j ∈ V, such that node j sends information to node i. Each node i possesses a private local cost
function fi : Rp → R and the goal of the networked nodes
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Ran Xin <ranx@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

is to solve, via local computation and communication, the
following optimization problem:
n

minp F (x) =

x∈R

1X
fi (x).
n i=1

This canonical formulation is known as decentralized optimization (Tsitsiklis et al., 1986; Nedić & Ozdaglar, 2009;
Kar et al., 2012; Chen & Sayed, 2015) that has emerged
as a promising framework for large-scale data science and
machine learning problems (Lian et al., 2017; Assran et al.,
2019). Decentralized optimization is essential in scenarios
where data is geographically distributed and/or centralized
data processing is infeasible due to communication and computation overhead or data privacy concerns. In this paper,
we focus on an online and non-convex setting. In particular,
we assume that each local cost fi is non-convex and each
node i only accesses fi by querying a local stochastic firstorder oracle (SFO) (Nemirovski et al., 2009) that returns a
stochastic gradient, i.e., a noisy version of the exact gradient, at the queried point. As a concrete example of practical
interest, the SFO mechanism applies to many online learning and expected risk minimization problems where the
noise in SFO lies in the uncertainty of sampling from the
underlying streaming data received at each node (Kar et al.,
2012; Chen & Sayed, 2015). We are interested in the oracle
complexity, i.e., the total number of queries to SFO required
at each node, to find an -accurate first-order stationary
point x∗ of the global cost F such that E[k∇F (x∗ )k] ≤ .
1.1. Related Work
We now briefly review the literature of decentralized nonconvex optimization with SFO, which has been widely studied recently. Perhaps the most well-known approach is the
decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) and its
variants (Chen & Sayed, 2015; Kar et al., 2012; Vlaski &
Sayed, 2019; Lian et al., 2017; Taheri et al., 2020), which
combine average consensus and a local stochastic gradient
step. Although being simple and effective, DSGD is known
to have difficulties in handling heterogeneous data (Xin
et al., 2020a). Recent works (Tang et al., 2018; Lu et al.,
2019; Xin et al., 2020e; Yi et al., 2020) achieve robustness to heterogeneous environments by leveraging certain

