Factor-analytic Inverse Regression for High-dimension, Small-sample
Dimensionality Reduction

Aditi Jha * 1 2 Michael J. Morais * 1 Jonathan W. Pillow 1 3

Abstract
Sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) methods
are a family of supervised methods for dimensionality reduction that seek to reduce dimensionality
while preserving information about a target variable of interest. However, existing SDR methods
typically require more observations than the number of dimensions (N > p). To overcome this limitation, we propose Class-conditional Factor Analytic Dimensions (CFAD), a model-based dimensionality reduction method for high-dimensional,
small-sample data. We show that CFAD substantially outperforms existing SDR methods in the
small-sample regime, and can be extended to incorporate prior information such as smoothness
in the projection axes. We demonstrate the effectiveness of CFAD with an application to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measurements during visual object recognition and
working memory tasks, where it outperforms existing SDR and a variety of other dimensionalityreduction methods.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality-reduction methods are important tools for
analyzing noisy, high-dimensional data, which operate by
mapping data to a low-dimensional space while preserving
key features of interest. This low-dimensional projection
of the original data allows for easier analysis, visualization and compression of data. Dimensionality reduction
methods have been developed to exploit a wide variety of
different data features, such as mean, covariance, class separation, and temporal or spatial structure (Cunningham & Yu,
2014; Cunningham & Ghahramani, 2015; Pang et al., 2016;
*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 3 Department of Psychology, Princeton University, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Aditi
Jha <aditijha@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Kobak et al., 2016). Another class of dimensionality reduction methods, known as Sufficient Dimension Reduction
(SDR), reduce dimensions with the aim of preserving the
statistical relationship between high-dimensional data (X)
and an observed output variable (Y ) (Globerson & Tishby,
2003; Cook, 2007; Cook & Forzani, 2009). SDR methods
seek to find a subspace that captures the conditional distribution of X | Y . That is, they discard dimensions of X
that are statistically independent of Y , preserving only the
dimensions in which X depends on Y . So-called “inverse
regression” methods, which seek to model the distribution
of X | Y , provide a framework for estimating the dimension reduction subspace, leading to the popularity of inverse
regression-based SDR methods (Cook & Ni, 2005).
Regression models for predicting scalar variables or class
labels from high-dimensional data represent a common setting for the application of dimensionality reduction methods.
In neuroscience, for example, such methods are frequently
employed for quantifying the relationship between highdimensional neural activity and the stimuli that elicit them
(Cunningham & Yu, 2014; Kobak et al., 2016; Cowley et al.,
2016; Aoi & Pillow, 2018).
However, existing inverse regression-based SDR methods
are not well suited to such problems. Their performance
severely degrades when the sample size N is small relative
to the data-dimensionality p, and they completely collapse
in the N < p regime, as they often depend on the positivedefiniteness of now-rank-deficient sample covariance matrices. As a result of these challenges, Principal Components
Analysis or Independent Components Analysis continue to
be the most commonly used method(s) for dimensionality reduction of neural data, despite the fact that they completely
ignore the information provided by target labels. This motivates the need for a dimensionality reduction method for
high-dimensional small-sample-size data, which preserves
output-relevant information in the low-dimensional input.
In this paper, we introduce a model-based inverse regression method for high-dimensional data that is robust to
sample size and does not collapse in the N < p regime.
Our method, Class-conditional Factor-Analytic Dimensions

