Learning in Nonzero-Sum Stochastic Games with Potentials
David Mguni 1 Yutong Wu 2 Yali Du 3 Yaodong Yang 1 3 Ziyi Wang 2 Minne Li 3 Ying Wen 4 Joel Jennings 1
Jun Wang 3

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
become effective in tackling discrete cooperative
game scenarios. However, MARL has yet to penetrate settings beyond those modelled by team and
zero-sum games, confining it to a small subset of
multi-agent systems. In this paper, we introduce a
new generation of MARL learners that can handle
nonzero-sum payoff structures and continuous settings. In particular, we study the MARL problem
in a class of games known as stochastic potential games (SPGs) with continuous state-action
spaces. Unlike cooperative games, in which all
agents share a common reward, SPGs are capable
of modelling real-world scenarios where agents
seek to fulfil their individual goals. We prove
theoretically our learning method, SPot-AC, enables independent agents to learn Nash equilibrium strategies in polynomial time. We demonstrate our framework tackles previously unsolvable tasks such as Coordination Navigation and
large selfish routing games and that it outperforms
the state of the art MARL baselines such as MADDPG and COMIX in such scenarios.

1. Introduction
Many real-world systems give rise to multi-agent systems
(MAS); traffic network systems with autonomous vehicles
(Ye et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2020), network packet routing systems (Wiering, 2000) and financial trading (Mariano
et al., 2001) are some examples. In these systems, selfinterested agents act in a shared environment, each seeking
to perform some pre-specified task. Each agent’s actions
affect the performance of other agents and may even prevent
them from completing their tasks altogether. For example,
1
Huawei R&D UK 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University College London,
UK 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to:
David Mguni <davidmguni@hotmail.com>, Yaodong Yang
<yaodong.yang@outlook.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

autonomous vehicles seeking to arrive at their individual
destinations must avoid colliding with other vehicles. Therefore to perform their task the agents must account for other
agents’ behaviours.
There is therefore a great need for reinforcement learning
(RL) agents with their own goals to learn to perform in
MAS. In these scenarios, agents are not required to behave
as a team nor as perfect adversaries. These settings are
modelled by nonzero-sum stochastic games (SGs) whose
solution concept is a fixed point known as Nash equilibrium
(NE). An NE describes the stable point in which all agents
respond optimally to the actions of other agent. Computing
the NE is therefore central to solving MAS.
Despite its fundamental importance for solving many MAS,
computing the NE of any SG with a general payoff structure
remains an open challenge (Yang & Wang, 2020). Presently,
methods to compute NE in SGs that are neither zero-sum
nor team settings are extremely scarce and impose limiting
assumptions. As such, the application of these methods
is generally unsuitable for real world MAS (Shoham &
Leyton-Brown, 2008). Moreover, finding NE even in the
simple case of normal form games (where agents take only
a single action) is generally intractable when the game is
nonzero-sum (Chen et al., 2009).
Among multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods are a class of algorithms known as independent learners
e.g. independent Q learning (Tan, 1993). These algorithms
ignore actions of other agents and are ill-suited to tackle
MAS and often fail to learn (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2017).
In contrast, algorithms such as MADDPG (Lowe et al.,
2017), COMA (Foerster et al., 2018) and QDPP (Yang et al.,
2020) include a centralised critic that accounts for the actions of all agents. To date none of these algorithms have
been proven to converge in SGs that are neither team nor
zero-sum (adversarial). Additionally, these methods suffer
from combinatorial growth in complexity with the number of agents (Yang et al., 2019) leading to prohibitively
expensive computations in some systems. There is also a
noticeable lack of MARL methods that can handle continuous spaces which is required for tasks such as physical
control (Bloembergen et al., 2015). This has left MARL
largely unable to solve various practical tasks such as multi-

