Grid-Functioned Neural Networks
Javier Dehesa 1 2 Andrew Vidler 2 Julian Padget 1 Christof Lutteroth 1

Abstract
We introduce a new neural network architecture
that we call “grid-functioned” neural networks. It
utilises a grid structure of network parameterisations that can be specialised for different subdomains of the problem, while maintaining smooth,
continuous behaviour. The grid gives the user
flexibility to prevent gross features from overshadowing important minor ones. We present a full
characterisation of its computational and spatial
complexity, and demonstrate its potential, compared to a traditional architecture, over a set of
synthetic regression problems. We further illustrate the benefits through a real-world 3D skeletal
animation case study, where it offers the same
visual quality as a state-of-the-art model, but with
lower computational complexity and better control accuracy.

1. Introduction
In the last decades, a huge variety of neural network models
and architectures have been put forward with the purpose of
exploiting particular structures or the properties of different
problem domains. Such is the case with convolutional neural
networks for computer vision or recurrent neural networks
for sequential data. However, beyond the structure of the
data, network architectures rarely look at the data itself
to condition their behaviour. The reason is simple: the
analysis of the data values is left to the individual network
units, according to the parameters that are learnt through
the training process. That is, indeed, the whole intent of
a neural network, whereby data can be largely regarded
as an opaque container of information that is only made
intelligible through the model. Nevertheless, this means
the neural network must attempt to learn a single common
function for the entire domain of the problem at hand. This
is entirely possible, but in some cases it can be challenging
for one model to reliably learn all the patterns hidden in data
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Bath,
UK 2 Ninja Theory, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Javier
Dehesa <javier.dehesa@bath.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

points scattered throughout the whole problem space. For
example, predicting a geographical feature given a latitude
and a longitude can be difficult for a neural network if it
does not have an architecture that reflects the coordinate
system articulating the data.
We introduce grid-functioned neural networks (GFNN), a
novel kind of network architecture that overcomes this limitation through the definition of a multidimensional grid of
neural network experts specialised in different subspaces
of the input domain. The grid experts’ parameters are combined according to the given data, using an interpolation
scheme, to produce a network configuration tailored to each
particular input. As we will show, the result is a continuous
and differentiable model that is able to capture complex
local patterns better than conventional configurations, and
in many cases with smaller inference complexity. Furthermore, GFNN supports a variety of inference methods that
can be used to trade off between accuracy, memory use, and
inference speed. Specifically, our contributions are:
1. The mathematical definition of GFNN.
2. An analysis of the computational complexity of inference for GFNN, as well as different approximate
inference methods.
3. A comparison between the performance of GFNN and
other architectures, namely a standard multilayer perceptron, using a small set of synthetic problems, and a
state-of-the-art 3D animation synthesis model, as part
of a case study.

2. Related Work
Ensembles of experts, in the general sense, have been used
in machine learning for a long time. Classic algorithms like
bagging (Breiman, 1996) or AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire,
1997), which aggregate the results of a collection of learners,
take advantage of the diversity in the ensemble to mitigate
the shortcomings of individual models. This kind of learner
aggregation is very well suited for classification, and it can
also be extended for regression (Drucker, 1997). However,
traditional ensembles are unstructured sets of “weak” learners for the whole problem, as opposed to a structure of
“strong” models for specific subspaces of it. This prevents
them from exploiting the continuity and simplicity of local patterns in the data. In the field of neural networks,

