Conditional Variational Autoencoder with Adversarial Learning for
End-to-End Text-to-Speech

Jaehyeon Kim 1 Jungil Kong 1 Juhee Son 1 2

Abstract
Several recent end-to-end text-to-speech (TTS)
models enabling single-stage training and parallel
sampling have been proposed, but their sample
quality does not match that of two-stage TTS systems. In this work, we present a parallel endto-end TTS method that generates more natural sounding audio than current two-stage models. Our method adopts variational inference augmented with normalizing flows and an adversarial
training process, which improves the expressive
power of generative modeling. We also propose a
stochastic duration predictor to synthesize speech
with diverse rhythms from input text. With the
uncertainty modeling over latent variables and
the stochastic duration predictor, our method expresses the natural one-to-many relationship in
which a text input can be spoken in multiple ways
with different pitches and rhythms. A subjective
human evaluation (mean opinion score, or MOS)
on the LJ Speech, a single speaker dataset, shows
that our method outperforms the best publicly
available TTS systems and achieves a MOS comparable to ground truth.

1. Introduction
Text-to-speech (TTS) systems synthesize raw speech waveforms from given text through several components. With
the rapid development of deep neural networks, TTS system pipelines have been simplified to two-stage generative modeling apart from text preprocessing such as text
normalization and phonemization. The first stage is to
produce intermediate speech representations such as melspectrograms (Shen et al., 2018) or linguistic features (Oord
1

Kakao Enterprise, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Jaehyeon Kim
<jay.xyz@kakaoenterprise.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2016) from the preprocessed text,1 and the second
stage is to generate raw waveforms conditioned on the intermediate representations (Oord et al., 2016; Kalchbrenner
et al., 2018). Models at each of the two-stage pipelines have
been developed independently.
Neural network-based autoregressive TTS systems have
shown the capability of synthesizing realistic speech (Shen
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019), but their sequential generative
process makes it difficult to fully utilize modern parallel processors. To overcome this limitation and improve synthesis
speed, several non-autoregressive methods have been proposed. In the text-to-spectrogram generation step, extracting
attention maps from pre-trained autoregressive teacher networks (Ren et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020) is attempted to
decrease the difficulty of learning alignments between text
and spectrograms. More recently, likelihood-based methods
further eliminate the dependency on external aligners by
estimating or learning alignments that maximize the likelihood of target mel-spectrograms (Zeng et al., 2020; Miao
et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020). Meanwhile, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have been
explored in second stage models. GAN-based feed-forward
networks with multiple discriminators, each distinguishing
samples at different scales or periods, achieve high-quality
raw waveform synthesis (Kumar et al., 2019; Bińkowski
et al., 2019; Kong et al., 2020).
Despite the progress of parallel TTS systems, two-stage
pipelines remain problematic because they require sequential training or fine-tuning (Shen et al., 2018; Weiss et al.,
2020) for high-quality production wherein latter stage models are trained with the generated samples of earlier stage
models. In addition, their dependency on predefined intermediate features precludes applying learned hidden representations to obtain further improvements in performance.
Recently, several works, i.e., FastSpeech 2s (Ren et al.,
2021) and EATS (Donahue et al., 2021), have proposed
efficient end-to-end training methods such as training over
short audio clips rather than entire waveforms, leveraging a
mel-spectrogram decoder to aid text representation learning,
1
Although there is a text preprocessing step in TTS systems,
We herein use preprocessed text interchangeably with the word
“text”.

