Monte Carlo Variational Auto-Encoders
Achille Thin 1 Nikita Kotelevskii 2 Alain Durmus 3 Maxim Panov 2 Eric Moulines 1 4 Arnaud Doucet 5

Abstract
Variational auto-encoders (VAE) are popular deep
latent variable models which are trained by maximizing an Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). To
obtain tighter ELBO and hence better variational
approximations, it has been proposed to use importance sampling to get a lower variance estimate
of the evidence. However, importance sampling
is known to perform poorly in high dimensions.
While it has been suggested many times in the literature to use more sophisticated algorithms such
as Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) and its
Sequential Importance Sampling (SIS) extensions,
the potential benefits brought by these advanced
techniques have never been realized for VAE: the
AIS estimate cannot be easily differentiated, while
SIS requires the specification of carefully chosen backward Markov kernels. In this paper, we
address both issues and demonstrate the performance of the resulting Monte Carlo VAEs on a
variety of applications.

1. Introduction
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) introduced by (Kingma &
Welling, 2013) are a very popular class of methods in unsupervised learning and generative modelling. These methods
aim at finding a parameter
θ maximizing the marginal logR
likelihood pθ (x) = pθ (x, z)dz where x ∈ RN is the
observation and z ∈ Rd is the latent variable. They rely on
the introduction of an additional parameter φ and a family
of variational distributions qφ (z|x). The joint parameters
{θ, φ} are then inferred through the optimization of the
*

Equal contribution 1 CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Universite Paris-Saclay, France 2 CDISE, Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Moscow, Russia 3 Ecole Nationale Supérieure
Paris-Saclay, France 4 HDI Lab, HSE University, Moscow, Russia 5 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Achille Thin
<achille.thin@polytechnique.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) defined as
L(θ, φ) =



Z

pθ (x, z)
qφ (z|x)



qφ (z|x)dz

= log pθ (x) − KL qφ (z|x) k pθ (z|x) ⩽ log pθ (x) .
log

The design of expressive variational families has been the
topic of many works and is a core ingredient in the efficiency of VAE (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma et al.,
2016). Another line of research consists in using positive
unbiased estimators p̂θ (x) of the loglikelihood pθ (x) for
qφ , i.e. Eqφ [p̂θ (x)] = pθ (x). Indeed, as noted in (Mnih &
Rezende, 2016), it follows from Jensen’s inequality that
L(θ, φ) = Eqφ [log p̂θ (x)] ⩽ log pθ (x) .

(1)

A Taylor expansion shows that


1
p̂θ (x)
L(θ, φ) ≈ log pθ (x) − varqφ
;
2
pθ (x)
see e.g. (Maddison et al., 2017; Domke & Sheldon, 2018)
for formal results. Hence the ELBO becomes tighter as the
variance of the estimator decreases.
A common method to obtain an unbiased estimate
is built on importance sampling; i.e. p̂θ (x) =
Pn
i.i.d.
n−1 i=1 [pθ (x, zi )/qφ (zi |x)] for zi ∼ qφ (·|x). In particular, combined with (1), we obtain the popular Importance
Weighted Auto Encoder (IWAE) proposed by (Burda et al.,
2015). However, it is expected that the relative variance
of this importance-sampling based estimator typically increases with the dimension of the latent z. To circumvent
this issue, we suggest in this paper to consider other estimates of the evidence which have shown great success in the
Monte Carlo literature. In particular, Annealed Importance
Sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001; Wu et al., 2016), and its Sequential Importance Sampling (SIS) extensions (Del Moral
et al., 2006) define state-of-the-art estimators of the evidence. These algorithms rely on an extended target distribution for which an efficient importance distribution can be
defined using non-homogeneous Markov kernels.
It has been suggested in various contributions that AIS could
be useful to train VAE (Salimans et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2016; Maddison et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2020). However, to
the authors knowledge, no contribution discusses how an

