Clustered Sampling: Low-Variance and Improved Representativity
for Clients Selection in Federated Learning

Yann Fraboni 1 2 Richard Vidal 2 Laetitia Kameni 2 Marco Lorenzi 1

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of optimizing
communications between server and clients in
federated learning (FL). Current sampling approaches in FL are either biased, or non optimal
in terms of server-clients communications and
training stability. To overcome this issue, we introduce clustered sampling for clients selection.
We prove that clustered sampling leads to better
clients representatitivity and to reduced variance
of the clients stochastic aggregation weights in
FL. Compatibly with our theory, we provide two
different clustering approaches enabling clients
aggregation based on 1) sample size, and 2) models similarity. Through a series of experiments
in non-iid and unbalanced scenarios, we demonstrate that model aggregation through clustered
sampling consistently leads to better training convergence and variability when compared to standard sampling approaches. Our approach does
not require any additional operation on the clients
side, and can be seamlessly integrated in standard
FL implementations. Finally, clustered sampling
is compatible with existing methods and technologies for privacy enhancement, and for communication reduction through model compression.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a training paradigm enabling
different clients to jointly learn a global model without
sharing their respective data. Communication can be a
primary bottleneck for FL since wireless and other end-user
internet connections operate at variable communication rates
while being potentially unreliable. Moreover, the capacity
of the aggregating server may impose constraints on the
number of clients the server can communicate with at the
1
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, Epione Research Group, France
Accenture Labs, Sophia Antipolis, France. Correspondence to:
Yann Fraboni <yann.fraboni@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

same time. These considerations led to significant interest
in reducing the number and bandwidth of communications
at every step of the FL process.
One of the most popular communication reduction strategies
consists in limiting the frequency of communications at the
expense of increased computation on the clients side. This
is usually achieved by asking the clients to perform multiple
iterations of local gradient descent before communicating
their updates. In this setting, FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
2017) is the first and most widely used FL algorithm, for
which convergence bounds were given in (Wang et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019;
Khaled et al., 2020; Woodworth et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020;
Stich, 2019).
To further reduce the number of communications, the server
can select a subset of clients participating at every iteration. This strategy, called client sampling, enables reducing
communications to the minimum. FedAvg first proposed
selecting m clients uniformly without replacement while
replacing the contribution of the non-sampled clients with
the current global model. However this scheme is known
for being biased, since the resulting model is, in expectation, different from the deterministic aggregation of every
client. To overcome this issue, (Li et al., 2018) proposes an
unbiased sampling scheme where the new global model is
created as the average of the sampled clients work. The sampling is based on a multinomial distribution (MD) whose
clients probabilities corresponds to their relative sample size.
While other clients sampling schemes have been proposed,
most of them require additional server-clients communications and are not proven to be unbiased (Li et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Nishio & Yonetani, 2019).
To the best of our knowledge, FedAvg and MD sampling are
the only schemes keeping to a minimum server-clients communications. In particular, MD sampling has been proven
to lead to FL optimum and shown experimentally to outperform FedAvg sampling (Li et al., 2020). In spite of its
unbiasedness, MD sampling may still lead to large variance in the clients selection procedure. While unbiasedness
guarantees proper clients representativity in expectation,
representativity is not necessarily achieved when considering a single FL iteration. Since at each MD sampling

