Breaking the Limits of Message Passing Graph Neural Networks

Muhammet Balcilar 1 2 Pierre Héroux 1 Benoit Gaüzère 3 Pascal Vasseur 1 4 Sébastien Adam 1 Paul Honeine 1

Abstract
Since the Message Passing (Graph) Neural Networks (MPNNs) have a linear complexity with
respect to the number of nodes when applied
to sparse graphs, they have been widely implemented and still raise a lot of interest even though
their theoretical expressive power is limited to
the first order Weisfeiler-Lehman test (1-WL). In
this paper, we show that if the graph convolution
supports are designed in spectral-domain by a nonlinear custom function of eigenvalues and masked
with an arbitrary large receptive field, the MPNN
is theoretically more powerful than the 1-WL test
and experimentally as powerful as a 3-WL existing models, while remaining spatially localized.
Moreover, by designing custom filter functions,
outputs can have various frequency components
that allow the convolution process to learn different relationships between a given input graph signal and its associated properties. So far, the best
3-WL equivalent graph neural networks have a
computational complexity in O(n3 ) with memory
usage in O(n2 ), consider non-local update mechanism and do not provide the spectral richness of
output profile. The proposed method overcomes
all these aforementioned problems and reaches
state-of-the-art results in many downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, finding the best inductive bias for
relational data represented as graphs has gained a lot of
interest in the machine learning community. Node-based
message passing mechanisms relying on the graph structure
have given rise to the first generation of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) called Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017). These algorithms spread
each node features to the neighborhood nodes using train1

LITIS Lab, University of Rouen Normandy, France
InterDigital, France 3 LITIS Lab, INSA Rouen Normandy, France
4
MIS Lab, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, France. Correspondence to: Muhammet Balcilar <muhammetbalcilar@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

able weights. These weights can be shared with respect
to the distance between nodes (Chebnet GNN) (Defferrard
et al., 2016), to the connected nodes features (GAT for graph
attention network) (Veličković et al., 2018) and/or to edge
features (Bresson & Laurent, 2018). When considering
sparse graphs, the memory and computational complexity
of such approaches are linear with respect to the number of
nodes. As a consequence, these algorithms are feasible for
large sparse graphs and thus have been applied with success
on many downstream tasks (Dwivedi et al., 2020).
Despite these successes and these interesting computational
properties, it has been shown that MPNNs are not powerful enough (Xu et al., 2019). Considering two nonisomorphic graphs that are not distinguishable by the first
order Weisfeiler-Lehman test (known as the 1-WL test), existing maximum powerful MPNNs embed them to the same
point. Thus, from a theoretical expressive power point of
view, these algorithms are not more powerful than the 1-WL
test. Beyond the graph isomorphism issue, it has also been
shown that many other combinatorial problems on graph
cannot be solved by MPNNs (Sato et al., 2019).
In (Maron et al., 2019b; Keriven & Peyré, 2019), it has been
proven that in order to reach universal approximation, higher
order relations are required. In this context, some powerful
models that are equivalent to the 3-WL test were proposed.
For instance, (Maron et al., 2019a) proposed the model
PPGN (Provably Powerful Graph Network) that mimics the
second order Folklore WL test (2-FWL), which is equivalent
to the 3-WL test. In (Morris et al., 2019), they proposed to
use message passing between 1, 2 and 3 order node tuples
hierarchically, thus reaching the 3-WL expressive power.
However, using such relations makes both memory usage
and computational complexities grown exponentially. Thus,
it is not feasible to have universal approximation models in
practice.
In order to increase the theoretical expressive power of
MPNNs by keeping the linear complexity mentioned above,
some researchers proposed to partly randomize node features (Abboud et al., 2020; Sato et al., 2020) or to add a
unique label (Murphy et al., 2019) in order to have the
ability to distinguish two non-isomorphic graphs that are
not distinguished by the 1-WL test. These solutions need
massively training samples and involve slow convergence.

