Representation Matters:
Assessing the Importance of Subgroup Allocations in Training Data

Esther Rolf 1 Theodora Worledge 1 Benjamin Recht 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 2

Abstract
Collecting more diverse and representative training data is often touted as a remedy for the disparate performance of machine learning predictors across subpopulations. However, a precise
framework for understanding how dataset properties like diversity affect learning outcomes is
largely lacking. By casting data collection as part
of the learning process, we demonstrate that diverse representation in training data is key not
only to increasing subgroup performances, but
also to achieving population-level objectives. Our
analysis and experiments describe how dataset
compositions influence performance and provide
constructive results for using trends in existing
data, alongside domain knowledge, to help guide
intentional, objective-aware dataset design.

1. Introduction
Datasets play a critical role in shaping the perception of
performance and progress in machine learning (ML)—the
way we collect, process, and analyze data affects the way
we benchmark success and form new research agendas
(Paullada et al., 2020; Dotan & Milli, 2020). A growing appreciation of this determinative role of datasets has sparked
a concomitant concern that standard datasets used for training and evaluating ML models lack diversity along significant dimensions, for example, geography, gender, and skin
type (Shankar et al., 2017; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018).
Lack of diversity in evaluation data can obfuscate disparate
performance when evaluating based on aggregate accuracy
(Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). Lack of diversity in training data can limit the extent to which learned models can
adequately apply to all portions of a population, a concern
highlighted in recent work in the medical domain (Habib
et al., 2019; Hofmanninger et al., 2020).
1
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Esther Rolf <esther_rolf@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Our work aims to develop a general unifying perspective
on the way that dataset composition affects outcomes of
machine learning systems. We focus on dataset allocations:
the number of datapoints from predefined subsets of the
population. While we acknowledge that numerical inclusion of groups is an imperfect proxy of representation, we
believe that allocations provide a useful initial mathematical
abstraction for formulating relationships among diversity,
data collection, and statistical risk. We discuss broader
implications of our formulation in Section 5.
With the implicit assumption that the learning task is well
specified and performance evaluation from data is meaningful for all groups, we ask:
Are group allocations in training data pivotal to performance? To what extent can up-weighting underrepresented
groups help, and when might it actually hurt performance?
Taking a point of view that data collection is a critical component of the overall machine learning process, we study the
effect that dataset composition has on group and population
accuracies. This complements work showing that simply
gathering more data can mitigate some sources of bias or unfairness in ML outcomes (Chen et al., 2018), a phenomenon
which has been observed in practice as well. Indeed, in
response to the Gender Shades study (Buolamwini & Gebru,
2018), companies selectively collected additional data to
decrease the exposed inaccuracies of their facial recognition
models for certain groups, often raising aggregate accuracy
in the process (Raji & Buolamwini, 2019). Given the potential for targeted data collection efforts to repair unintended
outcomes of ML systems, we next ask:
How can we describe “optimal” data allocations for different learning objectives? Does a lack of diversity in largescale datasets align with maximizing population accuracy?
We show that purposeful data collection efforts can proactively support intentional objectives of an ML system, and
that diversity and population objectives are often aligned.
Many datasets have recently been designed or amended to
exhibit diversity of the underlying population (Ryu et al.,
2017; Tschandl et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020). These are
significant undertakings, as data gathering and annotation
must consider consent, privacy, and power concerns in ad-

