Probabilistic Generating Circuits

Honghua Zhang 1 Brendan Juba 2 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract
Generating functions, which are widely used
in combinatorics and probability theory, encode function values into the coefficients of a
polynomial. In this paper, we explore their
use as a tractable probabilistic model, and propose probabilistic generating circuits (PGCs) for
their efficient representation. PGCs are strictly
more expressive efficient than many existing
tractable probabilistic models, including determinantal point processes (DPPs), probabilistic
circuits (PCs) such as sum-product networks, and
tractable graphical models. We contend that PGCs
are not just a theoretical framework that unifies
vastly different existing models, but also show
great potential in modeling realistic data. We
exhibit a simple class of PGCs that are not trivially subsumed by simple combinations of PCs
and DPPs, and obtain competitive performance
on a suite of density estimation benchmarks. We
also highlight PGCs’ connection to the theory of
strongly Rayleigh distributions.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modeling is an important task in machine learning. Scaling up such models is a key challenge: probabilistic
inference quickly becomes intractable as the models become
large and sophisticated (Roth, 1996). Central to this effort is
the development of tractable probabilistic models (TPMs)
that guarantee tractable probabilistic inference in the size
of the model, yet can efficiently represent a wide range of
probability distributions. There has been a proliferation
of different classes of TPMs. Examples include boundedtreewidth graphical models (Meila & Jordan, 2000), determinantal point processes (Borodin & Rains, 2005; Kulesza
& Taskar, 2012), and various probabilistic circuits (Dar1

Computer Science Department, University of California Los
Angeles, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, USA. Correspondence to: Honghua
Zhang <hzhang19@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

wiche, 2009; Kisa et al., 2014; Vergari et al., 2020) such as
sum-product networks (Poon & Domingos, 2011).
Ideally, we want our probabilistic models to be as expressive
efficient (Martens & Medabalimi, 2014) as possible, meaning that they can efficiently represent as many classes of
distributions as possible, and adapt to a wider spectrum of
realistic applications. Often, however, stronger expressive
power comes at the expense of tractability: fewer restrictions can make a model more expressive efficient, but it can
also make probabilistic inference intractable. We therefore
raise the following central research question of this paper:
Does there exist a class of tractable probabilistic models
that is strictly more expressive efficient than current TPMs?
All aforementioned models are usually seen as representing
probability mass functions: they take assignments to random
variables as input and output likelihoods. In contrast, especially in the field of probability theory, it is also common
to represent distributions as probability generating polynomials (or generating polynomials for short). Generating
polynomials are a powerful mathematical tool, but they have
not yet found direct use as a probabilistic machine learning
representation that permits tractable probabilistic inference.
We make the key observation that the marginal probabilities (including likelihoods) for a probability distribution can
be computed by evaluating its generating polynomial in a
particular way. Based on this observation, we propose probabilistic generating circuits (PGCs), a class of probabilistic
models that represent probability generating polynomials
compactly as directed acyclic graphs. PGCs provide a partly
positive answer to our research question: they are the first
known class of TPMs that are strictly more expressive efficient than decomposable probabilistic circuits (PCs), in
particular, sum-product networks, and determinantal point
processes (DPPs) while supporting tractable marginal inference.
Section 2 formally defines PGCs and establishes their
tractability by presenting an efficient algorithm for computing marginals. Section 3 demonstrates the expressive
power of PGCs by showing that they subsume PCs and
DPPs while remaining strictly more expressive efficient.
Section 4 shows that there are PGCs that cannot be represented by PCs with DPPs as leaves. Section 5 evaluates
PGCs on standard density estimation benchmarks: even the

