Demystifying Inductive Biases for (Beta-)VAE Based Architectures

Dominik Zietlow 1 Michal Rolı́nek 1 Georg Martius 1

Abstract
The performance of β-Variational-Autoencoders
(β-VAEs) and their variants on learning semantically meaningful, disentangled representations
is unparalleled. On the other hand, there are theoretical arguments suggesting the impossibility
of unsupervised disentanglement. In this work,
we shed light on the inductive bias responsible
for the success of VAE-based architectures. We
show that in classical datasets the structure of variance induced by the generating factors is conveniently aligned with the latent directions fostered
by the VAE objective. This builds the pivotal
bias on which the disentangling abilities of VAEs
rely. By small, elaborate perturbations of existing datasets, we hide the convenient correlation
structure that is easily exploited by a variety of
architectures. To demonstrate this, we construct
modified versions of standard datasets in which (i)
the generative factors are perfectly preserved; (ii)
each image undergoes a mild transformation causing a small change of variance; (iii) the leading
VAE-based disentanglement architectures fail
to produce disentangled representations while
the performance of a non-variational method
remains unchanged.

1. Introduction
The task of unsupervised learning of interpretable data representations has a long history. From classical approaches
using linear algebra e.g. via Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) (Pearson, 1901) or statistical methods such as Independent Component Analysis (ICA) (Comon, 1994) all the
way to more recent approaches that rely on deep learning
architectures.
The cornerstone architecture is the Variational Autoencoder
(Kingma & Welling, 2014) (VAE) which clearly demon1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
Germany.
Correspondence to: Dominik Zietlow <dzietlow@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

strates both high semantic quality as well as good performance in terms of disentanglement. Until today, derivates of
VAEs (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018a; Chen et al.,
2018; Kumar et al., 2017; Klindt et al., 2021) excel over
other architectures in terms of disentanglement metrics. The
extent of the VAE’s success even prompted recent deeper
analyses of its inner workings (Rolinek et al., 2019; Burgess
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Mathieu et al., 2018).
If we treat the overloaded term disentanglement to the highest of its aspirations, as the ability to recover the true generating factors of data, fundamental problems arise. As
explained by Locatello et al. (2019), already the concept
of generative factors is compromised from a statistical perspective: two (or in fact infinitely many) sets of generative
factors can generate statistically indistinguishable datasets.
Yet, the scores on the disentanglement benchmarks are high
and continue to rise. This apparent contradiction stems from
biases present in used datasets, metrics, and architectures.
It was concluded in Locatello et al. (2020) that
[...] future work on disentanglement learning
should be explicit about the role of inductive biases and (implicit) supervision [...].
which did not happen for the majority of existing unsupervised approaches. We close this gap for VAE-based
architectures on the two most common datasets, namely
dSprites (Matthey et al., 2017) and Shapes3d (Burgess &
Kim, 2018).
The main hypothesis of this work is that all unsupervised,
VAE-based disentanglement architectures are successful because they exploit the same structural bias in the data. The
ground truth generating factors are well aligned with the
nonlinear principal components that VAEs strive for. This
bias can be reduced by introducing a small change of the local correlation structure of the input data, which, however,
perfectly preserves the set of generative factors. We evaluate a set of approaches on slightly modified versions of the
two leading datasets in which each image undergoes a modification inducing little variance. We report drastic drops of
disentanglement performance on the altered datasets.
On a technical level, we build on the findings by Rolinek
et al. (2019) who argued that VAEs recover the nonlinear
principal components of the data. In other words, they recover a set of scalars that embody the sources of variance

