Descending through a Crowded Valley —
Benchmarking Deep Learning Optimizers
Robin M. Schmidt * 1 Frank Schneider * 1 Philipp Hennig 1 2

Abstract
Choosing the optimizer is considered to be among
the most crucial design decisions in deep learning,
and it is not an easy one. The growing literature
now lists hundreds of optimization methods. In
the absence of clear theoretical guidance and conclusive empirical evidence, the decision is often
made based on anecdotes. In this work, we aim
to replace these anecdotes, if not with a conclusive ranking, then at least with evidence-backed
heuristics. To do so, we perform an extensive,
standardized benchmark of ffteen particularly
popular deep learning optimizers while giving
a concise overview of the wide range of possible
choices. Analyzing more than 50,000 individual
runs, we contribute the following three points:
(i) Optimizer performance varies greatly across
tasks. (ii) We observe that evaluating multiple
optimizers with default parameters works approximately as well as tuning the hyperparameters of
a single, fxed optimizer. (iii) While we cannot
discern an optimization method clearly dominating across all tested tasks, we identify a signifcantly reduced subset of specifc optimizers and
parameter choices that generally lead to competitive results in our experiments: A DAM remains a
strong contender, with newer methods failing to
signifcantly and consistently outperform it. Our
open-sourced results1 are available as challenging and well-tuned baselines for more meaningful
evaluations of novel optimization methods without requiring any further computational efforts.
*
Equal contribution 1 Methods of Machine Learning, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Robin M. Schmidt <robin.schmidt.97@web.de>, Frank Schneider
<f.schneider@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/SirRob1997/
Crowded-Valley---Results

1. Introduction
Large-scale stochastic optimization drives a wide variety of
machine learning tasks. Because choosing the right optimization method and effectively tuning its hyperparameters
heavily infuences the training speed and fnal performance
of the learned model, it is an important, every-day challenge
to practitioners. It is probably the task that requires the most
time and resources in many applications. Hence, stochastic
optimization has been a focal point of research, engendering an ever-growing list of methods (cf. Figure 1), many of
them targeted at deep learning. The hypothetical machine
learning practitioner who is able to keep up with the literature now has the choice among hundreds of methods (see
Table 2 in the appendix), each with their own set of tunable
hyperparameters, when deciding how to train a model.
There is limited theoretical analysis that clearly favors one
of these choices over the others. Some authors have offered
empirical comparisons on comparably small sets of popular methods (e.g. Wilson et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2019;
Sivaprasad et al., 2020); but for most optimizers, the only
empirical evaluation is offered by the original work introducing the method. Many practitioners and researchers,
meanwhile, rely on personal and anecdotal experience, and
informal discussion with colleagues or on social media.
The result is an often unclear, ever-changing “state of the
art” occasionally driven by hype. The key obstacle for an
objective benchmark is the combinatorial cost of such an
endeavor posed by comparing a large number of methods
on a large number of problems, with the high resource and
time cost of tuning each method’s parameters and repeating
each (stochastic) experiment repeatedly for fdelity.
We conduct a large-scale benchmark of optimizers to ground
the ongoing debate about deep learning optimizers on empirical evidence, and to help understand how the choice of
optimization methods and hyperparameters infuences the
training performance. Specifcally, we examine whether
recently proposed methods show an improved performance
compared to more established methods such as SGD or
A DAM. Additionally, we assess whether there exist optimization methods with well-working default hyperparameters that are able to keep up with tuned optimizers. To this
end, we evaluate ffteen optimization methods, selected for

