On the Optimality of Batch Policy Optimization Algorithms

Chenjun Xiao * 1 2 Yifan Wu * 3 Tor Littlemore 4 Bo Dai 2 Jincheng Mei 1 2 Lihong Li † 5 Csaba Szepesvari 1 4
Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract
Batch policy optimization considers leveraging
existing data for policy construction before interacting with an environment. Although interest
in this problem has grown significantly in recent
years, its theoretical foundations remain underdeveloped. To advance the understanding of this
problem, we provide three results that characterize the limits and possibilities of batch policy optimization in the finite-armed stochastic bandit
setting. First, we introduce a class of confidenceadjusted index algorithms that unifies optimistic
and pessimistic principles in a common framework, which enables a general analysis. For this
family, we show that any confidence-adjusted index algorithm is minimax optimal, whether it
be optimistic, pessimistic or neutral. Our analysis reveals that instance-dependent optimality,
commonly used to establish optimality of on-line
stochastic bandit algorithms, cannot be achieved
by any algorithm in the batch setting. In particular, for any algorithm that performs optimally in
some environment, there exists another environment where the same algorithm suffers arbitrarily
larger regret. Therefore, to establish a framework
for distinguishing algorithms, we introduce a new
weighted-minimax criterion that considers the inherent difficulty of optimal value prediction. We
demonstrate how this criterion can be used to
justify commonly used pessimistic principles for
batch policy optimization.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of batch policy optimization, where
a learner must infer a behavior policy given only access to
*
Equal contribution † Work done when Lihong Li was with
Google Research 1 University of Alberta 2 Google Research, Brain
Team 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 DeepMind 5 Amazon. Correspondence to: Chenjun Xiao <chenjun@ualberta.ca>, Yifan Wu
<yw4@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a fixed dataset of previously collected experience, with no
further environment interaction available. Interest in this
problem has grown recently, as effective solutions hold the
promise of extracting powerful decision making strategies
from years of logged experience, with important applications to many practical problems (Strehl et al., 2011; Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Covington et al., 2016; Jaques
et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020).
Despite the prevalence and importance of batch policy optimization, the theoretical understanding of this problem has,
until recently, been rather limited. A fundamental challenge
in batch policy optimization is the insufficient coverage
of the dataset. In online reinforcement learning (RL), the
learner is allowed to continually explore the environment to
collect useful information for the learning tasks. By contrast,
in the batch setting, the learner has to evaluate and optimize
over various candidate policies based only on experience
that has been collected a priori. The distribution mismatch
between the logged experience and agent-environment interaction with a learned policy can cause erroneous value
overestimation, which leads to the failure of standard policy
optimization methods (Fujimoto et al., 2019). To overcome
this problem, recent studies propose to use the pessimistic
principle, by either learning a pessimistic value function
(Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Wu et al., 2019; Jaques
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; 2020) or pessimistic surrogate (Buckman et al., 2020), or planning with a pessimistic
model (Kidambi et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020). However, it
still remains unclear how to maximally exploit the logged
experience without further exploration.
In this paper, we investigate batch policy optimization with
finite-armed stochastic bandits, and make three contributions toward better understanding the statistical limits of
this problem.
First, we prove a minimax lower bound of
√
Ω(1/ mini ni ) on the simple regret for batch policy optimization with stochastic bandits, where ni is the number
of times arm i was chosen in the dataset. We then introduce the notion of a confidence-adjusted index algorithm
that unifies both the optimistic and pessimistic principles
in a single algorithmic framework. Our analysis suggests
that any index algorithm with an appropriate adjustment,
whether pessimistic or optimistic, is minimax optimal.

