Incentivized Bandit Learning with Self-Reinforcing User Preferences

Tianchen Zhou 1 Jia Liu 1 Chaosheng Dong 2 Jingyuan Deng 2

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a new multi-armed
bandit (MAB) online learning model that considers real-world phenomena in many recommender
systems: (i) the learning agent cannot pull the
arms by itself and thus has to offer payments to
users to incentivize arm-pulling indirectly; and
(ii) if users with specific arm preferences are well
rewarded, they induce a “self-reinforcing” effect
in the sense that they will attract more users of
similar arm preferences. Besides addressing the
tradeoff of exploration and exploitation, another
key feature of this new MAB model is to balance reward and incentivizing payment. The goal
of the agent is to minimize the accumulative regret over a fixed time horizon T with a low total
payment. Our contributions in this paper are twofold: (i) We propose a new MAB model with
random arm selection that considers the relationship of users’ self-reinforcing preferences and
incentives; and (ii) We leverage the properties of
a multi-color Pólya urn with nonlinear feedback
models to propose two MAB policies termed “AtLeast-n Explore-Then-Commit” and “UCB-List.”
We prove that both policies achieve O(log T ) expected regret with O(log T ) expected payment
over a time horizon T . We conduct numerical
simulations to demonstrate and verify the performances of these two policies and study their robustness under various settings.

1. Introduction
In many online e-Commerce platforms, there exists a selfreinforcing phenomenon, where the current user’s behavior
is influenced by the user behaviors in the past (Barabási
& Albert, 1999; Chakrabarti et al., 2005; Ratkiewicz et al.,
2010), or an item is getting increasingly more popular as it
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 2 Amazon, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Tianchen Zhou
<zhou.2220@osu.edu>, Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

accumulates more positive feedbacks. For example, on a
movie rental website, current customers tend to have more
interest in Movie A that has 500 positive reviews, compared
with Movie B that only has 10 positive reviews. As an online
learner, the e-Commerce service provider wants to identify
the most profitable item in order to maximize the total profit
in the long run. In the literature, such an online profit
maximization problem can often be modeled by the multiarmed bandit (MAB) framework (Berry & Fristedt, 1985;
Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012). However, existing works on
MAB that consider the self-reinforcing preferences remain
quite limited (see, e.g., Fiez et al. (2018); Shah et al. (2018)).
In fact, Shah et al. (2018) showed that the self-reinforcing
preferences might render the classic UCB (upper confidence
bound) policy (Auer et al., 2002) sub-optimal, and new
optimal arm selection algorithms are necessary.
On the other hand, in many online learning problems that
utilize the MAB framework for sequential decision making (e.g., recommender systems, healthcare, finance, dynamic pricing, see Bouneffouf & Rish (2019)), the learning
agent (e.g., an online service provider) cannot select the
arms directly. Rather, arms are pulled by the users who
are exhibiting self-reinforcing preferences. The agent thus
needs to incentivize users to select certain arms to maximize
the total rewards, while avoiding incurring high incentive
costs. Hence, the bandit models in (Fiez et al., 2018; Shah
et al., 2018) are no longer applicable, even though the selfreinforcing preferences behavior is considered. Meanwhile,
there exist several works (Frazier et al., 2014; Mansour et al.,
2015; 2016; Wang & Huang, 2018) that studied incentivized
bandit under various settings and proposed efficient algorithms (more details in Section 2), but none of these works
models users with self-reinforcing preferences.
The missing of joint modeling of incentives and selfreinforcing preferences in the existing MAB framework
(two key features of many online e-Commerce systems) motivates us to fill this gap in this paper. Specifically, in this
work, we first propose a more general MAB model with
stochastic arm selections following user preferences, which
is closely modeling random user behaviors in most online
recommender systems. This is in stark contrast to most
existing works in the areas of incentivized bandits (Frazier
et al., 2014; Wang & Huang, 2018), where a (unrealistic)
deterministic greedy user behavior is often assumed. Un-

