Instance Speciﬁc Approximations for Submodular Maximization

Eric Balkanski 1 Sharon Qian 2 Yaron Singer 2

Abstract
For many optimization problems in machine learning, ﬁnding an optimal solution is computationally intractable and we seek algorithms that perform well in practice. Since computational intractability often results from pathological instances, we look for methods to benchmark algorithms’ performance against optimal solutions
on real-world instances. The main challenge is
that an optimal solution cannot be efﬁciently computed for intractable problems, and we therefore
often do not know how far a solution is from being optimal. A major question is therefore how
to measure the performance of an algorithm in
comparison to an optimal solution on instances
we encounter in practice.
In this paper, we address this question in the
context of submodular optimization problems.
For the canonical problem of submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint, it is intractable to compute a solution that is better than
a 1 − 1/e ≈ 0.63 fraction of the optimum. Algorithms like the celebrated greedy algorithm are
guaranteed to achieve this 1 − 1/e bound on any
instance, and are used in practice.
Our main contribution is not a new algorithm
for submodular maximization but an analytical
method that measures how close an algorithm
for submodular maximization is to optimal on a
given problem instance. We use this method to
show that on a wide variety of real-world datasets
and objectives, the approximation of the solution
found by greedy goes well beyond 1 − 1/e and is
often at least 0.95. We develop this method using
a novel technique that lower bounds the objective
of a dual minimization problem to obtain an upper
bound on the value of an optimal solution to the
primal maximization problem.
1
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 2 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Balkanski
<eb3224@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A central challenge in machine learning is that many of the
optimization problems we deal with are computationally
intractable. For problems like clustering, sparse recovery,
and maximum likelihood estimation for example, ﬁnding
an optimal solution is computationally intractable and we
seek heuristics that perform well in practice. Computational intractability implies that under worst case analysis
any efﬁcient algorithm is suboptimal; however, worst-case
approximation guarantees are often due to pathological instances that are not representative of instances we encounter
in practice. Thus, we would like to be assured that the algorithms we use, despite poor performance on pathological
instances, perform provably well on real-world instances.
In order to evaluate the performance of an algorithm on realworld instances, we would like to measure its performance
in comparison to an optimal solution. The main challenge
however, is that we cannot evaluate the performance of an
algorithm against an optimal solution since ﬁnding an optimal solution for a computationally intractable problem is,
by deﬁnition, intractable. Thus, we often do not know how
far an algorithm solution is from optimal, and whether there
is a substantially better algorithm. Therefore, for computationally intractable problems, our main challenge is not
necessarily how to design better algorithms, but rather how
to measure the performance of an algorithm in comparison
to a theoretically optimal solution on real-world instances.
How do we measure the performance of an algorithm on
speciﬁc instances for problems that are intractable?
In this paper, we develop a method to measure how close
to optimal the performance of an algorithm is on speciﬁc
instances for the broad class of submodular maximization
problems. Since many objectives that we aim to optimize,
such as coverage, diversity, entropy, and graph cuts are
submodular, submodular maximization algorithms are heavily employed in applications such as speech and document
summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011), recommender systems (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016b), feature selection (Das
& Kempe, 2011), sensor placement (Guestrin et al., 2005),
and network analysis (Kempe et al., 2003). Submodular
maximization provides an ideal framework to address this
problem since it is intractable to compute a solution that

