Fairness for Image Generation with Uncertain Sensitive Attributes

Ajil Jalal * 1 Sushrut Karmalkar * 2 Jessica Hoffmann * 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Eric Price 2

Abstract
This work tackles the issue of fairness in the
context of generative procedures, such as image
super-resolution, which entail different definitions
from the standard classification setting. Moreover,
while traditional group fairness definitions are typically defined with respect to specified protected
groups – camouflaging the fact that these groupings are artificial and carry historical and political motivations – we emphasize that there are no
ground truth identities. For instance, should South
and East Asians be viewed as a single group or
separate groups? Should we consider one race
as a whole or further split by gender? Choosing
which groups are valid and who belongs in them
is an impossible dilemma and being “fair” with
respect to Asians may require being “unfair” with
respect to South Asians. This motivates the introduction of definitions that allow algorithms to be
oblivious to the relevant groupings.
We define several intuitive notions of group fairness and study their incompatibilities and tradeoffs. We show that the natural extension of demographic parity is strongly dependent on the
grouping, and impossible to achieve obliviously.
On the other hand, the conceptually new definition we introduce, Conditional Proportional Representation, can be achieved obliviously through
Posterior Sampling. Our experiments validate our
theoretical results and achieve fair image reconstruction using state-of-the-art generative models.

1. Introduction
Fairness, accountability, and transparency have taken a frontrow seat in the machine learning community. Numerous
*

Equal contribution .
Our code and models are
available at:
https://github.com/ajiljalal/
1
code-cs-fairness.
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at
Austin. Correspondence to: Ajil Jalal <ajiljalal@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

recent controversies have erupted over how current machine
learning systems already in use can be racist (Simonite,
2018), sexist (Kay et al., 2015), homophobic (Morse, 2017),
or all of the above (Moore, 2016). In a recent controversy, a
low-resolution image of Barack Obama was put into PULSE,
a super-resolution generative model (Menon et al., 2020b),
but the resulting image was of a distinctly White man. While
we generally have to be careful when identifying the race
of a person that does not exist, such as the one represented
by the generated image, multiple other reconstructions by
PULSE strongly suggest that this algorithm contributes to
the systemic bias against people of color.
Accuracy of representation as a fairness notion is a significant leap from the more traditional classification setting,
in which we require some form of independence (or conditional independence) between the sensitive attributes and
the algorithm prediction. In the context of image reconstruction, the output itself can be considered as having sensitive
attributes, and we want the sensitive attributes of the input
to match the sensitive attributes of the output – which is fundamentally different from an independence condition. This
leads us to introduce and discuss new fairness definitions,
specific to the field of image generation, reconstruction,
denoising and super-resolution.
In light of the “White Obama” controversy (Menon et al.,
2020b), it has been suggested that reconstruction algorithms
are biased because the datasets are not representative of the
true population distribution. While it is true that the datasets
are biased (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Khosla et al., 2012),
current algorithms also play their part in widening this gap
(Wang et al., 2019; Terhörst et al., 2020), such that majority classes get overrepresented, and minorities get further
underrepresented. Indeed, when applying PULSE (Menon
et al., 2020b) to an unbalanced dataset with 80% dogs (majority class) and 20% cats, we observe that 80% of cats are
mistakenly reconstructed as dogs, while only 2% of dogs
are reconstructed as cats (see Figure 4b). When cats are
the 80% majority, the situation reverses to 1% and 98%
mistakes, respectively (see Figure 4d).
There is a simple intuitive reason why reconstruction algorithms designed to maximize accuracy will increase bias.
Assume we observe a noisy version y of an image x∗ that
is either a dog or a cat. Assume cats are the minority, with

