Uncovering the Connections Between
Adversarial Transferability and Knowledge Transferability

Kaizhao Liang * 1 Jacky Y. Zhang * 1 Boxin Wang 1 Zhuolin Yang 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1 Bo Li 1

Abstract
Knowledge transferability, or transfer learning,
has been widely adopted to allow a pre-trained
model in the source domain to be effectively
adapted to downstream tasks in the target domain. It is thus important to explore and understand the factors affecting knowledge transferability. In this paper, as the first work, we
analyze and demonstrate the connections between
knowledge transferability and another important
phenomenon–adversarial transferability, i.e., adversarial examples generated against one model
can be transferred to attack other models. Our
theoretical studies show that adversarial transferability indicates knowledge transferability, and
vice versa. Moreover, based on the theoretical
insights, we propose two practical adversarial
transferability metrics to characterize this process,
serving as bidirectional indicators between adversarial and knowledge transferability. We conduct
extensive experiments for different scenarios on
diverse datasets, showing a positive correlation between adversarial transferability and knowledge
transferability. Our findings will shed light on future research about effective knowledge transfer
learning and adversarial transferability analyses.
All code and data are available here.

1. Introduction
Knowledge transfer is quickly becoming the standard approach for fast learning adaptation across domains. Also
known as transfer learning or learning transfer, knowledge
transfer has been a critical technology for enabling several
real-world applications, including object detection (Zhang
et al., 2014), image segmentation (Kendall et al., 2018),
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA. Correspondence to: Oluwasanmi Koyejo <sanmi@illinois.edu>, Bo Li
<lbo@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

multi-lingual machine translation (Dong et al., 2015), and
language understanding evaluation (Wang et al., 2019a),
among others. For example, since the release of ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), pretrained ImageNet models (e.g., on TensorFlow Hub or PyTorch-Hub) have become
the default option for the knowledge transfer source due to
its broad coverage of visual concepts and compatibility with
various visual tasks (Huh et al., 2016). Motivated by its
importance, many studies have explored the factors associated with knowledge transferability. Most recently, Salman
et al. (2020) showed that more robust pretrained ImageNet
models transfer better to downstream tasks, which reveals
that adversarial training helps to improve knowledge transferability.
In the meantime, adversarial transferability has been extensively studied—a phenomenon that an adversarial instance
generated against one model has high probability attack another one without additional modification (Papernot et al.,
2016; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Joon Oh et al., 2017). Hence,
adversarial transferability is widely exploited in black-box
attacks (Ilyas et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2016; Naseer et al.,
2019). A line of work has been conducted to bound the
adversarial transferability based on model (gradient) similarity (Tramèr et al., 2017b). Given that both adversarial
transferability and knowledge transferability are impacted
by certain model similarity and adversarial ML properties,
in this work, we aim to conduct the first study to analyze
the connections between them and ask,
What is the fundamental connection between
knowledge transferability and adversarial transferability? Can we measure one and indicate the
other?
Technical Contributions. In this paper, we take the first
step towards exploring the fundamental relation between
adversarial transferability and knowledge transferability. We
make contributions on both theoretical and empirical fronts.
• We formally define the adversarial transferability for the
first time by considering all potential adversarial perturbation vectors. We then conduct thorough and novel theoretical analysis to characterize the precise connection
between adversarial transferability and knowledge transferability based on our definition.

