Near-Optimal Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
in Non-Stationary Episodic MDPs

Weichao Mao 1 Kaiqing Zhang 1 Ruihao Zhu 2 David Simchi-Levi 2 Tamer Başar 1

Abstract
We consider model-free reinforcement learning
(RL) in non-stationary Markov decision processes.
Both the reward functions and the state transition functions are allowed to vary arbitrarily over
time as long as their cumulative variations do
not exceed certain variation budgets. We propose Restarted Q-Learning with Upper Confidence Bounds (RestartQ-UCB), the first modelfree algorithm for non-stationary RL, and show
that it outperforms existing solutions in terms of
dynamic regret. Specifically, RestartQ-UCB with
Freedman-type bonus terms achieves a dynamic
1
1
2
1
regret bound of e
O(S 3 A 3 ∆ 3 HT 3 ), where S and
A are the numbers of states and actions, respectively, ∆ > 0 is the variation budget, H is the
number of time steps per episode, and T is the
total number of time steps. We further show
that our algorithm is nearly optimal by establishing an information-theoretical lower bound
1
1
1
2
2
of Ω(S 3 A 3 ∆ 3 H 3 T 3 ), the first lower bound in
non-stationary RL. Numerical experiments validate the advantages of RestartQ-UCB in terms of
both cumulative rewards and computational efficiency. We further demonstrate the power of our
results in the context of multi-agent RL, where
non-stationarity is a key challenge.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on the class of problems where an agent maximizes its cumulative reward
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
& Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA 2 Institute for
Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Weichao Mao <weichao2@illinois.edu>, Kaiqing Zhang
<kzhang66@illinois.edu>, Ruihao Zhu <rzhu@mit.edu>,
David Simchi-Levi <dslevi@mit.edu>,
Tamer Başar
<basar1@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

through sequential interactions with an initially unknown
but fixed environment, usually modeled by a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In classical RL problems, the state
transition functions and the reward functions are assumed
to be time-invariant, i.e., stationary. However, stationary models cannot capture the time-varying environments
in a wide range of sequential decision-making problems,
such as online advertisement auctions (Cai et al., 2017; Lu
et al., 2019), dynamic pricing (Chawla et al., 2016; Mao
et al., 2018), traffic management (Chen et al., 2020), healthcare operations (Shortreed et al., 2011), and inventory control (Agrawal & Jia, 2019).
Among others, we want to highlight the connection between
non-stationary RL and multi-agent RL (Littman, 1994). In
multi-agent RL, a set of agents collaborate or compete by
taking actions in a shared environment. Consequently, each
agent is facing a non-stationary environment, especially
when the agents learn and update policies simultaneously,
as the actions of the other agents can alter the environment.
We discuss this connection in greater details in Section 7
and also provide more applications of non-stationary RL to
other important problems, such as sequential transfer and
multi-task RL, in Appendix A.
RL in a non-stationary MDP is highly non-trivial due to
the following challenges. First, similar to stationary RL,
the agent faces the exploration vs. exploitation dilemma:
it needs to explore the uncertain environment efficiently
while maximizing its rewards along the way. In Jaksch et al.
(2010), the authors proposed to leverage the “optimism in
the face of uncertain” principle to guide exploration. Another challenge, which is unique to non-stationary RL, is
the trade-off between remembering and forgetting. On the
one hand, since the underlying MDP varies over time, data
samples collected in prior interactions can become obsolete.
In fact, it has been shown that a standard stationary RL algorithm might incur a linear regret if the non-stationarity is not
handled properly (Ortner et al., 2019). On the other hand,
the agent needs to extract a sufficient amount of information
from historical data to inform future decision-making.
To resolve the aforementioned challenges, Ortner et al.
(2019) and Cheung et al. (2020) have proposed algorithms
to guide learning in non-stationary MDPs. Although both

