Unbalanced minibatch Optimal Transport; applications to Domain Adaptation

Kilian Fatras 1 Thibault Séjourné 2 Nicolas Courty 1 Rémi Flamary 3

Abstract
Optimal transport distances have found many applications in machine learning for their capacity
to compare non-parametric probability distributions. Yet their algorithmic complexity generally
prevents their direct use on large scale datasets.
Among the possible strategies to alleviate this issue, practitioners can rely on computing estimates
of these distances over subsets of data, i.e. minibatches. While computationally appealing, we
highlight in this paper some limits of this strategy,
arguing it can lead to undesirable smoothing effects. As an alternative, we suggest that the same
minibatch strategy coupled with unbalanced optimal transport can yield more robust behavior. We
discuss the associated theoretical properties, such
as unbiased estimators, existence of gradients and
concentration bounds. Our experimental study
shows that in challenging problems associated to
domain adaptation, the use of unbalanced optimal transport leads to significantly better results,
competing with or surpassing recent baselines.

1. Introduction
Computing distances between distributions is a fundamental problem in machine learning. As an example, considering the space of distributions M+ (X ) over a space X ,
and given an empirical distribution α ∈ M+ (X ), many
machine learning problems amount to estimate a distribution βλ parametrized by a vector λ which approximates
the distribution α. In order to compute the dissimilarities
between distributions, it is common to rely on a contrast
function or divergence L : M+ (X ) × M+ (X ) → R+ . In
this setting, the goal is to find the optimal λ∗ which minimizes the distance L between the distributions βλ and α,
i.e. λ∗ = argminλ L(α, βλ ). As the available distributions
are mostly empirical and come from data, the function L
1
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, I NRIA, IRISA, France 2 ENS, PSL
University 3 École Polytechnique, CMAP, France. Correspondence
to: Kilian Fatras <kilian.fatras@irisa.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

needs good statistical estimation properties and optimization guarantees when using modern optimization techniques.
Optimal transport (OT) losses have emerged recently as a
competitive loss candidate for generative models (Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Genevay et al., 2018). It also proved to be competitive in the context of Domain Adaptation (Courty et al.,
2017; Courty et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018) or for missing
data imputation (Muzellec et al., 2020). The corresponding
estimator is usually found in the literature under the name
of Minimum Kantorovich Estimator (Bassetti et al., 2006;
Peyré & Cuturi, 2019). However the computation of OT
losses is a challenging problem, its computational cost being
of order O(n3 log(n)), where n is the number of samples.
Variants and approximations of optimal transport have been
proposed to reduce its complexity. One of the most popular
consists in adding an entropic regularization (Cuturi, 2013),
leading to the Sinkhorn algorithm with complexity Õ(n2 ) in
both space and time. However, when n is large, computing
OT remains rather expensive and might not fit on GPUs.
The KeOps package (Feydy et al., 2019) allows to overcome
this difficulty and avoid overflows by storing operations as
formulas and stream computation on the fly. It is still difficult to use it in deep learning applications which involves
high dimensional data and repeated computations of gradients. Another approach is to focus on the Wasserstein-1
distance which has a nice reformulation but needs to approximate 1-Lipschitz functions, which meets some difficulties
in practice (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017).
Minibatch Optimal Transport. A straightforward and
scalable approach consists in computing OT solutions over
subsets (minibatches) of the original data (α and β) and averaging the results as a proxy for the original problem. Such
idea stems from the need to scale OT in practice and was
applied in several situations (Kolouri et al., 2016; Genevay
et al., 2018; Damodaran et al., 2018; Liutkus et al., 2019).
It was proven for generative models that minimizers of the
minibatch loss converge to the true minimizer when the
minibatch size increases (Bernton et al., 2019). There exists deviation bounds between the true OT loss and a single
minibatch estimate (Sommerfeld et al., 2019). Finally, concentration bounds and optimization properties for averaged
minibatch OT were exhibited in (Fatras et al., 2020; 2021).
However, the gain in computation time is achieved at the
expense of the quality of the final transport plan, which turns

