CombOptNet: Fit the Right NP-Hard Problem by
Learning Integer Programming Constraints

Anselm Paulus 1 Michal Rolı́nek 1 Vı́t Musil 2 Brandon Amos 3 Georg Martius 1

P
I L er
v
l
So

Figure 1: CombOptNet as a module in a deep architecture.

Abstract

Bridging logical and algorithmic reasoning with
modern machine learning techniques is a fundamental challenge with potentially transformative
impact. On the algorithmic side, many NP- HARD
problems can be expressed as integer programs, in
which the constraints play the role of their “combinatorial specification.” In this work, we aim to
integrate integer programming solvers into neural
network architectures as layers capable of learning both the cost terms and the constraints. The
resulting end-to-end trainable architectures jointly
extract features from raw data and solve a suitable
(learned) combinatorial problem with state-of-theart integer programming solvers. We demonstrate
the potential of such layers with an extensive performance analysis on synthetic data and with a
demonstration on a competitive computer vision
keypoint matching benchmark.

1

Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia 3 Facebook AI Research,
USA. Correspondence to: Anselm Paulus & Georg Martius <firstname.lastname@tuebingen.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
It is becoming increasingly clear that to advance artificial
intelligence, we need to dramatically enhance the reasoning, algorithmic, logical, and symbolic capabilities of datadriven models. Only then we can aspire to match humans in
their astonishing ability to perform complicated abstract
tasks such as playing chess only based on visual input.
While there are decades worth of research directed at solving
complicated abstract tasks from their abstract formulation, it
seems very difficult to align these methods with deep learning architectures needed for processing raw inputs. Deep
learning methods often struggle to implicitly acquire the
abstract reasoning capabilities to solve and generalize to
new tasks. Recent work has investigated more structured
paradigms that have more explicit reasoning components,
such as layers capable of convex optimization. In this paper,
we focus on combinatorial optimization, which has been
well-studied and captures nontrivial reasoning capabilities
over discrete objects. Enabling its unrestrained usage in
machine learning models should fundamentally enrich the
set of available components.
On the technical level, the main challenge of incorporating
combinatorial optimization into the model typically amounts
to non-differentiability of methods that operate with discrete
inputs or outputs. Three basic approaches to overcome
this are to a) develop “soft” continuous versions of the discrete algorithms (Wang et al., 2019; Zanfir & Sminchisescu,
2018); b) adjust the topology of neural network architectures to express certain algorithmic behaviour (Graves et al.,

