M ANDOLINE: Model Evaluation under Distribution Shift
Mayee Chen * 1 Karan Goel * 1 Nimit Sohoni * 2 Fait Poms 1 Kayvon Fatahalian 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Machine learning models are often deployed in
different settings than they were trained and validated on, posing a challenge to practitioners who
wish to predict how well the deployed model will
perform on a target distribution. If an unlabeled
sample from the target distribution is available,
along with a labeled sample from a possibly different source distribution, standard approaches
such as importance weighting can be applied to
estimate performance on the target. However, importance weighting struggles when the source and
target distributions have non-overlapping support
or are high-dimensional. Taking inspiration from
fields such as epidemiology and polling, we develop M ANDOLINE, a new evaluation framework
that mitigates these issues. Our key insight is that
practitioners may have prior knowledge about the
ways in which the distribution shifts, which we
can use to better guide the importance weighting procedure. Specifically, users write simple
“slicing functions”—noisy, potentially correlated
binary functions intended to capture possible axes
of distribution shift—to compute reweighted performance estimates. We further describe a density
ratio estimation framework for the slices and show
how its estimation error scales with slice quality
and dataset size. Empirical validation on NLP and
vision tasks shows that M ANDOLINE can estimate
performance on the target distribution up to 3×
more accurately compared to standard baselines.

1

Introduction

Model evaluation is central to the machine learning (ML)
pipeline. Ostensibly, the goal of evaluation is for practi*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, USA 2 Institute for Computational
and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford,
USA. Correspondence to: Mayee Chen <mfchen@stanford.edu>,
Karan Goel <kgoel@cs.stanford.edu>, Nimit Sohoni
<nims@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tioners to determine if their models will perform well when
deployed. Unfortunately, standard evaluation falls short
of this goal on two counts. First, evaluation data is frequently from a different distribution than the one on which
the model will be deployed, for instance due to data collection procedures or distributional shifts over time. Second,
practitioners play a passive role in evaluation, which misses
an opportunity to leverage their understanding of what distributional shifts they expect and what shifts they want their
model to be robust to.
By contrast, fields such as polling (Isakov & Kuriwaki,
2020) and epidemiology (Austin, 2011) “adjust” evaluation estimates to account for such shifts using techniques
such as propensity weighting, correcting for differences
between treatment and control groups in observational studies (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; D’Agostino Jr, 1998).
Taking inspiration from this, we develop M ANDOLINE (Figure 1), a user-guided, theoretically grounded framework
for evaluating ML models. Using a labeled validation set
from a source distribution and an unlabeled set from a target
(test) distribution of interest, M ANDOLINE computes performance estimates for the target distribution using adjusted
estimates on the validation set.
A central challenge is how to account for the shift between
source and target distributions when adjusting estimates. A
straightforward approach is to use importance weighting
(IW)—estimating the density ratio between source and target data to adjust performance. IW works well when the
source and target distribution overlap significantly but performs poorly when the distributions’ supports have little
overlap, as is common under distribution shift. Additionally, IW works well in low dimensions but struggles with
large variances of estimated ratios in high dimensional settings (Stojanov et al., 2019).
Our key insight is that practitioners can use their understanding to identify the axes along which the distributions may
have changed. Practitioners commonly express this knowledge programmatically by grouping (“slicing”) data along
such axes for analysis. For example, in sentiment analysis a
heuristic may use the word “not” to detect sentence negation
(Figure 1). Or, slices can identify critical data subsets (e.g.
X-rays of critically-ill patients with chest drains (OakdenRayner et al., 2020) or demographic slices when detecting

