Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning with Context-based Representations
Shagun Sodhani 1 Amy Zhang 1 2 3 Joelle Pineau 1 2 3

Abstract
The benefit of multi-task learning over singletask learning relies on the ability to use relations
across tasks to improve performance on any single task. While sharing representations is an important mechanism to share information across
tasks, its success depends on how well the structure underlying the tasks is captured. In some
real-world situations, we have access to metadata,
or additional information about a task, that may
not provide any new insight in the context of a
single task setup alone but inform relations across
multiple tasks. While this metadata can be useful
for improving multi-task learning performance,
effectively incorporating it can be an additional
challenge. We posit that an efficient approach to
knowledge transfer is through the use of multiple
context-dependent, composable representations
shared across a family of tasks. In this framework,
metadata can help to learn interpretable representations and provide the context to inform which
representations to compose and how to compose
them. We use the proposed approach to obtain
state-of-the-art results in Meta-World, a challenging multi-task benchmark consisting of 50 distinct
robotic manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has made large strides over the
last several years (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019). While these improvements are significant,
much of this success has been restricted to the single task
setting (Teh et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2020b). In contrast, humans are adept at multi-tasking by acquiring new skills and
composing known skills to solve complex tasks (Parascandolo et al., 2018; Allen et al., 2020). For autonomous agents
to adapt effectively in the real world, they need to master multiple tasks in a sample efficient manner. Multi-task
1

Facebook AI Research 2 Mila 3 McGill University. Correspondence to: Shagun Sodhani <sodhani@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

reinforcement learning (MTRL) is a promising approach
to train effective real-world agents (Tanaka & Yamamura,
2003; Rusu et al., 2016; Borsa et al., 2016; Rajeswaran et al.,
2016; El Bsat et al., 2017; Andreas et al., 2017; Igl et al.,
2020; D’Eramo et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020a).
One limitation of existing MTRL methods is the inability to
leverage side information (or metadata), like the description
of a task, to learn generalizable skills and transfer common knowledge across tasks. Such metadata is often available in real-world tasks but is not leveraged in the typical
MTRL setting. This metadata can take the form of natural
language task descriptions or instructions, which are often
incorporated only for human usage to communicate information about tasks. These natural language descriptions have
been utilized in single-task RL setups like goal-oriented
RL (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019; Luketina et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2019). We show that this information can also
be used to learn context-dependent, composable representations shared across a family of tasks, with the metadata
acting as the context. Specifically, we show that the metadata can be used to learn a prior over a collection of encoders
and can be leveraged to select the encoder(s) for any given
task. The learned encoders can specialize to different aspects of the tasks, allowing for more efficient sharing of
knowledge across the tasks. An important additional benefit
is that the learned representations are interpretable.
The default formulation of MTRL environments is as a family of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Bellman, 1957;
Puterman, 1995). This framework does not provide a natural way to incorporate metadata. We therefore turn to the

%!
#!

%!"#
#!"#

"!

"!"#
$!

$!"#

Figure 1. Graphical model of the Contextual MDP setting (left).
Example of different contexts that can affect the task of pouring
(right).

