Distributionally Robust Optimization with Markovian Data

Mengmeng Li 1 Tobias Sutter 1 Daniel Kuhn 1

Abstract
We study a stochastic program where the probability distribution of the uncertain problem parameters is unknown and only indirectly observed via
finitely many correlated samples generated by an
unknown Markov chain with d states. We propose
a data-driven distributionally robust optimization
model to estimate the problem’s objective function and optimal solution. By leveraging results
from large deviations theory, we derive statistical guarantees on the quality of these estimators.
The underlying worst-case expectation problem
is nonconvex and involves O(d2 ) decision variables. Thus, it cannot be solved efficiently for
large d. By exploiting the structure of this problem, we devise a customized Frank-Wolfe algorithm with convex direction-finding subproblems
of size O(d). We prove that this algorithm finds a
stationary point efficiently under mild conditions.
The efficiency of the method is predicated on a
dimensionality reduction enabled by a dual reformulation. Numerical experiments indicate that
our approach has better computational and statistical properties than the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Decision problems under uncertainty are ubiquitous in machine learning, engineering and economics. Traditionally,
such problems are modeled as stochastic programs that seek
a decision x ∈ X ⊆ Rn minimizing an expected loss
EP [L(x, ξ)], where the expectation is taken with respect
to the distribution P of the random problem parameter ξ.
However, more often than not, P is unknown to the decision maker and can only be observed indirectly via a finite
number of training samples ξ1 , . . . , ξT . The classical sample average approximation (SAA) replaces the unknown
probability distribution P with the empirical distribution cor1
Risk Analytics and Optimization Chair, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne. Correspondence to: Mengmeng Li <mengmeng.li@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

responding to the training samples and solves the resulting
empirical risk minimization problem (Shapiro et al., 2014).
Fuelled by modern applications in machine learning, however, there has recently been a surge of alternative methods
for data-driven optimization complementing SAA. Ideally,
any meaningful approach to data-driven optimization should
display the following desirable properties.
(i) Avoiding the optimizer’s curse. It is well understood
that decisions achieving a low empirical cost on the training
dataset may perform poorly on a test dataset generated by
the same distribution. In decision analysis, this phenomenon
is called the optimizer’s curse, and it is closely related to
overfitting in statistics (Smith & Winkler, 2006). Practically
useful schemes should mitigate this detrimental effect.
(ii) Statistical guarantees. Most statistical guarantees for
existing approaches to data-driven optimization critically
rely on the assumption that the training samples are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). This assumption
is often not justifiable or even wrong in practice. Practically
useful methods should offer guarantees that remain valid
when the training samples display serial dependencies.
(iii) Computational tractability. For a data-driven
scheme to be practically useful it is indispensable that the
underlying optimization problems can be solved efficiently.
While the SAA method is computationally tractable, it is
susceptible to the optimizer’s curse if training data is scarce;
see, e.g., (Van Parys et al., 2021). Distributionally robust
optimization (DRO) is an alternative approach that mitigates
overfitting effects (Delage & Ye, 2010; Goh & Sim, 2010;
Wiesemann et al., 2014). DRO seeks worst-case optimal
decisions that minimize the expected loss under the most adverse distribution from within a given ambiguity set, that is,
a distribution family characterized by certain known properties of the unknown data-generating distribution. DRO has
been studied since Scarf’s seminal treatise on the ambiguityaverse newsvendor problem (Scarf, 1958), but it has gained
thrust only with the advent of modern robust optimization
techniques (Bertsimas & Sim, 2004; Ben-Tal et al., 2009).
In many cases of practical interest, DRO problems can be
reformulated exactly as finite convex programs that are solvable in polynomial time. Indeed, such reformulations are
available for many different ambiguity sets defined through
generalized moment constraints (Delage & Ye, 2010; Goh &
Sim, 2010; Wiesemann et al., 2014; Bertsimas et al., 2018),

