Inferring Latent Dynamics Underlying Neural Population Activity
via Neural Differential Equations

Timothy Doyeon Kim 1 Thomas Zhihao Luo 1 Jonathan W. Pillow 1 2 Carlos D. Brody 1 3

Abstract
An important problem in systems neuroscience is
to identify the latent dynamics underlying neural
population activity. Here we address this problem by introducing a low-dimensional nonlinear
model for latent neural population dynamics using neural ordinary differential equations (neural
ODEs), with noisy sensory inputs and Poisson
spike train outputs. We refer to this as the Poisson
Latent Neural Differential Equations (PLNDE)
model. We apply the PLNDE framework to a
variety of synthetic datasets, and show that it accurately infers the phase portraits and fixed points
of nonlinear systems augmented to produce spike
train data, including the FitzHugh-Nagumo oscillator, a 3-dimensional nonlinear spiral, and a
nonlinear sensory decision-making model with
attractor dynamics. Our model significantly outperforms existing methods at inferring single-trial
neural firing rates and the corresponding latent
trajectories that generated them, especially in
the regime where the spike counts and number
of trials are low. We then apply our model to
multi-region neural population recordings from
medial frontal cortex of rats performing an auditory decision-making task. Our model provides a
general, interpretable framework for investigating
the neural mechanisms of decision-making and
other cognitive computations through the lens of
dynamical systems.

a neural population can coordinate movement, or how it
can retain working memory or integrate evidence useful
for decision-making (Hopfield, 1982; Fetz, 1992; Seung,
1996; Brody et al., 2003; Machens et al., 2005; Wong &
Wang, 2006; Chaudhuri & Fiete, 2016). Recent experiments
showed that neural population activities across a surprisingly
large number of brain regions and species can be described
by a low-dimensional dynamical system (Churchland et al.,
2012; Harvey et al., 2012; Mante et al., 2013; Kaufman
et al., 2014; Nieh et al., 2021). This was accompanied by a
growing interest in modeling neural population activity in
terms of the generic dynamical system:
ż(t) = f (z(t), u(t), t)

(1)

where the latent variable z ∈ RL evolves in a lowdimensional space with dimension L. The dynamics can be
perturbed by external input stimuli u ∈ RK . Spike times of
neural activities observed on a single trial can be modeled
as inhomogeneous Poisson processes:
λ(t) = exp(Cz(t) + d)
(n) (n)
(n)
tx,1 , tx,2 , ..., tx,α(n) ∼ PoissonProcess(λn (t))

(2)

n = 1, 2, ..., N
(n)

where C and d are the loading matrix and bias, tx,· are the
spike times and λ ∈ RN are the firing rates of the observed
neurons n = 1, 2, ..., N . α(n) is the total number of spike
counts of the n-th neuron.

2

Recent studies show that a recurrent neural network (RNN)
can be trained to approximate nonlinear latent dynamics (1)
in a variety of brain areas, including motor and premotor
cortices during reaching and other motor tasks (Pandarinath
et al., 2018; Flint et al., 2020; Suresh et al., 2020). This approach marked a huge influence in thinking towards neural
computation through dynamical systems (Vyas et al., 2020).
However, there are a few drawbacks to this approach.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1) RNN and its dynamics are generally high-dimensional,
making it difficult to interpret and gain insight into the putatively low-dimensional dynamics underlying neural activity.
2) It often requires a large number of trials to avoid overfitting and reach competitive performance against other latent

1. Introduction
The language of dynamical systems has long been used
to describe neural population activity—for example, how
1
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton, New Jersey
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New
Jersey 3 Howard Hughs Medical Institute, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey. Correspondence to: Timothy Doyeon Kim
<tdkim@princeton.edu>.

