Correlation Clustering in Constantly Many Parallel Rounds

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Slobodan Mitrović * 2 Ashkan Norouzi-Fard * 1 Nikos Parotsidis * 1
Jakub Tarnawski * 3

Abstract
Correlation clustering is a central topic in unsupervised learning, with many applications in ML
and data mining. In correlation clustering, one
receives as input a signed graph and the goal is to
partition it to minimize the number of disagreements. In this work we propose a massively parallel computation (MPC) algorithm for this problem
that is considerably faster than prior work. In particular, our algorithm uses machines with memory
sublinear in the number of nodes in the graph and
returns a constant approximation while running
only for a constant number of rounds. To the
best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the first
that can provably approximate a clustering problem on graphs using only a constant number of
MPC rounds in the sublinear memory regime. We
complement our analysis with an experimental
analysis of our techniques.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a classic problem in machine learning. The
goal of clustering is to partition a given set of objects into
sets so that objects in the same cluster are similar to each
other while objects in different clusters are dissimilar. One
of the most studied formulations of this problem is correlation clustering. Thanks to its simple and natural formulation,
this clustering variant has many applications in finding clustering ensembles (Bonchi et al., 2013), in duplicate detection (Arasu et al., 2009), community detection (Chen et al.,
2012), disambiguation tasks (Kalashnikov et al., 2008), and
automated labelling (Agrawal et al., 2009; Chakrabarti et al.,
2008).
Correlation clustering was first formulated by Bansal et al.
(2004). Formally, in this problem we are given as input a
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Zürich, Switzerland
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Ashkan Norouzi-Fard
<ashkannorouzi@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

weighted graph with n nodes, where positive edges represent similarities between nodes and negative edges represent
dissimilarities between them. We are interested in clustering
the nodes to minimize the sum of the weights of the negative
edges contained inside any cluster plus the sum of positive
edges crossing any two clusters. The problem is known to
be NP-hard, and much attention has been paid to designing approximation algorithms for the minimization version
of the problem, as well as for its complementary version
where one is interested in maximizing agreement. In particular, for the most studied version of the problem, where
the weights are restricted to be in {−1, +1}, a polynomialtime approximation scheme is known for the maximization
version of the problem (Bansal et al., 2004) and a 2.06approximation algorithm is known for its minimization version (Chawla et al., 2015). Furthermore, when weights are
in {−1, +1} and the number of clusters is upper-bounded
by k, a polynomial-time approximation scheme is known
also for the minimization version of the problem (Giotis
& Guruswami, 2005). For arbitrary weights, we know a
0.7666-approximation algorithm for the maximization version of the problem (Charikar et al., 2005; Swamy, 2004)
and an O(log n)-approximation for the minimization version of the problem (Demaine et al., 2006).
One main drawback of classic solutions for correlation clustering is that they do not scale very well to very large networks. Thus, as the magnitude of available data grows, it
becomes increasingly important to design efficient parallel algorithms for this problem. Unfortunately, obtaining
such algorithms is often challenging because classic solutions to graph problems are inherently sequential, e.g., the
algorithm is defined iteratively and in an adaptive manner.
Concretely, a well-known and widely used algorithm for the
unweighted minimization version of the problem requires
solving a linear program or running a so-called Pivot algorithm (Ailon et al., 2008; Chawla et al., 2015). Designing
an efficient parallel linear program solver, if one exists at
all, is a major challenge. The Pivot algorithm is extremely
elegant and simple: it starts by selecting a node uniformly
at random in the graph; then it creates a cluster by clustering together the node with all its positive neighbors; finally
the algorithm recurs on the rest of the graph. Interestingly,
this simple algorithm returns a 3-approximation to the min-

