Tilting the playing field: Dynamical loss functions for machine learning

Miguel Ruiz-Garcia 1 2 Ge Zhang 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 3 Andrea J. Liu 1

Abstract
We show that learning can be improved by using loss functions that evolve cyclically during
training to emphasize one class at a time. In underparameterized networks, such dynamical loss
functions can lead to successful training for networks that fail to find deep minima of the standard cross-entropy loss. In overparameterized
networks, dynamical loss functions can lead to
better generalization. Improvement arises from
the interplay of the changing loss landscape with
the dynamics of the system as it evolves to minimize the loss. In particular, as the loss function oscillates, instabilities develop in the form of
bifurcation cascades, which we study using the
Hessian and Neural Tangent Kernel. Valleys in
the landscape widen and deepen, and then narrow and rise as the loss landscape changes during
a cycle. As the landscape narrows, the learning
rate becomes too large and the network becomes
unstable and bounces around the valley. This
process ultimately pushes the system into deeper
and wider regions of the loss landscape and is
characterized by decreasing eigenvalues of the
Hessian. This results in better regularized models with improved generalization performance.

1. Introduction
In supervised classification tasks, neural networks learn as
they descend a loss function that quantifies their performance. Given a task, there are many components of the
learning algorithm that may be tuned to improve performance including: hyperparameters such as the initializaCode reproducing our main results can be found at
https://github.com/miguel-rg/dynamical-loss-functions.
1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 Department of Applied
Mathematics, ETSII, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain 3 Google Research: Brain Team. Correspondence to:
Miguel Ruiz-Garcia <miguel.ruiz.garcia@uc3m.es>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion scale (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; Xiao et al., 2018) or
learning rate schedule (He et al., 2016); the neural network
architecture itself (Zoph & Le, 2016); the types of data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2018); or the optimization algorithm (Kingma & Ba, 2015). The structure of the loss function also plays an important role in the outcome of learning (Choromanska et al., 2015; Soudry & Carmon, 2016;
Cooper, 2018; Verpoort et al., 2020; Ballard et al., 2017;
Mannelli et al., 2019; Arous et al., 2019), and it promotes
phenomenology reminiscent of physical systems, such as
the jamming transition (Franz & Parisi, 2016; Geiger et al.,
2019; Franz et al., 2019a;b; Geiger et al., 2020a;b). A possible strategy to improve learning could be to vary the loss
function itself; is it possible to tailor the loss function to
the training data and to the network architecture to facilitate learning? The first step along this path is to compare how different loss functions perform under the same
conditions, see for example (Janocha & Czarnecki, 2017;
Rosasco et al., 2004; Kornblith et al., 2020). However,
the plethora of different types of initializations, optimizers,
or hyper-parameter combinations, makes it very difficult to
find the best option even for a specified set of tasks. Given
that choosing an optimal loss function landscape from the
beginning is difficult, one might ask if transforming the
landscape continuously during training can lead to a better final result. This takes us to continuation methods, very
popular in computational chemistry (Stillinger & Weber,
1988; Wawak et al., 1998; Wales & Scheraga, 1999), which
had their machine learning counterpart in curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009).
Curriculum learning was introduced by Bengio et al. (Bengio et al., 2009) as a method to improve training of deep
neural networks. They found that learning can be improved
when the training examples are not randomly presented but
are organized in a meaningful order which illustrates gradually more concepts, and gradually more complex ones.
In practice, this “curriculum” can be achieved by weighing the contribution of easier samples (e.g. most common
words) to the loss function more at the beginning and increasing the weight of more difficult samples (e.g. less frequent words) at the end of training. In this way one expects
to start with a smoothed-out version of the loss landscape
that progressively becomes more complex as training progresses. Since its introduction in 2009, curriculum learn-

