Interactive Learning from Activity Description

Khanh Nguyen 1 Dipendra Misra 2 Robert Schapire 2 Miro Dudı́k 2 Patrick Shafto 3

Abstract
We present a novel interactive learning protocol
that enables training request-fulfilling agents by
verbally describing their activities. Unlike imitation learning (IL), our protocol allows the teaching agent to provide feedback in a language that is
most appropriate for them. Compared with reward
in reinforcement learning (RL), the description
feedback is richer and allows for improved sample
complexity. We develop a probabilistic framework and an algorithm that practically implements
our protocol. Empirical results in two challenging
request-fulfilling problems demonstrate the
strengths of our approach: compared with RL
baselines, it is more sample-efficient; compared
with IL baselines, it achieves competitive success
rates without requiring the teaching agent to be
able to demonstrate the desired behavior using
the learning agent’s actions. Apart from empirical
evaluation, we also provide theoretical guarantees
for our algorithm under certain assumptions
about the teacher and the environment.

“Walk through the living
room and turn left. Walk
towards the pool table
and stop in the doorway.”

“Walk through the
hallway and turn right.
Walk past the dining table
and stop in the doorway.”

“Enter the house and go
left. Walk down the hall,
and take a right at the end
of the hallway. Stop outside
of the bathroom door.”

Figure 1. A real example of training an agent to fulfill a navigation
request in a 3D environment (Anderson et al., 2018) using A DEL,
our implementation of the I LIAD protocol. The agent receives a
request “Enter the house...” which implies the path. Initially, it
wanders far from the goal because it does not understand language.
Its execution ( ) is described as “Walk through the living room...”.
To ground language, the agent learns to generate the path conditioned on the description. After a number of interactions, its
execution ( ) is closer to the optimal path. As this process iterates,
the agent learns to ground diverse descriptions to executions and
can execute requests more precisely.

1. Introduction
The goal of a request-fulfilling agent is to map a given
request in a situated environment to an execution that accomplishes the intent of the request (Winograd, 1972; Chen
& Mooney, 2011; Tellex et al., 2012; Artzi et al., 2013;
Misra et al., 2017; Anderson et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2019; Nguyen & Daumé III, 2019; Gaddy &
Klein, 2019). Request-fulfilling agents have been typically
trained using non-verbal interactive learning protocols such
as imitation learning (IL) which assumes labeled executions
as feedback (Mei et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2018; Yao
et al., 2020), or reinforcement learning (RL) which uses
scalar rewards as feedback (Chaplot et al., 2018; Hermann
et al., 2017). These protocols are suitable for training agents
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
Maryland, USA 2 Microsoft Research, New York, USA 3 Rutgers
University, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Khanh Nguyen
<kxnguyen@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

with pre-collected datasets or in simulators, but they do
not lend themselves easily to training by human teachers
that only possess domain knowledge, but might not be able
to precisely define the reward function, or provide direct
demonstrations. To enable training by such teachers, we introduce a verbal interactive learning protocol called I LIAD:
Interactive Learning from Activity Description, where feedback is limited to descriptions of activities, in a language
that is appropriate for a given teacher (e.g., a natural language for humans).
Figure 1 illustrates an example of training an agent using
the I LIAD protocol. Learning proceeds in episodes of
interaction between a learning agent and a teacher. In each
episode, the agent is presented with a request, provided in
the teacher’s description language, and takes a sequence of
actions in the environment to execute it. After an execution
is completed, the teacher provides the agent with a description of the execution, in the same description language. The
agent then uses this feedback to update its policy.

