On Characterizing GAN Convergence Through Proximal Duality Gap

Sahil Sidheekh 1 Aroof Aimen 1 Narayanan C. Krishnan 1

Abstract
Despite the accomplishments of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in modeling data distributions, training them remains a challenging
task. A contributing factor to this difﬁculty is
the non-intuitive nature of the GAN loss curves,
which necessitates a subjective evaluation of the
generated output to infer training progress. Recently, motivated by game theory, duality gap has
been proposed as a domain agnostic measure to
monitor GAN training. However, it is restricted
to the setting when the GAN converges to a Nash
equilibrium. But GANs need not always converge to a Nash equilibrium to model the data
distribution. In this work, we extend the notion
of duality gap to proximal duality gap that is applicable to the general context of training GANs
where Nash equilibria may not exist. We show
theoretically that the proximal duality gap is capable of monitoring the convergence of GANs
to a wider spectrum of equilibria that subsumes
Nash equilibria. We also theoretically establish
the relationship between the proximal duality gap
and the divergence between the real and generated
data distributions for different GAN formulations.
Our results provide new insights into the nature
of GAN convergence. Finally, we validate experimentally the usefulness of proximal duality gap
for monitoring and inﬂuencing GAN training.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is an important machine learning
paradigm, aiming to learn data distributions. The ability
to parametrically model the true underlying distribution of
real-world data from a given empirical distribution brings
with it the power to generate new and unseen instances.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are perhaps the
1

Department of Computer Science, Indian Institute of
Technology, Ropar, India. Correspondence to: Sahil Sidheekh <2017csb1104@iitrpr.ac.in>, Narayanan C Krishnan
<ckn@iitrpr.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

most popular and successful of innovations for learning data
distributions. A GAN formulates the generative modeling
problem as a zero-sum game between two agents - a Discriminator (D) and a Generator (G). The discriminator aims
to differentiate the fake samples produced by the generator
from samples belonging to the true data distribution. On the
other hand, the generator seeks to fool the discriminator by
learning a mapping from an input noise space to the data
space. The generator can also be viewed as performing
adversarial attacks on the discriminator, exploiting the information leak through the discriminator and learning the real
data distribution as the game proceeds to an equilibrium.
Formally, the GAN game is deﬁned as :
min

max V (Dθd , Gθg ),

θg ∈ΘG θd ∈ΘD

(1)

where the generator (parametrized by θg ) and discriminator (parametrized by θd ) are neural networks and V is the
objective function that the agents seek to optimize. Different GAN formulations yield different expressions for V ,
each minimizing a unique divergence between the real and
generated data distributions. The classic GAN formulation
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) minimizes the JS divergence and
is deﬁned by :
V = Ex∼Pr [log(D(x))] + Ex∼Pθg [log(1 − D(x))]
where Pr denotes the real data distribution and Pθg denotes
the generated data distribution.
In any learning problem, the trajectory of the loss functions
should indicate the goodness of the trained model. However, such intuitive inferences cannot be drawn from the
loss curves of a GAN. This is because classical training of
a GAN involves alternate gradient descent optimization of
the objective function w.r.t the individual agents. Each optimization step of an agent alters its adversary’s loss surface,
resulting in non-intuitive loss curves for both the agents
over time. Figure 1 shows discriminator and generator loss
curves for a GAN when it (a) converges and (b) diverges.
Ideally, losses should decrease during model convergence
and increase during divergence. However, we observe a
diminishing generator loss and an increasing discriminator
loss when the GAN converges. When it diverges, there is an
interplay between both the losses. These loss curves do not

