Positive-Negative Momentum:
Manipulating Stochastic Gradient Noise to Improve Generalization

Zeke Xie 1 Li Yuan 2 Zhanxing Zhu 3 Masashi Sugiyama 4 1

Abstract
It is well-known that stochastic gradient noise
(SGN) acts as implicit regularization for deep
learning and is essentially important for both optimization and generalization of deep networks.
Some works attempted to artificially simulate
SGN by injecting random noise to improve deep
learning. However, it turned out that the injected
simple random noise cannot work as well as SGN,
which is anisotropic and parameter-dependent.
For simulating SGN at low computational costs
and without changing the learning rate or batch
size, we propose the Positive-Negative Momentum (PNM) approach that is a powerful alternative
to conventional Momentum in classic optimizers.
The introduced PNM method maintains two approximate independent momentum terms. Then,
we can control the magnitude of SGN explicitly
by adjusting the momentum difference. We theoretically prove the convergence guarantee and the
generalization advantage of PNM over Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). By incorporating PNM
into the two conventional optimizers, SGD with
Momentum and Adam, our extensive experiments
empirically verified the significant advantage of
the PNM-based variants over the corresponding conventional Momentum-based optimizers.
Code: https://github.com/zeke-xie/
Positive-Negative-Momentum.

1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization methods, such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), have been popular and even necessary in training deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015).
1
The University of Tokyo 2 National University of Singapore
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research 4 RIKEN Center for AIP.
Correspondence to: Zeke Xie <xie@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Li Yuan
<yuanli@u.nus.edu>, Zhanxing Zhu <zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn>,
Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
3

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

It is well-known that stochastic gradient noise (SGN) in
stochastic optimization acts as implicit regularization for
deep learning and is essentially important for both optimization and generalization of deep neural networks (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1995; 1997a; Hardt et al., 2016; Xie et al.,
2021b; Wu et al., 2021). The theoretical mechanism behind
the success of stochastic optimization, particularly the SGN,
is still a fundamental issue in deep learning theory.
SGN matters. From the viewpoint of minima selection,
SGN can help find flatter minima, which tend to yield better generalization performance (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1995; 1997a). For this reason, how SGN selects flat minima
has been investigated thoroughly. For example, Zhu et al.
(2019) quantitatively revealed that SGN is better at selecting
flat minima than trivial random noise, as SGN is anisotropic
and parameter-dependent. Xie et al. (2021b) recently proved
that, due to the anisotropic and parameter-dependent SGN,
SGD favors flat minima even exponentially more than sharp
minima. From the viewpoint of optimization dynamics,
SGN can accelerate escaping from saddle points via stochastic perturbations to gradients (Jin et al., 2017; Daneshmand
et al., 2018; Staib et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020b).
Manipulating SGN. Due to the benefits of SGN, improving
deep learning by manipulating SGN has become a popular
topic. There are mainly two approaches along this line.
The first approach is to control SGN by tuning the hyperparameters, such as the learning rate and batch size, as the
magnitude of SGN has been better understood recently. It is
well-known (Mandt et al., 2017) that the magnitude of SGN
in continuous-time dynamics of SGD is proportional to the
ratio of the learning rate η and the batch size B, namely
η
B . He et al. (2019) and Li et al. (2019) reported that inη
creasing the ratio B
indeed can improve test performance
due to the stronger implicit regularization of SGN. However,
this method is limited and not practical for at least three
reasons. First, training with a too small batch size is computationally expensive per epoch and often requires more
epochs for convergence (Hoffer et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2019). Second, increasing the learning rate only works in
a narrow range, since too large initial learning rates may
lead to optimization divergence or bad convergence (Keskar
et al., 2017; Masters & Luschi, 2018; Xie et al., 2020a). In

