Outlier-Robust Optimal Transport

Debarghya Mukherjee 1 2 Aritra Guha 3 Justin Solomon 4 2 Yuekai Sun 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 5 2

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) measures distances between distributions in a way that depends on the
geometry of the sample space. In light of recent
advances in computational OT, OT distances are
widely used as loss functions in machine learning. Despite their prevalence and advantages, OT
loss functions can be extremely sensitive to outliers. In fact, a single adversarially-picked outlier
can increase the standard W2 -distance arbitrarily. To address this issue, we propose an outlierrobust formulation of OT. Our formulation is
convex but challenging to scale at a first glance.
Our main contribution is deriving an equivalent
formulation based on cost truncation that is easy
to incorporate into modern algorithms for computational OT. We demonstrate the benefits of
our formulation in mean estimation problems under the Huber contamination model in simulations and outlier detection tasks on real data.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is a fundamental problem in applied
mathematics. In its original form (Monge, 1781), the problem seeks the minimum-cost way to transport mass from a
probability distribution µ on X to another distribution ν on
X . In its original form, Monge’s problem proved hard to
study, and Kantorovich (1942) relaxed Monge’s formulation of the optimal transport problem to


OT(µ, ν) , min E(X1 ,X2 )∼Π c(X1 , X2 ) , (1.1)
Π∈F (µ,ν)

where F(µ, ν) is the set of couplings between µ and ν
(probability distributions on X × X whose marginals are
µ and ν) and c is a cost function. In this paper, we assume
c(x, y) ≥ 0 and c(x, x) = 0. Compared to other common measure of distance between probability distributions
1

Department of Statistics, University of Michigan 2 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab 3 Department of Statistical Science, Duke University 4 MIT CSAIL 5 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Debarghya Mukherjee <mdeb@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(e.g.d-divergences), optimal transport uniquely depends on
the geometry of the sample space (through the cost function).
Recent advancements in optimization for optimal transport
(Cuturi, 2013; Solomon et al., 2015; Genevay et al., 2016;
Seguy et al., 2018) enable its broad adaptation in machine
learning applications where geometry of the data is important; see (Peyré & Cuturi, 2018) for a survey. Optimal
transport has found applications in natural language processing (Kusner et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2016; AlvarezMelis & Jaakkola, 2018; Yurochkin et al., 2019), generative modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017), clustering (Ho
et al., 2017), domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2014; 2017),
large-scale Bayesian modeling (Srivastava et al., 2018),
anomaly detection (Tong et al., 2020), and many other domains.
Many applications use OT as a loss in an optimization problem of the form:
θ ∈ arg minθ∈Θ OT(µn , νθ ),

(1.2)

where {νθ }θ∈Θ is a collection of parametric models and
µn is the empirical distribution of the samples. Such estimators are called minimum Kantorovich estimators (MKE)
(Bassetti et al., 2006). They are popular alternatives to
likelihood-based estimators, especially in generative modeling. For example, when OT(·, ·) is the Wasserstein-1
distance and νθ is a generator parameterized by a neural
network with weights θ, equation 1.2 corresponds to the
Wasserstein GAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
One drawback of optimal transport is its sensitivity to outliers. Because all the mass in µ must be transported to ν,
a small fraction of outliers can have an outsized impact.
For statistics and machine learning applications in which
the data is corrupted or noisy, this is a major issue. For
example, the poor performance of Wasserstein GANs in
the presence of outliers was noted in the recent works on
outlier-robust generative learning with f -divergence GANs
(Chao et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020). The problem of outlierrobustness in MKE has not been studied except in two recent works proposing changes to the OT formulation that
are challenging to handle computationally (Staerman et al.,
2020; Balaji et al., 2020). Our goal is to derive an outlierrobust OT formulation compatible with existing efficient

