UnICORNN: A recurrent model for learning very long time dependencies

T. Konstantin Rusch 1 Siddhartha Mishra 1

Abstract
The design of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
to accurately process sequential inputs with longtime dependencies is very challenging on account
of the exploding and vanishing gradient problem.
To overcome this, we propose a novel RNN architecture which is based on a structure preserving
discretization of a Hamiltonian system of secondorder ordinary differential equations that models
networks of oscillators. The resulting RNN is fast,
invertible (in time), memory efficient and we derive rigorous bounds on the hidden state gradients
to prove the mitigation of the exploding and vanishing gradient problem. A suite of experiments
are presented to demonstrate that the proposed
RNN provides state of the art performance on a
variety of learning tasks with (very) long-time
dependencies.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been very successful in solving a diverse set of learning tasks involving
sequential inputs (LeCun et al., 2015). These include text
and speech recognition, time-series analysis and natural language processing. However, the well-known Exploding and
Vanishing Gradient Problem (EVGP) (Pascanu et al., 2013)
and references therein, impedes the efficiency of RNNs on
tasks that require processing (very) long sequential inputs.
The EVGP arises from the fact that the backpropagation
through time (BPTT) algorithm for training RNNs entails
computing products of hidden state gradients over a large
number of steps and this product can either be exponentially small or large as the number of recurrent interactions
increases.
Different approaches to solve the EVGP has been suggested
in recent years. These include the use of gating mechanisms,
1

Seminar for Applied Mathematics (SAM), D-MATH,
ETH Zürich, Rämistrasse 101, Zürich-8092, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: T. Konstantin Rusch <konstantin.rusch@sam.math.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

such as in LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and
GRUs (Cho et al., 2014), where the additive structure of
the gates mitigates the vanishing gradient problem. However, gradients might still explode, impeding the efficiency
of LSTMs and GRUs on problems with very long time dependencies (LTDs) (Li et al., 2018). The EVGP can also
be mitigated by constraining the structure of the recurrent
weight matrices, for instance requiring them to be orthogonal or unitary (Henaff et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2016;
Wisdom et al., 2016; Kerg et al., 2019). Constraining recurrent weight matrices may lead to a loss of expressivity
of the resulting RNN, reducing its efficiency in handling
realistic learning tasks (Kerg et al., 2019). Finally, restricting weights of the RNN to lie within some prespecified
bounds might lead to control over the norms of the recurrent
weight matrices and alleviate the EVGP. Such an approach
has been suggested in the context of independent neurons in
each layer in (Li et al., 2018), and using a coupled system
of damped oscillators in (Rusch & Mishra, 2021), among
others. However, ensuring that weights remain within a
pre-defined range during training might be difficult. Furthermore, weight clipping could also reduce expressivity of the
resulting RNN.
In addition to EVGP, the learning of sequential tasks with
very long time dependencies can require significant computational resources, for training and evaluating the RNN.
Moreover, as the BPTT training algorithms entail storing
all hidden states at every time step, the overall memory requirements can be prohibitive. Thus, the design of a fast
and memory efficient RNN architecture that can mitigate
the EVGP is highly desirable for the effective use of RNNs
in realistic learning tasks with very long time dependencies.
The main objective of this article is to propose, analyze and
test such an architecture.
The basis of our proposed RNN is the observation that a
large class of dynamical systems in physics and engineering,
the so-called Hamiltonian systems (Arnold, 1989), allow
for very precise control on the underlying states. Moreover,
the fact that the phase space volume is preserved by the
trajectories of a Hamiltonian system, makes such systems
invertible and allows one to significantly reduce the storage
requirements. Furthermore, if the resulting hidden state
gradients also evolve according to a Hamiltonian dynamical
system, one can obtain precise bounds on the hidden state

