Partially Observed Exchangeable Modeling
Yang Li 1 Junier B. Oliva 1

Abstract
Modeling dependencies among features is fundamental for many machine learning tasks. Although there are often multiple related instances
that may be leveraged to inform conditional dependencies, typical approaches only model conditional dependencies over individual instances.
In this work, we propose a novel framework, partially observed exchangeable modeling (POEx)
that takes in a set of related partially observed
instances and infers the conditional distribution
for the unobserved dimensions over multiple elements. Our approach jointly models the intrainstance (among features in a point) and interinstance (among multiple points in a set) dependencies in data. POEx is a general framework that
encompasses many existing tasks such as point
cloud expansion and few-shot generation, as well
as new tasks like few-shot imputation. Despite its
generality, extensive empirical evaluations show
that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance across a range of applications.

1. Introduction
Modeling dependencies among features is at the core of
many unsupervised learning tasks. Typical approaches consider modeling dependencies in a vacuum. For example,
one typically imputes the unobserved features of a single
instance based only on that instance’s observed features.
However, there are often multiple related instances that may
be leveraged to inform conditional dependencies. For instance, a patient may have multiple visits to a clinic with
different sets of measurements, which may be used together
to infer the missing ones. In this work, we propose to jointly
model the intra-instance (among features in a point) and
inter-instance (among multiple points in a set) dependencies
by modeling sets of partially observed instances. To our
1

Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Correspondence
to: Yang Li <yangli95@cs.unc.edu>, Junier B. Oliva <joliva@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that generalizes the concept
of partially observed data to exchangeable sets. We consider
modeling an exchangeable (permutation invariant) likelid
hood over a set x = {xi }N
i=1 , xi ∈ R . However, unlike
previous approaches (Korshunova et al., 2018; Edwards &
Storkey, 2016; Li et al., 2020b; Bender et al., 2020), we
model a partially observed set, where “unobserved” features
(u )
of points xu = {xi i }N
i=1 are conditioned on “observed”
(o )
features of points xo = {xi i }N
i=1 and oi , ui ⊆ {1, . . . , d}
and oi ∩ ui = ∅. Since each feature in xu depends not
only on features from the corresponding element but also on
features from other set elements, the conditional likelihood
p(xu | xo ) captures the dependencies across both features
and set elements.
Probabilistic modeling of sets where each instance itself
contains a collection of elements is challenging, since set elements are exchangeable and the cardinality may vary. Our
partially observed setting brings another level of challenge
due to the arbitrariness of the observed subset for each element. First, the subsets have arbitrary dimensionality, which
poses challenges for modern neural network based models.
Second, the combinatorial nature of the subsets renders the
conditional distributions highly multi-modal, which makes
it difﬁcult to model accurately. To resolve these difﬁculties,
we propose a variational weight-sharing scheme that is able
to model the combinatorial cases in a single model.
Partially observed exchangeable modeling (POEx) is a general framework that encompasses many impactful applications, which we describe below. Despite its generality, we
ﬁnd that our single POEx approach provides competitive or
better results than specialized approaches for these tasks.
Few-shot Imputation A direct application of the conditional distribution p(xu | xo ) enables a task we coin fewshot imputation, where one models a subset of covariates based on multiple related observations of an instance
(o )
{xi i }N
i=1 . Our set imputation formulation leverages the
dependencies across set elements to infer the missing values. For example, when modeling an occluded region in
(u )
an image xi i , it would be beneﬁcial to also condition on
(o )
observed pixels from other angles xj j . This task is akin to
multi-task imputation and is related to group mean imputation (Sim et al., 2015), which imputes missing features in
an instance according to the mean value of the features in

