LAMDA: Label Matching Deep Domain Adaptation

Trung Le 1 Tuan Nguyen 1 Nhat Ho 2 Hung Bui 3 Dinh Phung 1 3

Abstract
Deep domain adaptation (DDA) approaches have
recently been shown to perform better than their
shallow rivals with better modeling capacity on
complex domains (e.g., image, structural data, and
sequential data). The underlying idea is to learn
domain invariant representations on a latent space
that can bridge the gap between source and target
domains. Several theoretical studies have established insightful understanding and the benefit of
learning domain invariant features; however, they
are usually limited to the case where there is no label shift, hence hindering its applicability. In this
paper, we propose and study a new challenging
setting that allows us to use a Wasserstein distance (WS) to not only quantify the data shift but
also to define the label shift directly. We further
develop a theory to demonstrate that minimizing
the WS of the data shift leads to closing the gap
between the source and target data distributions
on the latent space (e.g., an intermediate layer of
a deep net), while still being able to quantify the
label shift with respect to this latent space. Interestingly, our theory can consequently explain
certain drawbacks of learning domain invariant
features on the latent space. Finally, grounded on
the results and guidance of our developed theory,
we propose the Label Matching Deep Domain
Adaptation (LAMDA) approach that outperforms
baselines on real-world datasets for DA problems.

1. Introduction
The great achievement of machine learning in general and
deep learning in particular can be attributed to the significant
advancement of in computational power and large-scale annotated datasets. However, in many application domains, it
is often prohibitively labor-expensive, error-prone, and time1
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia 2 University of Texas, Austin, USA 3 VinAI Research, Vietnam. Correspondence to: Trung Le <trunglm@monash.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

consuming to collect and label high-quality data sufficiently
large to train accurate deep models, such as in the domain
of medicine or autonomous driving. Domain adaptation
(DA) or transfer learning has emerged as a vital solution
for this issue by transferring knowledge from a label-rich
domain (a.k.a. source domain) to a label-scarce domain
(a.k.a. target domain). Along with DA methods (Ganin
& Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015;
Shu et al., 2018; French et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2021b;a;
2019; 2020) achieved impressive performance on real-world
datasets of various application domains, theoretical results
(Mansour et al., 2009; Ben-David et al., 2010; Redko et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2019a; Cortes et al., 2019) are abundant
to provide rigorous and insightful understanding of various
aspects of transfer learning.
Moving beyond using fixed features and taking advantage
of deep nets in learning rich and meaningful representations,
DDA aims to learn domain invariant representations, i.e.,
intermediate representations whose distribution is the same
in source and target domains. While relying on invariant
representations helps to reduce the data shift between the
source and target domains, Zhao et al. (2019) found that this
might seriously cause the label shift. More specifically, it
was shown that if the marginal label distributions are significantly different between the source and target domains,
enforcing learning domain invariant representations leads to
an increase of the general loss on the target domain. Moreover, while data shift can be understood as a divergence
between the source and target data distributions, the label
shift is harder to quantify. It is commonly interpreted as the
difference in labeling mechanisms of the source and target
domains (i.e., ps (y | x) and pt (y | x)), however, it is not
an explicit definition for the label shift since the mechanic
to indicate how a source example couple to a target example is missing. Another explanation is using a divergence
between the marginal label distributions of the source and
target domains (i.e., ps (y) and pt (y)), nevertheless, this
naive approach is simple and ignores individual conditional
distributions of labels w.r.t. data examples.
We propose in this paper a new theoretical setting for unsupervised DA which enables us to study the data and label
shifts under a more rigorous framework. Specifically, let
Hs be the hypothesis class on source domain, we introduce
a transformation T that maps the target to source domains,

