Modelling Behavioural Diversity for Learning in Open-Ended Games

Nicolas Perez Nieves * 1 2 Yaodong Yang * 1 3 Oliver Slumbers * 3 David Henry Mguni 1 Ying Wen 3 Jun Wang 1 3

Abstract
Promoting behavioural diversity is critical for
solving games with non-transitive dynamics
where strategic cycles exist, and there is no consistent winner (e.g., Rock-Paper-Scissors). Yet,
there is a lack of rigorous treatment for defining
diversity and constructing diversity-aware learning dynamics. In this work, we offer a geometric
interpretation of behavioural diversity in games
and introduce a novel diversity metric based on determinantal point processes (DPP). By incorporating the diversity metric into best-response dynamics, we develop diverse fictitious play and diverse
policy-space response oracle for solving normalform games and open-ended games. We prove
the uniqueness of the diverse best response and
the convergence of our algorithms on two-player
games. Importantly, we show that maximising the
DPP-based diversity metric guarantees to enlarge
the gamescape – convex polytopes spanned by
agents’ mixtures of strategies. To validate our
diversity-aware solvers, we test on tens of games
that show strong non-transitivity. Results suggest
that our methods achieve at least the same, and
in most games, lower exploitability than PSRO
solvers by finding effective and diverse strategies.

1. Introduction
Nature exhibits a remarkable tendency towards diversity
(Holland et al., 1992). Over the past billions of years, natural
evolution has discovered a vast assortment of unique species.
Each of them is capable of orchestrating, in different ways,
the complex biological processes that are necessary to sustain life. Equally, in computer science, machine intelligence
can be considered as the ability to adapt to a diverse set
of complex environments (Hernández-Orallo, 2017). This
suggests that the intelligence of AI evolves with environments of increasing diversity. In fact, recent successes in
*
Equal contribution 1 Huawei U.K. 2 Imperial College London,
work done during internship at Huawei U.K. 3 University College
London. Correspondence to: <yaodong.yang@outlook.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

developing AIs that achieve super-human performance on
sophisticated battle games (Vinyals et al., 2019b; Ye et al.,
2020) have provided factual justifications for promoting
behavioural diversity in training intelligent agents.
In game theory, the necessity of pursuing behavioural diversity is also deeply rooted in the non-transitive structure of
games (Balduzzi et al., 2019). In general, an arbitrary game,
of either the normal-form type (Candogan et al., 2011) or
the differential type (Balduzzi et al., 2018a), can always be
decomposed into a sum of two components: a transitive
part and a non-transitive part. The transitive part of a game
represents the structure in which the rule of winning is transitive (i.e., if strategy A beats B, B beats C, then A beats C),
and the non-transitive part refers to the structure in which
the set of strategies follows a cyclic rule (e.g., the endless
cycles among Rock, Paper and Scissors). Diversity matters
especially for the non-transitive part simply because there
is no consistent winner in such part of a game: if a player
only plays Rock, he can be exploited by Paper, but not so if
he has a diverse strategy set of Rock and Scissor.
In fact, many real-world games demonstrate strong nontransitivity (Czarnecki et al., 2020); therefore, it is critical to
design objectives in the learning framework that can lead to
behavioural diversity. In multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) (Yang & Wang, 2020), promoting diversity not
only prevents AI agents from checking the same policies
repeatedly, but more importantly, helps them discover niche
skills, avoid being exploited and maintain robust performance when encountering unfamiliar types of opponents.
In the examples of StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019b), Soccer
(Kurach et al., 2020) and autonomous driving (Zhou et al.,
2020), learning a diverse set of strategies has been reported
as an imperative step in strengthening AI’s performance.
Despite the importance of diversity (Yang et al., 2021), there
is very little work that offers a rigorous treatment in even
defining diversity. The majority of work so far has followed
a heuristic approach. For example, the idea of co-evolution
(Durham, 1991; Paredis, 1995) has drawn forth a series of
effective methods, such as open-ended evolution (Standish,
2003; Banzhaf et al., 2016; Lehman & Stanley, 2008), population based training methods (Jaderberg et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2018), and auto-curricula (Leibo et al., 2019; Baker
et al., 2019). Despite many empirical successes, the lack

