How Does Loss Function Affect Generalization Performance of Deep Learning?
Application to Human Age Estimation

Ali Akbari 1 Muhammad Awais 1 Manijeh Bashar 2 Josef Kittler 1

Abstract
Good generalization performance across a wide
variety of domains caused by many external and
internal factors is the fundamental goal of any machine learning algorithm. This paper theoretically
proves that the choice of loss function matters for
improving the generalization performance of deep
learning-based systems. By deriving the generalization error bound for deep neural models trained
by stochastic gradient descent, we pinpoint the
characteristics of the loss function that is linked
to the generalization error, and can therefore be
used for guiding the loss function selection process. In summary, our main statement in this
paper is: choose a stable loss function, generalize
better. Focusing on human age estimation from
the face which is a challenging topic in computer
vision, we then propose a novel loss function for
this learning problem. We theoretically prove that
the proposed loss function achieves stronger stability, and consequently a tighter generalization
error bound, compared to the other common loss
functions for this problem. We have supported
our findings theoretically, and demonstrated the
merits of the guidance process experimentally,
achieving significant improvements.

1. Introduction
The human age estimation from a face image has received
increasing attention in a wide variety of applications, including advanced video surveillance, age-specific advertising, demographic statistics collection, customer profiling,
or search optimization in large datasets. Nevertheless, it
is one of the most challenging topics in computer vision
due to the large variations of factors, such as lightening
1

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP),
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. 2 Institute for Communication
Systems (ICS), University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. Correspondence to: Ali Akbari <ali.akbari@surrey.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

conditions, camera quality, head pose, makeup application
and face expression, which have a negative effect on the
estimation accuracy. These factors, mixed with other personal attributes such as gene, gender, race and personal life
style, make the problem even more challenging. Collecting
large-scale datasets may offer opportunities to advance the
state-of-the-art in the field, however, training datasets can
never represent all the aforementioned factors fully. Consequently, methods with substantial robustness need to be
developed in order to get better accuracy in unseen scenarios.
The ultimate objective of an ideal machine learning algorithm is to build an optimal model being able to generalize to any test data that might be distributed differently
than the data used for training. However, deep neural networks (DNN) have the tendency to over-fit the training data.
In view of this over-fitting issue, it is very important to
understand the factors, that impact on the generalization
performance of DNNs. In order to link the generalization
performance of a deep neural model to its causal factors, one
approach is to derive an upper bound for the generalization
error, which defines the potential gap between the error on
the training and test data.
One established way to upper-bound the generalization error is achieved by exploiting form the notion of uniform
stability (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2010; Hardt et al., 2016; Jakubovitz et al., 2018; Wu et al.,
2020). Roughly speaking, the stability measures the sensitivity of a learning algorithm to perturbations in the training set.
The pioneering work of Bousquet and Elisseeff (Bousquet &
Elisseeff, 2002; Elisseeff et al., 2005) show that, with high
probability, a tighter generalization bound is achieved by
the help of using a more stable learning algorithm. However,
this result is valid for deterministic learning algorithms. In
a following work, Hardt et al. (Hardt et al., 2016) extend
the notion of uniform stability to randomized learning algorithms in order to derive upper-bounds for the generalization
error of a neural model trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Conceptually, they demonstrate that SGD is
more stable, provided that the number of iterations taken by
SGD is sufficiently small.
It is common in practice to choose an appropriate loss func-

