Off-Policy Confidence Sequences

Nikos Karampatziakis 1 Paul Mineiro 2 Aaditya Ramdas 3

Abstract
We develop confidence bounds that hold uniformly over time for off-policy evaluation in the
contextual bandit setting. These confidence sequences are based on recent ideas from martingale
analysis and are non-asymptotic, non-parametric,
and valid at arbitrary stopping times. We provide algorithms for computing these confidence
sequences that strike a good balance between computational and statistical efficiency. We empirically demonstrate the tightness of our approach in
terms of failure probability and width and apply
it to the “gated deployment” problem of safely
upgrading a production contextual bandit system.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about the reward that a new policy π would have
achieved if it had been deployed, a task known as Off-Policy
Evaluation (OPE), is one of the key challenges in modern
Contextual Bandits (CBs) (Langford and Zhang, 2007) and
Reinforcement Learning (RL). A typical OPE use case is
the validation of new modeling ideas by data scientists. If
OPE suggests that π is better, this can then be validated
online by deploying the new policy to the real world.
The classic way to answer whether π has better reward
than the current policy h is via a confidence interval (CI).
Unfortunately, CIs take a very static view of the world.
Suppose that π is better than h and our OPE shows a higher
but not significantly better estimated reward. What should
we do? We could collect more data, but since a CI holds for
a particular (fixed) sample size and is not designed to handle
interactive/adaptive data collection, simply recalculating the
CI at a larger sample size invalidates its coverage guarantee.
While there are ways to fix this, such as a crude union
bound, the proper statistical tool for such cases is called a
Confidence Sequence (CS). A CS is a sequence of CIs such
1
Microsoft Azure AI 2 Microsoft Research 3 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Nikos Karampatziakis
<nikosk@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

that the probability that they ever exclude the true value is
bounded by a prespecified quantity. In other words, they
retain validity under optional (early) stopping and optional
continuation (collecting more data).
In this work we develop CSs for OPE using recent insights
from martingale analysis (for simpler problems). Besides
the aforementioned high probability uniformly over time
guarantee, these CSs make no parametric assumptions and
are easy to compute. We use them to create a “gated deployment” primitive: instead of deploying π directly we keep it
in a staging area where we compute its off-policy CS as h
is collecting data. Then π can replace h as soon as (if ever)
we can reject the hypothesis that h is better than π.
We now introduce some notation to give context to our
contributions. We have iid CB data of the form (x, a, r)
collected by a historical policy h in the following way. First
a context x was sampled from an unknown distribution D.
Then h assigns a probability to each action. An action a is
sampled with probability h(a; x) and performed. A reward
r associated with performing a in situation x is sampled
from an unknown distribution R(x, a). Afterwards, we wish
to estimate the reward of another policy π that is absolutely
continuous wrt h. We have


π(a; x)
V (π) = Ex∼D
[r] = Ex∼D
r
(1)
h(a; x)
a∼π(x)
a∼h(x)
r∼R(x,a)

r∼R(x,a)

where the last quantity can be estimated from data.
Letting w = π(a;x)
h(a;x) we see that Ex∼D,a∼h [w] = 1, where
we write w instead of w(x, a) to reduce notation clutter.
More generally for any function q(x, a) — which is typically a predictor of the reward of a at x — we have
X
Ex∼D,a∼h [wq(x, a)] =
π(a0 ; x)q(x, a0 ),
(2)
a0

which reduces to E[w] = 1 when q(x, a) = 1 always.
Eq. (1) and (2) are the building blocks of OPE estimators. The IPS estimator (Horvitz and Thompson,
Pn 1952)
estimates (1) via Monte Carlo: V̂ IPS (π) = 1/n i=1 wi ri .
A plethora of other OPE estimators are discussed in Section 6. In general there is a tension between the desirability
of an unbiased estimator like V̂ IPS and the difficulty of working with it in finite samples due to its excessive variance.

