How Framelets Enhance Graph Neural Networks

Xuebin Zheng * 1 Bingxin Zhou * 1 Junbin Gao 1 Yu Guang Wang 2 3 4
Pietro Liò 5 Ming Li 6 Guido Montúfar 7 2

Abstract
This paper presents a new approach for assembling graph neural networks based on framelet
transforms. The latter provides a multi-scale
representation for graph-structured data. We decompose an input graph into low-pass and highpass frequencies coefficients for network training,
which then defines a framelet-based graph convolution. The framelet decomposition naturally induces a graph pooling strategy by aggregating the
graph feature into low-pass and high-pass spectra,
which considers both the feature values and geometry of the graph data and conserves the total information. The graph neural networks with the proposed framelet convolution and pooling achieve
state-of-the-art performance in many node and
graph prediction tasks. Moreover, we propose
shrinkage as a new activation for the framelet
convolution, which thresholds high-frequency information at different scales. Compared to ReLU,
shrinkage activation improves model performance
on denoising and signal compression: noises in
both node and structure can be significantly reduced by accurately cutting off the high-pass coefficients from framelet decomposition, and the signal can be compressed to less than half its original
size with well-preserved prediction performance.
*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Sydney Business
School, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006,
Australia. 2 Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. 3 Institute of Natural Sciences and
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. 5 Department
of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. 6 Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China. 7 Department
of Mathematics and Department of Statistics, University of
California, Los Angeles, United States. Correspondence to:
Bingxin Zhou <bzho3923@uni.sydney.edu.au>, Yu Guang Wang
<yuguang.wang@mis.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a powerful deep learning
method for prediction tasks on graph-structured data (Wu
et al., 2021). Most existing GNN models are spatial-based,
such as GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GAT (Veličković
et al., 2018) and GIN (Xu et al., 2019b). These methods
compute graph convolution on vertices and edges in the
form of message passing (Gilmer et al., 2017), but leave
the signal frequency of graph data unexplored. In this paper, we seek to exploit signal processing for GNNs. Graph
framelets (Dong, 2017; Zheng et al., 2020b), akin to traditional wavelets, provide a multiresolution analysis (MRA)
for graph signals. The fully tensorized framelet transforms
guarantee an efficient design of graph convolution that combines low-pass and high-pass information, where the transforms only require graph Laplacian, Chebyshev polynomial
approximation, and filter banks. We propose framelet convolution that exploits the decomposition and reconstruction
procedures of framelet transforms, and the network learns
in the frequency domain.
The wavelet-like graph data analysis allows us to exploit
traditional tools from signal processing. An effective practice is the shrinkage that thresholds high-pass coefficients
in the framelet representation. The multi-scale property of
framelet convolution introduces diffusion for GNNs. The
associated shrinkage defines a new type of activation that
adapts to the diffusion scales in nonlinear feature transformation and extraction. Shrinkage in framelet convolution
provides a mechanism for effective noise reduction of input
graph data, where noise may appear in node and/or edge features. This ability is inherited from the traditional wavelet
denoising model. Moreover, the shrinkage activation provides a way to compress graph signals. The shrinkage trims
coefficients and significantly compresses the graph data representation while at the same time the underlying GNN
reaches state-of-the-art performance in multiple tasks. The
framelet MRA and shrinkage threshold provide GNNs with
multi-scale and compression characteristics, which distinguishes our model from existing graph convolution methods.
The framelet transform naturally induces a graph pooling
strategy by aggregating the different scales of framelet
features. The consequent framelet pooling conserves the

