Quantifying and Reducing Bias in Maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Structured Anomalies
Uthsav Chitra 1 Kimberly Ding 1 Jasper C.H. Lee 2 Benjamin J. Raphael 1

Abstract
Anomaly estimation, or the problem of finding
a subset of a dataset that differs from the rest of
the dataset, is a classic problem in machine learning and data mining. In both theoretical work
and in applications, the anomaly is assumed to
have a specific structure defined by membership
in an anomaly family. For example, in temporal
data the anomaly family may be time intervals,
while in network data the anomaly family may
be connected subgraphs. The most prominent
approach for anomaly estimation is to compute
the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE) of
the anomaly; however, it was recently observed
that for normally distributed data, the MLE is
a biased estimator for some anomaly families.
In this work, we demonstrate that in the normal
means setting, the bias of the MLE depends on
the size of the anomaly family. We prove that
if the number of sets in the anomaly family that
contain the anomaly is sub-exponential, then the
MLE is asymptotically unbiased. We also provide empirical evidence that the converse is true:
if the number of such sets is exponential, then
the MLE is asymptotically biased. Our analysis
unifies a number of earlier results on the bias of
the MLE for specific anomaly families. Next, we
derive a new anomaly estimator using a mixture
model, and we prove that our anomaly estimator
is asymptotically unbiased regardless of the size
of the anomaly family. We illustrate the advantages of our estimator versus the MLE on disease
outbreak data and highway traffic data.

1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin J. Raphael <braphael@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Anomaly identification — the discovery of rare, irregular,
or otherwise anomalous behavior in data — is a fundamental problem in machine learning and data mining with
numerous applications (Chandola et al., 2009). In temporal/sequential data, applications of anomaly identification
include change-point detection and inference (Page, 1955;
Hinkley, 1970; Adams & MacKay, 2007; Zhai et al., 2016);
in matrix data, applications include bi-clustering (Hartigan,
1972; Tanay et al., 2005; Kolar et al., 2011) and gene expression analysis (Ideker et al., 2002; Dittrich et al., 2008); in
spatial data, applications include disease outbreak and event
detection (Neill & Moore, 2004; Neill et al., 2005; Neill,
2012); and in network data, applications include large-scale
network surveillance (Arias-Castro et al., 2011; Sharpnack
et al., 2013b;a) and outbreak detection (Wong et al., 2003;
Leskovec et al., 2007). In many applications, the anomalous
behavior is assumed to have a specific structure described by
membership in an anomaly family. For example, in temporal data the anomaly family may be time intervals; in matrix
data the anomaly family may be submatrices; and in network
data the anomaly family may be connected subgraphs.
Anomaly identification can be divided into two different but
closely related problems: anomaly detection and anomaly
estimation. Given a dataset, the goal of anomaly detection
is to decide whether or not there exists an anomaly, or a
subset of the data, that is distributed according to a different
probability distribution compared to the rest of the data. The
goal of anomaly estimation is to determine the data points
in the anomaly. The distinction between anomaly detection and anomaly estimation is analogous to the distinction
between property testing and proper learning in statistical
learning theory (Goldreich et al., 1998): just as property
testing is “easier" than proper learning (with difficulty measured by sample complexity), anomaly detection is easier
than anomaly estimation (with difficulty measured by the
separation between the distributions of the anomaly and the
rest of the data). Different choices of the anomaly family
give rise to different versions of the anomaly detection and
estimation problems; e.g. change-point detection versus
change-point inference in temporal data (Arias-Castro et al.,
2005; Hinkley, 1971; Jeng et al., 2010), or submatrix detection versus submatrix estimation in matrix data (Hajek et al.,

