Two-way kernel matrix puncturing:
towards resource-efficient PCA and spectral clustering

Romain Couillet 1 2 Florent Chatelain 1 Nicolas Le Bihan 1

Abstract
The article introduces an elementary cost and storage reduction method for spectral clustering and
principal component analysis. The method consists in randomly “puncturing” both the data matrix X ∈ Cp×n (or Rp×n ) and its corresponding
kernel (Gram) matrix K through Bernoulli masks:
S ∈ {0, 1}p×n for X and B ∈ {0, 1}n×n for
K. The resulting “two-way punctured” kernel is
thus given by K = p1 [(X S)H (X S)] B.
We demonstrate that, for X composed of independent columns drawn from a Gaussian mixture
model, as n, p → ∞ with p/n → c0 ∈ (0, ∞),
the spectral behavior of K – its limiting eigenvalue distribution, as well as its isolated eigenvalues and eigenvectors – is fully tractable and
exhibits a series of counter-intuitive phenomena.
We notably prove, and empirically confirm on various real image databases, that it is possible to
drastically puncture the data, thereby providing
possibly huge computational and storage gains,
for a virtually constant (clustering or PCA) performance. This preliminary study opens as such the
path towards rethinking, from a large dimensional
standpoint, computational and storage costs in
elementary machine learning models.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing tremendous amounts of data that machine learning algorithms now need to face start to tip the
scale towards a major computational and storage resource
bottleneck. In such fields as astrophysics with the recent
SKA radiotelescope or Internet data mining, the collected
data are simply too large to be stored and must therefore
*

Equal contribution 1 GIPSA-lab, CNRS, Grenoble-INP, University Grenoble-Alps 2 CentraleSupélec, University Paris Saclay.
Correspondence to: Romain Couillet <romain.couillet@gipsalab.grenoble-inp.fr>, Florent Chatelain <florent.chatelain@gipsalab.grenoble-inp.fr>, Nicolas Le Bihan <nicolas.lebihan@gipsalab.grenoble-inp.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

be processed in real-time before being discarded altogether.
In parallel, even if those data could be stored, algorithm
complexities beyond linear can in general not be afforded.
This is already a problem for as elementary methods as
principal component analysis (PCA) or spectral clustering –
both related to Gram matrix eigenvector retrieval.
Evidently, numerous works have proposed various directions of cost-efficient methods for PCA and spectral clustering. For instance, the line of works (Johnstone & Lu, 2009;
Cai et al., 2013; Deshpande & Montanari, 2014) provides a
series of sparse PCA methods by assuming that the principal
components are sparse: the main gain arises from automatically selecting the reduced set of covariates having largest
amplitude. More recently, inspired by statistical physics,
(Zhong et al., 2020) proposes an empirical Bayes version of
PCA, by setting a (non-Gaussian) product measure prior on
the principal components: (Zhong et al., 2020) in particular
obtains (in simulations) a thousand-fold reduction in the
number of data necessary to maintain equal performance
with respect to standard PCA. Yet, the most popular methods to handle large dimensional PCA fall into the realm of
dimensionality reduction and random projections (Freund
et al., 2007) which, one way or another, also require prior
knowledge on the sought principal components to avoid
dramatic performance losses. Similar ideas have been devised for spectral clustering, such as hierarchical clustering
(Murtagh & Contreras, 2012).
But these works all exploit strong structural prior on the
data (e.g., a prior on principal components) to reduce the
effective data dimension, and in general only operate on one
dimension – either the data size or number.
As for mitigating storage constraints, clustering can be performed in a streaming manner, as proposed in (Keriven et al.,
2018) by means of a data sketching approach. This approach
however looses much discriminating power in not effectively
“comparing” all raw data and thus fails to compete against
spectral methods. Stochastic gradient descent in deep neural
networks also performs clustering in a non-spectral manner by “streaming” in small data batches (Bottou, 1991),
but these algorithms only converge after multiple epochs,
meaning that the data must be stored for later reuse. More

