Online Unrelated Machine Load Balancing with Predictions Revisited
Shi Li * 1 Jiayi Xian * 1

Abstract
We study the online load balancing problem
with machine learned predictions, and give results that improve upon and extend those in a
recent paper by Lattanzi et al. (2020). First,
we design deterministic and randomized online
rounding algorithms for the problem
in the
 unre
log m
lated machine setting, with O log log m - and


O logloglogloglogmm -competitive ratios. They respectively improve upon the previous ratios of
O(log m) and O(log3 log m), and match the
lower bounds given by Lattanzi et al. Second,
we extend their prediction scheme from the identical machine restricted assignment setting to the
unrelated machine setting. With the knowledge
of two vectors over machines, a dual vector and
a weight vector, we can construct a good fractional assignment online, that can be passed to
an online rounding algorithm. Finally, we consider the learning model introduced by Lavastida
et al. (2020), and show that under the model, the
two vectors can be learned efficiently with a few
samples of instances.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the tremendous success of modern machine
learning techniques, there is a recent surge of interest in
using machine learned predictions to design algorithms for
online combinatorial optimization problems. In contrast to
the worst case analysis of online algorithms, we are given
some predicted information about the problem instance we
need to solve online, usually learned from previous instances
of the same nature. The prediction should be useful and
simple: It should allow the algorithm to achieve a better
performance than when no information is given, but on the
other hand, it should be simple enough so that it can be
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA. Research is
supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1844890. Correspondence to:
Shi Li <shil@buffalo.edu>, Jiayi Xian <jxian@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learned easily. As predictions are often error-prone, ideally the performance of the algorithm should deteriorate
smoothly as a function of some error measurement, but at
the same time is never worse than the worst-case guarantee,
no matter how bad the prediction is. This has led to the area
of learning augmented online algorithm, in which many
classic problems have been studied (See Section 1.2).
In this paper, we study the classic online load balancing
problem in the general unrelated machine setting under this
model. In the offline problem, we are given m machines M ,
n jobs J, and pi,j ∈ (0, ∞] for every i ∈ M, j ∈ J, which
indicates the time needed to process job j if it is assigned to
machine i. The goal of the problem is to assign the jobs to
machines so as to minimize the makespan, i.e, the maximum
over all i ∈ M , the sum of pi,j ’s over all jobs j assigned to
i. In the online version of the problem, M is given upfront,
but jobs in J come one by one. When a job j ∈ J arrives,
it reveals the vector (pi,j )i∈M ∈ (0, ∞]M . The online
algorithm has to irrevocably assign j to a machine upon its
arrival. When no predictions are given, the problem admits
an O(log m)-competitive ratio (Azar et al., 1995; Aspnes
et al., 1997), which is tight (Azar et al., 1995).
An extensively studied special case of the problem is the
identical machine restricted assignment setting. 1 There is
an intrinsic size pj > 0 for every job j ∈ J and for every
machine i ∈ M , we have pi,j ∈ {pj , ∞}. So, every job j
has a set of permissible machines which it can be assigned
to, and the processing time of j is always pj on a permissible
machine. The lower bound Ω(log m) of Azar et al. (1995)
on the competitive ratio is indeed for this special case.
Lattanzi et al. (2020) initiated the study of online load balancing with learned predictions. Their result contains two
components. First, given a load balancing instance in the
identical machine restricted assignment setting, they leveraged the proportion allocation scheme of Agrawal et al.
(2018) to show that there is a weight vector w ∈ RM
>0
over the machines, such that the fractional assignment
(xi,j )i∈M,j∈J obtained by assigning each job j to its permissible machines proportionally to the weights is (1 + )approximately optimum. Thus if the weight vector w is
1
Usually the model is simply called the restricted assignment
setting. We use the longer name since later we shall define another
setting called the related machine restricted assignment setting.

