Evaluating Robustness of Predictive Uncertainty Estimation:
Are Dirichlet-based Models Reliable?
Anna-Kathrin Kopetzki * 1 Bertrand Charpentier * 1 Daniel Zügner 1 Sandhya Giri 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
Dirichlet-based uncertainty (DBU) models are a
recent and promising class of uncertainty-aware
models. DBU models predict the parameters of a
Dirichlet distribution to provide fast, high-quality
uncertainty estimates alongside with class predictions. In this work, we present the first largescale, in-depth study of the robustness of DBU
models under adversarial attacks. Our results suggest that uncertainty estimates of DBU models
are not robust w.r.t. three important tasks: (1)
indicating correctly and wrongly classified samples; (2) detecting adversarial examples; and (3)
distinguishing between in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Additionally, we
explore the first approaches to make DBU models more robust. While adversarial training has
a minor effect, our median smoothing based approach significantly increases robustness of DBU
models.

1. Introduction
Neural networks achieve high predictive accuracy in many
tasks, but they are known to have two substantial weaknesses: First, neural networks are not robust against adversarial perturbations, i.e., semantically meaningless input
changes that lead to wrong predictions (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015). Second, standard neural networks
are unable to identify samples that are different from the
ones they were trained on and tend to make over-confident
predictions at test time (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
These weaknesses make them impracticable in sensitive domains like financial, autonomous driving or medical areas
which require trust in predictions.
To increase trust in neural networks, models that provide pre*

Equal contribution 1 Technical University of Munich, Germany;
Department of Informatics. Correspondence to: Anna-Kathrin
Kopetzki <kopetzki@in.tum.de>, Bertrand Charpentier <charpent@in.tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Visualization of the desired uncertainty estimates.

dictions along with the corresponding uncertainty have been
proposed. An important, quickly growing family of models
is the Dirichlet-based uncertainty (DBU) family (Malinin
& Gales, 2018a; 2019; Sensoy et al., 2018; Malinin et al.,
2019; Charpentier et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020; Nandy
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020; Sensoy et al., 2020). Contrary to other approaches such as Bayesian Neural Networks
(Blundell et al., 2015; Osawa et al., 2019; Maddox et al.,
2019), drop out (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) or ensembles
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), DBU models provide efficient uncertainty estimates at test time in a single forward
pass by directly predicting the parameters of a Dirichlet
distribution over categorical probability distributions. DBU
models have the advantage that they provide both, aleatoric
uncertainty estimates resulting from irreducible uncertainty
(e.g. class overlap or noise) and epistemic uncertainty estimates resulting from the lack of knowledge about unseen
data (e.g. an unknown object is presented to the model).
Both uncertainty types can be quantified from Dirichlet
distributions using different uncertainty measures such as
differential entropy, mutual information, or pseudo-counts.
These uncertainty measures show outstanding performance
in, e.g., the detection of OOD samples and thus are superior to softmax based confidence (Malinin & Gales, 2018a;
2019; Charpentier et al., 2020).

