Federated Continual Learning with Weighted Inter-client Transfer

Jaehong Yoon 1 * Wonyong Jeong 1 2 * Giwoong Lee 1 Eunho Yang 1 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract
There has been a surge of interest in continual
learning and federated learning, both of which
are important in deep neural networks in realworld scenarios. Yet little research has been
done regarding the scenario where each client
learns on a sequence of tasks from a private local data stream. This problem of federated continual learning poses new challenges to continual learning, such as utilizing knowledge from
other clients, while preventing interference from
irrelevant knowledge. To resolve these issues,
we propose a novel federated continual learning framework, Federated Weighted Inter-client
Transfer (FedWeIT), which decomposes the network weights into global federated parameters
and sparse task-specific parameters, and each
client receives selective knowledge from other
clients by taking a weighted combination of their
task-specific parameters. FedWeIT minimizes
interference between incompatible tasks, and
also allows positive knowledge transfer across
clients during learning. We validate our FedWeIT against existing federated learning and continual learning methods under varying degrees of
task similarity across clients, and our model significantly outperforms them with a large reduction
in the communication cost. Code is available at
https://github.com/wyjeong/FedWeIT.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (Thrun, 1995; Kumar & Daume III, 2012;
Ruvolo & Eaton, 2013; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Schwarz
et al., 2018) describes a learning scenario where a model
continuously trains on a sequence of tasks; it is inspired by
the human learning process, as a person learns to perform
numerous tasks with large diversity over his/her lifespan,
*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), South Korea 2 AITRICS, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Jaehong Yoon <jaehong.yoon@kaist.ac.kr>,
Wonyong Jeong <wyjeong@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Concept. A continual learner at a hospital which learns
on sequence of disease prediction tasks may want to utilize relevant
task parameters from other hospitals. FCL allows such inter-client
knowledge transfer via the communication of task-decomposed
parameters.

making use of the past knowledge to learn about new tasks
without forgetting previously learned ones. Continual learning is a long-studied topic since having such an ability leads
to the potential of building a general artificial intelligence.
However, there are crucial challenges in implementing it
with conventional models such as deep neural networks
(DNNs), such as catastrophic forgetting, which describes
the problem where parameters or semantic representations
learned for the past tasks drift to the direction of new tasks
during training. The problem has been tackled by various prior work (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2017;
Riemer et al., 2019). More recent works tackle other issues,
such as scalability or order-robustness (Schwarz et al., 2018;
Hung et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2020).
However, all of these models are fundamentally limited in
that the models can only learn from its direct experience they only learn from the sequence of the tasks they have
trained on. Contrarily, humans can learn from indirect experience from others, through different means (e.g. verbal
communications, books, or various media). Then wouldn’t
it be beneficial to implement such an ability to a continual
learning framework, such that multiple models learning on
different machines can learn from the knowledge of the
tasks that have been already experienced by other clients?
One problem that arises here, is that due to data privacy
on individual clients and exorbitant communication cost, it
may not be possible to communicate data directly between
the clients or between the server and clients. Federated
learning (McMahan et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018; Yurochkin

