Flow-based Attribution in Graphical Models: A Recursive Shapley Approach

Raghav Singal 1 George Michailidis 1 2 Hoiyi Ng 1

Abstract
We study the attribution problem in a graphical
model, wherein the objective is to quantify how
the effect of changes at the source nodes propagates through the graph. We develop a modelagnostic flow-based attribution method, called recursive Shapley value (RSV). RSV generalizes
a number of existing node-based methods and
uniquely satisfies a set of flow-based axioms. In
addition to admitting a natural characterization for
linear models and facilitating mediation analysis
for non-linear models, RSV satisfies a mix of desirable properties discussed in the recent literature,
including implementation invariance, sensitivity,
monotonicity, and affine scale invariance.

1. Introduction
Quantifying effect propagation is a fundamental problem,
related to various concepts on causality: direct / indirect
effects (Pearl, 2001), responsibility (Chockler & Halpern,
2004), explanations (Halpern & Pearl, 2005), mediation
analysis (MacKinnon et al., 2007), and causal influence
(Janzing et al., 2013). A recent application of effect propagation is on interpretable ML / explainable AI (XAI) (Adadi
& Berrada, 2018). For example, in a neural network, quantifying how the effect of changes at the input layer propagates
through the network aids in explaining its behavior, thus
turning a complex and opaque AI system into a “glassbox” (Sokol & Flach, 2018; Biecek, 2018; Turek, 2020). In
addition to being desirable, model interpretability is now enforced as a “right to explanation” (Selbst & Powles, 2018),
highlighting the need to understand effect propagation.
In this work, we consider a graphical model where the underlying graph is a DAG with arbitrary relations between the
variables (“model agnostic”). This is an adequately general
framework capturing a wide array of causal and AI systems
(e.g., non-linear structural equations and neural networks).
1
Amazon 2 University of Florida.
Correspondence to:
RS <rs3566@columbia.edu>, GM <gmichail@ufl.edu>, HN
<nghoiyi@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

For instance, as we illustrate in §6, our framework can be
used to understand whether sensitive attributes exert an “unfair” influence on the output (e.g. school admission or credit
approval). The key research question addressed is: “Given
a change in the “source” nodes, how does the effect (change
in the output) flow through the graph?”
X1
X2

X3
Y

Figure 1. Example of a linear graphical model. X1 is set exogenously, X2 = 2X1 , X3 = 3X1 , and Y = 5X1 + X2 + X3 .

As an example, consider the deterministic graphical model
in Figure 1, specified by linear structural equations. Suppose
the value at source node (without parents) X1 changes from
0 to 1. As a result, the output Y changes from 0 to 10. How
does the effect (10) of this change at X1 flow through the
graph? For this linear model, a natural answer is to use the
edge weights: path X1 → X2 → Y propagates 20% of
the effect, X1 → Y propagates 50%, and X1 → X3 → Y
propagates 30%. It is of interest to address the following
questions regarding how changes at the “source” nodes flow
through the graph: (a) what if the model is non-linear and
(b) how the graph structure impacts the propagation.
The main contribution is to develop a flow-based attribution
method that quantifies effect propagation, coined recursive
Shapley value (RSV). RSV operates on a top-down principle
by first attributing to the “source” nodes and then flowing it
down the DAG, as illustrated in Figure 2. RSV generalizes
a number of existing methods. Further, we establish RSV’s
uniqueness to a set of flow-based axioms, characterize it
under a linear model, and illustrate how it facilitates mediation analysis in non-linear models. Finally, we demonstrate
its adherence to various desirable properties discussed in
the recent literature, including implementation invariance,
sensitivity, monotonicity, and affine scale invariance.
Outline. The attribution problem is stated in §2, limitations
of existing approaches1 in §3, and the proposed approach in
1
We focus on the XAI literature and plan to explore connections
with the causality literature in a future work.

