SparseBERT: Rethinking the Importance Analysis in Self-attention

Han Shi 1 Jiahui Gao 2 Xiaozhe Ren 3 Hang Xu 3 Xiaodan Liang 4 Zhenguo Li 3 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract
Transformer-based models are popularly used in
natural language processing (NLP). Its core component, self-attention, has aroused widespread
interest. To understand the self-attention mechanism, a direct method is to visualize the attention
map of a pre-trained model. Based on the patterns
observed, a series of efficient Transformers with
different sparse attention masks have been proposed. From a theoretical perspective, universal
approximability of Transformer-based models is
also recently proved. However, the above understanding and analysis of self-attention is based on
a pre-trained model. To rethink the importance
analysis in self-attention, we study the significance of different positions in attention matrix
during pre-training. A surprising result is that diagonal elements in the attention map are the least
important compared with other attention positions.
We provide a proof showing that these diagonal
elements can indeed be removed without deteriorating model performance. Furthermore, we
propose a Differentiable Attention Mask (DAM)
algorithm, which further guides the design of the
SparseBERT. Extensive experiments verify our
interesting findings and illustrate the effect of the
proposed algorithm.

include the BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), which achieves stateof-the-art performance on a wide range of NLP tasks, and
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) which applies the Transformer’s
decoder on generative downstream tasks.
Self-attention is a core component in Transformer-based
architectures. Recently, its interpretation has aroused a lot
of interest. Visualization has been commonly used to understand the attention map during inference (Park et al., 2019;
Gong et al., 2019; Kovaleva et al., 2019). For example, Park
et al. (2019) and Gong et al. (2019) randomly select a
sentence from the corpus and visualize the attention maps
of different heads in a pre-trained Transformer model. Kovaleva et al. (2019) summarizes five attention patterns and
estimates their ratios in different tasks. A common observation from these studies is that local attention and global
attention are both important for token understanding.
While self-attention is powerful, a main concern is its efficiency bottleneck. As each token has to attend to all n
tokens in the sequence, the complexity scales as O(n2 ).
This can be expensive on long sequences. To alleviate this
problem, sparse attention allows each token to attend to only
a token subset. A series of Transformer variants have been
proposed along this direction (Guo et al., 2019; Child et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020). However, these
sparse attention schemes are designed manually. It is still
an open issue on how to find a suitable attention scheme.

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark
Lab 4 Sun Yat-sen University, China. Correspondence to: Han Shi
<hshiac@cse.ust.hk>.

Recently, there is a growing interest in understanding selfattention mechanism from a theoretical perspective. Results
show that the Transformer and its variants are universal approximators of arbitrary continuous sequence-to-sequence
functions (Yun et al., 2019; 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020). A
key part of their proofs is that self-attention layers implement contextual mappings of the input sequences. Yun et al.
(2019) constructs the self-attention model as a selective shift
operation such that contextual mapping can be implemented.
Zaheer et al. (2020) shows that universal approximation
holds for their sparse Transformer BigBird if its attention
structure contains the star graph. Yun et al. (2020) provides a unifying framework for the universal approximation
of sparse Transformers. Note that they all emphasize the
importance of diagonal elements in the attention map.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To guide the design of an efficient Transformer, it is useful to investigate the importance of different positions in

1. Introduction
The Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been commonly
used in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks
such as text classification (Wang et al., 2018a), text translation (Ott et al., 2018), and question answering (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016). The recent use of Transformer for image
classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object detection
(Carion et al., 2020) also demonstrates its potential in computer vision. Two notable descendants from the Transformer
1

2

