Online Learning with Optimism and Delay
Genevieve Flaspohler 1 2 Francesco Orabona 3 Judah Cohen 4 Soukayna Mouatadid 5 Miruna Oprescu 6
Paulo Orenstein 7 Lester Mackey 6

Abstract
Inspired by the demands of real-time climate and
weather forecasting, we develop optimistic online learning algorithms that require no parameter tuning and have optimal regret guarantees under delayed feedback. Our algorithms—DORM,
DORM+, and AdaHedgeD—arise from a novel
reduction of delayed online learning to optimistic
online learning that reveals how optimistic hints
can mitigate the regret penalty caused by delay.
We pair this delay-as-optimism perspective with
a new analysis of optimistic learning that exposes
its robustness to hinting errors and a new metaalgorithm for learning effective hinting strategies
in the presence of delay. We conclude by benchmarking our algorithms on four subseasonal climate forecasting tasks, demonstrating low regret
relative to state-of-the-art forecasting models.

1. Introduction
Online learning is a sequential decision-making paradigm in
which a learner is pitted against a potentially adversarial environment (Shalev-Shwartz, 2007; Orabona, 2019). At time
t, the learner must select a play wt from some set of possible
plays W. The environment then reveals the loss function `t
and the learner pays the cost `t (wt ). The learner uses information collected in previous rounds to improve its plays in
subsequent rounds. Optimistic online learners additionally
make use of side-information or “hints” about expected future losses to improve their plays. Over a period of length T ,
the goal of the learner is to minimize regret, an objective that
quantifies the performance gap between the learner and the
best possible constant play in
in some competitor
Pretrospect
T
set U: RegretT = supu2U t=1 `t (wt ) `t (u). Adversar1

Dept. of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Dept.
of AOSE, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 3 Dept. of ECE,
Boston University 4 Atmospheric and Environmental Research
5
Dept. of CS, University of Toronto 6 Microsoft Research New
England 7 Instituto de Matemática Pura e Aplicada. Correspondence to: Genevieve Flaspohler <geflaspo@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ial online learning algorithms provide robust performance in
many complex real-world online prediction problems such
as climate or weather forecasting.
In traditional online learning paradigms, the loss for round
t is revealed to the learner immediately at the end of round
t. However, many real-world applications produce delayed
feedback, i.e., the loss for round t is not available until round
t + D for some delay period D.1 Existing delayed online
learning algorithms achieve optimal worst-case regret rates
against adversarial loss sequences, but each has drawbacks
when deployed for real applications with short horizons
T . Some use only a small fraction of the data to train
each learner (Weinberger & Ordentlich, 2002; Joulani et al.,
2013); others tune their parameters using uniform bounds on
future gradients that are often challenging to obtain or overly
conservative in applications (McMahan & Streeter, 2014;
Quanrud & Khashabi, 2015; Joulani et al., 2016; Korotin
et al., 2020; Hsieh et al., 2020). Only the concurrent work
of Hsieh et al. (2020, Thm. 13) can make use of optimistic
hints and only for the special case of unconstrained online
gradient descent.
In this work, we aim to develop robust and practical algorithms for real-world delayed online learning. To this end,
we introduce three novel algorithms—DORM, DORM+,
and AdaHedgeD—that use every observation to train the
learner, have no parameters to tune, exhibit optimal worstcase regret rates under delay, and enjoy improved performance when accurate hints for unobserved losses are available. We begin by formulating delayed online learning as
a special case of optimistic online learning and use this
“delay-as-optimism” perspective to develop:
1. A formal reduction of delayed online learning to optimistic online learning (Lems. 1 and 2),
2. The first optimistic tuning-free and self-tuning algorithms with optimal regret guarantees under delay
(DORM, DORM+, and AdaHedgeD),
3. A tightening of standard optimistic online learning
regret bounds that reveals the robustness of optimistic
algorithms to inaccurate hints (Thms. 3 and 4),
1
Our initial presentation will assume constant delay D, but we
provide extensions to variable and unbounded delays in App. O.

