Finding k in Latent k-Polytope

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya * 1 Ravi Kannan * 2 Amit Kumar * 3

Abstract
The recently introduced Latent k− Polytope(LkP)
encompasses several stochastic Mixed Membership models including Topic Models. The problem of finding k, the number of extreme points
of LkP, is a fundamental challenge and includes
several important open problems such as determination of number of components in Ad-mixtures.
This paper addresses this challenge by introducing Interpolative Convex Rank(ICR) of a matrix
defined as the minimum number of its columns
whose convex hull is within Hausdorff distance
ε of the convex hull of all columns. The first important contribution of this paper is to show that
under standard assumptions k equals the ICR of
a subset smoothed data matrix defined from Data
generated from an LkP. The second important
contribution of the paper is a polynomial time algorithm for finding k under standard assumptions.
An immediate corollary is the first polynomial
time algorithm for finding the inner dimension
in Non-negative matrix factorisation(NMF) with
assumptions which are qualitatively different than
existing ones such as Separability.

1. Introduction
Latent variable models have found large number of applications in the real world. Such models specify a generative
process between the observed variables and a set of underlying un-observed variables, often called Latent variables.
Examples of latent variable models include Clustering like
k-means, Finite Mixture models, Topic models (LDA), and
Stochastic block models. In such models learning the parameters of the generative process is often intractable and
remains an active area of research.
1
Department of Computer Science and Automation, IISc
Bangalore, India 2 Microsoft Research India Lab., Bangalore,
India 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT
Delhi, India. Correspondence to: Chiranjib Bhattacharya
<chiru@iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Bhattacharyya & Kannan, 2020) suggested Latent k
polytope(LkP), an unifying model which includes all of
the above mentioned instances of latent variable modelis as
special cases. LkP defines a latent polytope K on k vertices
and data is generated by first picking latent points from
this polytope, denoted by columns of a matrix P, and then
perturbing them in an adversarial manner to produce datapoints. The perturbations can be quite large in magnitude,
and the data points can lie quite far from the actual polytope K. The problem of recovering (vertices of) K from
data generated in this manner is in general hard, unless we
make assumptions about K and the data matrix A, each of
whose columns represents one data point. They crystallized
a set of assumptions, which will be referred in the sequel as
standard assumptions, and showed that the vertices of the
polytope K can be provably recovered to an ε approximation
from a data Matrix A satisfying the assumptions.
The algorithm generally applies to all special cases and
results in Model estimation with guaranteed approximation
from a finite sample of data. However, as is usual practice
in Latent Variable models the value of k is assumed known.
For example, most algorithms for k− Means or LDA with
k topics would require the value of k.
In this paper we rely on the geometry of the problem to
find k from the data Matrix A. Straightforward attempts
such as examining the rank etc of A are fruitless because
most of the points in A can be very far from the actual
polytope K. We use two key insights here: (i) Suppose first
we have access to the latent points matrix P instead of A.
In this case, the convex hull of P, CH(P), would be a close
approximation of K. Still it is not clear how to identify k
from the CH(P). (ii) Such a strategy is still not practical as
P is not available. However the eigen structure of A can
provide important clues.
Contributions: This paper addresses some of these challenges and a summary of contributions are listed below.
• The paper introduces the notion of Interpolative Convex Rank(ICR) of a matrix, and shows that k = ICR
of a subset smoothed data matrix where k is the number of vertices in LkP (see details in Theorem 1). The
notion of ICR should be of independent interest.
• The paper introduces new techniques based on the hy-

