Quasi-Global Momentum:
Accelerating Decentralized Deep Learning on Heterogeneous Data

Tao Lin 1 Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
Decentralized training of deep learning models
is a key element for enabling data privacy and
on-device learning over networks. In realistic
learning scenarios, the presence of heterogeneity
across different clients’ local datasets poses an optimization challenge and may severely deteriorate
the generalization performance.
In this paper, we investigate and identify the limitation of several decentralized optimization algorithms for different degrees of data heterogeneity.
We propose a novel momentum-based method to
mitigate this decentralized training difficulty. We
show in extensive empirical experiments on various CV/NLP datasets (CIFAR-10, ImageNet, and
AG News) and several network topologies (Ring
and Social Network) that our method is much
more robust to the heterogeneity of clients’ data
than other existing methods, by a significant improvement in test performance (1%−20%). Our
code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Decentralized machine learning methods—allowing communications in a peer-to-peer fashion on an underlying communication network topology (without a central
coordinator)—have emerged as an important paradigm
in large-scale machine learning (Lian et al., 2017; 2018;
Koloskova et al., 2019; 2020b). Decentralized Stochastic
Gradient Descent (DSGD) methods offer (1) scalability to
large datasets and systems in large data-centers (Lian et al.,
2017; Assran et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2020a), as well
as (2) privacy-preserving learning for the emerging EdgeAI
applications (Kairouz et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2020a),
where the training data remains distributed over a large number of clients (e.g. mobile phones, sensors, or hospitals) and
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Tao Lin
<tao.lin@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code: github.com/epfml/quasi-global-momentum

is kept locally (never transmitted during training).
A key challenge—in particular in the second scenario—is
the large heterogeneity (non-i.i.d.-ness) in the data present
on the different clients (Zhao et al., 2018; Kairouz et al.,
2019; Hsieh et al., 2020). Heterogeneous data (e.g. as
illustrated in Figure 1) causes very diverse optimization
objectives on each client, which results in slow and unstable
global convergence, as well as poor generalization performance (shown in the inline table of Figure 1). Addressing
these optimization difficulties is essential to realize reliable
decentralized deep learning applications. Although such
challenges have been theoretically pointed out in Shi et al.
(2015); Lee et al. (2015); Tang et al. (2018b); Koloskova
et al. (2020b), the empirical performance of different DSGD
methods remains poorly understood. To the best of our
knowledge, there currently exists no efficient, effective, and
robust optimization algorithm yet for decentralized deep
learning on heterogeneous data.
In the meantime, SGD with momentum acceleration
(SGDm) remains the current workhorse for the state-of-theart (SOTA) centralized deep learning training (He et al.,
2016; Goyal et al., 2017; He et al., 2019). For decentralized deep learning, the currently used training recipes
(i.e. DSGDm) maintain a local momentum buffer on each
worker (Assran et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2020a; Nadiradze et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2021) while
only communicating the model parameters to the neighbors.
However, these attempts in prior work mainly consider homogeneous decentralized data—and there is no evidence
that local momentum enhances generalization performance
of decentralized deep learning on heterogeneous data.
As our first contribution, we investigate how DSGD and
DSGDm are impacted by the degree of data heterogeneity
and the choice of the network topology. We find that heterogeneous data hinders the local momentum acceleration in
DSGDm. We further show that using a high-quality shared
momentum buffer (e.g. synchronizing the momentum buffer
globally) improves the optimization and generalization performance of DSGDm. However, such a global communication significantly increases the communication cost and
violates the decentralized learning setup.

