ShaRF: Shape-conditioned Radiance Fields from a Single View

Konstantinos Rematas 1 Ricardo Martin-Brualla 1 Vittorio Ferrari 1

Abstract
We present a method for estimating neural scenes
representations of objects given only a single image. The core of our method is the estimation
of a geometric scaffold for the object and its use
as a guide for the reconstruction of the underlying radiance field. Our formulation is based on
a generative process that first maps a latent code
to a voxelized shape, and then renders it to an image, with the object appearance being controlled
by a second latent code. During inference, we
optimize both the latent codes and the networks
to fit a test image of a new object. The explicit
disentanglement of shape and appearance allows
our model to be fine-tuned given a single image.
We can then render new views in a geometrically
consistent manner and they represent faithfully
the input object. Additionally, our method is able
to generalize to images outside of the training
domain (more realistic renderings and even real
photographs). Finally, the inferred geometric scaffold is itself an accurate estimate of the object’s
3D shape. We demonstrate in several experiments
the effectiveness of our approach in both synthetic
and real images.

1. Introduction
Understanding and reconstructing the intrinsic properties of
a 3D scene, such as 3D shape and materials of objects,
is a longstanding fundamental problem in computer vision (Marr, 1982). The typical process for these tasks starts
with a collection of multiple views of a scene and continues
with the application of an algorithm to extract information
such as the geometry and appearance (Hartley & Zisserman,
2004; Yu et al., 1999). There are several representations
for geometry such as voxels or meshes; similarly for appearance, there are colored voxels (Seitz & Dyer, 1999),
BRDFs (Matusik et al., 2003), etc. Recently, there has been
1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Rematas
<krematas@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a paradigm shift due to the success of deep learning methods.
Firstly, the 3D scene properties can be estimated from a single image (Choy et al., 2016; Tulsiani et al., 2017; Fan et al.,
2017; Eigen et al., 2014; Shu et al., 2017). This removes the
requirement of multiple views and enables the application
of a method to a wider range of scenarios. Secondly, in
some recent works the 3D scene properties are modeled
with implicit representations (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder
et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020; Oechsle et al., 2019).
These representations overcome specific shortcomings that
traditional representations face (e.g. space discretization
for voxels, requirement for accurate geometry for textured
meshes).
In this paper we propose a generative method tailored for
inverse rendering from a single image, using both explicit
and implicit representations. In our method, the geometry
and appearance of an object in the rendered image are controlled by two networks. The first network maps a latent
code to an explicit voxelized shape. The second network estimates implicitly the radiance field around the object (color
and volumetric density for any point) using the estimated
shape as a geometric scaffold, together with a second latent
code that controls appearance. Hence, the radiance field is
conditioned on these two factors. The final image is rendered by casting rays towards the scene and accumulating
the color and densities to pixel values. After training the networks, our model can input a new test image and estimate
its geometric and appearance properties by re-rendering it:
we optimize for the latent codes and fine-tune the network
parameters so the rendered image matches the input. At
this point, our model is ready to render novel views of the
test object, as both the implicit and explicit representations
within our model are aware of its 3D shape.
By using an explicit geometric representation for an object,
we guide the appearance reconstruction to focus on its surface. The empty volume around an object does not provide
useful information. Moreover, during inference on a test
image we only have one view. Therefore we cannot rely
on multi-view consistency for accurate shape/appearance
reconstruction, as done in previous work (Mildenhall et al.,
2020), and our geometric scaffold compensates for that.
Our disentangled shape and appearance representation improves performance for novel view synthesis in several sce-

