Batch Value-function Approximation with Only Realizability

Tengyang Xie 1 Nan Jiang 1

Abstract
We make progress in a long-standing problem
of batch reinforcement learning (RL): learning
Q? from an exploratory and polynomial-sized
dataset, using a realizable and otherwise arbitrary function class. In fact, all existing algorithms demand function-approximation assumptions stronger than realizability, and the mounting negative evidence has led to a conjecture that
sample-efficient learning is impossible in this setting (Chen & Jiang, 2019). Our algorithm, BVFT,
breaks the hardness conjecture (albeit under a
stronger notion of exploratory data) via a tournament procedure that reduces the learning problem to pairwise comparison, and solves the latter
with the help of a state-action-space partition constructed from the compared functions. We also
discuss how BVFT can be applied to model selection among other extensions and open problems.

this subproblem, we create a piecewise constant function
class of statistical complexity O(1/2 ) that can express both
candidate functions up to small discretization errors, and
use the projected Bellman operator associated with the class
to identify Q? . We present the algorithm in Section 4 and
prove its sample complexity in Sections 5 and 6. A limitation of our approach is the use of a relatively stringent
version of concentrability coefficient from Munos (2003)
to measure the exploratoriness of the dataset (see Assumption 1). Section 7.2 investigates the difficulties in relaxing
the assumption, and Appendix D discusses how to mitigate the pathological behavior of the algorithm when the
assumption does not hold.
As another limitation, BVFT enumerates over the function
class and is computationally inefficient for training. That
said, the algorithm is efficient when the function class has a
polynomial cardinality, making it applicable to another problem in batch RL: model selection (Farahmand & Szepesvári,
2011).1 In Section 7.1, we review the literature on this important problem and discuss how BVFT has significantly
advanced the state of the art on the theoretical front.

1. Introduction
What is the minimal function-approximation assumption
that enables polynomial sample complexity, when we try
to learn Q? from an exploratory batch dataset? Existing
algorithms and analyses—those that have largely laid the
theoretical foundation of modern reinforcement learning—
have always demanded assumptions that are substantially
stronger than the most basic one: realizability, i.e., that Q?
(approximately) lies in the function class. These strong assumptions have recently compelled Chen & Jiang (2019) to
conjecture an information-theoretic barrier, that polynomial
learning is impossible in batch RL, even with exploratory
data and realizable function approximation.
In this paper, we break this barrier by an algorithm called
Batch Value-Function Tournament (BVFT). Via a tournament procedure, BVFT reduces the learning problem to that
of identifying Q? from a pair of candidate functions. In
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang
<nanjiang@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2. Related Work
Stronger Function-Approximation Assumptions in Existing Theory The theory of batch RL has struggled for
a long time to provide sample-efficiency guarantees when
realizability is the only assumption imposed on the function
class. An intuitive reason is that learning Q? is roughly
equivalent to minimizing the Bellman error, but the latter cannot be estimated from data (Jiang, 2019; Sutton &
Barto, 2018, Chapter 11.6), leading to the infamous “double sampling” difficulty (Baird, 1995; Antos et al., 2008).
Stronger/additional assumptions have been proposed to circumvent the issue, including low inherent Bellman errors
(Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Antos et al., 2008), averager
classes (Gordon, 1995), and additional function approximation of importance weights (Xie & Jiang, 2020).
State Abstractions State abstractions are the simplest form
of function approximation. (They are also special cases of
1

We use the phrase “model selection” as in the context of e.g.,
cross validation, and the word “model” does not refer to MDP
dynamics; rather they refer to value functions for our purposes.

