Parallel and Flexible Sampling from Autoregressive
Models via Langevin Dynamics

Vivek Jayaram * 1 John Thickstun * 1

Abstract
This paper introduces an alternative approach
to sampling from autoregressive models. Autoregressive models are typically sampled sequentially, according to the transition dynamics
defined by the model. Instead, we propose a
sampling procedure that initializes a sequence
with white noise and follows a Markov chain defined by Langevin dynamics on the global loglikelihood of the sequence. This approach parallelizes the sampling process and generalizes to
conditional sampling. Using an autoregressive
model as a Bayesian prior, we can steer the output
of a generative model using a conditional likelihood or constraints. We apply these techniques to
autoregressive models in the visual and audio domains, with competitive results for audio source
separation, super-resolution, and inpainting.

1. Introduction
Neural autoregressive models (Larochelle & Murray, 2011)
are a popular family of generative models, with wideranging applications in a variety of domains including audio
(van den Oord et al., 2016a; Dhariwal et al., 2020), images
(van den Oord et al., 2016b; Salimans et al., 2017; Parmar
et al., 2018; Razavi et al., 2019), and text (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020). These models parameterize the
conditional distribution over a token in an ordered sequence,
given previous tokens in the sequence. The standard approach to sampling from an autoregressive model iteratively
generates tokens, according to a conditional distribution
over tokens defined by the model, conditioned on the partial
sequence of previously generated tokens. We will refer to
this approach to sampling as the ancestral sampler.
There are two major drawbacks to ancestral sampling that
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Vivek Jayaram <vjayaram@cs.washington.edu>, John Thickstun <thickstn@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

limit the usefulness of autoregressive models in practical
settings. First, ancestral sampling has time complexity that
scales linearly in the length of the generated sequence. For
data such as high-resolution images or audio, ancestral sampling from an autoregressive model (where the tokens are
pixels or sound pressure readings respectively) can be impractically slow. Second, ancestral sampling is frustratingly
inflexible. It is easy to sample the second half of a sequence
conditioned on the first, but filling in the first half a sequence
conditioned on the second naively requires training a new
model that reverses the ordering of tokens in the autoregressive factorization. Conditioning on arbitrary subsets
of tokens for tasks such as inpainting or super-resolution
seems beyond reach of autoregressive modeling.
This paper introduces an alternative, parallel and flexible
(PnF) sampler for autoregressive models that can be parallelized and steered using conditioning information or constraints.1 Instead of sampling tokens sequentially, the PnF
sampler initializes a complete sequence (with random tokens) and proceeds to increase the log-likelihood of this
sequence by following a Markov chain defined by Langevin
dynamics (Neal et al., 2011) on a smoothed log-likelihood.
The smoothing temperature is cooled over time according
to an annealing schedule informed by Song & Ermon (2019;
2020). Convergence time of this annealed Langevin dynamics is empirically independent of the sequence length and,
generalizing Jayaram & Thickstun (2020), the PnF sampler
can be applied to posterior log-likelihoods to incorporate
conditional information into the sampling process.
The primary technical contribution of this paper is the development of the PnF sampler for discretized autoregressive
models (Section 3.1). Our interest in these models is motivated by their success as unconditional models of audio
waves (van den Oord et al., 2016a; Mehri et al., 2017; Dhariwal et al., 2020). Defined over a discrete lattice within a
continuous space, these models occupy a middle ground
between continuous and discrete models. For continuous
models such as RNADE (Uria et al., 2013), PnF sampling
can be directly applied as in Song & Ermon (2019); Jayaram
1
Code and examples of PnF sampling are available at:
https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/
pnf-sampling/.

