Projection Robust Wasserstein Barycenters

Minhui Huang 1 Shiqian Ma 2 Lifeng Lai 1

Abstract
Collecting and aggregating information from several probability measures or histograms is a fundamental task in machine learning. One of the
popular solution methods for this task is to compute the barycenter of the probability measures
under the Wasserstein metric. However, approximating the Wasserstein barycenter is numerically
challenging because of the curse of dimensionality. This paper proposes the projection robust
Wasserstein barycenter (PRWB) that has the potential to mitigate the curse of dimensionality, and
a relaxed PRWB (RPRWB) model that is computationally more tractable. By combining the
iterative Bregman projection algorithm and Riemannian optimization, we propose two algorithms
for computing the RPRWB, which is a max-min
problem over the Stiefel manifold. The complexity of arithmetic operations of the proposed algorithms for obtaining an -stationary solution
is analyzed. We incorporate the RPRWB into a
discrete distribution clustering algorithm, and the
numerical results on real text datasets confirm that
our RPRWB model helps improve the clustering
performance significantly.

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein barycenter (WB) problem is attracting a lot
of interest recently due to its wide applications in statistics
and machine learning, including but not limited to image
processing (Rabin et al., 2011), multi-level clustering (Ho
et al., 2017), and text mining (Ye et al., 2017a;b). The WB
serves as a geodesic interpolation between two or more
distributions. It aggregates the underlying geometric structures of the input distributions under the Wasserstein metric.
Therefore, the WB model provides deep insight when collecting information from probability distributions.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA, USA 2 Department of Mathematics,
University of California, Davis, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Shiqian Ma <sqma@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

However, computing the WB for a set of probability distributions is notoriously hard. The hardness comes from
two aspects: the representation of the measure support and
the potential curse of dimensionality. In many applications,
the underlying distributions are unknown and we only have
sampled data from these distributions. We wish to estimate
the WB using the sampled data only. Therefore, the task
reduces to compute WB from sampled discrete measures
on a fixed number of support points. However, solving the
free-support discrete WB is still very difficult (Borgwardt
& Patterson, 2019). In this paper, we mainly consider the
fixed-support WB problem. On the other hand, computing fixed-support WB can be challenging if the dimension
of the problem is high. Recent theoretical developments
have revealed that the sample complexity of approximating Wasserstein distances grows exponentially in dimension
(Dudley, 1969; Weed & Bach, 2019). For the WB problem,
(Altschuler & Boix-Adsera, 2021) has proved that computing WB is NP-hard since its runtime scales exponentially
in the dimension. However, the sample complexity of original WB is still not well understood. Since the WB model
minimizes a sum of Wasserstein distances, we conjecture
that the WB problem would also have the issue of curse of
dimensionality. To overcome this difficulty, we adopt a technique used in computing the Wasserstein distance (Paty &
Cuturi, 2019) to the WB problem. The resulting projection
robust WB (PRWB) model is an inf-sup-inf problem, which
is computationally intractable. We further propose a relaxation of PRWB that is computationally more tractable. The
idea of the new technique is to project the sampled data to a
common low dimensional subspace and compute the WB of
the projected data as an approximation to the original WB.
The resulting problem is a max-min problem with Stiefel
manifold constraint, and we propose two algorithms that
can find an -stationary point of it efficiently.
Related work: Most existing works for fixed-support WB
focus on designing efficient algorithms. (Cuturi & Doucet,
2014) proposed to add an entropy regularizer and solve its
dual problem that is smooth. This idea was further studied by (Benamou et al., 2015) under the name of iterative
Bregman projection (IBP) algorithm. The convergence behavior of IBP was studied in (Kroshnin et al., 2019). There
exist some other algorithms for computing fixed-support
WB, including the dual accelerated gradient descent method

