Quantization Algorithms for Random Fourier Features

Xiaoyun Li, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St Bellevue WA 98004 USA
{lixiaoyun996, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
The method of random projection (RP) is the standard technique for dimensionality reduction, approximate near neighbor search, compressed sensing, etc., which provides a simple and effective
scheme for approximating pairwise inner products
and Euclidean distances in massive data. Closely
related to RP, the method of random Fourier features (RFF) has also become popular for approximating the (nonlinear) Gaussian kernel. RFF
applies a specific nonlinear transformation on the
projected data from RP. In practice, using the
Gaussian kernel often leads to better performance
than the linear kernel (inner product).
After random projections, quantization is an important step for efficient data storage, computation
and transmission. Quantization for RP has been
extensively studied in the literature. In this paper,
we focus on developing quantization algorithms
for RFF. The task is in a sense challenging due
to the tuning parameter γ in the Gaussian kernel.
For example, the quantizer and the quantized data
might be tied to each specific Gaussian kernel
parameter γ. Our contribution begins with the
analysis on the probability distributions of RFF,
and an interesting discovery that the marginal distribution of RFF is free of the parameter γ. This
significantly simplifies the design of the LloydMax (LM) quantization scheme for RFF in that
there would be only one LM quantizer (regardless
of γ). Detailed theoretical analysis is provided
on the kernel estimators and approximation error,
and experiments confirm the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
The method of random projections (RP) is a popular strategy
to deal with big data, for instance, for efficient processing,
computations, storage and transmissions of massive (and
high-dimensional) datasets. The merit of RP is highlighted
by the celebrated Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma (Johnson
and Lindenstrauss, 1984), which states that with high probability the Euclidean distance between data points is approximately preserved in the projected space if the number of
projections is sufficiently large. In the past two decades, RP
has been used extensively in dimension reduction, approximate near neighbor search, compressed sensing, computational biology, etc. See examples of relatively early works
on RP (Dasgupta, 2000; Bingham and Mannila, 2001; Buhler, 2001; Achlioptas, 2003; Fern and Brodley, 2003; Datar
et al., 2004; Candès et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006; Li et al.,
2006; Freund et al., 2007; Li, 2007). In this paper, we study
quantization schemes for random Fourier features (RFF),
which are nonlinear transformations of random projections,
to accurately approximate the (nonlinear) Gaussian kernel.
1.1. Linear Kernel and Gaussian Kernel
Let u, v ∈ X ⊆ Rd denote two d-dimensional data vectors. The linear kernel is the inner product hu, vi = uT v.
For training large-scale linear learning algorithms such as
linear support vector machine (SVM) and linear logistic
regression, highly efficient training algorithms have been
widely used (Joachims, 2006; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011;
Fan et al., 2008). Despite their high efficiency, the drawback
of linear learning methods is that they often do not provide a
good accuracy as they neglect the nonlinearity of data. This
motivates researchers to find efficient training algorithms for
nonlinear kernels such as the Gaussian kernel (Hastie et al.,
2001; Schölkopf and Smola, 2002; Bottou et al., 2007),
which is defined through a real-valued kernel function
Kγ (u, v) = hξ(u), ξ(v)i = e−

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

γ 2 ku−vk2
2

,

where ξ(·) : X 7→ H is the implicit feature map and γ is
a hyper-parameter, with H the corresponding Reproducing

