Communication-Efficient Distributed SVD via Local Power Iterations
Xiang Li 1 Shusen Wang 2 Kun Chen 1 Zhihua Zhang 1

Abstract
We study distributed computing of the truncated
singular value decomposition problem. We develop an algorithm that we call LocalPower
for improving communication efficiency. Specifically, we uniformly partition the dataset among m
nodes and alternate between multiple (precisely p)
local power iterations and one global aggregation.
In the aggregation, we propose to weight each local eigenvector matrix with orthogonal Procrustes
transformation (OPT). As a practical surrogate
of OPT, sign-fixing, which uses a diagonal matrix with ±1 entries as weights, has better computation complexity and stability in experiments.
We theoretically show that under certain assumptions LocalPower lowers the required number
of communications by a factor of p to reach a
constant accuracy. We also show that the strategy of periodically decaying p helps obtain highprecision solutions. We conduct experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of LocalPower.

When either n or d is big, the data matrix A ∈ Rn×d may
not fit in the memory, making standard single-machine algorithms infeasible. A distributed power iteration is feasible
and practical for large-scale truncated SVDs. In particular,
we partition the rows of A among m worker nodes (see
Figure 1(a)) and let the nodes perform power iterations in
parallel (see Figure 1(b)). In every iteration, every node
performs O( ndk
m ) FLOPs (suppose the load is balanced),
while the server performs only O(dk 2 ) FLOPs.
When solving large-scale matrix computation problems,
communication costs are not negligible; in fact, communication costs can outweigh computation costs. The largescale SVD experiments in (Gittens et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2019) show that the runtime caused by communication and
straggler’s effect1 can exceed the computation time. Due
to the communication costs and other overheads, parallel
computing can even demonstrate anti-scaling; that is, when
m is big, the overall wall-clock runtime increases with m.
Reducing the frequency of communications will reduce the
communication and synchronization costs and thereby improving the scalability.
1.1. Our Contributions

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider the truncated singular value decomposition (SVD) which has broad applications in machine
learning, such as dimension reduction (Wold et al., 1987),
matrix completion (Candès & Recht, 2009), and information
retrieval (Deerwester et al., 1990). Let a1 , · · · , an ∈ Rd
be sampled i.i.d. from some fixed but unknown distribution.
The goal is to compute the k (k < min{d, n}) singular
vectors of A , [a1 , . . . , an ]> ∈ Rn×d . Let Vk ∈ Rd×k
contain the top k singular vectors. The power iteration and
its variants such as Krylov subspace iterations are common
approaches to the truncated SVD. They have O(nd) space
complexity and O(ndk) per-iteration time complexity. They
take Õ(log d ) iterations to converge to  precision, where
Õ hides the spectral gap and constants (Golub & Van Loan,
2012; Saad, 2011).
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology,
USA. Correspondence to: Xiang Li <lx10077@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Inspired by the FedAvg algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017),
we propose an algorithm called LocalPower to improve
communication-efficiency. LocalPower is based on the
distributed power iteration (DPI) described in Figure 1. The
difference is that LocalPower makes every node locally
perform orthogonal iterations using its own data for p iterations. In the case for p = 1, LocalPower degenerates
to DPI. When p ≥ 2, local updates are employed to reduce
communication frequency.
In practice, a naive implementation of the proposed
LocalPower does not work very well. We propose three
effective techniques for improving LocalPower:
• We propose to decay the communication interval, p,
over time. In this way, the loss drops fast in the beginning and converge to the optimal solution in the
end. Without the decay strategy, LocalPower is not
1

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Straggler’s effect means that one outlier node is tremendously
slower than the rest, and the system waits for the slowest to complete.

