First-Order Methods for Wasserstein Distributionally Robust MDPs

Julien Grand-Clément 1 Christian Kroer 1

Abstract
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are known
to be sensitive to parameter specification. Distributionally robust MDPs alleviate this issue by
allowing for ambiguity sets which give a set of
possible distributions over parameter sets. The
goal is to find an optimal policy with respect to
the worst-case parameter distribution. We propose a framework for solving Distributionally robust MDPs via first-order methods, and instantiate it for several types of Wasserstein ambiguity sets. By developing efficient proximal updates, our algorithms achieve a convergence
rate

of O N A2.5 S 3.5 log(S) log(−1 )−1.5 for the
number of kernels N in the support of the nominal distribution, states S, and actions A; this rate
varies slightly based on the Wasserstein setup.
Our dependence on N, A and S is significantly
better than existing methods, which have
 a complexity of O N 3.5 A3.5 S 4.5 log2 (−1 ) . Numerical experiments show that our algorithm is significantly more scalable than state-of-the-art approaches across several domains.

1. Introduction
In many applications of sequential decision-making problems, the dynamics of the environment can only be partially
modeled, because of statistical errors and inaccurate distributional information regarding the parameters of the model.
This occurs, for example, in healthcare applications (GrandClément et al., 2020; Steimle et al., 2018) and vehicle routing (Miao et al., 2017). In Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), this can be addressed using robust formulations,
where the transition probabilities belong to a safety region
called the uncertainty set (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & Ghaoui,
2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013; Goyal & Grand-Clément,
2018). However, robust MDPs often compute conservative
*
1
Equal contribution
IEOR Department, Columbia
University.
Correspondence to: Julien Grand-Clément
<jg3728@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

policies, as they optimize only for the worst-case kernel realization, without incorporating distributional information
about uncertainties.
Distributionally Robust MDPs (DR-MDPs) (Xu & Mannor,
2010; Yu & Xu, 2015) attempt to overcome the conservative
nature of robust MDPs. In DR-MDPs the goal is to maximize the worst-case expected reward, assuming that the
distribution over the set of possible transition kernels is not
known, but belongs to a so-called ambiguity set consisting
of all the possible measures over transition kernels. Robust
MDPs can be viewed as a special case of DR-MDP, where
the distribution over the set of possible kernels is restricted
to Dirac masses. Yang (2017) introduces a Wasserstein ball
formulation for ambiguity sets, shows the existence of an
optimal policy that is Markovian, and gives a Value Iteration (VI) algorithm based on iterating a Bellman equation.
Wasserstein distances have been shown to be particularly
useful when the data is too sparse to use moment-based
ambiguity sets (Gao & Kleywegt, 2016; Esfahani & Kuhn,
2018; Zhao & Guan, 2018).
One drawback of the Value Iteration approach to solving DRMDPs is that every iteration of the algorithm requires solving the associated Bellman equation. Yang (2017) shows
that this Bellman equation can be reformulated as a finitedimensional convex program with a max-min objective. In
the special case of DR-MDP policies for Wasserstein balls
with a finite number of states and actions and s-rectangular
ambiguity sets, it is possible to derive a large conic convex program using standard optimization methods. Letting
N be the number of kernels in the support of the nominal
distribution over the set of possible kernels, S the number of states, and A the number of actions of the MDP, VI
with such a conic convex reformulation (solved using standard interior-point methods)returns an -optimal policy in
O N 3.5 A3.5 S 4.5 log2 (−1 ) time, for Wasserstein uncertainty based on the `2 -metric. The same complexity results
hold for Wasserstein uncertainty based on `1 and `∞ metric,
see end of Section 2.1. This time complexity is largely due
to the expensive per-iteration cost of interior-point methods.
This may prove prohibitively slow when the MDP instance
or the number of kernels is large.
In this paper, our goal is to design algorithms based on firstorder methods (FOMs), which are typically more scalable

