From Poincaré Recurrence to Convergence in Imperfect Information Games:
Finding Equilibrium via Regularization

Julien Perolat 1 Remi Munos 1 Jean-Baptiste Lespiau 1 Shayegan Omidshafiei 1 Mark Rowland 1
Pedro Ortega 1 Neil Burch 1 Thomas Anthony 1 David Balduzzi 1 Bart De Vylder 1 Georgios Piliouras 2
Marc Lanctot 1 Karl Tuyls 1

Abstract
In this paper we investigate the Follow the Regularized Leader dynamics in sequential imperfect
information games (IIG). We generalize existing
results of Poincaré recurrence from normal-form
games to zero-sum two-player imperfect information games and other sequential game settings.
We then investigate how adapting the reward (by
adding a regularization term) of the game can
give strong convergence guarantees in monotone
games. We continue by showing how this reward
adaptation technique can be leveraged to build
algorithms that converge exactly to the Nash equilibrium. Finally, we show how these insights can
be directly used to build state-of-the-art modelfree algorithms for zero-sum two-player Imperfect Information Games (IIG).

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of learning a Nash equilibrium in several classes of games. Learning Nash equilibria
in competitive games is complex as agents no longer share
information but behave independently. Various techniques
have been proposed to solve these games, with the current
state-of-the-art usually guaranteeing average-time convergence of the learned policy to a Nash equilibrium, but not
necessarily convergence of the policy itself to Nash. Unfortunately, these convergence guarantees are not conducive
to learning in large games, which rely on general function
approximation techniques (e.g., deep neural networks) that
are inherently difficult to time-average. Moreover, the realtime behaviors of the policy can be quite distinctive from its
time-average counterpart, and can even diverge away from
Nash equilibria (Bailey & Piliouras, 2018).
1

DeepMind 2 SUTD. Correspondence to: Julien Perolat <perolat@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In some adversarial games, Follow the Regularized
Leader (FoReL) is known to be convergent if the equilibrium is deterministic, and recurrent if the equilibrium is
mixed with full support (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018). A special case of FoReL dynamics is replicator dynamics (Taylor
& Jonker, 1978), the main dynamic of evolutionary game
theory, whose recurrent behavior in zero-sum games and
generalizations is well studied (Piliouras & Shamma, 2014;
Boone & Piliouras, 2019). More generally, value-based
methods have been well-studied in multi-agent reinforcement learning (Littman, 1994; 2001; Hu & Wellman, 2003)
but numerous issues of convergence have been noticed. But
a notable empirical finding shows that regularization of
Q-learning in matrix games can induce the policy to converge in real-time to a Nash equilibrium (Tuyls et al., 2003;
Kaisers & Tuyls, 2010; 2011) or in the replicator dynamics
to Quantal-Response-Equilibrium (Ortega & Legg, 2018;
McKelvey & Palfrey, 1995; Tuyls & Nowé, 2005). Other
theoretical investigations show that softmax best response
can guarantee convergence in Q-learning (Leslie & Collins,
2005).
Motivated by these findings, this paper formally analyzes
the impact of regularization on learning dynamics, extending beyond the simple case of matrix games and focusing
particularly on the application of FoReL to imperfect information games. The contributions of the paper are as
follows:
• We generalize the Poincaré recurrence result (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018) to the case of sequential imperfect information games. This proves that strategies
can cycle in IIG when using FoReL (e.g., similar to the
normal form game case Fig. 1, (a)).
• We prove that changing the reward structure of the
game improves convergence guarantees at the cost of
slightly modifying the equilibrium of the game (e.g.,
as in Fig. 1, (b), (c), (d)).
• We show that this reward adaptation method can be
used to build a sequence of closer and closer pseudosolutions converging onto a Nash equilibrium.

