Decision-Making Under Selective Labels:
Optimal Finite-Domain Policies and Beyond

Dennis Wei 1

Abstract
Selective labels are a common feature of highstakes decision-making applications, referring to
the lack of observed outcomes under one of the
possible decisions. This paper studies the learning
of decision policies in the face of selective labels,
in an online setting that balances learning costs
against future utility. In the homogeneous case in
which individuals’ features are disregarded, the
optimal decision policy is shown to be a threshold
policy. The threshold becomes more stringent as
more labels are collected; the rate at which this
occurs is characterized. In the case of features
drawn from a finite domain, the optimal policy
consists of multiple homogeneous policies in parallel. For the general infinite-domain case, the
homogeneous policy is extended by using a probabilistic classifier and bootstrapping to provide
its inputs. In experiments on synthetic and real
data, the proposed policies achieve consistently
superior utility with no parameter tuning in the
finite-domain case and lower parameter sensitivity
in the general case.

1. Introduction
The problem of selective labels is common to many highstakes decision-making scenarios affecting human subjects.
In these scenarios, individuals receive binary decisions,
which will be referred to generically as acceptance or rejection. If the decision is to accept, then an outcome label
is observed, which determines the utility of the decision.
However if the decision is to reject, no outcome is observed.
In lending for example, the decision is whether to offer or
deny the loan, and the outcome of repayment or default is
observed only if the loan is made. In pre-trial bail decisions,
the outcome is whether a defendant returns to court without committing another offense, but there is no opportunity
1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: <dwei@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to observe it if bail is denied. In hiring, a candidate’s job
performance is observed only if they are hired.
The prevalence and challenges of selective labels were recently emphasized by Lakkaraju et al. (2017), who studied
the evaluation of machine learning models in comparison to
human decision-makers using data labelled selectively by
the human decisions themselves. The subject of the present
paper is the learning of decision policies in the face of selective labels. This problem was addressed indirectly by
De-Arteaga et al. (2018), who proposed label imputation
in regions of high human confidence, and more deeply by
Kilbertus et al. (2020). In the latter paper, the goal is to maximize expected utility (possibly including a fairness penalty)
over a held-out population, given data and labels collected
selectively by a suboptimal existing policy. Kilbertus et al.
(2020) showed that an existing policy that is deterministic,
commonly achieved by thresholding the output of a predictive model, may condemn future policies to suboptimality.
However, if the existing policy is stochastic and “exploring”, then the optimal policy can be learned and a stochastic
gradient ascent algorithm is proposed to do so.
This paper studies an online formulation of the selective
labels problem, presented in Section 2, that accounts for
the costs of decisions taken during learning and seeks to
maximize discounted total reward. This contrasts with Kilbertus et al. (2020) where learning costs do not enter into
the objective of held-out utility. Also unlike Kilbertus et al.
(2020), there is no need for labelled data from an existing
exploring policy. The online formulation brings the problem
closer to one of contextual bandits, with which comparisons
are made throughout the paper.
The approach taken herein is to first solve a simpler special case and then explore the extent to which this solution
can generalize. Specifically, in Section 3, it is assumed
that individuals are drawn from a homogeneous population,
without features to distinguish them. By formulating the
problem as a partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) and applying dynamic programming, the optimal acceptance policy is shown to be a threshold policy on
the estimated probability of success. Properties of the optimal policy are derived. These show that the policy becomes
more stringent (i.e., the rejection set grows) as more observa-

