A Proxy Variable View of Shared Confounding
Yixin Wang 1 David M. Blei 2

Abstract
Causal inference from observational data
can be biased by unobserved confounders.
Confounders—the variables that affect both the
treatments and the outcome—induce spurious
non-causal correlations between the two. Without
additional conditions, unobserved confounders
generally make causal quantities hard to identify.
In this paper, we focus on the setting where there
are many treatments with shared confounding,
and we study under what conditions is causal
identification possible. The key observation is
that we can view subsets of treatments as proxies
of the unobserved confounder and identify the
intervention distributions of the rest. Moreover,
while existing identification formulas for proxy
variables involve solving integral equations, we
show that one can circumvent the need for such
solutions by directly modeling the data. Finally,
we extend these results to an expanded class of
causal graphs, those with other confounders and
selection variables.

1. Introduction
Causal inference from observational data can be biased by
unobserved confounders. Confounders are variables that
affect both the treatments and the outcome. When measured,
we can account for them with adjustments (Pearl, 2009). But
when unobserved, they open back-door paths that bias the
causal inference; back-door adjustments are not possible.
Consider the following causal problem. How does a person’s diet affect her body fat percentage? One confounder
is lifestyle: someone with a healthy lifestyle will eat healthy
foods such as boiled broccoli; but she will also exercise
frequently, which lowers her body fat. When lifestyle is
unobserved, the composition of diet will be correlated with
body fat, regardless of its true causal effect. Compounding the difficulty, accurate measurements of lifestyle (the

confounder) are difficult to obtain, e.g., requiring expensive
real-time tracking of activities. Lifestyle is necessarily an
unobserved confounder.
Here we focus on the setting where multiple treatments share
the same unobserved confounder. The example fits into this
setting. Each type of food—broccoli, burgers, granola bars,
pizza, and so on—is a potential “treatment” for body fat.
Further, each person’s lifestyle affects multiple treatments,
i.e., their consumption of multiple types of food. People
with a healthy lifestyle eat broccoli and granola; people
with an unhealthy lifestyle eat pizza and burgers. Thus the
different foods share the same unobserved confounder, i.e.
each person’s lifestyle.
When multiple treatments share the same unobserved confounding, which causal quantities can be identified? How
can we estimate them? These are the questions we address.
Begin with the causal graph of Figure 1a, where an unobserved confounder U (lifestyle) affects multiple treatments
{A1 , . . . , Am } (food choices) and an outcome Y (body
fat). Further consider a subset of treatments C. We prove
that, under suitable conditions, the intervention distribution
p(y | do(aC )) is identifiable.

The key observation is that, under shared confounding,
some treatments can serve as proxies of unobserved confounders (Miao et al., 2018; Kuroki & Pearl, 2014), enabling
causal identification of other treatments. This observation
helps identify the intervention distributions of subsets of
treatments. Unlike prior work, we do not need to find two
external proxies for the unobserved confounder; some treatments themselves can serve as proxies for other treatments.

University of California, Berkeley 2 Columbia University. Correspondence to: David M. Blei <david.blei@columbia.edu>.

We then turn to estimation. The identification formula we obtain requires solving an integral equation (Miao et al., 2018),
which might be difficult. We show that the deconfounder
algorithm of Wang & Blei (2019a) can help bypass this
requirement, producing correct causal estimates by directly
modeling the data. With a simulation study, we demonstrate
that the identification conditions we require are crucial for
the algorithm to produce correct causal inferences. We note
that, while we use the same algorithm, the theoretical setting
considered here is different from Wang & Blei (2019a).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

We finally generalize the identification and estimation results to an expanded class of graphs in Figure 2b. This class

1

