PAGE: A Simple and Optimal Probabilistic Gradient Estimator for
Nonconvex Optimization

Zhize Li 1 Hongyan Bao 1 Xiangliang Zhang 1 Peter Richtárik 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel stochastic gradient estimator—ProbAbilistic Gradient Estimator
(PAGE)—for nonconvex optimization. PAGE is
easy to implement as it is designed via a small adjustment to vanilla SGD: in each iteration, PAGE
uses the vanilla minibatch SGD update with probability pt or reuses the previous gradient with a
small adjustment, at a much lower computational
cost, with probability 1 − pt . We give a simple
formula for the optimal choice of pt . Moreover,
√
we prove the first tight lower bound Ω(n + 2n )
for nonconvex finite-sum problems,√which also
leads to a tight lower bound Ω(b + 2b ) for non2
convex online problems, where b := min{ σ2 , n}.
Then, we show that PAGE√obtains the optimal
convergence results O(n + 2n ) (finite-sum) and

(Jain & Kar, 2017). Driven by the applied success of deep
neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015), and the critical place
nonconvex optimization plays in training them, research
in nonconvex optimization has been undergoing a renaissance (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Ghadimi et al., 2016; Zhou
et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2018; Li, 2019; Li & Richtárik,
2020).
1.1. The problem
Motivated by this development, we consider the general
optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a differentiable and possibly nonconvex function. We are interested in functions having the
finite-sum form

√

O(b + 2b ) (online) matching our lower bounds
for both nonconvex finite-sum and online problems. Besides, we also show that for nonconvex
functions satisfying the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL)
condition, PAGE can automatically switch to a
faster linear convergence rate O(· log 1 ). Finally,
we conduct several deep learning experiments
(e.g., LeNet, VGG, ResNet) on real datasets in
PyTorch showing that PAGE not only converges
much faster than SGD in training but also achieves
the higher test accuracy, validating the optimal
theoretical results and confirming the practical
superiority of PAGE.

1. Introduction
Nonconvex optimization is ubiquitous across many domains
of machine learning, including robust regression, low rank
matrix recovery, sparse recovery and supervised learning
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Zhize Li
<zhize.li@kaust.edu.sa>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

n

f (x) :=

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(2)

where the functions fi are also differentiable and possibly nonconvex. Form (2) captures the standard empirical
risk minimization problems in machine learning (ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014). Moreover, if the number of
data samples n is very large or even infinite, e.g., in the
online/streaming case, then f (x) usually is modeled via the
online form
f (x) := Eζ∼D [F (x, ζ)],

(3)

which we also consider in this work. For notational convenience, we adopt the notation of the finite-sum form (2)
in the descriptions and algorithms in the rest of this paper.
However, our results apply to the online form (3) as well
by letting fi (x) := F (x, ζi ) and treating n as a very large
value or even infinite.
1.2. Gradient complexity
To measure the efficiency of algorithms for solving the
nonconvex optimization problem (1), it is standard to bound
the number of stochastic gradient computations needed to
find a solution of suitable characteristics. In this paper we

