Improved Regret Bounds of Bilinear Bandits using
Action Space Analysis

Kyoungseok Jang 1 Kwang-Sung Jun 2 Se-Young Yun 3 Wanmo Kang 1

Abstract
We consider the bilinear bandit problem where
the learner chooses a pair of arms, each from two
different action spaces of dimension d1 and d2 ,
respectively. The learner then receives a reward
whose expectation is a bilinear function of the
two chosen arms with an unknown matrix parameter Θ∗ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 with rank r. Despite abundant
applications such as drug discovery, the optimal
regret rate is unknown for this
p problem, though
it was conjectured to be Õ( d1 d2 (d1 + d2 )rT )
by Jun et al. (2019) where Õ ignores polylogarithmic factors in T . In this paper, we make progress
towards closing the gap between the upper and
lower bound on the optimal regret. First, we reject
the conjecture above bypproposing algorithms that
achieve the regret Õ( d1 d2 (d1 + d2 )T ) using
the fact that the action space dimension O(d1 +d2 )
is significantly lower than the matrix parameter dimension O(d1 d2 ). Second, we additionally devise
an algorithm with better empirical performance
than previous algorithms.

arrange couples based on their experiences to get better ratings and rewards. Balancing exploration and exploitation is
the core framework of the bandit approach, and researchers
start to involve in this approach to construct a better recommendation system for the matching problem. Few good
examples are protein-drug pair approach (Luo et al., 2017),
dating market (Das & Kamenica, 2005), duel matching system (Sui et al., 2018), and a cloth recommendation system.
However, research on this two-sided bandit problem has
not been done well for even the simplest form, the bilinear
model. While researchers have shown interest for a long
time in pure exploration perspectives such as the matrix
sensing and the matrix completion problem (Chi et al., 2019;
Keshavan et al., 2009), there have been only few studies on
the bilinear bandit problem.
We consider the stochastic bilinear bandit problem. Let
X ⊂ Rd1 and Z ⊂ Rd2 be the left and right action space,
respectively. For each round t, the agent chooses a pair of
actions xt ∈ X and zt ∈ Z and then receives a reward rt as
a noisy bilinear function:
∗
rt = x>
t Θ zt + ηt

where ηt ∈ R is a σ sub-Gaussian noise. The objective is to
maximize the cumulative rewards.

1. Introduction
Recently, researchers have shown much attention in the application of the bandit algorithms to the matching problem.
Imagine a newly starting marriage agency company. Since
they have less knowledge about how each factor of the customer (e.g., wealth, height, education) makes synergy with
the opponent customer, they will want to try several matchings to learn the importance of each feature. However, they
will also not want to lose their ratings by poor matchings
caused by excessive exploration, so someday they should
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea 2 Department
of Computation, University of Arizona, Arizona, USA 3 Graduate
School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Wanmo Kang
<wanmo.kang@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The lack of research on the bilinear bandit problem was
partly due to the belief that the bilinear model can be sufficiently explained by the linear bandit model. The bilinear
∗
term x>
t Θ zt in the reward with action spaces of dimension
d1 and d2 can be re-written as hvec(xt zt> ), vec(Θ∗ )i in the
sense of d1 × d2 dimensional linear bandit problem. Moreover, in the linear bandit field, several algorithms such as
LinUCB (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) have proven their
effectiveness. Naturally, specific studies aimed only for bilinear bandits are limited, and most of the existing studies
have been mainly conducted only in the setting of broader
structures (Johnson et al., 2016; Zimmert & Seldin, 2018),
or with more powerful or peculiar structures (Katariya et al.,
2017; Trinh et al., 2020; Kveton et al., 2017)
However, such naive linear bandit approaches for bilinear
bandits cannot fully utilize the characteristics of the hidden
parameter or action spaces, which leads to the limited regret analysis. Jun et al. (2019) proves that when the hidden

