Active Testing: Sample–Efficient Model Evaluation

Jannik Kossen * 1 Sebastian Farquhar * 1 Yarin Gal 1 Tom Rainforth 2
×10−2

We introduce a new framework for sampleefficient model evaluation that we call active
testing. While approaches like active learning
reduce the number of labels needed for model
training, existing literature largely ignores the
cost of labeling test data, typically unrealistically
assuming large test sets for model evaluation.
This creates a disconnect to real applications,
where test labels are important and just as
expensive, e.g. for optimizing hyperparameters.
Active testing addresses this by carefully selecting
the test points to label, ensuring model evaluation
is sample-efficient. To this end, we derive
theoretically-grounded and intuitive acquisition
strategies that are specifically tailored to the goals
of active testing, noting these are distinct to
those of active learning. As actively selecting
labels introduces a bias; we further show how to
remove this bias while reducing the variance of
the estimator at the same time. Active testing
is easy to implement and can be applied to
any supervised machine learning method. We
demonstrate its effectiveness on models including
WideResNets and Gaussian processes on datasets
including Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR-100.

1. Introduction
Although unlabeled datapoints are often plentiful, labels
can be expensive. For example, in scientific applications
acquiring a single label can require expert researchers
and weeks of lab time. However, some labels are more
informative than others. In principle, this means that we can
pick the most useful points to spend our budget wisely.
These ideas have motivated extensive research into actively
selecting training labels (Atlas et al., 1990; Settles, 2010),
but the cost of labeling test data has been largely ignored
*
Equal contribution 1 OATML, Department of Computer
Science, 2 Department of Statistics, Oxford. Correspondence to:
Jannik Kossen <jannik.kossen@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Difference to Full Test Loss

Abstract

I.I.D. Acquisition
Active Testing

5

0

−5
1

10
20
Number of Acquired Test Points

30

Figure 1. Active testing estimates the test loss much more precisely
than uniform sampling for the same number of labeled test points.
Active data selection during testing resolves a major barrier to
sample-efficient machine learning, complementing prior work
which has focused only on training. For details, see §5.1.

(Lowell et al., 2019). In artificial research settings, this is
often not a problem: we can ‘cheat’ by using enormous
test datasets if the goal is to see how good some sampleefficient training approach is. But for practitioners this
creates a huge issue: in practice, one must evaluate model
performance, both to choose the best model and to develop
trust in individual models. Whenever labels are expensive
enough that we need to carefully pick training data, we
cannot afford to be wasteful with test data either.
To address this, we introduce a framework for actively
selecting test points for efficient labeling that we call active
testing. To this end, we derive acquisition functions with
which to select test points to maximize the accuracy of the
resulting empirical risk estimate. We find that the principles
that make these acquisition functions effective are quite
different from their active learning counterparts. Given a
fixed budget, we can then estimate quantities like the test
loss much more accurately than naively labeling points at
random. An example of this is given in Fig. 1.
Starting with an idealized, but intractable, approach,
we show how practical acquisition strategies for active
testing can be derived. In particular, we derive specific
principled acquisition frameworks for classification and
regression. Each of these depends only on a predictive
model for outputs, allowing for substantial customization of
the framework to particular problems and computational

