Linear Transformers Are Secretly Fast Weight Programmers

Imanol Schlag∗ 1 Kazuki Irie∗ 1 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1

Abstract
We show the formal equivalence of linearised selfattention mechanisms and fast weight controllers
from the early ’90s, where a “slow” neural net
learns by gradient descent to program the “fast
weights” of another net through sequences of elementary programming instructions which are additive outer products of self-invented activation
patterns (today called keys and values). Such Fast
Weight Programmers (FWPs) learn to manipulate
the contents of a finite memory and dynamically
interact with it. We infer a memory capacity limitation of recent linearised softmax attention variants, and replace the purely additive outer products by a delta rule-like programming instruction,
such that the FWP can more easily learn to correct the current mapping from keys to values. The
FWP also learns to compute dynamically changing learning rates. We also propose a new kernel
function to linearise attention which balances simplicity and effectiveness. We conduct experiments
on synthetic retrieval problems as well as standard
machine translation and language modelling tasks
which demonstrate the benefits of our methods.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved impressive results in a myriad of sequence processing tasks, including machine translation, language modelling (Al-Rfou
et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2019; Baevski & Auli, 2019; Radford
et al., 2019), and question answering (Devlin et al., 2019),
domains previously dominated by recurrent neural networks
(Graves, 2013; Bahdanau et al., 2015).
The core component of a Transformer is the self-attention
mechanism (Cheng et al., 2016; Parikh et al., 2016; Lin et al.,
2017) which was recently connected to the modern Hop*

Equal contribution 1 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI &
SUPSI. Correspondence to: Imanol Schlag <imanol@idsia.ch>,
Kazuki Irie <kazuki@idsia.ch>, Jürgen Schmidhuber <juergen@idsia.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

field network (Ramsauer et al., 2021; Krotov & Hopfield,
2016; Demircigil et al., 2017). It extends a form of attention
(Bahdanau et al., 2015) originally introduced to complement
recurrent neural networks, e.g., (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997). While relinquishing the recurrence property, all computations across the time axis can be parallelised. However,
this comes with drawbacks: self-attention computations
scale quadratically with sequence length while the memory of the model grows linearly. Therefore, practitioners
are forced to limit the context window to a reasonable size,
which in turn makes it impossible to capture longer-term
dependencies.
Recent work proposed “linear Transformers” with constant
size memory and time complexity linear in sequence length
(Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021; Peng
et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2018). This complexity reduction
is mainly due to a linearisation of the softmax (reviewed in
Sec. 3.2).
Here we emphasize the formal equivalence of this family of
linear Transformers and the Fast Weight Controllers or Fast
Weight Programmers (FWPs) from the ’90s (Schmidhuber,
1991; 1992; 1993; AI Blog, 2021) (apart from normalisation). The memories of such FWPs contain key-value associations, and an FWP can learn to reprogram them through
sequences of differentiable elementary instructions (also
called update rules), which are additive outer products between keys and values invented by the FWP.
This view allows us to derive a limitation of the memory
capacity of linear Transformers and similar models. When
the sequence length exceeds storage capacity, the model
may end up in an overcapacity regime (discussed in depth
in Sec. 4.1). To properly operate under such a regime, the
model should learn to dynamically interact with the memory
contents and selectively decide which key-value associations
to keep and which ones to delete. The purely additive instruction may be inappropriate for this purpose. Therefore,
inspired by recent work on FWPs (Schlag et al., 2021), we
introduce an improved programming instruction akin to the
famous error-correcting delta-rule (Widrow & Hoff, 1960).
Furthermore, softmax linearisation techniques for Transformers are still underexplored. The existing techniques
are either very simplistic (Katharopoulos et al., 2020) or
mathematically well explained but complex (Choromanski

