Prior Image-Constrained Reconstruction using Style-Based Generative Models

Varun A. Kelkar 1 Mark A. Anastasio 1

Abstract
Obtaining a useful estimate of an object from
highly incomplete imaging measurements remains a holy grail of imaging science. Deep
learning methods have shown promise in learning
object priors or constraints to improve the conditioning of an ill-posed imaging inverse problem.
In this study, a framework for estimating an object of interest that is semantically related to a
known prior image, is proposed. An optimization
problem is formulated in the disentangled latent
space of a style-based generative model, and semantically meaningful constraints are imposed
using the disentangled latent representation of the
prior image. Stable recovery from incomplete
measurements with the help of a prior image is
theoretically analyzed. Numerical experiments
demonstrating the superior performance of our
approach as compared to related methods are presented.

1. Introduction
In recent years, generative models based on deep neural
networks have risen to the forefront of machine learning
research. By taking advantage of the approximately low
dimensional structure of natural image data, generative
models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs)
have been able to learn effective mappings from a simple,
tractable, low dimensional distribution to a complex image
data distribution, giving it the ability to generate highly realistic looking images, approximately from the distribution
induced by the training data. Apart from image synthesis,
generative models have found applications such as density
estimation (Dinh et al., 2016), image restoration (Ledig
et al., 2017), object detection (Prakash & Karam, 2019),
video generation (Cai et al., 2018) and style transfer (Zhang
et al., 2018) to name a few. Recent research in GANs has
achieved state of the art performance in terms of visual
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801,
USA. Correspondence to: Varun A. Kelkar <vak2@illinois.edu>,
Mark A. Anastasio <maa@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

quality of images generated, invertibility and image representation, and a meaningful control of semantic features of
the image (Karras et al., 2019; 2020).
Generative models have also found applications for image
reconstruction in computed imaging systems, where a computational procedure is employed to form an estimate of
an object of interest from imaging measurements. When
the measurements are insufficient to uniquely determine
the object of interest, this procedure amounts to solving
an ill-posed inverse problem, and requires additional prior
information about the object distribution. Approaches incorporating sparsity-based priors have been successful in
obtaining accurate reconstructions from incomplete measurements (Candès & Wakin, 2008; Lustig et al., 2008).
Seeking to better characterize the object distribution, generative models have been proposed as a prior for solving
ill-posed inverse problems in imaging (Bora et al., 2017).
Improvements in the image-synthesis performance, stability, and quality of generative neural networks have in-turn
improved the performance of generative-model constrained
reconstruction methods.
In this study, style-based generative models are investigated
for constraining image reconstruction problems in which the
solution is known to be close to a given prior image. This
scenario, known as prior image-constrained reconstruction,
is of particular significance when, for instance, the same
object evolving over time is to be imaged multiple times. It
finds applications in several scientific and medical imaging
situations, such as monitoring tumor progression or perfusion (Chen et al., 2008), multi-contrast magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (Weizman et al., 2016), or sequential radar
imaging (Becquaert et al., 2019). Traditionally, this problem
has been solved by assuming that the difference between
the object of interest and the prior image is sparse in some
domain (Chen et al., 2008; Mota et al., 2017), and solving an
optimization problem penalizing this difference. However,
although many natural images are compressible in some
domain, their differences may not be so. Hence, penalizing
the `1 norm of the difference between the object and the
prior image in a linear transform domain may not be the best
strategy to ensure that the ground truth is related to the prior
image in a meaningful way. Style-based generative models
have been known to be able to control individual semantic
features, or styles, in an image by varying the disentangled

