Consistent Nonparametric Methods for Network Assisted Covariate Estimation

Xueyu Mao 1 Deepayan Chakrabarti 2 Purnamrita Sarkar 3

Abstract
Networks with node covariates are commonplace:
for example, people in a social network have interests, or product preferences, etc. If we know the
covariates for some nodes, can we infer them for
the remaining nodes? In this paper we propose a
new similarity measure between two nodes based
on the patterns of their 2-hop neighborhoods. We
show that a simple algorithm (CN-VEC) like
nearest neighbor regression with this metric is
consistent for a wide range of models when the
degree grows faster than n1/3 up-to logarithmic
factors, where n is the number of nodes. For
“low-rank” latent variable models, the natural contender will be to estimate the latent variables using
SVD and use them for non-parametric regression.
While we show consistency of this method under
less stringent sparsity conditions, our experimental results suggest that the simple local CN-VEC
method either outperforms the global SVD-RBF
method, or has comparable performance for low
rank models. We also present simulated and real
data experiments to show the effectiveness of our
algorithms compared to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Suppose we have a social network where each person has
a vector of interests, such as desired products, or preferred
news topics, or sporting interests. For some people, we know
their interest vector from, say, their past tweets or comments.
But for others, such data may be unavailable or insufficient.
Can we infer their interests from a few people’s known
interests and the structure of the social network? This basic
question is relevant for many applications, such as content
and ad targeting, friend and group recommendations, and
1

Department of Computer Science. 2 Department of Information, Risk, and Operations Management. 3 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences. The University of Texas at Austin, TX,
USA. Correspondence to: Xueyu Mao <xmao@cs.utexas.edu>,
Deepayan Chakrabarti <deepay@utexas.edu>, Purnamrita Sarkar
<purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for investigating privacy in social networks, among others.
Thus, a general solution to this problem would be useful in
many contexts.
Formally, we consider a network where each node has a
vector of node covariates. For some nodes, these covariates
are known; we want to predict the covariates for all other
nodes. Further, the predictions must have consistency guarantees. That is, the predicted covariates must converge to
their actual values as the size of the network grows under
some limiting process. In particular, we want consistency
even for relatively “sparse” networks, often seen in realworld settings, where the average node degree grows slowly
compared to the number of nodes.
To predict node covariates using the network structure, we
use latent variable models. Here, the network and the node
covariates are “generated” by latent variables associated
with the nodes. Such models have been used before for
community detection (Yang et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2016;
Weng & Feng, 2016; Binkiewicz et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2019; Yan & Sarkar, 2020). But the node covariate prediction problem is less well-studied.
A seemingly simple solution is to take the average of the
covariates of a node’s neighbors in the network. But this is
not effective in sparse networks. In sparse network models,
with high probability, two nodes with identical latent values
will not have an edge or even share a common neighbor. So,
a node’s neighbors may not be the nodes most similar to it.
Random-walk heuristics go beyond a node’s direct neighbors, but these lack provable guarantees except in special
cases (Li et al., 2019b). Thus, we need a more refined measure of similarity between nodes, which accurately reflects
distances in latent space and can be estimated consistently
from even sparse networks.
We propose a method (CN-VEC) to predict node covariates
by a nearest-neighbor regression using the top-k nodes with
the most similar two-hop neighborhoods. The similarity
between nodes i and j depends on the number of common
neighbors between the node pair (i, h), compared against
(j, h), over all nodes h. This goes beyond a simple count
of the common neighbors of i and j. Our carefully chosen
similarity formula is provably consistent for a wide range
of latent variable models and sparsities; to our knowledge,
it is the first such algorithm. We do not need to know

