Bayesian Algorithm Execution: Estimating Computable Properties of
Black-box Functions Using Mutual Information

Willie Neiswanger 1 Ke Alexander Wang 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
In many real world problems, we want to infer
some property of an expensive black-box function
f , given a budget of T function evaluations. One
example is budget constrained global optimization
of f , for which Bayesian optimization is a popular
method. Other properties of interest include local
optima, level sets, integrals, or graph-structured
information induced by f . Often, we can find an
algorithm A to compute the desired property, but
it may require far more than T queries to execute.
Given such an A, and a prior distribution over f ,
we refer to the problem of inferring the output of
A using T evaluations as Bayesian Algorithm Execution (BAX). To tackle this problem, we present
a procedure, I NFO BAX, that sequentially chooses
queries that maximize mutual information with
respect to the algorithm’s output. Applying this to
Dijkstra’s algorithm, for instance, we infer shortest paths in synthetic and real-world graphs with
black-box edge costs. Using evolution strategies,
we yield variants of Bayesian optimization that
target local, rather than global, optima. On these
problems, I NFO BAX uses up to 500 times fewer
queries to f than required by the original algorithm. Our method is closely connected to other
Bayesian optimal experimental design procedures
such as entropy search methods and optimal sensor placement using Gaussian processes.

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems can be described as inferring
properties of an expensive black-box function f , subject
to a computational budget of T function evaluations. This
class of problems includes global optimization, commonly
An extended version of this paper can be found on arXiv:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.09460
1

Stanford University, Computer Science Department. Correspondence to: Willie Neiswanger <neiswanger@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tackled by Bayesian optimization methods (Shahriari et al.,
2015; Frazier, 2018), but it also encompasses many additional problems. For example, in materials science, f (x)
may measure the strength of a material with composition
specified by x ∈ X , and the goal is to find the set of materials with strength above a threshold C, without ever evaluating more than T materials, due to the cost of such experiments (Zhong et al., 2020; Tran et al., 2021). Here, the
property of interest is a set of points, the superlevel set of f .
Often, there exist effective algorithms to compute our property of interest in the absence of a budget constraint. We
call such a property a computable property of f , if it is the
output of an algorithm A that makes a finite sequence of
function evaluations during its execution. In the superlevel
set example, A might simply evaluate f at each x ∈ X
and output points with f (x) > C. Other examples include
using numerical quadrature to find integrals of f (Davis &
Rabinowitz, 2007), using Newton’s method to find roots
of f (Madsen, 1973), using evolution strategies or finitedifference gradient descent to find local optima of f , and
using Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the shortest path between
nodes in a graph when the edge costs are given by f (Dijkstra et al., 1959). The property of interest in these examples
take different forms, such as a single value, a set of vectors,
or a sequence of edges in a graph. In each case, an algorithm for computing the property exists, but executing that
algorithm on f may exceed our budget of T evaluations.
In this paper, we address the general problem of estimating a
computable property OA := OA (f ) of a black-box function
f , under a budget constraint T , irrespective of the number
of evaluations required by the algorithm A. To do this, we
posit a probabilistic model for f , and use it to estimate OA
given data gathered via function evaluations. Our goal is to
make the best T evaluations to yield an accurate estimate.
We refer to this problem as Bayesian algorithm execution, or
BAX. Note that the probabilistic nature of BAX enables us
to work with noisy function evaluations, e.g. yx ∼ f (x) +
N (0, σ 2 ), even if A is only designed for noiseless settings.
We develop an iterative procedure for BAX, called I N FO BAX, that sequentially evaluates the x ∈ X that maximizes the mutual information (MI) between f (x) and OA
under our probabilistic model. Each iteration of our proce-

