Generalization Guarantees for Neural Architecture Search with
Train-Validation Split
Samet Oymak 1 Mingchen Li 2 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 3

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a popular
method for automatically designing optimized
deep-learning architectures. NAS methods commonly use bilevel optimization where one optimizes the weights over the training data (lowerlevel problem) and hyperparameters - such as the
architecture - over the validation data (upper-level
problem). This paper explores the statistical aspects of such problems with train-validation splits.
In practice, the lower-level problem is often overparameterized and can easily achieve zero loss.
Thus, a-priori, it seems impossible to distinguish
the right hyperparameters based on training loss
alone which motivates a better understanding of
train-validation split. To this aim, we first show
that refined properties of the validation loss such
as risk and hyper-gradients are indicative of those
of the true test loss and help prevent overfitting
with a near-minimal validation sample size. Importantly, this is established for continuous search
spaces which are relevant for differentiable search
schemes. We then establish generalization bounds
for NAS problems with an emphasis on an activation search problem and gradient-based methods.
Finally, we show rigorous connections between
NAS and low-rank matrix learning which leads to
algorithmic insights where the solution of the upper problem can be accurately learned via spectral
methods to achieve near-minimal risk.

1. Introduction
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is a critical component
of modern machine learning pipelines. It is particularly im1

Department of Electrical and Computer Eng., University of
California, Riverside. 2 Department of Computer Science and Eng.,
University of California, Riverside. 3 Ming Hsieh Department
of Electrical Eng., University of Southern California.. Correspondence to: Samet Oymak <soymak@ucr.edu>, Mingchen Li
<mli176@ucr.edu>, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi <soltanol@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

portant for deep learning applications where there are many
possibilities for choosing a variety of hyperparameters to
achieve the best test accuracy. A crucial application of HPO
is Neural Architecture Search (NAS) which aims to find the
most suitable architecture in an automated manner without
extensive user trial and error. HPO/NAS problems are often
formulated as bilevel optimization problems and critically
rely on a train-validation split of the data, where the parameters of the model (e.g. network weights) and the hyperparameters are optimized over the training data (lower-level problem) and validation data (upper-level problem) respectively.
With an ever growing number of configurations/architecture
choices in modern learning problems, there has been a surge
of interest in differentiable HPO methods that focus on continuous relaxations. For instance, differentiable architecture
search schemes learn continuously parameterized architectures which are discretized only at the end of the training
(Liu et al., 2018). Similar techniques have also been applied
to learn data-augmentation policies (Cubuk et al., 2020) and
meta-learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2017).
These differentiable algorithms are often faster and seamlessly scale to millions of hyperparameters (Lorraine et al.,
2020). However, the generalization capability of HPO/NAS
with such large search spaces and the benefits of the trainvalidation split remain largely mysterious.
Addressing the above challenge is particularly important in
modern overparameterized learning regimes where the training loss is often not indicative of the model’s performance
as large capacity networks can effortlessly fit to training
data and achieve zero loss. To be concrete, let nT and nV
denote the training and validation sample sizes and p and
h the number parameters and hyperparmeters of the model.
HPO/NAS problems typically operate in a regime where
p := # params ≥ nT ≥ nV ≥ h := # hyperparams

(1)

Figure 1 depicts such a regime (e.g. when p  poly(nT )))
where the neural network model is in fact expressive enough
to perfectly fit the dataset for all possible combinations
of hyperparameters. Nevertheless, training with a trainvalidation split tends to select the right hyperparameters
where the corresponding network achieves stellar test accuracy. This leads us to the main challenge of this paper1 :
1

While we do provide guarantees for generic HPO problems

