Training Recurrent Neural Networks via Forward Propagation Through Time

Anil Kag 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract

empirical risk function:

Back-propagation through time (BPTT) has been
widely used for training Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). BPTT updates RNN parameters on an instance by back-propagating the error in time over the entire sequence length, and
as a result, leads to poor trainability due to the
well-known gradient explosion/decay phenomena.
While a number of prior works have proposed to
mitigate vanishing/explosion effect through careful RNN architecture design, these RNN variants
still train with BPTT. We propose a novel forwardpropagation algorithm, FPTT , where at each time,
for an instance, we update RNN parameters by
optimizing an instantaneous risk function. Our
proposed risk is a regularization penalty at time
t that evolves dynamically based on previously
observed losses, and allows for RNN parameter updates to converge to a stationary solution
of the empirical RNN objective. We consider
both sequence-to-sequence as well as terminal
loss problems. Empirically FPTT outperforms
BPTT on a number of well-known benchmark
tasks, thus enabling architectures like LSTMs to
solve long range dependencies problems.

N

[W ∗ , v ∗ ] = arg min L(W, v) =
W,v

(2)
∀i, t;

hit = f (W, xit , hit−1 );

hi0 = 0

T
N X
X
∂`(yti , ŷit )
∂L
=
∂W
∂W
i=1 t=1

=

t
t
N T
1 X X ∂`(yti , ŷit ) ∂ ŷit X  Y ∂his  ∂hij−1
t
N T i=1 t=1
∂ ŷi
∂hit j=1 s=j ∂his−1 ∂W

(3)
We highlight two fundamental aspects of BPTT:

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been successfully
employed in many sequential learning tasks including language modelling, speech recognition, and terminal prediction. An RNN is described by its parameters W ∈ W and
the transition function f : W × X × H → H which takes
RNN parameters W , current input xt ∈ X and previous
hidden state ht−1 ∈ H ⊆ RD to output the next state ht :
(1)

Given the training dataset {xi , yi }N
i=1 with N

examples
of T −length sequences xi , yi , we optimize the following
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Boston University, USA. Correspondence to: Anil Kag
<anilkag@bu.edu>.
th

ŷti = v > hit ;

where, RNN parameters W and classifier v ∈ RD are optimized. This objective is generally optimized by gradient
descent. The gradient expression for each example, i ∈ [N ],
is a sum of products of partial gradients, and is commonly referred to as the error back-propagated through time (BPTT).
This is a direct result of the fact that the hidden state hit , at
each time, is recursively updated by the same parameter W .
As a consequence, via chain rule, we get:

1. Introduction

ht = f (W, xt , ht−1 )

T

1 XX i i
`(yt , ŷt )
N T i=1 t=1

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

s
• Trainability: Unless the partial terms ∂h∂hs−1
stay close
to identity, the product of these terms could explode or
vanish. As such, if gradients vanish, earlier times, t  T
have little contribution to the overall error. If gradients
explode, we see an opposite effect, namely, later states
may have little contribution.
• Complexity: Gradient computation is expensive for large
T , since it involves a sum-product of T terms, resulting
in Ω(T 2 ) scaling for each example, and for N examples,
computational cost for processing the dataset once scales
as Ω(N T 2 ). Note that this calculation assumes naive
computation of the sum-product. In practice, with additional memory overhead, an efficient gradient propagation
scheme would only result in cost linear in length of the
sequence. BPTT has a Ω(T ) memory overhead associated
with storing all the intermediate hidden states in the time
horizon.

In this work, our focus is on simplifying the RNN training
procedure. Once the RNN parameters are learnt, the inference process remains same as before. Our goal is to reduce

