Autoencoder Image Interpolation by Shaping the Latent Space

Alon Oring 1 Zohar Yakhini 1 Yacov Hel-Or 1

Abstract
Autoencoders represent an effective approach for
computing the underlying factors characterizing
datasets of different types. The latent representation of autoencoders have been studied in the
context of enabling interpolation between data
points by decoding convex combinations of latent
vectors. This interpolation, however, often leads
to artifacts or produces unrealistic results during
reconstruction. We argue that these incongruities
are due to the structure of the latent space and
because such naively interpolated latent vectors
deviate from the data manifold. In this paper, we
propose a regularization technique that shapes the
latent representation to follow a manifold that is
consistent with the training images and that drives
the manifold to be smooth and locally convex.
This regularization not only enables faithful interpolation between data points, as we show herein,
but can also be used as a general regularization
technique to avoid overfitting or to produce new
samples for data augmentation.

1. Introduction
Given a set of data points, data interpolation or extrapolation
aims at predicting novel data points between given samples
(interpolation) or predicting novel data outside the sample
range (extrapolation). Faithful data interpolation between
sampled data can be seen as a measure of the generalization
capacity of a learning system (Berthelot et al., 2018). In
the context of computer vision and computer graphics, data
interpolation may refer to generating novel views of an
object between two given views or predicting in-between
animated frames from key frames.

existing objects, camera parameters and additional scene
components, such as lighting and the reflective characteristics of nearby objects. Unfortunately, these characteristics
are not always available or are difficult to extract in realworld scenarios. Thus, in such cases, we can apply datadriven interpolation that is deduced based on a sampled
dataset drawn from the scene taken under various acquisition parameters.
The task of data interpolation is to extract new samples (possibly continuous) between known data samples. Clearly,
linear interpolation between two images in the input (image) domain does not work as it produces a cross-dissolve
effect between the intensities of the two images. Adopting
the manifold view of data (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Verma
et al., 2018; Bengio et al., 2013), this task can be seen as
sampling new data points along the geodesic path between
the given points. The problem is that this manifold is unknown in advance and one has to approximate it from the
given data. Alternatively, adopting the probabilistic perspective, interpolation can be viewed as drawing samples from
highly probable areas in the data space.
One fascinating property of unsupervised learning is the
network’s ability to reveal the underlying factors controlling
a given dataset. Autoencoders (Doersch, 2016; Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2016; Kramer, 1991;
Vincent et al., 2010) represent an effective approach for
exposing these factors. Researchers have demonstrated the
ability to interpolate between data points by decoding a
convex sum of latent vectors (Shu et al., 2018; Mathieu
et al., 2016); however, this interpolation often incorporates

Interpolation that produces novel views of a scene requires
input such as the geometric and photometric parameters of
1

School of Computer Science, The Interdisciplinary Center,
Herzliya, Israel . Correspondence to: Y.H. <toky@idc.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Left: A vertical pole casting a shadow. Yellow blocks-top
row: Cross-dissolve phenomena as a result of linear interpolation in
the input space. Yellow blocks-bottom row: Image reconstruction
obtained by a linear latent space interpolation of an autoencoder.
Unrealistic artifacts are introduced.

