LEGO: Latent Execution-Guided Reasoning
for Multi-Hop Question Answering on Knowledge Graphs

Hongyu Ren 1 Hanjun Dai 2 Bo Dai 2 Xinyun Chen 3 Michihiro Yasunaga 1 Haitian Sun 4 Dale Schuurmans 2
Jure Leskovec 1 Denny Zhou 2

Abstract
Answering complex natural language questions
on knowledge graphs (KGQA) is a challenging
task. It requires reasoning with the input natural language questions as well as a massive, incomplete heterogeneous KG. Prior methods obtain an abstract structured query graph/tree from
the input question and traverse the KG for answers following the query tree. However, they
inherently cannot deal with missing links in the
KG. Here we present LEGO, a Latent ExecutionGuided reasOning framework to handle this challenge in KGQA. LEGO works in an iterative way,
which alternates between (1) a Query Synthesizer,
which synthesizes a reasoning action and grows
the query tree step-by-step, and (2) a Latent Space
Executor that executes the reasoning action in
the latent embedding space to combat against the
missing information in KG. To learn the synthesizer without step-wise supervision, we design a
generic latent execution guided bottom-up search
procedure to find good execution traces efficiently
in the vast query space. Experimental results on
several KGQA benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework compared with previous state of the art.

1. Introduction
Answering complex natural language questions with multihop reasoning steps on incomplete knowledge graphs (KGs)
is a fundamental, yet challenging task (KGQA) (Sun et al.,
2019a; Saxena et al., 2020; Bordes et al., 2014; Xu et al.,
2016; Yu et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2017). KGQA takes a
question in natural language as an input, with the goal to
identify a set of KG entities that form the answer. There are
1
Stanford University 2 Google Brain 3 UC Berkeley 4 Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Hongyu Ren
<hyren@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Answer entities on KG
Termination

Updated Query 𝑔𝑡+1

Query
Synthesizer

Reasoning
Action 𝑎𝑡

Natural Language Question 𝑞

LEGO
KG

Latent
Executor

Initial Query 𝑔0

Figure 1. L EGO answers a question by iteratively performing
execution-guided query synthesis and latent query execution.

two important subproblems that need to be addressed: (1)
bridging the gap between natural language question and the
entities in the KG as structured query needs to be generated
and (2) a robust reasoning algorithm that efficiently locates
the answer entities with missing links in KGs.
Previous neural KGQA models that are based on semantic
parsing (Lan & Jiang, 2020; Chen et al., 2019b; Yih et al.,
2015; Bao et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2018) first synthesize
a tree-structured query by parsing the questions, and then
execute the query on KG, i.e., traverse the KG for answers.
Compared with non-parsing methods (Sun et al., 2019a;
Saxena et al., 2020), these models achieve better empirical
results and interpretability since the underlying structured
query captures the reasoning process. However, the performance of these parsing-based methods is hindered by three
major challenges. The first challenge is the scale and incomplete nature of KGs. Real-world KGs (Bollacker et al.,
2008; Suchanek et al., 2007; Liu & Singh, 2004) often have
millions of entities, and multi-hop traversal on a KG leads
to an exponential growth in computation time and space.
Since KGs are often noisy and incomplete, executing even
the ground truth query may still not return the fully correct
answer set. Another challenge is that the query synthesis
process and the execution process are separate and disjoint,
leading to a combinatorial search space, especially for multihop reasoning. It is currently addressed by KG context-free
beam search (Lan & Jiang, 2020; Chen et al., 2019b). Finally, these parsing-based models mostly require ground
truth queries for supervision in training. However, such
supervision is hard to obtain in practice.

Hongyu Ren, Stanfo

