How and Why to Use Experimental Data
to Evaluate Methods for Observational Causal Inference
Amanda Gentzel 1 2 Purva Pruthi 1 David Jensen 1

Abstract
Methods that infer causal dependence from observational data are central to many areas of science,
including medicine, economics, and the social
sciences. A variety of theoretical properties of
these methods have been proven, but empirical
evaluation remains a challenge, largely due to the
lack of observational data sets for which treatment
effect is known. We describe and analyze observational sampling from randomized controlled
trials (OSRCT), a method for evaluating causal
inference methods using data from randomized
controlled trials (RCTs). This method can be used
to create constructed observational data sets with
corresponding unbiased estimates of treatment effect, substantially increasing the number of data
sets available for empirical evaluation of causal
inference methods. We show that, in expectation,
OSRCT creates data sets that are equivalent to
those produced by randomly sampling from empirical data sets in which all potential outcomes
are available. We then perform a large-scale evaluation of seven causal inference methods over 37
data sets, drawn from RCTs, as well as simulators, real-world computational systems, and observational data sets augmented with a synthetic
response variable. We ﬁnd notable performance
differences when comparing across data from different sources, demonstrating the importance of
using data from a variety of sources when evaluating any causal inference method.

1. Introduction
Researchers in machine learning and statistics have become
increasingly interested in methods that estimate causal ef1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, United States 2 Leidos, Reston,
Virginia, United States. Correspondence to: Amanda Gentzel
<Amanda.M.Gentzel@leidos.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

fects from observational data. Such interest is understandable, given the centrality of causal questions in ﬁelds such as
medicine, economics, sociology, and political science (Morgan & Winship, 2015). Causal inference has also emerged as
an important class of methods for improving the explainability and fairness of machine learning systems, since causal
models can explicitly represent the underlying mechanisms
of systems and their likely behavior under counterfactual
conditions (Kusner et al., 2017; Pearl, 2019).
However, evaluating causal inference methods is far more
challenging than evaluating purely associational methods.
Both types of methods can be analyzed theoretically. However, empirical analysis—long a driver of research progress
in machine learning and statistics—has been increasingly
recognized as vital for research progress in causal inference
(e.g., Dorie et al., 2019; Gentzel et al., 2019), and empirical evaluation is substantially more challenging to perform
in the case of causal inference. Many associational models (e.g., classiﬁers and conditional probability estimators)
can be evaluated using cross-validation or held-out test sets.
However, causal inference aims to estimate the value or
distribution of an outcome variable under intervention, and
evaluating such estimates requires an alternative route to
estimating the effects of such interventions.
Most available data sets are either experimental (which can
yield unbiased estimates of treatment effect) or observational (for which treatment effect is unknown). Since most
causal inference methods are designed to infer causal dependence from observational data, accurate evaluation requires both observational data and corresponding unbiased
estimates of treatment effect. Several recent efforts have
attempted to address this problem (e.g., Dorie et al., 2019;
Gentzel et al., 2019; Tu et al., 2019; Shimoni et al., 2018),
most of which collect or modify data speciﬁcally for the
purpose of evaluation. Some approaches induce dependence
between variables in specially constructed or selected data,
while others re-purpose a simulator to produce data for evaluation. These approaches are promising and beneﬁcial to
the community, but creating individual, specialized new data
sets is difﬁcult and time-consuming, limiting the number
of data sets available. To this point, most data sets that are
easy to collect (such as synthetic data and simulators) are
generally unrealistic, while data sets with a high degree of

