Graph Cuts Always Find a Global Optimum for Potts Models (With a Catch)

Hunter Lang 1 David Sontag 1 Aravindan Vijayaraghavan 2

Abstract
We prove that the α-expansion algorithm for MAP
inference always returns a globally optimal assignment for Markov Random Fields with Potts
pairwise potentials, with a catch: the returned assignment is only guaranteed to be optimal for
an instance within a small perturbation of the
original problem instance. In other words, all
local minima with respect to expansion moves
are global minima to slightly perturbed versions
of the problem. On “real-world” instances, MAP
assignments of small perturbations of the problem
should be very similar to the MAP assignment(s)
of the original problem instance. We design an
algorithm that can certify whether this is the case
in practice. On several MAP inference problem
instances from computer vision, this algorithm
certifies that MAP solutions to all of these perturbations are very close to solutions of the original
instance. These results taken together give a cohesive explanation for the good performance of
“graph cuts” algorithms in practice. Every local
expansion minimum is a global minimum in a
small perturbation of the problem, and all of these
global minima are close to the original solution.

1. Introduction
Markov random fields are widely used for structured prediction in computer vision tasks such as image segmentation
and stereopsis (Geman & Geman, 1984), including in the
modern “deep” era (e.g., Zheng et al., 2015). Making predictions involves performing MAP inference. However, in
general, exactly solving the MAP inference problem is NPhard (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) and one must resort to
approximate inference.
“Graph cuts” algorithms for approximate MAP inference in
pairwise Markov random fields have been very influential in
1
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge MA, USA 2 Northwestern University, Evanston IL, USA. Correspondence to: Hunter Lang
<hjl@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

computer vision. These algorithms are popular because they
are simple and efficient, and they return very high-quality
solutions in practice (Szeliski et al., 2008; Kappes et al.,
2015). The α-expansion method of Boykov et al. (2001)
starts with an arbitrary initial labeling (an assignment of labels to variables), then iteratively makes “expansion moves”
to improve the current labeling. At each step, the optimal
expansion move of the current labeling can be computed
very efficiently by solving a binary minimum cut problem
(hence the name “graph cuts”). The algorithm converges
when no expansion moves can improve the labeling any
further.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the high-level algorithm steps. The
α-expansion algorithm is only guaranteed to return a local
minimum with respect to the moves made by the algorithm.
Figure 1 shows a globally optimal (MAP) labeling, which
took over four hours to obtain with an integer linear programming (ILP) solver, and the local minimum returned by
α-expansion in less than ten seconds. Although α-expansion
is only guaranteed to find a local minimum, the two assignments agree on over 99% of the vertices.
Despite this good practical performance, the sharpest worstcase theoretical guarantee for α-expansion is that it obtains a
2-approximation to the objective value of the MAP labeling
(Boykov et al., 2001). A 2-factor objective approximation
often translates to a very weak guarantee for recovering the
exact solution: Lang et al. (2019) show that MAP inference problems from computer vision admit 2-approximate
labelings that agree with the optimal assignment on fewer
than 1% of variables. Compare this to Figure 1, where
the expansion solution agrees with the exact solution on
over 99% of the nodes. Additionally, objective gap bounds
obtained from primal-dual variants of α-expansion are sometimes very close to one in practice (Komodakis et al., 2007).
Those bounds (which depend on the algorithm’s initialization) show that graph-cuts algorithms often vastly outperform their theoretical guarantees. So a large gap exists
between the worst-case guarantee of 2-approximation and
the practical performance (in both objective value and recovery of the true solution) of the α-expansion algorithm.
Why are the local minima with respect to expansion moves
so good in practice?
In this work, we prove a surprising structural result that

