Data-efficient Hindsight Off-policy Option Learning

Markus Wulfmeier 1 Dushyant Rao 1 Roland Hafner 1 Thomas Lampe 1 Abbas Abdolmaleki 1 Tim Hertweck 1
Michael Neunert 1 Dhruva Tirumala 1 Noah Siegel 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Martin Riedmiller 1

Abstract
We introduce Hindsight Off-policy Options (HO2), a data-efficient option learning
algorithm. Given any trajectory, HO2 infers
likely option choices and backpropagates through
the dynamic programming inference procedure to
robustly train all policy components off-policy
and end-to-end. The approach outperforms
existing option learning methods on common
benchmarks. To better understand the option
framework and disentangle benefits from both
temporal and action abstraction, we evaluate
ablations with flat policies and mixture policies
with comparable optimization. The results highlight the importance of both types of abstraction
as well as off-policy training and trust-region
constraints, particularly in challenging, simulated
3D robot manipulation tasks from raw pixel
inputs. Finally, we intuitively adapt the inference
step to investigate the effect of increased temporal
abstraction on training with pre-trained options
and from scratch.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has seen numerous successes
in recent years (Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI et al., 2018;
Vinyals et al., 2019), but still faces challenges in domains
where data is limited or expensive. One candidate solution
to address the challenges and improve data efficiency is to
impose hierarchical policy structures. By dividing an agent
into a combination of low-level and high-level controllers,
the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999; Precup, 2000)
introduces a form of action abstraction, effectively reducing
the high-level controller’s task to choosing from a discrete
set of reusable sub-policies. The framework further enables
temporal abstraction by explicitly modelling the temporal
continuation of low-level behaviors. Unfortunately, in prac1

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Markus Wulfmeier <mwulfmeier@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tice, hierarchical control schemes often introduce technical
challenges, including a tendency to learn degenerate solutions preventing the agent from using its full capacity (Harb
et al., 2018), undesirable trade-offs between learning efficiency and final performance (Harutyunyan et al., 2019), or
the increased variance of updates (Precup, 2000). Additional
challenges in off-policy learning for hierarchical approaches
(Precup et al., 2006) led to a focus of recent works on the
on-policy setting, forgoing the considerable improvements
in data efficiency often connected to off-policy methods.
We propose an approach to address these drawbacks, Hindsight Off-policy Options (HO2): a method for data-efficient,
robust, off-policy option learning. The algorithm simultaneously learns a high-level controller and low-level options
via a single end-to-end optimization procedure. It improves
data efficiency by leveraging off-policy learning and inferring distributions over option for trajectories in hindsight to
maximize the likelihood of good actions and options.
To facilitate off-policy learning the algorithm does not condition on executed options but treats these as latent variables
during optimization and marginalizes over all options to
compute the exact likelihood. HO2 backpropagates through
the resulting dynamic programming inference graph (conceptually related to (Rabiner, 1989; Shiarlis et al., 2018;
Smith et al., 2018)) to enable the training of all policy components from trajectories, independent of the executed option. As an additional benefit, the formulation of the inference graph allows to impose intuitive, hard constraints
on the option termination frequency, thereby regularizing
the learned solution (and encouraging temporally-extended
behaviors) independently of the scale of the reward.
The policy update follows an expectation-maximization perspective and generates an intermediate, non-parametric policy, which is adapted to maximize agent performance. This
enables the update of the parametric policy to rely on simple
weighted maximum likelihood, without requiring further approximations such as Monte Carlo estimation or continuous
relaxation (Li et al., 2019). Finally, the updates are stabilized using adaptive trust-region constraints, demonstrating
the importance of robust policy optimization for hierarchical
reinforcement learning (HRL) in line with recent work on
on-policy option learning (Zhang & Whiteson, 2019).

