Unifying Vision-and-Language Tasks via Text Generation

Jaemin Cho 1 Jie Lei Hao Tan Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jmincho,jielei,haotan,mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Existing methods for vision-and-language learning typically require designing task-specific architectures and objectives for each task. For example, a multi-label answer classifier for visual
question answering, a region scorer for referring
expression comprehension, and a language decoder for image captioning, etc. To alleviate
these hassles, in this work, we propose a unified framework that learns different tasks in a
single architecture with the same language modeling objective, i.e., multimodal conditional text
generation, where our models learn to generate
labels in text based on the visual and textual inputs. On 7 popular vision-and-language benchmarks, including visual question answering, referring expression comprehension, visual commonsense reasoning, most of which have been previously modeled as discriminative tasks, our generative approach (with a single unified architecture)
reaches comparable performance to recent taskspecific state-of-the-art vision-and-language models. Moreover, our generative approach shows better generalization ability on questions that have
rare answers. Also, we show that our framework
allows multi-task learning in a single architecture
with a single set of parameters, achieving similar performance to separately optimized singletask models. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/j-min/VL-T5

1. Introduction
Mirroring the success of the pretraining-finetuning paradigm
with transformer language models (Devlin et al., 2019),
recent vision-and-language transformers (Tan & Bansal
(2019); Lu et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2020); Li et al. (2020b),
1

UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence to: Jaemin Cho <jmincho@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2
1

3
Text Input

Text Output

Multimodal
LM

“span prediction: A <text_1> is
<text_2> over fire hydrant”

“<text_1> man
<text_2> jumping”

Visual QA

“vqa: what is the man jumping over?”

“fire hydrant”

Visual
Grounding

“visual grounding: yellow fire hydrant”

“<vis_3>”

Image-Text
Matching

“image text match: A cat is lying on a
bed”

“false”

Figure 1. Our unified framework for learning vision-and-language
tasks. While existing methods require designing task-specific architectures for different tasks, our framework unifies them together
as generating text labels conditioned on multimodal inputs.

inter alia) have also been adopted in a wide range of visionand-language tasks. These models are firstly pretrained on
large image-text corpus (e.g., COCO Caption (Chen et al.,
2015)), then finetuned on downstream tasks (e.g., visual
question answering (Goyal et al., 2019) and referring expression comprehension (Mao et al., 2016)), which outperformed many previous non-pretraining-finetuning methods.
For each pretraining or downstream task, existing visionand-language transformers typically require designing taskspecific, separately-parameterized architectures on top of
the transformer encoder (e.g., multi-label sigmoid classifier
for visual question answering, and softmax classifier for referring expression comprehension). However, the reasoning
skills required by these tasks overlap significantly. Consider
the example in Fig. 1. Both answering the question “What
is the man jumping over?” and grounding an image region
corresponding to the phrase “yellow fire hydrant” require
recognizing the object “fire hydrant”. In addition, the labels
for these tasks can be easily expressed in text. For instance,
we can assign a region id (e.g., “<vis 3>”, a special text

