Provably Efficient Reinforcement Learning for Discounted MDPs with
Feature Mapping

Dongruo Zhou 1 Jiafan He 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Modern tasks in reinforcement learning have large
state and action spaces. To deal with them efficiently, one often uses predefined feature mapping
to represent states and actions in a low dimensional space. In this paper, we study reinforcement learning for discounted Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs), where the transition kernel
can be parameterized as a linear function of certain feature mapping. We propose a novel algorithm which makes√use of the feature mapping
and obtains a e
O(d T /(1 − γ)2 ) regret, where
d is the dimension of the feature space, T is the
time horizon and γ is the discount factor of the
MDP. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first polynomial regret bound without accessing to
a generative model or making strong assumptions
such as ergodicity of the MDP. By constructing
a special class of MDPs, we also show that for
any √
algorithms, the regret is lower bounded by
Ω(d T /(1 − γ)1.5 ). Our upper and lower bound
results together suggest that the proposed reinforcement learning algorithm is near-optimal up
to a (1 − γ)−0.5 factor.

1. Introduction
Designing efficient algorithms that learn and plan in sequential decision-making tasks with large state and action
spaces has become the central goal of modern reinforcement learning (RL) in recent years. Due to numerous possible states and actions, traditional tabular reinforcement
learning methods (Watkins, 1989; Jaksch et al., 2010; Azar
et al., 2017) which directly access each state-action pair are
computationally intractable. A common method to design
reinforcement learning algorithms for large-scale state and
action spaces is to make use of feature mappings such as
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

linear functions or neural networks to map states and actions
to a low-dimensional space and solve the decision-making
problem in the feature space. Despite the empirical success
of feature mapping based reinforcement learning methods
(Singh et al., 1995; Bertsekas, 2018), the theoretical understanding and the fundamental limits of these methods
remain largely understudied.
In this paper, we aim to develop provable reinforcement
learning algorithms with feature mapping for discounted
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Discounted MDP is
one of the most widely used models to formulate the modern reinforcement learning tasks such as Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015) and deep recommendation system (Zheng et al.,
2018). With feature mapping, a series of recent work (Yang
& Wang, 2019a; Lattimore et al., 2020; Bhandari et al.,
2018; Zou et al., 2019) have proposed provably efficient algorithms along with theoretical guarantees. However, these
existing results either rely on a special oracle called generative model (Kakade et al., 2003) that allows an algorithm
to query any possible state-action pairs and return both the
reward and the next state (Yang & Wang, 2019a; Lattimore
et al., 2020), or needs strong assumptions such as uniform
ergodicity (Bhandari et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019) on the
underlying MDP. A natural question arises:
Can we design provably efficient RL algorithms with feature
mapping for discounted MDPs under mild assumptions?
We answer this question affirmatively. To be more specific,
we consider a special class of discounted MDPs called linear kernel MDP, where the transition probability kernel
can be represented as a linear function of a predefined ddimensional feature mapping. A similar model has been
studied in earlier work Jia et al. (2020); Ayoub et al. (2020)
for finite horizon episodic MDPs, where the authors call it
linear mixture model. Linear kernel MDP is a rich MDP
class, which covers many classes of MDPs proposed in previous work (Yang & Wang, 2019b; Modi et al., 2019) as
special cases. We propose a novel provably efficient algorithm namely Upper-Confidence Linear Kernel reinforcement learning (UCLK) to solve this MDP. We prove both
upper and lower regret bounds and show that our algorithm
is near-optimal under the linear kernel MDP setting.

