Efficient Differentiable Simulation of Articulated Bodies
Yi-Ling Qiao * 1 2 Junbang Liang * 1 Vladlen Koltun 2 Ming C. Lin 1

Abstract
We present a method for efficient differentiable
simulation of articulated bodies. This enables integration of articulated body dynamics into deep
learning frameworks, and gradient-based optimization of neural networks that operate on articulated bodies. We derive the gradients of the
contact solver using spatial algebra and the adjoint
method. Our approach is an order of magnitude
faster than autodiff tools. By only saving the initial states throughout the simulation process, our
method reduces memory requirements by two orders of magnitude. We demonstrate the utility of
efficient differentiable dynamics for articulated
bodies in a variety of applications. We show that
reinforcement learning with articulated systems
can be accelerated using gradients provided by
our method. In applications to control and inverse
problems, gradient-based optimization enabled by
our work accelerates convergence by more than
an order of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Differentiable physics enables efficient gradient-based optimization with dynamical systems. It has achieved promising
results in both simulated (Hu et al., 2019; Qiao et al., 2020)
and real environments (Bern et al., 2019; Song & Boularias,
2020a). Our goal is to make articulated body simulation
efficiently differentiable. We aim to maximize efficiency in
both computation and memory use, in order to support fast
gradient-based optimization of differentiable systems that
interact with articulated bodies in physical environments.
Articulated bodies play a central role in robotics, computer
graphics, and embodied AI. Many control systems are optimized via experiences collected in simulation (Todorov
et al., 2012; Coumans, 2015; Lee et al., 2018; Tedrake et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College Park
Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang,
and Ming C. Lin <{yilingq,liangjb,lin}@cs.umd.edu>, Vladlen
Koltun <vladlen.koltun@intel.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2019). However, they do not have access to analytic derivatives of the articulated dynamics. Therefore, nearly all
gradient-based approaches have to design strategies to compute the gradients indirectly when dealing with articulated
bodies.
The straightforward way to differentiate the simulation is
to use existing automatic differentiation tools (Griewank &
Walther, 2008; Abadi et al., 2016; Paszke et al., 2019). However, autodiff tools consume prohibitive amounts of memory
when there are many simulation steps. Autodiff tracks every
operation and stores the intermediate results in order to perform backpropagation. In articulated body simulation, the
iterative contact solver and the dynamics algorithm (Featherstone, 2007) yield exceedingly long computational graphs.
In our experiments, differentiable simulators built with autodiff tools run out of memory after 5,000 simulation steps –
just a few seconds of experience. As a result, learning is
constrained to short experiences or forced to used large time
steps, thus curtailing the scope of behaviors that can be
learned or undermining the simulation’s stability.
Furthermore, the overhead of creating and storing the auxiliary variables for autodiff also slows down the forward
simulation. Although autodiff tools like DiffTaichi (Hu
et al., 2020) and JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) can accelerate
the simulation of fluids and deformable solids by vectorization, it is difficult to achieve the same speedup in articulated
body simulation because the articulated dynamics algorithm
is highly serialized, unlike inherently parallel computation
on grids and particles.
In this paper, we design a differentiable articulated body simulation method that runs 10x faster with 1% of the memory
consumption compared to differentiation based on autodiff
tools. In order to minimize the overhead of differentiation,
we derive the gradients of articulated body simulation using the adjoint method (Giles & Pierce, 2000). The adjoint
method has been applied to fluids (McNamara et al., 2004)
and multi-body systems (Geilinger et al., 2020), but these
applications do not support physically correct differentiable
simulation of articulated bodies. Our derivation of the operator adjoints uses spatial algebra (Featherstone, 2008). Our
method needs almost no additional computation during the
forward simulation and is an order of magnitude faster than
autodiff tools.

