Learn-to-Share: A Hardware-friendly Transfer Learning Framework
Exploiting Computation and Parameter Sharing

Cheng Fu 1 Hanxian Huang 1 Xinyun Chen 2 Yuandong Tian 3 Jishen Zhao 1

Abstract
Task-specific fine-tuning on pre-trained transformers has achieved performance breakthroughs in
multiple NLP tasks. Yet, as both computation and
parameter size grows linearly with the number
of sub-tasks, it is increasingly difficult to adopt
such methods to the real world due to unrealistic
memory and computation overhead on computing devices. Previous works on fine-tuning focus
on reducing the growing parameter size to save
storage cost by parameter sharing. However, compared to storage, the constraint of computation is
a more critical issue with the fine-tuning models
in modern computing environments. In this work,
we propose LeTS, a framework that leverages both
computation and parameter sharing across multiple tasks. Compared to traditional fine-tuning,
LeTS proposes a novel neural architecture that
contains a fixed pre-trained transformer model,
plus learnable additive components for sub-tasks.
The learnable components reuse the intermediate
activations in the fixed pre-trained model, decoupling computation dependency. Differentiable
neural architecture search is used to determine
a task-specific computation sharing scheme, and
a novel early stage pruning is applied to additive components for sparsity to achieve parameter
sharing. Extensive experiments show that with
1.4% of extra parameters per task, LeTS reduces
the computation by 49.5% on GLUE benchmarks
with only 0.2% accuracy loss compared to full
fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning from pre-trained transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) has become the de-facto method for many NLP tasks,
1 University of California, San Diego 2 University of California,
Berkeley 3 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Cheng Fu
<cfu@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Roadmap of GLUE score v.s. total operations
and parameters. The area of a point is proportional to the
parameter size. F-n denotes freezing bottom n layers. MB,
TB, DB represent MobileBERT, TinyBERT, DistilBERT
respectively. LeTS outperforms other parameter-sharing
methods in terms of computation and parameter efficiency.
LeTS is orthogonal to model compression techniques (e.g.
MB/TB/DB) as LeTS does not modify the pre-trained model
for fine-tuning.
with performance breakthrough in various natural language
understanding benchmarks (Devlin et al., 2019; Lan et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2019d; Joshi et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019).
Yet, the growing number of different NLP tasks arriving
in stream makes this approach hard to integrate into realworld commercial products. The key bottlenecks lie in both
computation and storage constraints. In particular, with
conventional fine-tuning methods (Howard & Ruder, 2018;
Wang et al., 2018), both single input processing latency and
storage requirement grow linearly to the number of subtasks. This incurs an impractical computation, power, and
storage overhead for a commercial product.
Both computation and storage constraints are critical to finetuning tasks. On the one hand, without much sacrifice in
the quality of service, cloud computing vendors care more
about the computation constraint to further improve the
quality. The storage overhead can potentially be resolved
by the advances in memory and storage technologies (Intel, 2019; Consortium, a;b), which enable the low-cost and
large-capacity data storage. On the other hand, in memorylimited devices (e.g, mobile), both constraints are critical
to user experience. Most prior works focus on reducing the
storage constrained across multiple sub-tasks by leverag-

