Integer Programming for Causal Structure Learning
in the Presence of Latent Variables
Rui Chen 1 Sanjeeb Dash 2 Tian Gao 2

Abstract
The problem of finding an ancestral acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG) that represents the
causal relationships between a set of variables
is an important area of research on causal inference. Most existing score-based structure learning
methods focus on learning directed acyclic graph
(DAG) models without latent variables. A number of score-based methods have recently been
proposed for the ADMG learning, yet they are
heuristic in nature and do not guarantee an optimal solution. We propose a novel exact scorebased method that solves an integer programming
(IP) formulation and returns a score-maximizing
ancestral ADMG for a set of continuous variables
that follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution.
We generalize the state-of-the-art IP model for
DAG learning problems and derive new classes
of valid inequalities to formulate an IP model
for ADMG learning. Empirically, our model can
be solved efficiently for medium-sized problems
and achieves better accuracy than state-of-theart score-based methods as well as benchmark
constraint-based methods.

1. Introduction
Causal graphs are graphical models representing dependencies and causal relationships between a set of variables. One
class of the most common causal graphs, often known as
Bayesian networks (BNs), is modeled by directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) in which a direct causal relationship between two nodes is indicated by a directed edge. However,
its structure learning problem is NP-hard (Chickering et al.,
2004). Many exact and approximate algorithms for learning
BN structures from data have been developed, including
1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 2 IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Chen
<rchen234@wisc.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

score-based and constraint-based approaches. Score-based
methods use a score – such as Bayesian scores or Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) – to measure the goodness of
fit of different graphs over the data, and then use a search
procedure – such as hill-climbing (Heckerman et al., 1995;
Tsamardinos et al., 2006a; Gámez et al., 2011), forwardbackward search (Chickering, 2002), dynamic programming
(Singh & Moore, 2005; Silander & Myllymaki, 2006; Gao &
Wei, 2018), A* (Yuan & Malone, 2013) or integer programming (Jaakkola et al., 2010; Cussens, 2011; Cussens et al.,
2016) – in order to find the best graph. On the other hand,
constraint-based structure learning algorithms use (conditional) independence tests to decide on the existence of
edges between all pairs of variables. Popular algorithms include the SGS algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000), PC algorithm
(Spirtes et al., 2000), and IC algorithm (Pearl, 2000).
Despite their wide application (Pearl, 2000), it is known that
DAG models are not closed under marginalization (Tsirlis
et al., 2018). This implies that DAGs cannot be used to
model structures involving latent variables which are the
most common cases in practice. For example, in healthcare
domains, there may be numerous unobserved factors such
as gene expression. Self-reported family history and diets
may also leave out some important information. Ancestral
graphs (AGs) were proposed as a generalization of DAGs
(Richardson & Spirtes, 2002). AG models include all DAG
models and are closed under marginalization and conditioning. AGs capture the independence relations among
observed variables without explicitly including latent variables in the model. In this work, we assume no selection
biases (no undirected edges in AGs). Hence there are two
types of edges in the AGs: directed edges represent direct or ancestral causal relationships between variables and
bidirected edges represent latent confounded relationships
between variables. A bidirected edge between two nodes
means that there exists at least one latent confounder that
causes both nodes, and neither node causes the other node.
AGs considered in this work are also called ancestral acyclic
directed mixed graphs (ADMGs) (Bhattacharya et al., 2020)
in the literature.
Causal structure learning algorithms for ancestral ADMGs
can also be divided into two main classes: constraint-based
and score-based methods. Constraint-based methods apply

