Parallel Droplet Control in MEDA Biochips Using
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Tung-Che Liang 1 Jin Zhou 1 Yun-Sheng Chan 2 Tsung-Yi Ho 3 Krishnendu Chakrabarty 1 Chen-Yi Lee 2

Abstract
Microfluidic biochips are being utilized for clinical diagnostics, including COVID-19 testing, because they provide sample-to-result turnaround
at low cost. Recently, microelectrode-dot-array
(MEDA) biochips have been proposed to advance
microfluidics technology. A MEDA biochip manipulates droplets of nano/picoliter volumes to automatically execute biochemical protocols. During bioassay execution, droplets are transported
in parallel to achieve high-throughput outcomes.
However, a major concern associated with the use
of MEDA biochips is microelectrode degradation
over time. Recent work has shown that formulating droplet transportation as a reinforcementlearning (RL) problem enables the training of policies to capture the underlying health conditions of
microelectrodes and ensure reliable fluidic operations. However, the above RL-based approach suffers from two key limitations: 1) it cannot be used
for concurrent transportation of multiple droplets;
2) it requires the availability of CCD cameras for
monitoring droplet movement. To overcome these
problems, we present a multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) droplet-routing solution that
can be used for various sizes of MEDA biochips
with integrated sensors, and we demonstrate the
reliable execution of a serial-dilution bioassay
with the MARL droplet router on a fabricated
MEDA biochip. To facilitate further research, we
also present a simulation environment based on
the PettingZoo Gym Interface for MARL-guided
droplet-routing problems on MEDA biochips.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA 2 Department of Electronics Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan 3 Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Tung-Che Liang
<tung.che.liang@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen progress on the use of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) to assist sequential decisionmaking problems, such as games (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2019; Brown & Sandholm, 2019), robotics (Gu et al.,
2017), autonomous driving (Sallab et al., 2017; Palanisamy,
2020; Wachi, 2019), quantitative trading strategies (Lee
et al., 2020), and healthcare systems (Manak et al., 2018;
Liang et al., 2020a). Many of these successful RL applications involve more than one agent or player, which naturally
leads to the setting of multi-agent RL (MARL). MARL addresses the decision-making problem for multiple agents
in a common environment, where each agent’s goal is to
optimize its own long-term reward by interacting with the
environment and other agents (Zhang et al., 2019). In this
paper, we demonstrate the application of MARL for droplet
control in microfluidic biochips based on the microelectrode dot-array (MEDA) platform. We show that because
the health condition of a biochip dynamically changes over
time, the modeling of parallel droplet control in MEDA
biochips as an MARL problem can ensure reliable bioassay
execution with high throughput.
1.1. MEDA Biochips
The rapid worldwide spread and impact of the COVID19 virus has created an urgent need for reliable, accurate,
and affordable testing on a massive scale. For example,
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has launched the
Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx) initiative to
develop and implement technologies for COVID-19 testing (NIH, 2021a). One of the most promising technologies for realizing this goal is microfluidics. A microfluidic biochip manipulates tiny amounts of fluids to automatically execute biochemical protocols for point-of-care clinical diagnosis with high efficiency and fast sample-to-result
turnaround (Sun et al., 2020; Ganguli et al., 2020; Sheridan,
2020). Because of these characteristics, the RADx initiative has awarded grants to several biomedical diagnostic
companies to develop microfluidic technologies that could
dramatically increase testing capacity and throughput (NIH,
2021b; Ouyang et al., 2020). Other applications of microfluidics include screening of newborn infants (Sista et al., 2020;

