Dueling Convex Optimization

Aadirupa Saha 1 Tomer Koren 2 Yishay Mansour 2

Abstract
We address the problem of convex optimization
with preference (dueling) feedback. Like the traditional optimization objective, the goal is to find
the optimal point with the least possible query
complexity, however, without the luxury of even
a zeroth order feedback. Instead, the learner can
only observe a single noisy bit which is win-loss
feedback for a pair of queried points based on
their function values. The problem is certainly of
great practical relevance as in many real-world
scenarios, such as recommender systems or learning from customer preferences, where the system
feedback is often restricted to just one binary-bit
preference information. We consider the problem
of online convex optimization (OCO) solely by
actively querying {0, 1} noisy-comparison feedback of decision point pairs, with the objective of
finding a near-optimal point (function minimizer)
with the least possible number of queries. For
the non-stationary OCO setup, where the underlying convex function may change over time, we
prove an impossibility result towards achieving
the above objective. We next focus only on the stationary OCO problem, and our main contribution
lies in designing a normalized gradient descent
based algorithm towards finding a -best optimal
point. Towards this, our algorithm is shown to
yield a convergence rate of Õ(dβ/ν 2 ) (ν being
the noise parameter) when the underlying function is β-smooth. Further we show an improved
convergence rate of just Õ(dβ/αν 2 log 1 ) when the
function is additionally also α-strongly convex.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization is a very well studied field of
research where the goal is to optimize a convex function
through sequentially accessing the function information at
1

Microsoft Research, New York City 2 Blavatnik School
of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, and Google
Research Tel Aviv.
Correspondence to: Aadirupa Saha
<aadirupa.saha@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

actively queried points (Flaxman et al., 2005; Ghadimi &
Lan, 2013; Bubeck et al., 2017). Due to its great practical
relevance in diverse real world scenarios, over the years
the problem has been attempted for several problem setups,
e.g. optimization with gradient or hessian information (first
and second order optimization) (Zinkevich, 2003; Hazan
et al., 2007; Hazan & Kale, 2014), function value oracle
(zeroth order feedback) (Flaxman et al., 2005; Hazan & Li,
2016; Saha & Tewari, 2011; Yang & Mohri, 2016; Bubeck
et al., 2017), multi-point feedback (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013;
Shamir, 2017; Agarwal et al., 2010), projection free algorithms (Chen et al., 2018; Sahu et al., 2018) etc., for both
adversarial (Abernethy et al., 2008; Dekel et al., 2015; Bach
& Perchet, 2016; Bubeck et al., 2015) and stochastic (Agarwal et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2017) settings (Bubeck, 2014;
Hazan, 2019; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011).
Almost all the existing online optimization literature assumes a first order (gradient information) or at least zeroth
order (function value at the queried point) oracle access
towards solving the convex optimization problem. However,
in reality, many practical applications of online optimization
only allow a {0, 1}-comparison feedback indicating a noisy
preference of two (or more) queried points depending on
their function values (instead of revealing any information
of the gradients at the queried points or even the function
values at those points) Such examples are prevalent in many
real-world systems that need to collect user preferences instead of their absolute ratings, like recommender systems,
online merchandises, search engine optimization, crowdsourcing, drug testing, tournament ranking, social surveys,
etc.
This is precisely the reason why there was a massive surge
of interest in the bandit community to learn from preference
feedback—famously studied as the dueling bandit problem
(Komiyama et al., 2015; Ailon et al., 2014; Busa-Fekete &
Hüllermeier, 2014; Wu & Liu, 2016). It explicitly models
this relative preference information structure, often in the
setting of finite action spaces. The goal is to identify the
most rewarding activities in hindsight according to a specific
score function. Precisely, the learner repeatedly selects
a pair of items to be compared to each other in a “duel,”
and consequently observe a binary stochastic preference
feedback of the winning item in this duel. Over the last

