Tesseract: Tensorised Actors for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Anuj Mahajan 1 Mikayel Samvelyan 2 Lei Mao 3 Viktor Makoviychuk 3 Animesh Garg 3 Jean Kossaifi 3
Shimon Whiteson 1 Yuke Zhu 3 Animashree Anandkumar 3

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning in large action spaces is
a challenging problem. Cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) exacerbates matters by imposing various constraints on communication and observability. In this work, we consider the fundamental hurdle affecting both valuebased and policy-gradient approaches: an exponential blowup of the action space with the number of agents. For value-based methods, it poses
challenges in accurately representing the optimal
value function. For policy gradient methods, it
makes training the critic difficult and exacerbates
the problem of the lagging critic. We show that
from a learning theory perspective, both problems can be addressed by accurately representing the associated action-value function with a
low-complexity hypothesis class. This requires
accurately modelling the agent interactions in a
sample efficient way. To this end, we propose a
novel tensorised formulation of the Bellman equation. This gives rise to our method T ESSERACT,
which views the Q-function as a tensor whose
modes correspond to the action spaces of different agents. Algorithms derived from T ESSERACT
decompose the Q-tensor across agents and utilise
low-rank tensor approximations to model agent
interactions relevant to the task. We provide PAC
analysis for T ESSERACT-based algorithms and
highlight their relevance to the class of rich observation MDPs. Empirical results in different
domains confirm T ESSERACT’s gains in sample
efficiency predicted by the theory.

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems, such as swarm robotics and
autonomous vehicles, can be formulated as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Buşoniu et al., 2010) problems. MARL introduces several new challenges that do not
1

University of Oxford 2 University College London 3 NVIDIA.
Correspondence to: Anuj Mahajan <anuj.mahajan@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

arise in single-agent reinforcement learning (RL), including exponential growth of the action space in the number
of agents. This affects multiple aspects of learning, such
as credit assignment (Foerster et al., 2018), gradient variance (Lowe et al., 2017) and exploration (Mahajan et al.,
2019). In addition, while the agents can typically be trained
in a centralised manner, practical constraints on observability and communication after deployment imply that decision making must be decentralised, yielding the extensively
studied setting of centralised training with decentralised
execution (CTDE).
Recent work in CTDE-MARL can be broadly classified into
value-based methods and actor-critic methods. Value-based
methods (Sunehag et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2020a; Yao et al., 2019) typically enforce
decentralisability by modelling the joint action Q-value such
that the argmax over the joint action space can be tractably
computed by local maximisation of per-agent utilities. However, constraining the representation of the Q-function can
interfere with exploration, yielding provably suboptimal solutions (Mahajan et al., 2019). Actor-critic methods (Lowe
et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2018) typically
use a centralised critic to estimate the gradient for a set of
decentralised policies. In principle, actor-critic methods can
satisfy CTDE without incurring suboptimality, but in practice their performance is limited by the accuracy of the critic,
which is hard to learn given exponentially growing action
spaces. This can exacerbate the problem of the lagging critic
(Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2002). Moreover, unlike the singleagent setting, this problem cannot be fixed by increasing
the critic’s learning rate and number of training iterations.
Similar to these approaches, an exponential blowup in the
action space also makes it difficult to choose the appropriate
class of models which strike the correct balance between
expressibility and learnability for the given task.
In this work, we present new theoretical results that show
how the aforementioned approaches can be improved such
that they accurately represent the joint action-value function
whilst keeping the complexity of the underlying hypothesis class low. This translates to accurate, sample efficient
modelling of long-term agent interactions.
In particular, we propose T ESSERACT (derived from ”Ten-

