MorphVAE: Generating Neural Morphologies from 3D-Walks using a
Variational Autoencoder with Spherical Latent Space

Sophie Laturnus 1 Philipp Berens 1 2 3

Abstract
For the past century, the anatomy of a neuron
has been considered one of its defining features:
The shape of a neuron’s dendrites and axon fundamentally determines what other neurons it can
connect to. These neurites have been described
using mathematical tools e.g. in the context of cell
type classification, but generative models of these
structures have only rarely been proposed and are
often computationally inefficient. Here we propose M ORPH VAE, a sequence-to-sequence variational autoencoder with spherical latent space as
a generative model for neural morphologies. The
model operates on walks within the tree structure
of a neuron and can incorporate expert annotations on a subset of the data using semi-supervised
learning. We develop our model on artificially
generated toy data and evaluate its performance
on dendrites of excitatory cells and axons of inhibitory cells of mouse motor cortex (M1) and
dendrites of retinal ganglion cells. We show that
the learned latent feature space allows for better cell type discrimination than other commonly
used features. By sampling new walks from the
latent space we can easily construct new morphologies with a specified degree of similarity
to their reference neuron, providing an efficient
generative model for neural morphologies.

1. Introduction
The anatomy of a neuron has fascinated scientists ever since
the pioneering work of Cajal (Ramón y Cajal, 1911). The
dendritic and axonal processes of a neuron naturally decide
what other neurons it can connect to, and thus which in1
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen,
Germany 2 Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of
Tübingen, Germany 3 Tübingen AI Center, Germany. Correspondence to: Philipp Berens <philipp.berens@uni-tuebingen.de>,
Sophie Laturnus <sophie.laturnus@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

puts it receives and where the computed outputs are sent
to (Hill et al., 2012). The anatomical shape of a neuron
— its morphology — plays therefore an important role for
its function in the circuit. In particular, different types of
neurons, and thus different building blocks of the circuit,
have fundamentally different morphologies (Markram et al.,
2004; DeFelipe et al., 2013).
This variability of neural shapes has been quantified using
sets of expert-determined features (Scorcioni et al., 2008;
Armañanzas & Ascoli, 2015; Wang et al., 2018; Kanari et al.,
2019). While this approach allows classifying neurons into
distinct morphological types (m-types), it does not yield a
generative model for new neurons in a straightforward manner. Algorithms for generating neurons have been suggested
which either start with simple neuron shapes and assume
a distinct set of biologically motivated growth rules (van
Pelt & Schierwagen, 2004; Eberhard et al., 2006; Bingham
et al., 2020; Kassraian-Fard et al., 2020) or manipulate these
shapes to iteratively match a set of properties from observed
data (Cuntz et al., 2011; Serene, 2013; Farhoodi & Kording,
2018).
However, a unified, efficient framework for modeling the
cell type diversity of large sets of neuron morphologies and
generating new morphologies has been missing. Here we
propose M ORPH VAE, a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
variational autoencoder with spherical latent space (Davidson et al., 2018; Xu & Durrett, 2018) working on 3D-walks
along a neuron’s morphology. The generated morphologies
match key characteristics of their biological counterparts
even though no biological constraints are incorporated in the
model. Furthermore, M ORPH VAE yields a feature representation which is at least as good or better than state-of-the-art
morphology representations.

2. Methods
Our goal is (1) to build a generative model of a diverse set of
realistic looking neural morphologies and at the same time
(2) to learn a latent representation of neuron morphologies
revealing cell type related differences. Our model is trained
on a set of neural morphologies represented by their tree
graph T , possibly with assigned cell type label cT . For

