Asynchronous Decentralized Optimization With
Implicit Stochastic Variance Reduction
Kenta Niwa 1 2 Guoqiang Zhang 3 W. Bastiaan Kleijn 4
Noboru Harada 1 2 Hiroshi Sawada 1 Akinori Fujino 1

Abstract
A novel asynchronous decentralized optimization
method that follows Stochastic Variance Reduction (SVR) is proposed. Average consensus algorithms, such as Decentralized Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DSGD), facilitate distributed training of
machine learning models. However, the gradient
will drift within the local nodes due to statistical
heterogeneity of the subsets of data residing on
the nodes and long communication intervals. To
overcome the drift problem, (i) Gradient TrackingSVR (GT-SVR) integrates SVR into DSGD and
(ii) Edge-Consensus Learning (ECL) solves a
model constrained minimization problem using
a primal-dual formalism. In this paper, we reformulate the update procedure of ECL such that it
implicitly includes the gradient modification of
SVR by optimally selecting a constraint-strength
control parameter. Through convergence analysis
and experiments, we confirmed that the proposed
ECL with Implicit SVR (ECL-ISVR) is stable and
approximately reaches the reference performance
obtained with computation on a single-node using
full data set.

1. Introduction
While the use of massive data benefits the training of machine learning (ML) models, aggregating all data into one
physical location (e.g., cloud data center) may overwhelm
available communication bandwidth and violate rules on
consumer privacy. In the European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Custers et al., 2019) (article
46), a controller or processor may transfer personal data to
a third country or an international organization only if the
controller or processor has provided appropriate safeguards.
1
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan 3 University
of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia 4 Victoria University of
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. Correspondence to: Kenta
Niwa <kenta.niwa.bk@hco.ntt.co.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Our goal is to facilitate ML model training without revealing the original data from local nodes. This requires edge
computing (e.g., (Shi et al., 2016; Mao et al., 2017; Zhou
et al., 2019)), which brings computation and data storage
closer to the location where it is needed.
A representative collaborative learning algorithm is FedAvg
(McMahan et al., 2017) for centralized networks. In FedAvg,
the model update differences on a subset of local nodes are
synchronously transmitted to a central server where they are
averaged. Average consensus algorithms, such as DSGD
(Chen & Sayed, 2012; Kar & Moura, 2013; Ram et al.,
2010), Gossip SGD (GoSGD) (Ormándi et al., 2013; Jin
et al., 2016; Blot et al., 2016), and related parallel algorithms
(Sattler et al., 2019; Lim et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2017; Lian et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2018) have been
studied. However, it has been found empirically that these
average consensus algorithms (even with model normalization (Li et al., 2019)) do not perform well when (i) the data
subsets held on the local nodes are statistically heterogeneous,1 (ii) use asynchronous and/or sparse (long update
intervals) communication between local nodes, and (iii) the
networks have arbitrary/non-homogeneous configurations.
In such scenarios, the gradient used for model update will
often drift within the local nodes, resulting in either slow
convergence or unstable iterates. An effective approach to
overcome this issue is introduced in SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020), where SVR is applied to FedAvg. Later,
the gradient control rule of SVR was applied to DSGD in
GT-SVR (Xin et al., 2020). In GT-SVR, each local-node gradient bias is modified using expectations of both the global
and local gradients (control variates) for each update iteration. Representative methods to calculate control variates
are Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient descent (SVRG)
(Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014).
It is straightforward to include SVR in various algorithms,
as externally calculated control variates are just added to the
local stochastic gradient. However, there are uncertainties in
the implementation of the control variable calculation. For
example, SVRG updates the control variables by using first
order local node gradients for each regular update interval,
while a different update timing was used in SAGA.
1

This class of problems has also been referred to as ”non-IID”.

