Deep Learning for Functional Data Analysis with Adaptive Basis Layers

Junwen Yao 1 Jonas Mueller 2 Jane-Ling Wang 1

Abstract
Despite their widespread success, the application of deep neural networks to functional data
remains scarce today. The infinite dimensionality of functional data means standard learning
algorithms can be applied only after appropriate
dimension reduction, typically achieved via basis expansions. Currently, these bases are chosen a priori without the information for the task
at hand and thus may not be effective for the
designated task. We instead propose to adaptively learn these bases in an end-to-end fashion. We introduce neural networks that employ
a new Basis Layer whose hidden units are each
basis functions themselves implemented as a micro neural network. Our architecture learns to
apply parsimonious dimension reduction to functional inputs that focuses only on information
relevant to the target rather than irrelevant variation in the input function. Across numerous classification/regression tasks with functional data,
our method empirically outperforms other types
of neural networks, and we prove that our approach is statistically consistent with low generalization error. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/jwyyy/AdaFNN

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized data analysis and predictive modeling as its learned input representations capture
more relevant aspects of a problem than representations
based on manually selected features of the data. While the
powerful capabilities of neural networks (NN) have been
clearly demonstrated for vector/image/text/audio/graph data,
how to best adapt these models to functional data remains
under-explored. Functional data are sample of random functions. The simplest examples are random curves defined
over a (univariate) real-valued interval with one curve per
1

UC Davis 2 Amazon (work done prior to joining Amazon).
Correspondence to: Junwen Yao <jwyao@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

individual subject in our dataset. Without loss of generality we assume that the interval is [0, 1]. The curve for one
subject is thus a random function X(t), t ∈ [0, 1], which
can be viewed as a continuous stochastic process on [0, 1].
Extensively studied in the statistics literature (Ferraty &
Vieu, 2006; Ramsay & Silverman, 2007; Hsing & Eubank,
2015; Wang et al., 2016), functional data appear frequently
in scientific studies and daily life, such as in datasets of:
air pollution, fMRI scans, growth curves, and sensors like
wearable devices.
A fundamental property that distinguishes functional data
from other data types is that they are intrinsically infinite
dimensional and generated by smooth underlying processes.
While high-dimensionality poses challenges in modeling
and prediction, it brings benefits when data are generated
from smooth or continuous functions. This is because the
observed measurements at one location t0 can inform us the
values of X(t) for t at nearby locations, thereby increasing
the estimation efficiency. The smoothness assumption also
makes functional data resilient to noise contamination as
the magnitude of the noise can be estimated and statistical
methods designed for functional data can accommodate
noise in the observed data.
In practical applications, we are interested in using these
continuous curves X(t) to infer their relationship to some
response variable Y , often to predict the response. More formally, we have a dataset {(Xi (t), Yi )}ni=1 of i.i.d. samples
of X(t) and the associated Y , where X(t) is a mean-square
continuous process defined over t ∈ [0, 1]. For each subject
i in our dataset, the observations of Xi serve as a functional
covariate to predict scalar response variable Yi , which may
be either continuous or discrete. In many practical applications, the continuous process X(t) is only be observed on a
discrete time grid {ti , . . . , tJ+1 } in each observed Xi . Assuming there is an underlying map T : X(t) 7→ Y , our goal
is to estimate T from the data (e.g. using a neural network).
A common pipeline for functional data analysis (FDA) is to
summarize the information contained in each function into
a finite-dimensional vector and then carry out the analysis
using existing models for the resulting multivariate data.
Two popular dimension reduction approaches are Functional
Principal Component Analysis (FPCA) (Besse & Ramsay,
1986; Rice & Silverman, 1991; Silverman, 1996; Yao et al.,

