Guarantees for Tuning the Step Size using a Learning-to-Learn Approach

Xiang Wang 1 Shuai Yuan 1 Chenwei Wu 1 Rong Ge 1

Abstract
Choosing the right parameters for optimization
algorithms is often the key to their success in
practice. Solving this problem using a learning-tolearn approach—using meta-gradient descent on
a meta-objective based on the trajectory that the
optimizer generates—was recently shown to be effective. However, the meta-optimization problem
is difficult. In particular, the meta-gradient can
often explode/vanish, and the learned optimizer
may not have good generalization performance if
the meta-objective is not chosen carefully. In this
paper we give meta-optimization guarantees for
the learning-to-learn approach on a simple problem of tuning the step size for quadratic loss. Our
results show that the naı̈ve objective suffers from
meta-gradient explosion/vanishing problem. Although there is a way to design the meta-objective
so that the meta-gradient remains polynomially
bounded, computing the meta-gradient directly
using backpropagation leads to numerical issues.
We also characterize when it is necessary to compute the meta-objective on a separate validation
set to ensure the generalization performance of the
learned optimizer. Finally, we verify our results
empirically and show that a similar phenomenon
appears even for more complicated learned optimizers parametrized by neural networks.

1. Introduction
Choosing the right optimization algorithm and related hyperparameters is important for training a deep neural network. Even for simple algorithms like gradient descent and
stochastic gradient descent, choosing a good step size can
be important to the convergence speed and generalization
performance. Empirically, the parameters are often chosen
based on past experiences or grid search. Recently, Maclau1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Xiang Wang
<xwang@cs.duke.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rin et al. (2015) considered the idea of tuning these parameters by optimization—that is, consider a meta-optimization
problem where the goal is to find the best parameters for
an optimizer. A series of works (e.g., Andrychowicz et al.
(2016); Wichrowska et al. (2017)) extended such ideas and
parametrized the set of optimizers by neural networks.
Although this approach has shown empirical success, there
are very few theoretical guarantees for learned optimizers. Gupta & Roughgarden (2017) gave sample complexity
bounds for tuning the step size, but they did not address how
one can find the learned optimizer efficiently. In practice,
the meta-optimization problem is often solved by metagradient descent—define a meta-objective function based
on the trajectory that the optimizer generates, and then compute the meta-gradient using back-propagation (Franceschi
et al., 2017). The optimization for meta-parameters is usually a nonconvex problem, therefore it is unclear why simple
meta-gradient descent would find an optimal solution.
In this paper we consider using learning-to-learn approach
to tune the step size of standard gradient descent/stochastic
gradient descent algorithm. Even in this simple setting,
many of the challenges still remain and we can get better
learned optimizers by choosing the right meta-objective
function. Though our results are proved only in the simple
setting, we empirically verify the results using complicated
learned optimizers with neural network parametrizations.
1.1. Our Results
In this paper we focus on two basic questions on learningto-learn for gradient descent optimizer. First, will the metagradient explode/vanish and is there a way to fix the problem? Second, how could we guarantee that the learned
optimizer has good generalization properties?
Our first result shows that meta-gradient can explode/vanish
even for tuning the step size for gradient descent on a simple
quadratic objective. In this setting, we show that there
is a unique local and global minimizer for the step size,
and we also give a simple way to get rid of the gradient
explosion/vanishing problem.
Theorem 1 (Informal version of Theorem 3 and Theorem 4).
For tuning the step size of gradient descent on a quadratic
objective, if the meta-objective is the loss of the last iteration,

