Fundamental Tradeoffs in Distributionally Adversarial Training

Mohammad Mehrabi * 1 Adel Javanmard * 1 Ryan A. Rossi 2 Anup B. Rao 2 Tung Mai 2

Abstract
Adversarial training is among the most effective techniques to improve robustness of models
against adversarial perturbations. However, the
full effect of this approach on models is not well
understood. For example, while adversarial training can reduce the adversarial risk (prediction
error against an adversary), it sometimes increase
standard risk (generalization error when there is
no adversary). In this paper, we focus on distribution perturbing adversary framework wherein the
adversary can change the test distribution within
a neighborhood of the training data distribution.
The neighborhood is defined via Wasserstein distance between distributions and the radius of the
neighborhood is a measure of adversary’s manipulative power. We study the tradeoff between
standard risk and adversarial risk and derive the
Pareto-optimal tradeoff, achievable over specific
classes of models, in the infinite data limit with
features dimension kept fixed. We consider three
learning settings: 1) Regression with the class
of linear models; 2) Binary classification under
the Gaussian mixtures data model, with the class
of linear classifiers; 3) Regression with the class
of random features model (which can be equivalently represented as two-layer neural network
with random first-layer weights). We show that a
tradeoff between standard and adversarial risk is
manifested in all three settings. We further characterize the Pareto-optimal tradeoff curves and
discuss how a variety of factors, such as features
correlation, adversary’s power or the width of twolayer neural network would affect this tradeoff.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning algorithms, and in particular deep
neural networks, have demonstrated breakthrough empirical
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Data Sciences and Operations, USC Marshall School of Business, University of Southern
California, USA; 2 Adobe Research, USA. Correspondence to:
Adel Javanmard <ajavanma@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

performance, and have been deployed in a multitude of applications domains ranging from visual object classification
to speech recognition, robotics, natural language processing
and healthcare. The common practice to train these models is by empirical loss minimization on the training data.
Nonetheless, it has been observed that the resulting models
are surprisingly vulnerable to minute discrepancies between
the test and the training data distributions. There are several well documented examples of such behavior in computer vision and image processing where small imperceptible manipulations of images can significantly compromise
the performance of the state-of-the-art classifiers (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Biggio et al., 2013). Other examples include
well-designed malicious content like malware which can
be labeled legitimate by the classifier and harm the system (Chen et al., 2017; Papernot et al., 2017), or adversarial
attacks on speech recognition systems, such as GoogleNow
or Siri, which consists in voice commands that are incomprehensible or even completely inaudible to human and can
still control the systems (Carlini et al., 2016; Vaidya et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2017). It is evident that in practice such
vulnerability can have catastrophic consequences.
By studying adversarial samples, one can in turn improve the
robustness of machine learning algorithms against adversarial attacks. In the past few years, there has been a significant
research on generating various adversarial samples (Carlini
& Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al.,
2015b; Papernot et al., 2016a) and defenses (Madry et al.,
2018a; Cisse et al., 2017; Papernot et al., 2016b). Among
the considerable effort to improve the adversarial robustness
of algorithms, adversarial training is one of the most effective techniques. Adversarial training is often formulated as a
minimax optimization problem, where the inner maximization aims to find an adversarial example that maximizes a
predictive loss function, while the outer minimization aims
to train a robust estimator using the generated adversarial
examples (Goodfellow et al., 2015a; Kurakin et al., 2016;
Madry et al., 2018a; Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong &
Kolter, 2018).
While adversarial training techniques have been successful in improving the adversarial robustness of the models,
their full effect on machine learning systems is not well understood. In particular, some studies (Madry et al., 2018a)
observed that the robustness virtue of adversarial training

