Representation Subspace Distance for Domain Adaptation Regression

Xinyang Chen 1 Sinan Wang 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract
Regression, as a counterpart to classification, is a
major paradigm with a wide range of applications.
Domain adaptation regression extends it by generalizing a regressor from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain. Existing domain
adaptation regression methods have achieved positive results limited only to the shallow regime. A
question arises: Why learning invariant representations in the deep regime less pronounced? A
key finding of this paper is that classification is
robust to feature scaling but regression is not, and
aligning the distributions of deep representations
will alter feature scale and impede domain adaptation regression. Based on this finding, we propose
to close the domain gap through orthogonal bases
of the representation spaces, which are free from
feature scaling. Inspired by Riemannian geometry
of Grassmann manifold, we define a geometrical
distance over representation subspaces and learn
deep transferable representations by minimizing
it. To avoid breaking the geometrical properties
of deep representations, we further introduce the
bases mismatch penalization to match the ordering of orthogonal bases across representation subspaces. Our method is evaluated on three domain
adaptation regression benchmarks, two of which
are constructed in this paper. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods significantly,
forming early positive results in the deep regime.

1. Introduction
The regression paradigm is proposed to formalize the tasks
of predicting continuous values from each instance. As one
of the main paradigms in machine learning, regression tasks
attract parallel attention as classification tasks. Problems attributed to regression tasks arise widely in real applications,
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University.
Xinyang Chen <chenxinyang95@gmail.com>. Correspondence
to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

such as object localization, image registration, human pose
estimation, to name a few (Lathuilière et al., 2019).
Deep learning has made remarkable changes in diverse regression applications across many fields. Nonetheless, training high-quality deep models relies on large-scale labeled
datasets. And in many real-world regression applications,
precisely annotating abundant training instances is timeconsuming and laborious. A solution to this problem is
leveraging off-the-shelf labeled data from a relevant domain
and applying domain adaptation approaches to overcome
the domain shift or dataset bias (Shimodaira et al., 2009).
There are many pioneers hammering at tackling domain
adaptation regression (DAR) problem at the theoretical or
algorithmic level. Mansour et al. (2009) and Cortes & Mohri
(2011) conducted extensive theoretical analyses of the DAR
problem. Meanwhile, a series of algorithms are proposed
for the DAR problem. These methods focus on importance
weighting (Geng et al., 2007; Guo et al., 2008; Yamada
et al., 2014) or learning invariant representations (Cao et al.,
2010; Pan et al., 2011) in the shallow regime, achieving impressive improvements and bringing inspiration for future
works. However, most methods rely on labeled target data.
And there are rare DAR approaches in the deep regime.
Recent studies reveal that deep networks are able to learn
representations generically useful across a variety of tasks
(Yosinski et al., 2014). Inspired by this, deep domain adaptation methods have achieved remarkable advances in domain
adaptation classification (DAC) problems. In light of these
developments in DAC, a natural question arises: Why learning invariant representations in the deep regime for DAR
less pronounced? An essential question is: what is the vital
difference between classification and regression during the
representation learning process?
Intuitively, their essential difference lies in the loss function.
A commonly used loss function in regression is squared
loss (L2), while in classification it is cross-entropy loss
(CE) with softmax activation function. Softmax allows the
activation values of different categories to compete with
each other. Introducing this competition mechanism can
make classifiers quickly adapt to change in feature scales.
However, in regression tasks, regressors may not have such
adaptability. To further explore this property, we conduct an
exploratory study to verify the effect of feature scaling on

