Testing DNN-based Autonomous Driving Systems under
Critical Environmental Conditions
Zhong Li 1 2 Minxue Pan 1 3 Tian Zhang 1 2 Xuandong Li 1 2

Abstract
Due to the increasing usage of Deep Neural Network (DNN) based autonomous driving systems
(ADS) where erroneous or unexpected behaviours
can lead to catastrophic accidents, testing such
systems is of growing importance. Existing approaches often just focus on finding erroneous
behaviours and have not thoroughly studied the
impact of environmental conditions. In this paper, we propose to test DNN-based ADS under
different environmental conditions to identify the
critical ones, that is, the environmental conditions
under which the ADS are more prone to errors.
To tackle the problem of the space of environmental conditions being extremely large, we present
a novel approach named TACTIC that employs
the search-based method to identify critical environmental conditions generated by an image-toimage translation model. Large-scale experiments
show that TACTIC can effectively identify critical environmental conditions and produce realistic testing images, and meanwhile, reveal more
erroneous behaviours compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles have achieved tremendous success
over the past decade due to the significant advances in
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). We have witnessed a number of successful DNN-based autonomous driving systems
(ADSs) (Grzywaczewski, 2017; Bojarski et al., 2016), where
DNNs directly generate the control decisions (e.g., steering and braking) for the systems after processing inputs
received from sensors (e.g., camera, Radar, Lidar). Unfortunately, such systems often demonstrate incorrect/unexpected
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China 2 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 Software
Institute, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to:
Minxue Pan <mxp@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Testing driving scenes generated by DeepXplore (Pei
et al., 2017), DeepTest (Tian et al., 2018), PreScan (Marketakis
et al., 2009), and our approach TACTIC. Note that the coloured
arrows in Figure 1 (a) and (b) are attached to present the predicted
steering angles. TACTIC produces more realistic driving scenes
compared to the other three approaches.

behaviours that can lead to catastrophic accidents when
deployed in real-world environments, for instance, the
Tesla/Uber autonomous vehicle accidents (Boudette, 2017;
Gibbs, 2018). There is an urgent need for a better approach
to comprehensively and effectively testing these systems.
Recently, various approaches have been proposed for testing DNN-based ADSs which mostly rely on affine image
transformation (Pei et al., 2017; Tian et al., 2018) or highfidelity simulation (Marketakis et al., 2009; Abdessalem
et al., 2016; 2018; Fremont et al., 2019) to generate independent driving scenes that can cause erroneous behaviours.
However, there is little attention on studying the impact of
environmental conditions (e.g., time-of-day, illumination,
and weather, etc.) for DNN-based ADSs. Since DNN-based
ADSs must be able to conduct proper operations under all
possible environmental conditions in the real world, it is
critical to understand which environmental conditions will

