Bayesian Deep Learning via Subnetwork Inference
Erik Daxberger 1 2 Eric Nalisnick * 3 James Urquhart Allingham * 1 Javier Antorán * 1
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1 4 5

Abstract
The Bayesian paradigm has the potential to solve
core issues of deep neural networks such as poor
calibration and data inefficiency. Alas, scaling
Bayesian inference to large weight spaces often
requires restrictive approximations. In this work,
we show that it suffices to perform inference over
a small subset of model weights in order to obtain
accurate predictive posteriors. The other weights
are kept as point estimates. This subnetwork inference framework enables us to use expressive, otherwise intractable, posterior approximations over
such subsets. In particular, we implement subnetwork linearized Laplace as a simple, scalable
Bayesian deep learning method: We first obtain a
MAP estimate of all weights and then infer a fullcovariance Gaussian posterior over a subnetwork
using the linearized Laplace approximation. We
propose a subnetwork selection strategy that aims
to maximally preserve the model’s predictive uncertainty. Empirically, our approach compares
favorably to ensembles and less expressive posterior approximations over full networks.

1. Introduction
A critical shortcoming of deep neural networks (NNs) is
that they tend to be poorly calibrated and overconfident
in their predictions, especially when there is a shift between the train and test data distributions (Nguyen et al.,
2015; Guo et al., 2017). To reliably inform decision making, NNs need to robustly quantify the uncertainty in their
predictions (Bhatt et al., 2020). This is especially important for safety-critical applications such as healthcare or
autonomous driving (Amodei et al., 2016).
Bayesian modeling (Bishop, 2006; Ghahramani, 2015)
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 University of Amsterdam
4
Microsoft Research 5 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence
to: Erik Daxberger <ead54@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

presents a principled way to capture uncertainty via the
posterior distribution over model parameters. Unfortunately,
exact posterior inference is intractable in NNs. Despite
recent successes in the field of Bayesian deep learning (Osawa et al., 2019; Maddox et al., 2019; Dusenberry et al.,
2020), existing methods invoke unrealistic assumptions to
scale to NNs with large numbers of weights. This severely
limits the expressiveness of the inferred posterior and thus
deteriorates the quality of the induced uncertainty estimates
(Ovadia et al., 2019; Fort et al., 2019; Foong et al., 2019a).
Perhaps these unrealistic inference approximations can be
avoided. Due to the heavy overparameterization of NNs,
their accuracy is well-preserved by a small subnetwork
(Cheng et al., 2017). Moreover, doing inference over a
low-dimensional subspace of the weights can result in accurate uncertainty quantification (Izmailov et al., 2019). This
prompts the following question: Can a full NN’s model uncertainty be well-preserved by a small subnetwork? In this
work we demonstrate that the posterior predictive distribution of a full network can be well represented by that of a
subnetwork. In particular, our contributions are as follows:
1. We propose subnetwork inference, a general framework
for scalable Bayesian deep learning in which inference
is performed over only a small subset of the NN weights,
while all other weights are kept deterministic. This allows us to use expressive posterior approximations that
are typically intractable in large NNs. We present a concrete instantiation of this framework that first fits a MAP
estimate of the full NN, and then uses the linearized
Laplace approximation to infer a full-covariance Gaussian posterior over a subnetwork (illustrated in Fig. 1).
2. We derive a subnetwork selection strategy based on the
Wasserstein distance between the approximate posterior
for the full network and the approximate posterior for
the subnetwork. For scalability, we employ a diagonal
approximation during subnetwork selection. Selecting a
small subnetwork then allows us to infer weight covariances. Empirically, we find that making approximations
during subnetwork selection is much less harmful to the
posterior predictive than making them during inference.
3. We empirically evaluate our method on a range of bench-

