Sharing Less is More: Lifelong Learning
in Deep Networks with Selective Layer Transfer

Seungwon Lee 1 Sima Behpour 2 Eric Eaton 1

Abstract
Effective lifelong learning across diverse tasks
requires the transfer of diverse knowledge, yet
transferring irrelevant knowledge may lead to interference and catastrophic forgetting. In deep
networks, transferring the appropriate granularity
of knowledge is as important as the transfer mechanism, and must be driven by the relationships
among tasks. We first show that the lifelong learning performance of several current deep learning architectures can be significantly improved by
transfer at the appropriate layers. We then develop
an expectation-maximization (EM) method to automatically select the appropriate transfer configuration and optimize the task network weights.
This EM-based selective transfer is highly effective, balancing transfer performance on all tasks
with avoiding catastrophic forgetting, as demonstrated on three algorithms in several lifelong object classification scenarios.

1. Introduction
Transfer at different layers within a deep network corresponds to sharing knowledge between tasks at different
levels of abstraction. In multi-task scenarios that involve diverse tasks, reusing low-layer representations may be appropriate for tasks that share feature-based similarities, while
sharing high-level representations may be more appropriate
for tasks that share more abstract similarities. Selecting
the appropriate granularity of knowledge to transfer is an
important architectural consideration for deep networks that
support multiple tasks.
In scenarios where tasks share substantial similarities, many
multi-task methods have found success using a static configuration of the knowledge to share (Caruana, 1997; Yang
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 Computer Science
Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Seungwon Lee <leeswon@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

& Hospedales, 2017; Lee et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b;
Bulat et al., 2020), such as sharing the lower layers of a
deep network with upper-level task-specific heads. As tasks
become increasingly diverse, the appropriate granularity for
transfer may vary between tasks based on their relationships,
necessitating more selective transfer. Prior work in selective
sharing for deep networks has typically either 1.) branched
the network into a tree structure (Lu et al., 2017; Yoon
et al., 2018; Vandenhende et al., 2019; He et al., 2018),
which emphasizes the sharing of lower layers or 2.) introduced new learning modules between task models (Yang
& Hospedales, 2017; Xiao et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2018)
which increases the complexity of training. The transfer
configuration could then be optimized in batch settings to
maximize performance across the tasks.
However, the problem of selective transfer is further compounded in continual or lifelong learning settings, in which
tasks are presented consecutively. The optimal transfer configuration may vary between tasks or it may vary over time.
And indeed, we may not want to transfer at every layer, as
some task-specific layers may need to be interleaved with
shared knowledge in order to customize that shared knowledge to individual tasks. To verify this premise and motivate
our work, we conducted a simple brute-force initial experiment: we took a multi-task CNN with shared layers and
a lifelong learning CNN that uses factorized transfer (DFCNN, Lee et al., 2019) and varied the set of CNN layers
that employed transfer (with task-specific fully connected
layers at the top). Using two data sets, we considered several static transfer configurations: transfer at all CNN layers,
transfer at the top-k CNN layers, transfer at the bottom-k
CNN layers, and alternating transfer/no-transfer CNN layers. The results are shown in Figure 1, with details given in
Section 2. Clearly, we see that the optimal transfer configuration in hindsight varies between task relationships and
transfer mechanisms. Restricting the transfer layers significantly improves performance over the naı̈ve approach of
transferring at all layers, with the alternating configuration
performing extremely well for both multi-task and lifelong
learning. This verifies that selective transfer is beneficial for
learning multiple tasks simultaneously or consecutively.
Instead of only considering such a restricted set of static

