Improving Gradient Regularization
using Complex-Valued Neural Networks

Eric Yeats 1 Yiran Chen 1 Hai Li 1

Abstract
Gradient regularization is a neural network defense technique that requires no prior knowledge
of an adversarial attack and that brings only limited increase in training computational complexity. A form of complex-valued neural network
(CVNN) is proposed to improve the performance
of gradient regularization on classification tasks
of real-valued input in adversarial settings. The
activation derivatives of each layer of the CVNN
are dependent on the combination of inputs to
the layer, and locally stable representations can
be learned for inputs the network is trained on.
Furthermore, the properties of the CVNN parameter derivatives resist decrease of performance on
the standard objective that is caused by competition with the gradient regularization objective.
Experimental results show that the performance
of gradient regularized CVNN surpasses that of
real-valued neural networks with comparable storage and computational complexity. Moreover,
gradient regularized complex-valued networks exhibit robust performance approaching that of realvalued networks trained with multi-step adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Recent deep learning (DL) models can outperform humans
on image classification tasks (He et al., 2016). While the
exceptional performance of DL on tightly controlled classification tasks is a remarkable achievement, we would like
for DL’s high performance to be robust to all forms of noise
that a deployed DL model might encounter. Adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al., 2013) provide evidence that this
is not the case for standard DL models. Szegedy et al.
(2013) showed that neural networks can be fooled reliably
by adding adversarially crafted noise to clean DL inputs,
1

ECE Dept., Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Correspondence to: Eric Yeats <eric.yeats@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and that these inputs are difficult to distinguish from normal inputs. Subsequent investigation by Goodfellow et al.
(2014) and Papernot et al. (2016) further demonstrate that
adversarial examples generalize across DL models trained
on disjoint subsets of the dataset, and transfer well across
different machine learning algorithms. Computationally
cheap yet effective gradient-based “White-box” attacks (attacks which have knowledge of the network parameters)
such as FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2014), I-FGSM (Kurakin & Bengio, 2017), PGD (Madry et al., 2017), and MIM
(Dong et al., 2018) have since been developed. Carlini &
Wagner (2017) develop an attack that is extremely difficult
to detect by significantly improving the attack optimization
process.
For situations in which the DL model parameters are not
known to the attacker (“Black-box”), perturbed inputs are
often crafted using surrogate networks and later provided
to the black-box model. Several works have observed that
black-box attacks transfer more effectively if perturbations
are designed to alter neuron activations in the feature extraction layers (Inkawhich et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2018).
The existence of adversarial examples and their high transferability questions the fitness of current DL models for
security-sensitive applications (Eykholt et al., 2018; Kurakin & Bengio, 2017).
Methods of providing security to neural networks tend to
not be as effective as the methods to attack them. One of
the most well known and successful security methods is
adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which incorporates single-step adversarial example generation into the
standard training procedure. Subsequent works developed
more powerful multi-step attacks to circumvent adversarial
training (Kurakin et al., 2016). Madry et al. (2017) reformulated adversarial training as a multi-step dual optimization
problem to make it resistant to more powerful white-box
attack, at the cost of greatly increasing the computational
complexity of the training procedure. Although adversarial
training is the best empirical defense to date, it requires
prior knowledge of an attack to defend against. This leaves
the possibility for an adversary to develop a new attack to
circumvent the network’s security.
Other security methods rely on promoting some measure

