Logarithmic Regret for Reinforcement Learning with Linear Function
Approximation

Jiafan He 1 Dongruo Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) with linear function
approximation has received increasing attention
recently. However,
existing work has focused
√
on obtaining T -type regret bound, where T is
the number of interactions with the MDP. In this
paper, we show that logarithmic regret is attainable under two recently proposed linear MDP
assumptions provided that there exists a positive sub-optimality gap for the optimal actionvalue function. More specifically, under the linear
MDP assumption (Jin et al., 2020), the LSVIO(d3 H 5 /gapmin ·
UCB algorithm can achieve e
log(T ))regret; and under the linear mixture MDP
assumption (Ayoub et al., 2020), the UCRL-VTR
O(d2 H 5 /gapmin · log3 (T ))
algorithm can achieve e
regret, where d is the dimension of feature mapping, H is the length of episode, gapmin is the
e hides all logminimal sub-optimality gap, and O
arithmic terms except log(T ). To the best of our
knowledge, these are the first logarithmic regret
bounds for RL with linear function approximation.
We also establish gap-dependent lower bounds for
the two linear MDP models.

1. Introduction
Designing efficient algorithms that learn and plan in sequential decision-making tasks with large state and action spaces
has become a central task of modern reinforcement learning
(RL) in recent years. RL often assumes the environment
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), described by a tuple
of state space, action space, reward function, and transition
probability function. Due to a large number of possible
states and actions, traditional tabular reinforcement learning
methods such as Q-learning (Watkins, 1989), which directly
access each state-action pair, are computationally intractable.
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

A common approach to cope with high-dimensional state
and action spaces is to utilize function approximation such
as linear functions or neural networks to map states and
actions to a low-dimensional space.
Recently, a large body of literature has been devoted to
provide regret bounds for online RL with linear function approximation. These works can be divided into two main categories. The first category is model-free algorithms, which
directly parameterize the action-value function as a linear
function of some given feature mapping. For instance, Jin
et al. (2020) studied the episodic MDPs with linear MDP
assumption, which assumes that both transition probability
function and reward function can be represented as a linear
function of a given feature mapping. Under this assumption,
Jin et al. (2020) showed that the action-value function is
a linear function of the feature mapping and √
proposed a
e d3 H 3 T )
model-free LSVI-UCB algorithm to obtain an O(
regret, where d is the dimension of the feature mapping, H
is the length of the episode, and T is the number of interactions with the MDP. The second category is model-based
algorithms, which parameterize the underlying transition
probability function as a linear function of a given feature
mapping. For example, Ayoub et al. (2020) studied a class
of MDPs where the underlying transition probability kernel
is a linear mixture model. Ayoub et al. (2020)
proposed a
√
e
model-based UCRL-VTR algorithm with an O(d
H 3T )
regret. Zhou et al. (2020b) studied the linear kernel MDP1
in the infinite horizon
discounted setting and proposed
a
√
√
algorithm with T -type regret. Although these T -type
regrets are standard and easy to interpret, they do not consider any additional problem-dependent structure of the
underlying MDPs. This motivates us to seek a tighter and
instance-dependent regret analysis for RL.
There is a large body of literature on bandits, which study
the instance-dependent regret bounds (See Bubeck and
Cesa-Bianchi (2012); Slivkins et al. (2019); Lattimore and
Szepesvári (2018) and references therein). Note that bandits
can be seen as a special instance of RL problems. Suboptimality gap has been playing a central role in many
gap-dependent bounds for bandits, which is defined as gap
1
Linear kernel MDPs are essentially the same as linear mixture
MDPs.

