Active Learning for Distributionally Robust Level-Set Estimation

Yu Inatsu 1 Shogo Iwazaki 1 Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2

Abstract
Many cases exist in which a black-box function
f with high evaluation cost depends on two types
of variables x and w, where x is a controllable
design variable and w are uncontrollable environmental variables that have random variation
following a certain distribution P . In such cases,
an important task is to find the range of design
variables x such that the function f (x, w) has the
desired properties by incorporating the random
variation of the environmental variables w. A
natural measure of robustness is the probability
that f (x, w) exceeds a given threshold h, which
is known as the probability threshold robustness
(PTR) measure in the literature on robust optimization. However, this robustness measure cannot be correctly evaluated when the distribution
P is unknown. In this study, we addressed this
problem by considering the distributionally robust PTR (DRPTR) measure, which considers the
worst-case PTR within given candidate distributions. Specifically, we studied the problem of
efficiently identifying a reliable set H, which is
defined as a region in which the DRPTR measure
exceeds a certain desired probability α, which
can be interpreted as a level set estimation (LSE)
problem for DRPTR. We propose a theoretically
grounded and computationally efficient active
learning method for this problem. We show that
the proposed method has theoretical guarantees on
convergence and accuracy, and confirmed through
numerical experiments that the proposed method
outperforms existing methods.

1. Introduction
In the manufacturing industry, product performance often
depends on two types of variables: design variables and en1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ichiro Takeuchi
<takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

vironmental variables. The design variables are completely
controllable, whereas environmental variables are random
variables that change depending on the usage environment
of the product. When considering such a problem, it is important to identify the design variables that allow the product
performance to exceed the desired requirement threshold
with a sufficiently high degree of confidence, taking into
account the randomness of the environmental variables. In
this setting, we must emphasize that there are two distinctly
different phases of the product: the development phase and
the use phase. In the development phase, we have full control over the design variables and environmental variables.
In the use phase, on the other hand, the design variables are
fixed, and the environmental variables change randomly and
cannot be controlled.
Let f (x, w) represent the performance of the product, and
let h ∈ R be a desired performance threshold, where x is
a design variable defined on X , and w is an environmental
variable defined on Ω. Then, we consider the following
robustness measure:
Z
PTR(x) =
1l[f (x, w) > h]p† (w)dw,
Ω

where 1l[·] is the indicator function and p† (w) is the probability density function of w. This measure is called the
probability threshold robustness (PTR) measure in the field
of robust optimization (Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007), and can
be interpreted as a measure of how well the design variables
behave under randomness in the environmental variables.
In the manufacturing industry, it is desirable to identify the
set of controllable variables x ∈ X for which PTR(x) is
greater than a certain threshold. In other words, this problem
is interpreted as a level-set estimation (LSE) (Bryan et al.,
2006; Gotovos et al., 2013) of the PTR measure. There
are two main reasons for considering LSE of the PTR measure. One is that by enumerating all the design variables
that exceed the desired threshold with a high probability,
it is possible to respond the usage conditions of various
users. The other is to consider some optimization problem
(e.g., to find x with the minimum price) for design variables
with PTR measures above a certain level. This is known as
the chance-constrained programming problem (Charnes &
Cooper, 1959), and has many applications such as finance,
in addition to manufacturing industry. Unfortunately, however, the PTR measure cannot be correctly evaluated when

