Variational (Gradient) Estimate of the Score Function
in Energy-based Latent Variable Models

Fan Bao 1 2 Kun Xu 1 Chongxuan Li 1 Lanqing Hong 2 Jun Zhu 1 Bo Zhang 1

Abstract
This paper presents new estimates of the score
function and its gradient with respect to the model
parameters in a general energy-based latent variable model (EBLVM). The score function and
its gradient can be expressed as combinations of
expectation and covariance terms over the (generally intractable) posterior of the latent variables.
New estimates are obtained by introducing a variational posterior to approximate the true posterior
in these terms. The variational posterior is trained
to minimize a certain divergence (e.g., the KL
divergence) between itself and the true posterior.
Theoretically, the divergence characterizes upper
bounds of the bias of the estimates. In principle,
our estimates can be applied to a wide range of
objectives, including kernelized Stein discrepancy
(KSD), score matching (SM)-based methods and
exact Fisher divergence with a minimal model assumption. In particular, these estimates applied to
SM-based methods outperform existing methods
in learning EBLVMs on several image datasets.

1. Introduction
Energy-based models (EBMs) (LeCun et al., 2006) associate an energy to each configuration of visible variables,
which naturally induces a probability distribution by normalizing the exponential negative energy. Such models have
found applications in a wide range of areas, such as image
synthesis (Du & Mordatch, 2019; Nijkamp et al., 2020),
out-of-distribution detection (Grathwohl et al., 2020a; Liu
et al., 2020) and controllable generation (Nijkamp et al.,
2019). Based on EBMs, energy-based latent variable models (EBLVMs) (Swersky et al., 2011; Vértes et al., 2016)
incorporate latent variables to further improve the expres1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab,
BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sive power (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Bao et al., 2020)
and to enable representation learning (Welling et al., 2004;
Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Srivastava & Salakhutdinov,
2012) and conditional sampling (see results in Sec. 4.2).
Notably, the score function (SF) of an EBM is defined as
the gradient of its log-density with respect to the visible
variables, which is independent of the partition function
and thereby tractable. Due to its tractability, the SF-based
methods are appealing in both learning (Hyvärinen, 2005;
Liu et al., 2016) and evaluating (Grathwohl et al., 2020b)
EBMs, compared to many other approaches (Hinton, 2002;
Tieleman, 2008; Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; Salakhutdinov, 2008) (see a comprehensive discussion in Sec. 6). In
particular, score matching (SM) (Hyvärinen, 2005), which
minimizes the expected squared distance between the score
function of the data distribution and that of the model distribution, and its variants (Kingma & LeCun, 2010; Vincent,
2011; Saremi et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019;
Pang et al., 2020) have shown promise in learning EBMs.
Unfortunately, the score function and its gradient with respect to the model parameters in EBLVMs are generally
intractable without a strong structural assumption (e.g., the
joint distribution of visible and latent variables is in the exponential family (Vértes et al., 2016)) and thereby SF-based
methods are not directly applicable to general EBLVMs.
Recently, bi-level score matching (BiSM) (Bao et al., 2020)
applies SM to general EBLVMs by reformulating a SMbased objective as a bilevel optimization problem, which
learns a deep EBLVM on natural images and outperforms an
EBM of the same size. However, BiSM is not problemless —
practically BiSM is optimized by gradient unrolling (Metz
et al., 2017) of the lower level optimization, which is time
and memory consuming (see a comparison in Sec. 4.1).
In this paper, we present variational estimates of the score
function and its gradient with respect to the model parameters in general EBLVMs, referred to as VaES and VaGES
respectively. The score function and its gradient can be
expressed as combinations of expectation and covariance
terms over the posterior of the latent variables. VaES and
VaGES are obtained by introducing a variational posterior,
which approximates the true posterior in these terms by
minimizing a certain divergence between itself and the true

