Emergent Social Learning via Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Kamal Ndousse 1 Douglas Eck 2 Sergey Levine 2 3 Natasha Jaques 2 3

Abstract
Social learning is a key component of human
and animal intelligence. By taking cues from the
behavior of experts in their environment, social
learners can acquire sophisticated behavior and
rapidly adapt to new circumstances. This paper
investigates whether independent reinforcement
learning (RL) agents in a multi-agent environment
can learn to use social learning to improve their
performance. We find that in most circumstances,
vanilla model-free RL agents do not use social
learning. We analyze the reasons for this deficiency, and show that by imposing constraints on
the training environment and introducing a modelbased auxiliary loss we are able to obtain generalized social learning policies which enable agents
to: i) discover complex skills that are not learned
from single-agent training, and ii) adapt online
to novel environments by taking cues from experts present in the new environment. In contrast,
agents trained with model-free RL or imitation
learning generalize poorly and do not succeed in
the transfer tasks. By mixing multi-agent and
solo training, we can obtain agents that use social
learning to gain skills that they can deploy when
alone, even out-performing agents trained alone
from the start.

1. Introduction
Social learning—learning by observing the behavior of other
agents in the same environment—enables both humans and
animals to discover useful behaviors that would be difficult to obtain through individual exploration, and to adapt
rapidly to new circumstances (Henrich & McElreath, 2003;
Laland, 2004). For example, fish are able to locate safe
sources of food in new environments by observing where
other members of their species congregate (Laland, 2004).
1

OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA 2 Google Research –
Brain team, Mountain View, CA, USA 3 UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Kamal Ndousse <kamal.ndousse@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Humans are able to learn from one another without direct
access to the experiences or memories of experts. Rather,
the interactions that constitute social learning are mediated
directly by the environment. A novice may gain the ability
to solve a task merely by watching a self-interested expert
complete the same task, and without an explicit incentive
to mimic the expert. Beyond simple imitation, social learning allows individual humans to “stand on the shoulders of
giants” and develop sophisticated behaviors or innovations
that would be impossible to discover from scratch within
one lifetime. In fact, social learning may be a central feature of humans’ unprecedented cognitive and technological
development (Humphrey, 1976; Boyd et al., 2011).
Contemporary techniques for transmitting skills between
agents in AI systems are much more limited. For example,
Imitation Learning (IL) depends on manually curated expert
demonstration trajectories. This requires a system extrinsic
to the learning agent (i.e., a developer) to (1) identify tasks of
interest, (2) find and instrument task experts, and (3) collect
demonstration data. The resulting agent is brittle, only able
to replicate skills within the collected demonstrations, and
otherwise vulnerable to compounding error (Ross et al.,
2011; Reddy et al., 2019). In contrast, humans and animals
capable of social learning are able to identify experts at tasks
relevant to their own interests and learn from those experts
without the intervention of an external system. In novel
circumstances, social learning enables adapting online to
the new task, which IL cannot do.
In this work, we investigate whether RL agents can learn
to learn from the cues of other agents. We focus on two
hypotheses related to the benefits of social learning: H1)
Social learning can discover more complex policies that
would be difficult to discover through costly individual exploration, and H2) Social learning can be used to adapt
online to a new environment, when the social learning policy encodes how to learn from the cues of experts. We study
a setting representative of real-world human environments:
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) where completely independent agents pursue their own rewards with
no direct incentive to teach or learn from one another (decentralized training and decentralized execution, with no
shared parameters or state). This setting is representative of
real-world multi-agent problems such as autonomous driving, in which there are other cars on the road but the drivers

