The Limits of Min-Max Optimization Algorithms:
Convergence to Spurious Non-Critical Sets

Ya-Ping Hsieh 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 3 Volkan Cevher 4

Abstract

Given an algorithm for solving (SP), it is then natural to
ask:
Where does the algorithm converge to?
(?)

Compared to ordinary function minimization
problems, min-max optimization algorithms encounter far greater challenges because of the existence of periodic cycles and similar phenomena. Even though some of these behaviors can
be overcome in the convex-concave regime, the
general case is considerably more difficult. With
this in mind, we take an in-depth look at a comprehensive class of state-of-the art algorithms and
prevalent heuristics in non-convex / non-concave
problems, and we establish the following general
results: a) generically, the algorithms’ limit points
are contained in the internally chain-transitive
(ICT) sets of a common, mean-field system; b) the
attractors of this system also attract the algorithms
in question with arbitrarily high probability; and
c) all algorithms avoid the system’s unstable sets
with probability 1. On the surface, this provides a
highly optimistic outlook for min-max algorithms;
however, we show that there exist spurious attractors that do not contain any stationary points of
the problem under study. In this regard, our work
suggests that existing min-max algorithms may be
subject to inescapable convergence failures. We
complement our theoretical analysis by illustrating such attractors in simple, two-dimensional,
almost bilinear problems.

The goal of our paper is to treat (?) in a general nonconvex / non-concave setting and to provide answers for
a comprehensive array of state-of-the-art algorithms.
Related work. This question has attracted significant interest in the machine learning literature because of its potential implications to generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), robust reinforcement learning (Kamalaruban et al., 2020; Pinto et al., 2017), and other models
of adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018). In this broad setting, it has become empirically clear that the joint training of
two neural networks (NNs) is fundamentally more difficult
than that of a single NN of similar size and architecture.
The latter task boils down to successfully finding a (good)
local minimum of a non-convex function, so it is instructive
to revisit (?) in the context of non-convex minimization.
In this case, the existing convergence theory for stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) – the “gold standard” for deep NN
training – can be informally summed up as follows:
1. SGD always converges to critical points.
2. SGD does not converge to strict saddle points or other
spurious solutions.

1. Introduction
Consider a min-max optimization – or saddle-point – problem of the form
min max Φ(x, y).

x∈X y∈Y

(SP)

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG, Grenoble, France. 3 Criteo AI Lab. 4 Ecole Polytechnique Fedérale de
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ya-Ping Hsieh <yaping.hsieh@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

These results could be seen as plausible expectations for
algorithmic proposals to solve (SP). Unfortunately however,
there are well-known examples of simple bilinear min-max
games where stochastic gradient descent/ascent (SGDA),
the min-max analogue of SGD, leads to recurrent orbits
that do not contain any critical point of Φ. Such spurious
convergence phenomena arise from the min-max structure
of (SP) and have no counterpart in minimization problems.
This well-documented failure of SGDA has led to an extensive literature that is impossible to survey here. As a purely
indicative – and highly incomplete – list, we mention the
works of Daskalakis et al. (2018), Gidel et al. (2019a), Mertikopoulos et al. (2019) and Mokhtari et al. (2019a), who
studied how these failures can be overcome in deterministic
bilinear problems by means of an extra-gradient step (or an
optimistic proxy thereof). By contrast, in stochastic prob-

