Oneshot Differentially Private Top-k Selection

Gang Qiao 1 Weijie J. Su 2 Li Zhang 3

Abstract
Being able to efficiently and accurately select the
top-k elements with differential privacy is an integral component of various private data analysis tasks. In this paper, we present the oneshot
Laplace mechanism, which generalizes the wellknown Report Noisy Max (Dwork & Roth, 2014)
mechanism to reporting noisy top-k elements.
We show that the oneshot
√ Laplace mechanism
with a noise level of e
O( k/ε) is approximately
differentially private. Compared to the previous
peeling approach of running Report Noisy Max k
times, the oneshot Laplace mechanism only adds
noises and computes the top k elements once,
hence much more efficient for large k. In addition, our proof of privacy relies on a novel coupling technique that bypasses the use of composition theorems. Finally, we present a novel application of efficient top-k selection in the classical
problem of ranking from pairwise comparisons.

1. Introduction
Modern statistical analyses have increasingly relied on sensitive data from individuals and, accordingly, there is a
growing recognition that privacy constraints should be incorporated into consideration in data analysis. In response,
a mathematically rigorous framework called differential
privacy (Dwork et al., 2006a;b) was introduced for privacypreserving data analysis. Roughly speaking, a differentially private procedure ensures that the released information is not influenced significantly by any individual record
in the dataset. As a consequence, the privacy of the individuals will not be revealed based on the released information.
This paper is concerned with the top-k problem, one of the
most important primitives in differential privacy: reporting
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2 The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 3 Google Research, Mountain View,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: <qiaogang@umich.edu,
suw@wharton.upenn.edu, liqzhang@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

k items with (approximately) the maximum values among
m given values. The problem of privately reporting the
k largest elements is an essential building block in many
machine learning tasks and has gained continued popularity in the literature (McSherry & Mironov, 2009; Friedman & Schuster, 2010; Banerjee et al., 2012; McSherry &
Mironov, 2013; Shen & Jin, 2014; Qin et al., 2016; Bafna
& Ullman, 2017; Steinke & Ullman, 2017; Dwork et al.,
2018; Durfee & Rogers, 2019). The common peeling solution Hardt & Roth (2013) and Dwork et al. (2018) is by
iteratively applying the Report Noisy Max algorithm and
then resorting to the composition theorem for computing
the privacy loss. In general, this results
√ in the noise level of
e k/ε)1 for (ε, δ) privacy
O(k/ε) for ε pure privacy and O(
loss. While the peeling algorithm has good privacy guarantee, it requires to run Report Noisy Max k times, hence
incurring a high computational cost for large k.
In this paper, we show that by adapting Report Noisy Max
to reporting noisy top-k items, we can still achieve comparable utility but with a much more efficient procedure as
we only need to run the selection once. We call the resulted algorithm the oneshot Laplace mechanism. More
precisely, in the oneshot Laplace mechanism, we add the
Laplace noise to each count and then report the set of items
with the top-k noisy counts. In this paper, we show that
the oneshot Laplace mechanism can achieve utility comparable to those obtained from the peeling procedure (see
Theorems 2.1 and 2.2 for the precise statements).
It is relatively straightforward to show that by adding
Laplace noise of level k/ε, the mechanism is ε purely differentially private (Theorem 2.1).2 However, it turns
√ out
to be much more challenging to show that with e
O( k/ε)
noise, it is (ε, δ)-differentially private. Indeed, the proof
of this fact is the main contribution of our paper (Theorem 2.2).
Our proof directly bounds the privacy loss without the help
of the composition theorems. The difficulty of this approach is in untangling the complex distribution dependence of the k selected items, as opposed to the condi1
e to hide dependence on logThroughout the paper, we use O
arithmic factors.
2
This is probably a folklore but since we could not find a reference, we include its proof for completeness.

