Fair Classiﬁcation with Noisy Protected Attributes:
A Framework with Provable Guarantees
L. Elisa Celis 1 Lingxiao Huang 2 Vijay Keswani 1 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 3

Abstract
We present an optimization framework for learning a fair classiﬁer in the presence of noisy perturbations in the protected attributes. Compared
to prior work, our framework can be employed
with a very general class of linear and linearfractional fairness constraints, can handle multiple, non-binary protected attributes, and outputs
a classiﬁer that comes with provable guarantees
on both accuracy and fairness. Empirically, we
show that our framework can be used to attain
either statistical rate or false positive rate fairness
guarantees with a minimal loss in accuracy, even
when the noise is large, in two real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Fair classiﬁcation has been a topic of intense study due to
the growing importance of addressing social biases in automated prediction. Consequently, a host of fair classiﬁcation
algorithms have been proposed that learn from data (Bellamy et al., 2018a; Zafar et al., 2017b; Zhang et al., 2018;
Menon & Williamson, 2018b; Goel et al., 2018; Celis et al.,
2019; Hardt et al., 2016; Fish et al., 2016; Pleiss et al., 2017;
Woodworth et al., 2017; Dwork et al., 2018).
Fair classiﬁers need metrics that capture the extent of similarity in performance for different groups. The performance of
a classiﬁer f for group z can be deﬁned in many ways and a
general deﬁnition that captures the most common group performance metrics in literature is the following: given events
ξ and ξ 0 (that depend on classiﬁer and/or class label Y ), the
performance for group z can be quantiﬁed as Pr[ξ | ξ 0 , z]
(Defn 2.1). For instance, we get group-speciﬁc statistical
rate (a linear metric) by setting ξ := (f =1) and ξ 0 := ∅
and group-speciﬁc false discovery rate (a “linear-fractional
metric” (Celis et al., 2019)) by setting ξ := (Y =0) and
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
USA 2 Tsinghua University, China 3 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, USA. Correspondence to: L. Elisa Celis
<elisa.celis@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ξ 0 := (f =1). Then, given a performance function, fairness
constraints in classiﬁcation impose a feasible classiﬁer to
have similar performance for all groups, by constraining the
performance difference to be within τ of each other either
multiplicatively or additively. For any ﬁxed group performance function, multiplicative constraints imply additive
constraints and, hence, are traditionally studied (Calders &
Verwer, 2010; Zafar et al., 2017a;b; Menon & Williamson,
2018a; Celis et al., 2019) (see also Remark 2.2).
The choice of fairness metric depends on the context and
application. For instance, in a lending setting, statistical rate
metric can capture the disparity in loan approval rate across
gender/race (Comptroller, 2010). In a recidivism assessment setting, false positive rate metric is more relevant as it
captures the disparity in proportion to defendants falsely assigned high-risk across racial groups (Angwin et al., 2016a).
In other settings, e.g., healthcare, where the costs associated
with positive classiﬁcation are large, false discovery rate is
alternately employed to assess the disparity in proportion
to the treated patients who didn’t require treatment across
protected attribute types (Srivastava et al., 2019).
Most of the aforementioned fair classiﬁcation algorithms
crucially assume that one has access to the protected attributes (e.g., race, gender) for training and/or deployment.
Data collection, however, is a complex process and may
contain recording and reporting errors, unintentional or otherwise (Saez et al., 2013). Cleaning the data also requires
making difﬁcult and political decisions along the way, yet
is often necessary especially when it comes to questions of
race, gender, or identity (Nobles, 2000). Further, information about protected attributes may be missing entirely (Data
et al., 2004), or legally prohibited from being used directly,
as in the case of lending applications for non-mortgage products in US (Federal Reserve Bank, 1993). In such cases,
protected attributes can be predicted from other data, however, we know that this process is itself contains errors and
biases (Muthukumar et al., 2018; Buolamwini & Gebru,
2018). The above scenarios raise a challenge for existing
fair classiﬁers as they may not achieve the same fairness as
they would if the data were perfect. This raises the question
of learning fair classiﬁers in the presence of noisy protected
attributes, and has attracted recent attention (Awasthi et al.,
2020; Lamy et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).

