What Are Bayesian Neural Network Posteriors Really Like?

Pavel Izmailov 1 Sharad Vikram 2 Matthew D. Hoffman 2 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract
The posterior over Bayesian neural network
(BNN) parameters is extremely high-dimensional
and non-convex. For computational reasons, researchers approximate this posterior using inexpensive mini-batch methods such as meanfield variational inference or stochastic-gradient
Markov chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC). To investigate foundational questions in Bayesian deep
learning, we instead use full-batch Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) on modern architectures. We
show that (1) BNNs can achieve significant performance gains over standard training and deep
ensembles; (2) a single long HMC chain can provide a comparable representation of the posterior
to multiple shorter chains; (3) in contrast to recent studies, we find posterior tempering is not
needed for near-optimal performance, with little evidence for a “cold posterior” effect, which
we show is largely an artifact of data augmentation; (4) BMA performance is robust to the choice
of prior scale, and relatively similar for diagonal
Gaussian, mixture of Gaussian, and logistic priors;
(5) Bayesian neural networks show surprisingly
poor generalization under domain shift; (6) while
cheaper alternatives such as deep ensembles and
SGMCMC can provide good generalization, their
predictive distributions are distinct from HMC.
Notably, deep ensemble predictive distributions
are similarly close to HMC as standard SGLD,
and closer than standard variational inference.

1. Introduction
Over the last 25 years, there have been several strong arguments favouring a Bayesian approach to deep learning
(e.g., MacKay, 1995; Neal, 1996; Blundell et al., 2015;
Gal, 2016; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020). Bayesian inference
1
New York University 2 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Pavel Izmailov <pi390@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson
<andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for neural networks promises improved predictions, reliable uncertainty estimates, and principled model comparison, naturally supporting active learning, continual learning, and decision-making under uncertainty. The Bayesian
deep learning community has designed multiple successful practical methods inspired by the Bayesian approach
(Blundell et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Welling
& Teh, 2011; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Maddox et al., 2019;
Izmailov et al., 2019; Daxberger et al., 2020), with applications ranging from astrophysics (Cranmer et al., 2021) to
automatic diagnosis of Diabetic Retinopathy (Filos et al.,
2019), click-through rate prediction in advertising (Liu et al.,
2017) and fluid dynamics (Geneva & Zabaras, 2020).
However, inference with modern BNNs is distinctly challenging. We wish to compute a Bayesian model average corresponding to an integral over a multi-million dimensional
multi-modal posterior, with unusual topological properties
like mode-connectivity (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al.,
2018), under severe computational constraints.
There are therefore many unresolved questions about
Bayesian deep learning practice. Variational procedures
typically provide unimodal Gaussian approximations to the
multimodal posterior. Practically successful methods such
as deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Fort
et al., 2019) have a natural Bayesian interpretation (Wilson & Izmailov, 2020), but only represent modes of the
posterior. While Stochastic MCMC (Welling & Teh, 2011;
Chen et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2020b) is computationally
convenient, it could be providing heavily biased estimates
of posterior expectations. Moreover, Wenzel et al. (2020)
question the quality of standard Bayes posteriors, citing
results where “cold posteriors”, raised to a power 1/T with
T < 1, improve performance.
Additionally, Bayesian deep learning methods are typically
evaluated on their ability to generate useful, well-calibrated
predictions on held-out or out-of-distribution data. However,
strong performance on benchmark problems does not imply
that the algorithm accurately approximates the true Bayesian
model average (BMA).
In this paper, we investigate fundamental open questions in
Bayesian deep learning, using multi-chain full-batch Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC, Neal et al., 2011). HMC is
a highly-efficient and well-studied Markov Chain Monte

