Towards Rigorous Interpretations: a Formalisation of Feature Attribution

Darius Afchar 1 2 Romain Hennequin 1 Vincent Guigue 2

Abstract
Feature attribution is often loosely presented
as the process of selecting a subset of relevant
features as a rationale of a prediction. Taskdependent by nature, precise definitions of ”relevance” encountered in the literature are however
not always consistent. This lack of clarity stems
from the fact that we usually do not have access
to any notion of ground-truth attribution and from
a more general debate on what good interpretations are. In this paper we propose to formalise
feature selection/attribution based on the concept
of relaxed functional dependence. In particular,
we extend our notions to the instance-wise setting and derive necessary properties for candidate selection solutions, while leaving room for
task-dependence. By computing ground-truth attributions on synthetic datasets, we evaluate many
state-of-the-art attribution methods and show that,
even when optimised, some fail to verify the proposed properties and provide wrong solutions.

1. Introduction
As the adoption of intelligent algorithms of growing complexity is becoming ubiquitous in our everyday lives, concerns have consequently emerged about the lack of transparency and need for interpretability of these methods (Parliament, 2016). Interpretability is unfortunately somewhat
ill-defined and ill-evaluated (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017;
Lipton, 2018), partly because a wide range of concepts are
encompassed under the same label. One can think of the
protean purposes of interpretations: informativeness, causality, fairness, interactivity, trust, etc (Tintarev and Masthoff,
2007; Arrieta et al., 2020). Nonetheless, there is a consensus
on the fact that interpretations stem from a notion of incompleteness and aim at boosting human understandability. But
viewing understandability in an holistic manner requires
1

Deezer Research, Paris, France 2 LIP6, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Darius Afchar <research@deezer.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

controlling and disentangling every aspect of a model prediction, ranging from how the data is inherently structured,
to what priors are induced by a model architecture, to what
impact can a design choice to present explanations have on
a target audience and in a particular setting.
x3

C
B

D
E

A

x2

x1
H := { x | x1 = 1 }

Figure 1. Intuition of the formalisation Example prediction task
with five points pA , ..., pE in R3 and binary labels blue/red. Note
that, to correctly label point pA as blue, it is sufficient to know that
the point has its coordinate (pA )1 = 1. Indeed, the incomplete
view that x1 = 1, may lead to confuse points pA and pB , but not
the determination of their label (blue). We say that pA functionally
depends on X1 . Since all points in H symmetrically have the same
label, they also share the same dependence in X1 ; by comparison,
this does not hold for other points at x1 = 0. We will see that this
symmetry argument is a necessary property for any instance-wise
feature selection candidate solution.

This may explain why many methods have resorted to proxy
measures of interpretability and have proposed list of general requirements for interpretations - e.g. (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Lundberg and Lee, 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017),
that are sometimes confirmed by user-studies: e.g. sparsity
is widely considered a general desiderata of interpretation.
This process is not always successful (Rudin, 2019). In
fact, many recent works (Adebayo et al., 2018; Serrano
and Smith, 2019; Kindermans et al., 2019; Dombrowski
et al., 2019; Sixt et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020) tend to
suggest that well-established interpretation methods may

