Asymmetric Loss Functions for Learning with Noisy Labels

Xiong Zhou 1 2 Xianming Liu 1 2 Junjun Jiang 1 2 Xin Gao 3 2 Xiangyang Ji 4

Abstract
Robust loss functions are essential for training
deep neural networks with better generalization
power in the presence of noisy labels. Symmetric
loss functions are confirmed to be robust to label
noise. However, the symmetric condition is overly
restrictive. In this work, we propose a new class of
loss functions, namely asymmetric loss functions,
which are robust to learning with noisy labels for
various types of noise. We investigate general theoretical properties of asymmetric loss functions,
including classification calibration, excess risk
bound, and noise tolerance. Meanwhile, we introduce the asymmetry ratio to measure the asymmetry of a loss function. The empirical results show
that a higher ratio would provide better noise tolerance. Moreover, we modify several commonlyused loss functions and establish the necessary
and sufficient conditions for them to be asymmetric. Experimental results on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that asymmetric loss functions can
outperform state-of-the-art methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/hitcszx/ALFs

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks based supervised learning largely relies on massive high-quality labeled data. However, in practice, the annotation process inevitably introduces wrong labels, due to the lack of experts involved
or data from public crowdsourcing platforms (Liu et al.,
2011; Arpit et al., 2017). Empirical studies show that overparameterized deep networks can even fit random labels
(Zhang et al., 2017). When samples are mis-labeled, the network would memorize wrong patterns, leading to impaired
performance in the subsequent inference tasks. Accordingly,
robust learning of classifier in the presence of label noise
has received a lot of attention.
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology 4 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Xianming Liu <csxm@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To alleviate the impact of label noise to classifier learning,
one popular research line is to design noise-tolerant loss
functions. This approach has been pursued in a large body
of work (Long & Servedio, 2008; Wang et al., 2019a; Liu &
Guo, 2020; Lyu & Tsang, 2020; Menon et al., 2020; Feng
et al., 2020) that embraces new losses, especially symmetric loss functions and their variants (Manwani & Sastry,
2013; van Rooyen et al., 2015; Ghosh et al., 2017; Zhang &
Sabuncu, 2018; Wang et al., 2019b; Ma et al., 2020).
Symmetric loss functions were proposed as a sufficient condition such that the risk minimization with respect to the
loss becomes noise-tolerant for binary classification (Manwani & Sastry, 2013). Subsequently, the unhinged loss (van
Rooyen et al., 2015), which is equivalent to a scaled Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) (Ghosh et al., 2017), was proved
to be the only convex loss function that is strongly robust
for symmetric label noise (SLN). Ghosh et al. (Ghosh
et al., 2017) theoretically demonstrated that a loss function
would be inherently tolerant to SLN as long as it satisfies
the symmetric condition. The sufficient condition was then
extended for multi-class classification (Ghosh et al., 2017)
and was emphasized in the BER minimization and AUC
maximization from corrupted labels (Charoenphakdee et al.,
2019). However, MAE treats every sample equally, leading to significantly longer training time before convergence.
This drawback motivates some works to improve MAE,
which follows the principle of combining the robustness of
MAE and the fast convergence of Cross Entropy (CE). For
instance, (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018) advocated the use of
a more general class of noise-robust loss functions, called
Generalized Cross Entropy (GCE), which encompasses both
MAE and CE. Inspired by the symmetric KL-divergence,
the symmetric cross entropy (SCE) (Wang et al., 2019b)
was proposed to combine CE with a noise tolerance term,
namely Reverse Cross Entropy (RCE). Ma et al. (Ma et al.,
2020) theoretically demonstrated that by applying a simple
normalization, any loss can be made robust to noisy labels.
However, the normalized loss functions are not sufficient to
train accurate DNNs and are prone to encounter the gradient
explosion problem.
From the above review, it can be found that the fitting ability
of the existing symmetric loss functions is restricted by the
symmetric condition (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018; Charoenphakdee et al., 2019). However, the symmetric condition

