Geometric Convergence of Elliptical Slice Sampling

Viacheslav Natarovskii 1 Daniel Rudolf 1 Björn Sprungk 2

Abstract
For Bayesian learning, given likelihood function
and Gaussian prior, the elliptical slice sampler,
introduced by Murray, Adams and MacKay 2010,
provides a tool for the construction of a Markov
chain for approximate sampling of the underlying
posterior distribution. Besides of its wide applicability and simplicity its main feature is that no
tuning is required. Under weak regularity assumptions on the posterior density we show that the
corresponding Markov chain is geometrically ergodic and therefore yield qualitative convergence
guarantees. We illustrate our result for Gaussian
posteriors as they appear in Gaussian process regression, as well as in a setting of a multi-modal
distribution. Remarkably, our numerical experiments indicate a dimension-independent performance of elliptical slice sampling even in situations where our ergodicity result does not apply.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modeling provides a versatile tool in the analysis of data and allows for statistical inference. In particular,
in Bayesian approaches one is able to quantify model and
prediction uncertainty by extracting knowledge from the
posterior distribution through sampling. The generation of
exact samples w.r.t. the posterior distribution is usually quite
difficult, since it is in most scenarios only known up to a
normalizing constant. Let % : Rd → (0, ∞) be determined
by a likelihood function given some data (which we omit in
the following for simplicity) as mapping from the parameter
space into the non-negative reals and let µ0 = N (0, C) be
a Gaussian prior distribution on Rd with non-degenerate
covariance matrix C, such that the posterior distribution µ

on Rd takes the form
µ(dx) =

%(x)
µ0 (dx),
Z

Z
Z :=

%(x) µ0 (dx).

(1)

Rd

For convenience, we abbreviate the former relation between the measures µ(dx) and %(x)µ0 (dx) as µ(dx) ∝
%(x)µ0 (dx).
A standard approach for generating approximate samples
w.r.t. µ is given by Markov chain Monte Carlo. The idea is
to construct a Markov chain, which has µ as its stationary
and limit distribution1 . For this purpose in machine learning (and computational statistics in general) MetropolisHastings algorithms and slice sampling algorithms (which
include Gibbs sampling) are classical tools, see, e.g., (Neal,
1993; Andrieu et al., 2003; Neal, 2003).
Murray, Adams and MacKay in (Murray et al., 2010) introduced the elliptical slice sampler. On the one hand it
is based on a Metropolis-Hastings method suggested by
Neal (Neal, 1999) (nowadays also known as preconditioned
Crank-Nicolson Metropolis (Cotter et al., 2013; Rudolf &
Sprungk, 2018)) and on the other hand it is a modification
of slice sampling with stepping-out and shrinkage (Neal,
2003). Elliptical slice sampling is illustrated in (Murray
et al., 2010) on a number of applications, such as Gaussian regression, Gaussian process classification and a Log
Gaussian Cox process. Apart from its simplicity and wide
applicability the main advantage of the suggested algorithm
is that it performs well in practice and no tuning is necessary.
In addition to that in many scenarios it appears as a building block and/or influenced methodological development of
sampling approaches (Fagan et al., 2016; Hahn et al., 2019;
Bierkens et al., 2020; Murray & Graham, 2016; Nishihara
et al., 2014).

1
Institute for Mathematical Stochastics, Georg-AugustUniversität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 2 Faculty of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Technische Universität
Bergakademie Freiberg, Germany. Correspondence to: Viacheslav Natarovskii <vnataro@uni-goettingen.de>, Daniel
Rudolf <daniel.rudolf@uni-goettingen.de>, Björn Sprungk
<bjoern.sprungk@math.tu-freiberg.de>.

However, despite the arguments for being reversible w.r.t.
the desired posterior in (Murray et al., 2010) there is, to
our knowledge, no theory guaranteeing indeed convergence
of the corresponding Markov chain. Under a tail and a
weak boundedness assumption on % we derive a small set
and Lyapunov function which imply geometric ergodicity
by standard theorems for Markov chains on general state
spaces, see e.g. chapter 15 in (Meyn & Tweedie, 2009)

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
Limit distribution in the sense that for n → ∞ the distribution
of the nth random variable of the Markov chain converges to µ.

