What Does LIME Really See in Images?

Damien Garreau 1 Dina Mardaoui 2

Abstract
The performance of modern algorithms on certain
computer vision tasks such as object recognition
is now close to that of humans. This success
was achieved at the price of complicated architectures depending on millions of parameters and it
has become quite challenging to understand how
particular predictions are made. Interpretability
methods propose to give us this understanding. In
this paper, we study LIME, perhaps one of the
most popular. On the theoretical side, we show
that when the number of generated examples is
large, LIME explanations are concentrated around
a limit explanation for which we give an explicit
expression. We further this study for elementary
shape detectors and linear models. As a consequence of this analysis, we uncover a connection
between LIME and integrated gradients, another
explanation method. More precisely, the LIME
explanations are similar to the sum of integrated
gradients over the superpixels used in the preprocessing step of LIME.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks and deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) in particular have changed the way computers
look at images (Schmidhuber, 2015). Many specific tasks
in computer vision such as character recognition and object recognition are now routinely achieved by personal
computers with human-like accuracy. The success of these
algorithms seems partly due to the great complexity of the
models they encode, the most recent relying on hundreds of
layers and millions of parameters.
While the accuracy is often the only relevant metric for
practitioners, there are numerous situations where one is
not satisfied if the model is making good predictions for the
wrong reasons. We would like to know why the model makes
1
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, LJAD, France
Polytech Nice.
Correspondence to: Damien Garreau
<damien.garreau@univ-cotedazur.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a particular prediction. Responding to this emerging need,
many interpretability methods have appeared in the last five
years. Among them, model agnostic methods aim to provide
to the user meaningful insights on the inner working of a
specific algorithm without making any specific assumption
on the architecture of the model. We refer to Adadi and
Berrada (2018); Guidotti et al. (2018) and Linardatos et al.
(2021) for recent review papers.

Figure 1. Explaining a prediction with LIME. In this example,
the function to be explained f is the likelihood, according to
the InceptionV3 network, that the input image ξ contains a lion.
After a run of LIME with default parameters, the top five positive
coefficients are highlighted in the right panel.

In this paper, we study the image version of LIME (Local
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations, Ribeiro et al.,
2016). Let us recall briefly how it operates: in order to
explain the prediction of a model f for an example ξ, LIME
1. decomposes ξ in d superpixels, that is, small homogeneous image patches;
2. creates a number of new images x1 , . . . , xn by randomly turning on and off these superpixels;
3. queries the model, getting predictions yi = f (xi );
4. builds a local weighted surrogate model β̂n fitting the
yi s to the presence or absence of superpixels.
Each coefficient of β̂n is associated to a superpixel of the
original image ξ and, intuitively, the more positive the more
important the superpixel is for the prediction at ξ according
to LIME. Generally, the user visualizes β̂n by highlighting

