AlphaNet: Improved Training of Supernets with Alpha-Divergence
Dilin Wang 1 Chengyue Gong * 2 Meng Li * 1 Qiang Liu 2 Vikas Chandra 1

Abstract
Weight-sharing neural architecture search (NAS)
is an effective technique for automating efficient
neural architecture design. Weight-sharing NAS
builds a supernet that assembles all the architectures as its sub-networks and jointly trains the
supernet with the sub-networks. The success
of weight-sharing NAS heavily relies on distilling the knowledge of the supernet to the subnetworks. However, we find that the widely
used distillation divergence, i.e., KL divergence,
may lead to student sub-networks that overestimate or under-estimate the uncertainty of the
teacher supernet, leading to inferior performance
of the sub-networks. In this work, we propose to improve the supernet training with a
more generalized ↵-divergence. By adaptively
selecting the ↵-divergence, we simultaneously
prevent the over-estimation or under-estimation
of the uncertainty of the teacher model. We
apply the proposed ↵-divergence based supernets training to both slimmable neural networks and weight-sharing NAS, and demonstrate significant improvements. Specifically,
our discovered model family, AlphaNet, outperforms prior-art models on a wide range of
FLOPs regimes, including BigNAS, Once-forAll networks, and AttentiveNAS. We achieve
ImageNet top-1 accuracy of 80.0% with only
444M FLOPs. Our code and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/AlphaNet.

1. Introduction
Designing accurate and computationally efficient neural
network architectures is an important but challenging task.
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook 2 Department of Computer
Science, The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence
to: Dilin Wang <wdilin@fb.com>, Chengyue Gong <cygong@cs.utexas.edu>, Meng Li <meng.li@fb.com>, Qiang Liu
<lqiang@cs.utexas.edu>, Vikas Chandra <vchandra@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Neural architecture search (NAS) automates the neural network design by exploring an enormous architecture space
and achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on various applications including image classification (Zoph &
Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018), object detection (Ghiasi et al.,
2019), semantic segmentation (Zhang et al., 2019) and natural language processing (Wang et al., 2020b).
Conventional NAS approaches can be prohibitively expensive as hundreds of candidate architectures need to be
trained from scratch and evaluated (e.g., Tan et al., 2019;
Zoph et al., 2018). The supernet based approach has recently emerged to be a promising approach for efficient
NAS. A supernet assembles all candidate architectures into
a weight sharing network with each architecture corresponding to one sub-network. By training the sub-networks
simultaneously with the supernet, different architectures
can directly inherit the weights from the supernet for evaluation and deployment, which eliminates the huge cost of
training or fine-tuning each architecture individually.
Though promising, simultaneously optimizing all subnetworks with weight-sharing is highly challenging for the
supernet training (e.g., Yu et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2019a).
To stabilize the supernet training and improve the performance of sub-networks, one widely used approach is inplace knowledge distillation (KD) (Yu & Huang, 2019). Inplace KD leverages the soft labels predicted by the largest
sub-network in the supernet to supervise all the other subnetworks. By distilling the knowledge of the teacher
model, the performance of the sub-networks can be improved significantly (Yu & Huang, 2019; Yu et al., 2020).
Standard knowledge distillation uses KL divergence to
measure the discrepancy between the teacher and student
networks. However, KL divergence penalizes the student
model much more when it fails to cover one or more local
modes of the teacher model (Murphy, 2012). Hence, the
student model tends to over-estimate the uncertainty of the
teacher model and suffers from inaccurate approximation
of the most important mode, i.e., the correct prediction of
the teacher model.
To further enhance the supernet training, we propose to
replace the KL divergence with a more generalized ↵divergence (Amari, 1985; Minka et al., 2005). Specifically, by adaptively controlling ↵ in the proposed diver-

