Graph Convolution for Semi-Supervised Classification: Improved Linear
Separability and Out-of-Distribution Generalization

Aseem Baranwal 1 Kimon Fountoulakis 1 Aukosh Jagannath 2

Abstract
Recently there has been increased interest in semisupervised classification in the presence of graphical information. A new class of learning models
has emerged that relies, at its most basic level, on
classifying the data after first applying a graph
convolution. To understand the merits of this approach, we study the classification of a mixture
of Gaussians, where the data corresponds to the
node attributes of a stochastic block model. We
show that graph convolution extends the regime
in which the data
√ is linearly separable by a factor
of roughly 1/ D, where D is the expected degree of a node, as compared to the mixture model
data on its own. Furthermore, we find that the
linear classifier obtained by minimizing the crossentropy loss after the graph convolution generalizes to out-of-distribution data where the unseen
data can have different intra- and inter-class edge
probabilities from the training data.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised classification is one of the most important
topics in machine learning and artificial intelligence. Recently, researchers extended classification models to include
relational information (Hamilton, 2020), where relations are
captured by a graph. The attributes of the nodes capture
information about the nodes, while the edges of the graph
capture relations among the nodes. The reason behind this
trend is that many applications require the combination of
both the graph and the node attributes, such as recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018), predicting the properties
of compounds or molecules (Gilmer et al., 2017; Scarselli
et al., 2009), predicting states of physical objects (Battaglia
1
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, Department of Applied Mathematics, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Aseem Baranwal
<aseem.baranwal@uwaterloo.ca>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2016), and classifying types of nodes in knowledge
graphs (Kipf & Welling, 2017).
The most popular models use graph convolution (Kipf &
Welling, 2017) where one averages the attributes of a node
with those of its neighbors.1 This allows the model to make
predictions about a node using the attributes of its neighbors
instead of only using the node’s attributes. Despite the common perception among practitioners (Chen et al., 2019) that
graph convolution can improve the performance of models
for semi-supervised classification, we are not aware of any
work that studies the benefits of graph convolution in improving classifiability of the data as compared to traditional
classification methods, such as logistic regression, nor are
we aware of any work on its generalization performance on
out-of-distribution data for semi-supervised classification.
To understand these issues, we study the performance of
a graph convolution on a simple classification model with
node attributes that are correlated with the class information, namely semi-supervised classification for the contextual stochastic block model (Binkiewicz et al., 2017; Deshpande et al., 2018). The contextual stochastic block model
(CSBM) is a coupling of the standard stochastic block model
(SBM) (Holland et al., 1983) with a Gaussian mixture model.
In this model, each class in the graph corresponds to a different Gaussian component of the mixture model, which yields
the distribution for the attributes of the nodes. For a precise
definition of the model see Section 3. The CSBM allows us
to explore a range of questions related to linear separability
and, in particular, to probe how various methods perform as
one varies both the noise level of the mixture model, namely
the distance between the means, and the noise level of the
underlying graph, namely the difference between intra- and
inter-class edge probabilities. We focus here on the simple
case of two classes where the key issues are particularly
transparent. We expect that our methods apply readily to the
multi-class setting (see Section 6 for more on this).
Let us now briefly summarize our main findings. In the
following, let d be the dimension of the mixture model (the
number of attributes of a node in the graph), n the number
1

Other types of graph convolution exist, for simplicity we focus
on averaging since it’s one of the most popular.

