From Local to Global Norm Emergence:
Dissolving Self-reinforcing Substructures with Incremental Social Instruments

Yiwei Liu 1 2 3 4 Jiamou Liu 4 Kaibin Wan 1 Zhan Qin 5 6 Zijian Zhang 2 4 Bakhadyr Khoussainov 3 4
Liehuang Zhu 2

Abstract
Norm emergence is a process where agents in a
multi-agent system establish self-enforcing conformity through repeated interactions. When such
interactions are confined to a social topology,
several self-reinforcing substructures (SRS) may
emerge within the population. This prevents a formation of a global norm. We propose incremental
social instruments (ISI) to dissolve these SRSs by
creating ties between agents. Establishing ties requires some effort and cost. Hence, it is worth to
design methods that build a small number of ties
yet dissolve the SRSs. By using the notion of information entropy, we propose an indicator called
the BA-ratio that measures the current SRSs. We
find that by building ties with minimal BA-ratio,
our ISI is effective in facilitating the global norm
emergence. We explain this through our experiments and theoretical results. Furthermore, we
propose the small-degree principle in minimising
the BA-ratio that helps us to design efficient ISI
algorithms for finding the optimal ties. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world network
topologies demonstrate that our adaptive ISI is
efficient at dissolving SRS.

1. Introduction
From greeting etiquette and driving habits to personal conducts in workplace, social norms shape behaviors that are
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China 2 School of Cyberspace Science
and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China 4 School
of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand 5 Institute of Cyberspace Research, Zhejiang University,
Zhejiang, China 6 Ant Group - Zhejiang University Data Security
Joint Lab, China. Correspondence to: Zijian Zhang <zhangzijian@bit.edu.cn>, Liehuang Zhu <liehuangz@bit.edu.cn >.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

generally accepted by a society (Morris-Martin et al., 2020;
Santos et al., 2018). Online societies such as those facilitated by Facebook, Twitter, and Reddit present large platforms for expressing vastly different opinions and practices.
In a decentralized online society, social norms are often
organically grown. Take, as examples, the spread of Internet memes (Bauckhage, 2011) and the evolving narratives
of emoji (Miller et al., 2016). The decentralized nature of
open platforms leaves open the possibility for social bots
to manipulate public opinion, disrupt communication, and
influence public sentiment (Ferrara et al., 2016). Norm
emergence is the study of the process in which social norms
arise naturally through the interactions between individuals
of the society. Understanding norm emergence in diverse
societies is important as norms regulate communication,
help alleviate conflicts, enhance coordination, and ensure
meeting societies’ goals (Levin, 2002).
To capture the essence of norm emergence, imagine an individual who faces several possible actions, among which
only one is to be taken. The decision, which actions is taken,
depends on the interactions between this individual and others in the network. One can naturally model this scenario as
a multi-agent system (MAS) (Jiang & Jiang, 2013). Here,
individuals are agents who can internalize sensory input
and derive actions autonomously. Through interacting with
other agents, a type of self-enforcing behaviors, for instance
a social norm, may be adopted by every agent. One represents inter-agent interactions as games that contain multiple
equilibria. A norm is then defined as one of these equilibria which is accepted by every agent in the MAS (Young,
1996). Norm emergence is then the process that leads to the
establishment of such norm.
Sen and Airiau (Sen & Airiau, 2007) proposed the social learning mechanism. This is a simple yet powerful
paradigm for norm emergence. At every iteration, selected
agents participate in a fixed stage game through trial-anderror. Such games are meant to simulate repeated interactions between agents. After observing the outcomes of
their games, these agents accumulate their experiences with
a learning mechanism. The experience will, in turn, direct their game plays in subsequent iterations. The process

