LogME: Practical Assessment of Pre-trained Models for Transfer Learning

Kaichao You∗ 1 Yong Liu∗ 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract
This paper studies task adaptive pre-trained model
selection, an underexplored problem of assessing
pre-trained models for the target task and select
best ones from the model zoo without fine-tuning.
A few pilot works addressed the problem in transferring supervised pre-trained models to classification tasks, but they cannot handle emerging unsupervised pre-trained models or regression tasks.
In pursuit of a practical assessment method, we
propose to estimate the maximum value of label
evidence given features extracted by pre-trained
models. Unlike the maximum likelihood, the maximum evidence is immune to over-fitting, while
its expensive computation can be dramatically reduced by our carefully designed algorithm. The
Logarithm of Maximum Evidence (LogME) can
be used to assess pre-trained models for transfer
learning: a pre-trained model with a high LogME
value is likely to have good transfer performance.
LogME is fast, accurate, and general, characterizing itself as the first practical method for assessing pre-trained models. Compared with bruteforce fine-tuning, LogME brings at most 3000×
speedup in wall-clock time and requires only 1%
memory footprint. It outperforms prior methods
by a large margin in their setting and is applicable
to new settings. It is general enough for diverse
pre-trained models (supervised pre-trained and unsupervised pre-trained), downstream tasks (classification and regression), and modalities (vision
and language). Code is available at this repository:
https://github.com/thuml/LogME.

trained with large-scale supervised data (Deng et al., 2009;
Russakovsky et al., 2015) and specialized computational
devices (Jouppi et al., 2017). These trained neural networks,
also known as pre-trained models, not only work well on
tasks they are intended for but also produce generic representations (Donahue et al., 2014) that benefit downstream
tasks such as object detection (Girshick et al., 2014).
Apart from serving as fixed feature extractors, pre-trained
models can be fine-tuned (Yosinski et al., 2014; He et al.,
2019) to serve downstream tasks better. The transfer learning paradigm “pre-training → fine-tuning” enjoys tremendous success in both vision (Kornblith et al., 2019) and
language (Devlin et al., 2019) communities, and continues
to expand to communities like geometric learning (Hu et al.,
2020). Transfer of pre-trained models has become one of
the cornerstones of deep learning.
Nowadays, there are numerous public pre-trained models
offered by PyTorch (Benoit et al., 2019), TensorFlow (Abadi
et al., 2016) and third-party libraries like HuggingFace
Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020). When a practitioner wants
to employ transfer learning to solve a specific task, the first
problem is to select a good pre-trained model to start from.
The problem is non-trivial and task adaptive, considering
that different tasks favor different pre-trained models. Figure 1 intuitively illustrates the problem.
Model Zoo

Transferability
Assessment
Target Data

Potentially Best Model

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of task adaptive pre-trained model selection.

Human performance on many recognition tasks has been
surpassed by deep neural networks (He et al., 2015; 2016)

The problem challenges researchers to develop a practical
assessment method that is fast, accurate and general. It
should be fast enough compared to brute-force fine-tuning
all available pre-trained models (Zamir et al., 2018), should
be accurate enough so that potentially best models can be
identified, and should be general enough to tackle a wide
variety of common learning scenarios.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China.
Kaichao You <youkaichao@gmail.com>. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Despite its practical significance, there is limited guidance

