Benchmarks, Algorithms, and Metrics for Hierarchical Disentanglement

Andrew Slavin Ross 1 Finale Doshi-Velez 1

Abstract
In representation learning, there has been recent interest in developing algorithms to disentangle the ground-truth generative factors behind
a dataset, and metrics to quantify how fully this
occurs. However, these algorithms and metrics often assume that both representations and groundtruth factors are flat, continuous, and factorized,
whereas many real-world generative processes involve rich hierarchical structure, mixtures of discrete and continuous variables with dependence
between them, and even varying intrinsic dimensionality. In this work, we develop benchmarks,
algorithms, and metrics for learning such hierarchical representations.

able (Locatello et al., 2018), and it seems unlikely that continuous, factorized, fixed-dimensional representations are
the optimal choice for modeling many real-world generative
processes, which are often highly structured, with nested
parameters that only become active in particular cases.

1. Introduction

As a concrete example, consider the problem of learning
representations of medical phenotypes of patients with and
without diabetes mellitus, a complex disease with multiple
types and subtypes (American Diabetes Association, 2005).
Some underlying factors of phenotype variation—as well
as the intrinsic complexity of these variations—are likely
specific to the disease, its types, or its subtypes (Ahlqvist
et al., 2018). A representation that faithfully modeled the
true factors of variation would need to be deeply hierarchical, with some dimensions only active for certain subtypes.
Ideally, it also should also be possible to learn such representations even if these subtypes (and the number of dimensions
needed to parameterize them) are unknown.

Autoencoders aim to learn structure in data by compressing it to a lower-dimensional representation with minimal
loss of information. Although they have proven useful in
many applications (LeCun et al., 2015), the individual dimensions of their representations are often inscrutable, even
when the underlying data is generated by simple processes.
Motivated by needs for interpretability (Alvarez-Melis &
Jaakkola, 2018; Marx et al., 2019), fairness (Creager et al.,
2019), and generalizability (Bengio et al., 2013), as well
as a basic intuition that representations should model the
data correctly, a subfield has emerged which applies representation learning algorithms to synthetic datasets and
checks how well representation dimensions “disentangle”
the known ground-truth factors behind the dataset.

Our approach in this paper is ambitious: we introduce (1) a
flexible framework for modeling deep hierarchical structure
in datasets, (2) novel algorithms for learning both structure
and structured autoencoders entirely from data, which we
apply to (3) novel benchmark datasets, and evaluate with (4)
novel hierarchical disentanglement metrics. Our framework
is based on the idea that data may lie on multiple manifolds
with different intrinsic dimensionalities, and that certain
(nested groups of) dimensions may only be active for a
subset of the data. Though at first glance this approach
seems it should worsen, not improve, identifiability, our
structure assumptions also serve as an inductive bias that
empirically help us learn representations that more faithfully
(and explicitly) model ground-truth generative processes.

Perhaps the most common disentanglement approach has
been to learn continuous vector representations whose dimensions are statistically independent (and evaluate them
using metrics that assume ground-truth factors are also independent), reasoning that factorization is a useful proxy
(Ridgeway, 2016; Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018;
Kim & Mnih, 2018). However, this problem is not identifi1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Andrew Slavin Ross <andrew ross@g.harvard.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2. Related Work
In this section, we review work related to our notion of “hierarchical disentangled representations.” However, there are
many notions of hierarchy that can be introduced into representations (or into definitions of disentanglement), some
of which have little in common except a shift in focus away
from flatness or factorization.
Still, the problem of learning a flat, factorized representation
has received significant attention over the years. Much of the

