On the Predictability of Pruning Across Scales

Jonathan Rosenfeld 1 Jonathan Frankle 1 Michael Carbin 1 Nir Shavit 1

Abstract
We show that the error of iteratively magnitudepruned networks empirically follows a scaling law
with interpretable coefficients that depend on the
architecture and task. We functionally approximate the error of the pruned networks, showing it
is predictable in terms of an invariant tying width,
depth, and pruning level, such that networks of
vastly different pruned densities are interchangeable. We demonstrate the accuracy of this approximation over orders of magnitude in depth,
width, dataset size, and density. We show that
the functional form holds (generalizes) for large
scale data (e.g., ImageNet) and architectures (e.g.,
ResNets). As neural networks become ever larger
and costlier to train, our findings suggest a framework for reasoning conceptually and analytically
about a standard method for unstructured pruning.

1. Introduction
For decades, neural network pruning—eliminating unwanted parts of a network—has been a popular approach
for reducing network sizes or the computational demands
of inference (LeCun et al., 1990; Reed, 1993; Han et al.,
2015). In practice, pruning can reduce the parameter-counts
of contemporary models by 2x (Gordon et al., 2020) to 5x
(Renda et al., 2020) with no increase in error. More than 80
pruning techniques have been published in the past decade
(Blalock et al., 2020), but, despite this enormous volume of
research, there remains little guidance on important aspects
of pruning. Consider a seemingly simple question one might
ask when using a particular pruning technique:
Given a family of neural networks (e.g., ResNets on ImageNet of various widths and depths), which family member
should we prune (and by how much) to obtain the network
with the smallest parameter-count such that error does not
exceed some threshold k ?
1

MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
<jonsr@csail.mit.edu>.

Jonathan Rosenfeld

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

As a first try, we could attempt to answer this question using
brute force: we could prune every member of a network
family (i.e., perform grid search over widths, depth, and
pruned densities) and select the smallest pruned network
that satisfies our constraint on error. However, depending on
the technique, pruning one network (let alone grid searching)
could take days or weeks on expensive hardware.
If we want a more efficient alternative, we will need to make
assumptions about pruned networks: namely, that there is
some structure to the way that their error behaves. For
example, that pruning a particular network changes the error
in a predictable way. Or that changing its width or depth
changes the error when pruning it in a predictable way. We
could then train a smaller number of networks, characterize
this structure, and estimate the answer to our question.
We have reason to believe that such structure does exist for
certain pruning methods, since there are already techniques
that take advantage of it implicitly. For example, Cai et al.
(2019) create a single neural network architecture that can
be scaled down to many different sizes; to choose which subnetwork to deploy, Cai et al. train an auxiliary, black-box
neural network to predict subnetwork performance. Although this black-box approach implies the existence of
structure for this pruning method, it does not reveal this
structure explicitly or make it possible to reason analytically
in a fashion that could answer our research question.
For other aspects of deep learning beyond pruning,
such structure has been observed—and, further, codified
explicitly—yielding insights and predictions in the form of
scaling laws. Tan & Le (2019) design the EfficientNet family
by developing a heuristic for predicting efficient tradeoffs
between depth, width, and resolution. Hestness et al. (2017)
observe a power-law relationship between dataset size and
the error of vision and NLP models. Rosenfeld et al. (2020)
use a power law to predict the error of all variations of architecture families and dataset sizes, jointly, for computer
vision and natural language processing settings. Kaplan et al.
(2020) develop a similar power law for language models
that incorporates the computational cost of training.
Inspired by this work, we address our research question
about pruning by finding a scaling law to predict the error
of pruned networks. We focus on a pruning method called
iterative magnitude pruning (IMP), where weights with the

