Order Matters: Probabilistic Modeling of Node Sequence
for Graph Generation

Xiaohui Chen * 1 Xu Han * 1 Jiajing Hu 1 Francisco J. R. Ruiz 2 Liping Liu 1

Abstract
A graph generative model defines a distribution
over graphs. One type of generative model is
constructed by autoregressive neural networks,
which sequentially add nodes and edges to generate a graph. However, the likelihood of a graph
under the autoregressive model is intractable, as
there are numerous sequences leading to the given
graph; this makes maximum likelihood estimation challenging. Instead, in this work we derive
the exact joint probability over the graph and the
node ordering of the sequential process. From
the joint, we approximately marginalize out the
node orderings and compute a lower bound on
the log-likelihood using variational inference. We
train graph generative models by maximizing this
bound, without using the ad-hoc node orderings
of previous methods. Our experiments show that
the log-likelihood bound is significantly tighter
than the bound of previous schemes. Moreover,
the models fitted with the proposed algorithm can
generate high-quality graphs that match the structures of target graphs not seen during training.

1. Introduction
Random graphs have been a prominent topic in statistics and
graph theory for decades. An early and influential model of
random graphs is the Erdős–Rényi model (Erdős & Rényi,
1960). Since then, various models have been proposed to
characterize different global statistics of graphs or networks
in the real world (Watts & Strogatz, 1998; Nowicki & Snijders, 2001; Cai et al., 2016). However, these models are
usually not designed for capturing local structures of a graph,
such as bonds in a molecule graph.
Autoregressive generative models (You et al., 2018; Li et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Tufts
University, Medford, MA, USA. 2 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Xiaohui Chen <xiaohui.chen@tufts.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2018; Liao et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2020; Goyal et al., 2020;
Yuan et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020) are designed to learn fine
structures in graph data. These models generate a graph
by sequentially adding nodes and edges. Since a graph is
invariant to node permutations (Veitch & Roy, 2015), there
are multiple sequences of actions leading to the same graph.
When fitting an autoregressive model to data, a particular
node ordering π of the graph G (called “generation order”)
is used to pin down a single generation sequence of G, such
as depth-first search (DFS) or breadth-first search (BFS)
ordering. The model is then fitted assuming the graph was
generated under such ordering π. Autoregressive models
of graphs typically use deep learning tools (Guo & Zhao,
2020), such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), to learn
flexible and complex patterns from data.
Choosing a specific ordering π does not rigorously correspond to maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). Indeed, to
fit the parameters of an autoregressive model via MLE, we
need the likelihood of G under the model. One approach for
computing p(G)
P is to sum over all possible node orderings
π, p(G) = π p(G, π). However, this approach presents
some challenges. First, a generation sequence of G corresponds to multiple node orderings when G has non-trivial
automorphisms (You et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2019), which
require us to carefully derive the joint p(G, π) from the
model’s distribution of generation sequences. Second, the
marginalization is intractable in practice due to the number
of terms in the sum. As a consequence, p(G) cannot be
easily obtained. This does not only make MLE intractable,
but also implies that generative models cannot be evaluated
in terms of log-likelihood. Instead, other evaluation metrics such as degree distribution are used, but these metrics
exhibit some issues for complex graphs (Liu et al., 2019).
In this work, we provide a method to estimate the marginal
log-likelihood, enabling standard statistical model checking
and comparison. It also opens the door for other learning
tasks that require the log-likelihood of graph data, such as
density-based anomaly detection.
We aim at consolidating the foundation of autoregressive
graph generative models. In particular, we examine two
types of models: one that generates a graph through an
evolving graph sequence and one that generates an adja-

