Combining Pessimism with Optimism for Robust and Efficient
Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Sebastian Curi 1 Ilija Bogunovic 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
In real-world tasks, reinforcement learning (RL)
agents frequently encounter situations that are not
present during training time. To ensure reliable
performance, the RL agents need to exhibit
robustness against worst-case situations. The
robust RL framework addresses this challenge
via a worst-case optimization between an agent
and an adversary. Previous robust RL algorithms
are either sample inefficient, lack robustness
guarantees, or do not scale to large problems.
We propose the Robust Hallucinated UpperConfidence RL (RH-UCRL) algorithm to provably
solve this problem while attaining near-optimal
sample complexity guarantees. RH-UCRL is a
model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
algorithm that effectively distinguishes between
epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty, and efficiently explores both the agent and adversary
decision spaces during policy learning. We scale
RH-UCRL to complex tasks via neural networks
ensemble models as well as neural network
policies. Experimentally, we demonstrate that
RH-UCRL outperforms other robust deep RL algorithms in a variety of adversarial environments.

1. Introduction
A central challenge when deploying Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents in real environments is their robustness
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). As a motivating example,
consider designing a braking system on an autonomous
car. As this is a highly complex task, we want to learn
a policy that performs this maneuver. Even if various
real-world conditions can be simulated during the training
time, it is infeasible to consider all possible ones such as
road conditions, brightness, tire pressure, laden weight, or
actuator wear, as these can all vary over time in potentially
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Sebastian Curi <sebastian.curi@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

unpredictable ways. The main goal is then to learn a policy
that provably brakes in a robust fashion so that, even if
faced with new conditions, it performs reliably. Borrowing
from the robust control perspective (e.g, as considered
in H∞ control Başar & Bernhard (2008)), we model
robustness with an adversary that is allowed to perform the
worst-case disturbance for the given policy.
While there are theoretical approaches for robust RL that
offer sample complexity guarantees (see Section 2), the
existing algorithms are highly impractical. On the other
hand, there are empirically motivated heuristic approaches
that lack provable robustness. We bridge this gap by
proposing an algorithm that simultaneously enjoys rigorous
theoretical guarantees, yet can be applied to complex tasks.
We develop the Robust Hallucinated Upper-Confidence
Reinforcement Learning (RH-UCRL) algorithm for obtaining robust RL policies. It relies on a probabilistic model
that can distinguish between epistemic uncertainty (that
arises from the lack of data) and aleatoric uncertainty
(stochastic noise) (Der Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009).
A key algorithmic principle behind RH-UCRL is hallucination: In particular, the agent hallucinates an additional
control input to maximize an optimistic estimate of the
robust performance whereas the adversary hallucinates an
additional control input to minimize a pessimistic estimate
of the robust performance. The amount of “hallucination”
is limited by the epistemic uncertainty of the model and
it decreases as the learning algorithm collects more data.
In a number of experiments, we show that our algorithm
exhibits robust performance and outperforms previous
approaches on various popular RL benchmarks. In Figure 1,
we demonstrate how RH-UCRL outperforms baselines in
a pendulum swing-up control task. In particular, our main
observations are: (i) Robust baselines specifically designed
for different settings do not explore sufficiently and fail to
find a swing-up maneuver; (ii) Non-robust algorithm finds
the swing-up strategy, but as adversarial power increases its
performance significantly deteriorates, whereas RH-UCRL
exhibits higher robustness to worst-case perturbations.
Main contributions. We design RH-UCRL, the first practical provably robust RL algorithm that is: (i) sample-efficient,
(ii) compatible with deep models, and (iii) simulator-free as

