Exponential Reduction in Sample Complexity with
Learning of Ising Model Dynamics

Arkopal Dutt 1 Andrey Y. Lokhov 2 Marc Vuffray 2 Sidhant Misra 2

Abstract
The usual setting for learning the structure and
parameters of a graphical model assumes the availability of independent samples produced from the
corresponding multivariate probability distribution. However, for many models the mixing time
of the respective Markov chain can be very large
and i.i.d. samples may not be obtained. We study
the problem of reconstructing binary graphical
models from correlated samples produced by a
dynamical process, which is natural in many applications. We analyze the sample complexity of
two estimators that are based on the interaction
screening objective and the conditional likelihood
loss. We observe that for samples coming from a
dynamical process far from equilibrium, the sample complexity reduces exponentially compared
to a dynamical process that mixes quickly.

1. Introduction
A graphical model (GM) is a convenient description of a
probabilistic distribution which highlights the structure of
the conditional dependencies existing between a set of random variables. We focus our attention on GMs that can
be expressed as elements of an exponential family and are
naturally associated with a graph that captures the underlying structure of the conditional dependencies. These GMs,
sometimes referred as positive Markov random fields or
Boltzmann distributions, are ubiquitous tools used to describe behaviors of random systems across a broad range
of sciences such as physics (Chaves et al., 2015), biology (Jansen et al.), medicine (Constantinou et al., 2016),
data mining (Buczak & Guven, 2016) and computer vision (Wang et al., 2013). The expression of GMs can
sometimes be deduced from first principles, but often it
has to be learned from observed data accessible through
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA 2 Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Los Alamos, NM, USA. Correspondence to: Andrey Y. Lokhov
<lokhov@lanl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

measurements and experiments. As these samples are timeconsuming or costly to produce, it is not surprising that
efficient GM learning methods play an important role in
various fields such as in the study of gene expression (Marbach et al., 2012), protein interactions (Morcos et al., 2011),
neuroscience (Schneidman et al., 2006a), image processing
(Roth & Black, 2005), sociology (Eagle et al., 2009) and
even grid science (He & Zhang, 2011).
The practical problem of learning a GM from observed data
has a long-standing and rich history that can be traced back
to the seminal work of Chow-Liu (Chow & Liu, 1968). However, it wasn’t until recently and after further developments
that a body of work showed one can efficiently reconstruct
GMs from independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
samples (Bresler, 2015; Vuffray et al., 2016; Hamilton et al.,
2017; Klivans & Meka, 2017; Lokhov et al., 2018; Vuffray
et al., 2019). In these papers, two methods stand out for
being essentially optimal in the number of samples that they
require (Lokhov et al., 2018). These methods are named
Regularized Interaction Screening Estimator (RISE) and
Regularized Pseudo-likelihood Estimator (RPLE) and both
rely on the minimization of a convex loss function. The sample complexity of these estimators scales exponentially with
a quantity named β that represents the maximum magnitude
of the parameters in the GM. This exponential dependence
in β is a fundamental limit of GM learning from i.i.d. samples (Santhanam & Wainwright, 2012) with heavy practical
consequences as it restricts the possibility of learning GMs
when data is scarce. However, the assumption of having
access to independent samples is a modeling hypothesis that
is convenient in many ways, but for which we can challenge
the limits of its validity as it is known that sampling from arbitrary GMs is an NP-hard task. In most of the experimental
settings mentioned earlier, the samples are actually obtained
from a dynamic process whose stationary distribution is captured by a GM. Even the state of the art sampling techniques
for GMs are implemented through Markov Chain MonteCarlo (MCMC) dynamics (Levin & Peres, 2017; Gotovos
et al., 2015). It is therefore natural to wonder if learning a
graphical model from a dynamical process can be beneficial
from a sample complexity standpoint.
Surprisingly, GM learning from dynamics has been rigor-

