An Identifiable Double VAE For Disentangled Representations

Graziano Mita 1 2 Maurizio Filippone 1 Pietro Michiardi 1
z1

Abstract
A large part of the literature on learning disentangled representations focuses on variational autoencoders (VAEs). Recent developments demonstrate that disentanglement cannot be obtained in
a fully unsupervised setting without inductive biases on models and data. However, Khemakhem
et al., AISTATS, 2020 suggest that employing a
particular form of factorized prior, conditionally
dependent on auxiliary variables complementing
input observations, can be one such bias, resulting
in an identifiable model with guarantees on disentanglement. Working along this line, we propose
a novel VAE-based generative model with theoretical guarantees on identifiability. We obtain our
conditional prior over the latents by learning an
optimal representation, which imposes an additional strength on their regularization. We also extend our method to semi-supervised settings. Experimental results indicate superior performance
with respect to state-of-the-art approaches, according to several established metrics proposed in the
literature on disentanglement.

1. Introduction
Representation learning aims at learning data representations such that it is easier to extract useful information when
building classifiers or other predictive tasks (Bengio et al.,
2013). Representation learning seeks to obtain the following
properties: i) expressiveness: a reasonably-sized representation should allow to distinguish among a high number of different input configurations; ii) abstractness: learned representations should capture high-level features; iii) invariance:
representation should be invariant to local changes of input
configurations; iv) interpretability: learned representations
should allow each dimension to be informative about the
1
EURECOM, 06410 Biot (France) 2 SAP Labs France,
06250 Mougins (France).
Correspondence to: Graziano
Mita <graziano.mita@eurecom.fr>, Maurizio Filippone
<maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr>,
Pietro
Michiardi
<pietro.michiardi@eurecom.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

z2

Figure 1. Toy example where each zi controls a given ground-truth
factor: z1 the size, z2 the shape of the 2D objects.

given task. These properties are at the core of disentangled
representations. In disentangled representation learning, the
main assumption is that high-dimensional observations x
are the result of a (possibly nonlinear) transformation applied to a low dimensional latent variable of independent
generative factors, called ground-truth factors, capturing semantically meaningful concepts. Input observations can be
thought of as the result of a probabilistic generative process,
where latent variables z are first sampled from a prior distribution p(z), and then the observations x are sampled from
p(x|z). The goal is to learn a representation of the data that
captures the generative factors. In simple terms, illustrated
in fig. 1, each dimension of a disentangled representation
refers to a single factor of variation.
In this work, we focus on deep generative models, and in
particular those based on variational autoencoders (VAE),
to learn disentangled representations. A well known theoretical result asserts that disentanglement is essentially
impossible in a fully unsupervised setting, without inductive
biases on models and data (Locatello et al., 2019). However, inducing a disentangled structure into the latent space
where z lies is feasible by incorporating auxiliary information u about the ground-truth factors in the model. The
type and amount of supervision define different families
of disentanglement methods, often classified as supervised,
semi-supervised, and weakly-supervised. In most of these
methods, the auxiliary variables u become an integral part
of the latent space. However, recent work (Khemakhem
et al., 2020) indicates that there are alternative strategies
to benefit from auxiliary information, such as using it to
impose a structure on the latent space. In their proposal,
this is done by learning a prior distribution on the latent
space, where the crucial aspect is that this is conditioned
on auxiliary information u that is coupled with every input

