Achieving Near Instance-Optimality and Minimax-Optimality
in Stochastic and Adversarial Linear Bandits Simultaneously

Chung-Wei Lee 1 Haipeng Luo 1 Chen-Yu Wei 1 Mengxiao Zhang 1 Xiaojin Zhang 2

Abstract
In this work, we develop linear bandit algorithms
that automatically adapt to different environments.
By plugging a novel loss estimator into the optimization problem that characterizes the instanceoptimal strategy, our first algorithm not only
achieves nearly instance-optimal regret in stochastic environments, but also works in corrupted environments with additional regret being the amount
of corruption, while the state-of-the-art (Li et al.,
2019) achieves neither instance-optimality nor
the optimal dependence on the corruption amount.
Moreover, by equipping this algorithm with an adversarial component and carefully-designed testings, our second algorithm additionally enjoys
minimax-optimal regret in completely adversarial
environments, which is the first of this kind to our
knowledge. Finally, all our guarantees hold with
high probability, while existing instance-optimal
guarantees only hold in expectation.

adversarial environment, the loss vector can be arbitrary in
each round,√and we are interested in minimax-optimal regret
bound e
O( T ), where e
O(·) hides the problem dimension
and logarithmic factors in T .

1. Introduction

While there are many algorithms obtaining such optimal
bounds in either environment (e.g., (Lattimore & Szepesvari,
2017) in the stochastic setting and (Bubeck et al., 2012) in
the adversarial setting), a natural question is whether there
exists an algorithm achieving both guarantees simultaneously without knowing the type of the environment. Indeed,
the same question has been studied extensively in recent
years for the special case of multi-armed bandits where the
action set is the standard basis (Bubeck & Slivkins, 2012;
Seldin & Slivkins, 2014; Auer & Chiang, 2016; Seldin &
Lugosi, 2017; Wei & Luo, 2018; Zimmert & Seldin, 2019).
Notably, Zimmert & Seldin (2019) developed an algorithm
that is optimal up to universal constants for both stochastic and adversarial environments, and the techniques have
been extended to combinatorial semi-bandits (Zimmert et al.,
2019) and finite-horizon tabular Markov decision processes
(Jin & Luo, 2020). Despite all these advances, however,
it is still open whether similar results can be achieved for
general linear bandits.

We consider the linear bandit problem with a finite and fixed
action set. In this problem, the learner repeatedly selects
an action from the action set and observes her loss whose
mean is the inner product between the chosen action and
an unknown loss vector determined by the environment.
The goal is to minimize the regret, which is the difference
between the learner’s total loss and the total loss of the best
action in hindsight. Two standard environments are heavilystudied in the literature: the stochastic environment and
the adversarial environment. In the stochastic environment,
the loss vector is fixed over time, and we are interested
in instance-optimal regret bounds of order o(T  ) for any
 > 0, where T is the number of rounds and o(·) hides some
instance-dependent constants. On the other hand, in the

On the other hand, another line of recent works study the
robustness of stochastic linear bandit algorithms from a
different perspective and consider a corrupted setting where
an adversary can corrupt the stochastic losses up to some
limited amount C. This was first considered in multi-armed
bandits (Lykouris et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2019; Zimmert
& Seldin, 2019; 2021) and later extended to linear bandits
(Li et al., 2019) and Markov decision processes (Lykouris
et al., 2019; Jin & Luo, 2020). Ideally, the regret of a robust
stochastic algorithm should degrade with an additive term
O(C) in this setting, which is indeed the case in (Gupta
et al., 2019; Zimmert & Seldin, 2019; 2021; Jin & Luo,
2020) for multi-armed bandits or Markov decision processes,
but is not achieved yet for general linear bandits.

* Authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 University of Southern California 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Mengxiao Zhang <mengxiao.zhang@usc.edu>.

In this paper, we make significant progress in this direction
and develop algorithms with near-optimal regret simultaneously for different environments. Our main contributions
are as follows.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

