On Learnability via Gradient Method
for Two-Layer ReLU Neural Networks in Teacher-Student Setting

Shunta Akiyama 1 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract
Deep learning empirically achieves high performance in many applications, but its training dynamics has not been fully understood theoretically. In this paper, we explore theoretical analysis on training two-layer ReLU neural networks
in a teacher-student regression model, in which
a student network learns an unknown teacher
network through its outputs. We show that
with a specific regularization and sufficient overparameterization, the student network can identify
the parameters of the teacher network with high
probability via gradient descent with a norm dependent stepsize even though the objective function is highly non-convex. The key theoretical
tool is the measure representation of the neural
networks and a novel application of a dual certificate argument for sparse estimation on a measure
space. We analyze the global minima and global
convergence property in the measure space.

1. Introduction
Deep learning empirically achieves high performance in
many applications, such as computer vision and speech
recognition. To explain its success from the theoretical view
point, we need to reveal its optimization dynamics and the
generalization ability of the solution that is obtained by a
particular optimization method such as gradient descent.
However, its training dynamics has not been fully understood theoretically and thus the generalization ability of the
solution is still an open question. One of the difficulties of
this problem is non-convexity of the associated optimization
problem (Li et al., 2018) for the optimization aspect, and
the high dimensionality induced by over-parameterization
1
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced
Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Shunta Akiyama <shunta_akiyama@mist.i-tokyo.ac.jp>, Taiji
Suzuki <taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for the generalization aspect. In this study, we tackle these
two problems in a teacher-student problem with the ReLU
activation under an over-parameterized setting. In this setting, we need to take care of the non-differentiability of
the ReLU activation and the over-specification problem due
to the over-parameterization which potentially causes difficulty to show favorable generalization ability such as exact
recovery.
The teacher-student setting is one of the most common settings for theoretical studies, e.g., Tian (2017); Yehudai &
Shamir (2020); Goldt et al. (2019); Safran & Shamir (2018);
Safran et al. (2020); Tian (2020); Suzuki & Akiyama (2021);
Zhang et al. (2019); Zhou et al. (2021) to name a few. Zhong
et al. (2017) studied the case where the teacher and student
have the same width, showed that the strong convexity holds
around the parameters of the teacher network and proposed a
special tensor method for initialization to achieve the global
convergence to the global optimal. However, its global convergence is guaranteed only for a special initialization which
excludes a pure gradient descent method. Moreover, the
over-parameterized setting is not included in their analysis.
Safran & Shamir (2018) empirically showed that gradient
descent is likely to converge to non-global optimal local
minima, even if we prepare a student that has the same size
as the teacher. More recently, Yehudai & Shamir (2020)
showed that even in the simplest case where the teacher and
student have the width one, there exists distributions and
activations in which gradient descent fails to learn. Safran
et al. (2020) showed the strong convexity around the parameters of the teacher network in the case where the teacher
and student have the same width for Gaussian inputs. They
also studied the effect of over-parameterization and showed
that over-parameterization will change the spurious local
minima into the saddle points. However, it should be noted
that this does not imply that a gradient descent can reach
the global optima.
To alleviate the non-convexity of neural network optimization, over-parameterization is one of the promising approaches. Indeed, it is fully exploited by (i) Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019;
Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019; Weinan et al., 2020) and
(ii) mean field analysis (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017; Chizat &

