Nonmyopic Multifidelity Active Search

Quan Nguyen 1 Arghavan Modiri 2 Roman Garnett 1

Abstract
Active search is a learning paradigm where we
seek to identify as many members of a rare, valuable class as possible given a labeling budget. Previous work on active search has assumed access to
a faithful (and expensive) oracle reporting experimental results. However, some settings offer access to cheaper surrogates such as computational
simulation that may aid in the search. We propose
a model of multifidelity active search, as well as
a novel, computationally efficient policy for this
setting that is motivated by state-of-the-art classical policies. Our policy is nonmyopic and budget
aware, allowing for a dynamic tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation. We evaluate the performance of our solution on real-world datasets
and demonstrate significantly better performance
than natural benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The goal of active search is to identify members of a rare and
valuable class among a large pool of unlabeled points. This
is a simple model of many real-world discovery problems,
such as drug discovery and fraud detection. Active search
proceeds by successively querying an oracle that returns a
binary label indicating whether or not a chosen data point
exhibits the desired properties. In many applications, this
oracle is expensive, limiting the number of queries that could
be made. The challenge is to design a policy to sequentially
query the oracle in order to discover as many targets as
possible, subject to a given labeling budget.
Active search has been extensively studied under various
settings (Garnett et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2017; 2018; 2019).
Notably, Jiang et al. (2017) proved a hardness of approximation result, showing that no polynomial-time policy can
approximate the performance of the Bayesian optimal policy
within any constant factor. Thus active search is surprisingly
1
Washington University in St. Louis, MO, USA 2 University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Quan Nguyen
<quan@wustl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

hard. However, the authors also proposed an efficient approximation to the optimal policy that delivers impressive
empirical performance. The key feature of their policy is its
ability to account for the remaining budget and dynamically
trade off exploration and exploitation.
Most previous work on active search has assumed access
to only a single expensive oracle providing labels. In practice, however, we may have several methods of probing the
search space, including cheap, low-fidelity surrogates. For
example, a computational simulation may serve as a noisy
approximation to an experiment done in a laboratory, and we
may reasonably seek to use a cheaper computational search
to help design the expensive experiments. This motivates
the problem of multifidelity active search, where oracles
of different fidelities may be simultaneously accessed to
accelerate the search process. The central question in this
task is how to effectively leverage these oracles in order to
maximize the rate of discovery.
We present a model for multifidelity active search and study
the problem under the framework of Bayesian decision theory. We propose a novel policy for this setting inspired by
the state-of-the-art single-fidelity policy mentioned above.
The result is an efficient approximation to the optimal multifidelity policy that is specifically tailored to take advantage
of low-fidelity oracles. We also create aggressive branchand-bound pruning strategies to increase the efficiency of
our proposed algorithm, enabling scaling to large datasets.
In a series of experiments, we investigate the performance
of our policy on several real-world datasets for scientific
discovery. Our solution outperforms various baselines from
the literature by a large margin.

2. Problem Definition
We first introduce the general active search model and notations. Suppose we are given a finite set of points X , {xi },
which includes a rare, valuable subset R ⊂ X . The members of R, which we call targets or positives, are not known
a priori, but whether a given point x ∈ X is a target can be
determined by making a query to an oracle that returns the
binary label y , 1{x ∈ R}. We assume that querying the
oracle is expensive and that we only have a limited budget
of t queries to do so. We denote a given dataset of queried
points and their corresponding labels as D = {(xi , yi )}. At

