Actionable Models:
Unsupervised Offline Reinforcement Learning of Robotic Skills

Yevgen Chebotar 1 Karol Hausman 1 Yao Lu 1 Ted Xiao 1 Dmitry Kalashnikov 1 Jake Varley 1
Alex Irpan 1 Benjamin Eysenbach 1 2 Ryan Julian 1 3 Chelsea Finn 1 4 Sergey Levine 1 5

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning useful
robotic skills from previously collected offline
data without access to manually specified rewards
or additional online exploration, a setting that
is becoming increasingly important for scaling
robot learning by reusing past robotic data. In
particular, we propose the objective of learning
a functional understanding of the environment
by learning to reach any goal state in a given
dataset. We employ goal-conditioned Q-learning
with hindsight relabeling and develop several techniques that enable training in a particularly challenging offline setting. We find that our method
can operate on high-dimensional camera images
and learn a variety of skills on real robots that
generalize to previously unseen scenes and objects. We also show that our method can learn to
reach long-horizon goals across multiple episodes
through goal chaining, and learn rich representations that can help with downstream tasks through
pre-training or auxiliary objectives. The videos
of our experiments can be found at https://
actionable-models.github.io

Offline dataset of
robotic experience

Relabel all sub-sequences with
goals and mark as successes
g
Trajectories

g
g

Random goals
for goal chaining

Relabeled
sequences

gR

g

g

Train goal-conditioned
Q-function

gR

Add conservative action
negatives and mark as failures

Goal
reaching

Downstream
tasks

Figure 1. We propose a system for learning goal-reaching behaviors from offline datasets of real-world image-based experience.
Our method enables a real-world robotic system to accomplish a
wide range of visually indicated manipulation skills and learn rich
representations that can help with downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
General-purpose robots will need large repertoires of skills.
While reinforcement learning (RL) provides a way to learn
such skills automatically, learning each skill individually
can be prohibitive, particularly when task rewards must be
programmed by hand and data must be collected anew for
each task. Other fields of machine learning, such as natural
language processing, have seen impressive progress from
applying general-purpose training objectives on large and
1
Robotics at Google 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 University
of Southern California 4 Stanford University 5 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Yevgen Chebotar <chebotar@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

diverse datasets for either pre-training a general model that
can be further fine-tuned on task-specific objectives (Devlin
et al., 2018) or training a model that can be directly used for
zero-shot or few-shot generalization (Brown et al., 2020).
Reusing data in robotic control therefore seems like an appealing prospect, but raises a number of questions: How can
we obtain a general-purpose training objective in robotics?
How can we train diverse skills so that they are represented
by a single model? How can we employ this model to perform zero-shot generalization or solve downstream tasks?
We study these questions in the setting where the agent must
learn entirely from offline data, without hand-specified rewards or online interaction. This is particularly compelling
for a general-purpose robotic system, which might already

