Model-Free and Model-Based Policy Evaluation
when Causality is Uncertain

David Bruns-Smith 1

Abstract
When decision-makers can directly intervene, policy evaluation algorithms give valid causal estimates. In off-policy evaluation (OPE), there may
exist unobserved variables that both impact the dynamics and are used by the unknown behavior policy. These “confounders” will introduce spurious
correlations and naive estimates for a new policy
will be biased. We develop worst-case bounds to
assess sensitivity to these unobserved confounders
in finite horizons when confounders are drawn iid
each period. We demonstrate that a model-based
approach with robust MDPs gives sharper lower
bounds by exploiting domain knowledge about
the dynamics. Finally, we show that when unobserved confounders are persistent over time,
OPE is far more difficult and existing techniques
produce extremely conservative bounds.

1. Introduction
Due to cost, feasibility, or safety concerns, practitioners
often need to evaluate a sequential decision-making strategy
using only previously-collected observational data. In reinforcement learning (RL), this problem is called off-policy
policy evaluation (OPE). When the policy used to collect
the data is unknown, there might exist unobserved variables
correlated with both the policy and the outcomes. In this
case, the causal effect of future interventions is unidentified
and naive estimates for a new policy will be biased.
What kind of so-called unobserved confounders arise in
Markov decision processes (MDPs)? Unobserved variables
of interest in a medical setting are almost always highly
persistent. For example, consider electronic medical records
that do not document socio-economic status. A patient’s
socio-economic status is unlikely to change between visits to the hospital. In macroeconomics on the other hand,
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence
to: David Bruns-Smith <bruns-smith@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

unobserved shocks are often assumed to be drawn iid every period. Consider the Federal Reserve Board adjusting
monetary policy in response to oil price shocks. Events like
earthquakes in oil fields might reasonably be assumed to
occur independently across quarters.
Recent work develops OPE methods that are robust to unobserved confounding (Namkoong et al., 2020; Kallus & Zhou,
2020). Given an observational data set and a hypothetical
confounder, these methods adapt importance sampling approaches to calculate worst-case estimates for the value of a
new policy. A practitioner can assess the sensitivity of their
results to unobserved variables by increasing the strength
of confounding and computing how quickly the worst-case
bounds degrade.
However, the existing literature arrives at radically different
conclusions. (Kallus & Zhou, 2020) - henceforth KZ - finds
that it is possible to efficiently construct non-conservative
bounds in the infinite horizon setting. On the other hand,
(Namkoong et al., 2020) - henceforth NKYB - only finds
non-trivial bounds when confounding is restricted to a single time step. Furthermore, both approaches find the finite
horizon case with confounding at each step to be computationally intractable.
The natural questions are: 1) what is responsible for the
substantial gap between the conservativeness of the existing
bounds? and 2) how can we compute tractable lower bounds
for the finite horizon case?
Summary of our Results:
We identify a key assumption under which it is possible
to obtain sharp lower bounds on the expected value in a
confounded MDP, even as the horizon grows. When the unobserved confounding variables are drawn iid each period,
the marginal dynamics over the observed state themselves
form an MDP. In this case, OPE methods can be applied
to the marginal MDP after appropriate adjustments for confounding. Such an assumption is made in KZ.
But if the unobserved state might be persistent over time,
the problem is a genuine partially-observed MDP (POMDP).
Marginal transition probabilities for the observed state will
not be Markovian in general. Medical applications, which

