Towards Distraction-Robust Active Visual Tracking

Fangwei Zhong 1 Peng Sun 2 Wenhan Luo 3 Tingyun Yan 1 4 Yizhou Wang 1

Abstract
In active visual tracking, it is notoriously difficult when distracting objects appear, as distractors often mislead the tracker by occluding the
target or bringing a confusing appearance. To address this issue, we propose a mixed cooperativecompetitive multi-agent game, where a target and
multiple distractors form a collaborative team to
play against a tracker and make it fail to follow.
Through learning in our game, diverse distracting behaviors of the distractors naturally emerge,
thereby exposing the tracker’s weakness, which
helps enhance the distraction-robustness of the
tracker. For effective learning, we then present a
bunch of practical methods, including a reward
function for distractors, a cross-modal teacherstudent learning strategy, and a recurrent attention mechanism for the tracker. The experimental
results show that our tracker performs desired
distraction-robust active visual tracking and can
be well generalized to unseen environments. We
also show that the multi-agent game can be used
to adversarially test the robustness of trackers.

1. Introduction
We study Active Visual Tracking (AVT), which aims to follow a target object by actively controlling a mobile robot
given visual observations. AVT is a fundamental function
for active vision systems and widely demanded in real-world
applications, e.g., autonomous driving, household robots,
and intelligent surveillance. Here, the agent is required to
perform AVT in various scenarios, ranging from a simple
room to the wild world. However, the trackers are still vulnerable, when running in an environments with complex
situations, e.g., complicated backgrounds, obstacle occlusions, distracting objects.
1

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Dept. of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China. 2 Tencent Robotics
X, Shenzhen, P.R. China 3 Tencent, Shenzhen, P.R. China 4 Adv.
Inst. of Info. Tech, Peking University, Hangzhou, P.R. China..
Correspondence to: Fangwei Zhong <zfw1226@gmail.com>,
Yizhou Wang <yizhou.Wang@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Which one is the real target ?

Template

Visual Observation

Figure 1. An extreme situation of active visual tracking with distractors. Can you identify which one is the real target?

Among all the challenges, the distractor, which can induce
confusing visual observation and occlusion, is a considerably prominent difficulty. Distraction emerges frequently in
the real world scenario, such as a school where students wear
similar uniforms. Considering an extreme case (see Fig. 1),
there is a group of people dressed in the same clothes, and
you are only given a template image of the target, can you
confidently identify the target from the crowd?
The distraction has been primarily studied in the passive
tracking setting (Kristan et al., 2016) (running on collected
video clips) but is rarely considered in the active setting (Luo
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021). In the passive setting, previous researchers (Nam & Han, 2016; Zhu et al., 2018; Bhat
et al., 2019) took great efforts on learning a discriminative
visual representation in order to identify the target from the
crowded background. Yet it is not sufficient for an active
visual tracker, which should be of not only a suitable state
representation but also an optimal control strategy to move
the camera to actively avoid distractions, e.g., finding a more
suitable viewpoint to seize the target.
To realize such a robust active tracker, we argue that the
primary step is to build an interactive environment, where
various distraction situations can frequently emergent. A
straightforward solution is adding a number of moving objects as distractors in the environment. However, it is nontrivial to model a group of moving objects. Pre-defining
object trajectories based on hand-crafted rules seems tempting, but it will lead to overfitting in the sense that the yielded
tracker generalizes poorly on unseen trajectories.

