A Probabilistic Approach to Neural Network Pruning

Xin Qian 1 Diego Klabjan 1

Abstract
Neural network pruning techniques reduce the
number of parameters without compromising
predicting ability of a network. Many algorithms have been developed for pruning both overparameterized fully-connected networks (FCNs)
and convolutional neural networks (CNNs), but
analytical studies of capabilities and compression ratios of such pruned sub-networks are lacking. We theoretically study the performance of
two pruning techniques (random and magnitudebased) on FCNs and CNNs. Given a target
network whose weights are independently sampled from appropriate distributions, we provide
a universal approach to bound the gap between
a pruned and the target network in a probabilistic sense. The results establish that there exist
pruned networks with expressive power within
any specified bound from the target network.

called the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH). Ramanujan
et al. (2020) further conjecture that, a sufficiently overparameterized neural network with random initialization
contains subnetworks that can achieve competitive accuracy
without any training, when comparing to a large trained network. This conjecture can be viewed as a stronger version of
the LTH in the sense that we do not need to train this overparameterized random network. However, to determine
the lottery tickets from this over-parameterized network is
NP-Hard in the worst case (Malach et al., 2020; Pensia
et al., 2020). In addition, since over-parameterization is
compared to a trained neural network, which is usually already over-parameterized, the random initialized network is
over-over-parameterized and thus too large to consider.

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Science, Northwestern University. Correspondence to: Xin
Qian <xinqian2017@u.northwestern.edu>, Diego Klabjan <dklabjan@northwestern.edu>.

Although the development of such network pruning algorithms dates back to late 80s, there have been only limited
studies of the theoretical guarantees of network pruning.
The existence and the representation power of good subnetworks are lacking (see the related sections of the survey
papers (Sun, 2019; Fan et al., 2019)). Recently, Malach et al.
(2020) prove the strong LTH for fully-connected networks
with ReLU activations. They show that, given a target FCN
of depth l and width d,`any random
˘ initialized network with
depth 2l and width O d5 l2 {2 contains subnetworks that
can approximate the target network with  error with high
probability. In the following works, Pensia et al. (2020) and
Orseau et al. (2020) concurrently and independently prove
that the width of the random initialized network can be reduced to O pd logpdl{qq. Pensia et al. (2020) further show
that this logarithmic over-parameterization is essentially optimal for networks with constant depth. Note that a random
initialized network is introduced and pruning is applied on
this new network, instead of the target network. Thus, these
results cannot provide much insights for developing model
pruning algorithms that are applied on the target network
directly. Besides, the proof ideas heavily rely on the fact the
the random initialized network is well over-parameterized
so that a subnetwork with a specific structure that can replicate a single neuron of the target network exists. Although
the researchers have improved the polynomial dependency
of width to logarithm, the size of the random initialized
network is still very large.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this work, we focus on the theoretical results of pruning
an over-parameterized target network directly. There are two

1. Introduction
The common neural network architectures that achieve the
state-of-the-art results usually have tens of billions of trainable parameters (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020), leading to a problem that training
and inference of these models are computationally expensive
and memory intensive. To address this problem, researchers
have developed many practical algorithms to compress the
network structure while keeping the original network’s expressive power (Li et al., 2016; Han et al., 2015a;b; Cheng
et al., 2017).
Recently, Frankle & Carbin (2018) conjecture that, every
successfully trained neural network contains much smaller
subnetworks (winning tickets) that—when trained in isolation from the original initialization—reach test accuracy
comparable to the original network. This conjecture is
1

