The Heavy-Tail Phenomenon in SGD

Mert Gürbüzbalaban 1 Umut Şimşekli 2 Lingjiong Zhu 3

Abstract
In recent years, various notions of capacity and
complexity have been proposed for characterizing
the generalization properties of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in deep learning. Some of the
popular notions that correlate well with the performance on unseen data are (i) the ‘flatness’ of the
local minimum found by SGD, which is related to
the eigenvalues of the Hessian, (ii) the ratio of the
stepsize η to the batch-size b, which essentially
controls the magnitude of the stochastic gradient
noise, and (iii) the ‘tail-index’, which measures
the heaviness of the tails of the network weights
at convergence. In this paper, we argue that these
three seemingly unrelated perspectives for generalization are deeply linked to each other. We claim
that depending on the structure of the Hessian of
the loss at the minimum, and the choices of the
algorithm parameters η and b, the distribution of
the SGD iterates will converge to a heavy-tailed
stationary distribution. We rigorously prove this
claim in the setting of quadratic optimization: we
show that even in a simple linear regression problem with independent and identically distributed
data whose distribution has finite moments of all
order, the iterates can be heavy-tailed with infinite
variance. We further characterize the behavior
of the tails with respect to algorithm parameters,
the dimension, and the curvature. We then translate our results into insights about the behavior of
SGD in deep learning. We support our theory with
experiments conducted on synthetic data, fully
connected, and convolutional neural networks.

1
Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers Business School, Piscataway, USA 2 INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale Supérieure - PSL
Research University, Paris, France 3 Department of Mathematics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, USA. Correspondence
to: Mert Gürbüzbalaban <mg1366@rutgers.edu>, Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@inria.fr>, Lingjiong Zhu <zhu@math.fsu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The learning problem in neural networks can be expressed as
an instance of the well-known population risk minimization
problem in statistics, given as follows:
minx∈Rd F (x) := Ez∼D [f (x, z)],

(1.1)

where z ∈ Rp denotes a random data point, D is a probability distribution on Rp that denotes the law of the data
points, x ∈ Rd denotes the parameters of the neural network to be optimized, and f : Rd × Rp 7→ R+ denotes
a measurable cost function, which is often non-convex in
x. While this problem cannot be attacked directly since
D is typically unknown, if we have access to a training
dataset S = {z1 , . . . , zn } with n independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations, i.e., zi ∼i.i.d. D for
i = 1, . . . , n, we can use the empirical risk minimization
strategy, which aims at solving the following optimization
problem (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014):
min f (x) := f (x, S) := (1/n)

Xn
i=1

x∈Rd

f (i) (x),

(1.2)

where f (i) denotes the cost induced by the data point zi . The
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm has been one
of the most popular algorithms for addressing this problem:
xk = xk−1 − η∇f˜k (xk−1 ),
X
where ∇f˜k (x) := (1/b)

i∈Ωk

(1.3)
∇f

(i)

(x).

Here, k denotes the iterations, η > 0 is the stepsize (also
called the learning-rate), ∇f˜ is the stochastic gradient, b
is the batch-size, and Ωk ⊂ {1, . . . , n} is a random subset
with |Ωk | = b for all k.
Even though the practical success of SGD has been proven
in many domains, the theory for its generalization properties
is still in an early phase. Among others, one peculiar property of SGD that has not been theoretically well-grounded
is that, depending on the choice of η and b, the algorithm
can exhibit significantly different behaviors in terms of the
performance on unseen test data.
A common perspective over this phenomenon is based on
the ‘flat minima’ argument that dates back to Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber (1997), and associates the performance with

