Systematic Analysis of Cluster Similarity Indices:
How to Validate Validation Measures
Martijn Gösgens 1 Alexey Tikhonov 2 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 3 4 5

Abstract
Many cluster similarity indices are used to evaluate clustering algorithms, and choosing the best
one for a particular task remains an open problem. We demonstrate that this problem is crucial:
there are many disagreements among the indices,
these disagreements do affect which algorithms
are preferred in applications, and this can lead
to degraded performance in real-world systems.
We propose a theoretical framework to tackle this
problem: we develop a list of desirable properties
and conduct an extensive theoretical analysis to
verify which indices satisfy them. This allows
for making an informed choice: given a particular
application, one can first select properties that are
desirable for the task and then identify indices satisfying these. Our work unifies and considerably
extends existing attempts at analyzing cluster similarity indices: we introduce new properties, formalize existing ones, and mathematically prove
or disprove each property for an extensive list of
validation indices. This broader and more rigorous approach leads to recommendations that
considerably differ from how validation indices
are currently being chosen by practitioners. Some
of the most popular indices are even shown to be
dominated by previously overlooked ones.

1. Introduction
Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning problem,
where the task is to group objects that are similar to each
other. In network analysis, a related problem is called community detection, where groupings are based on relations
between items (links), and the obtained clusters are expected
1

Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 2 Yandex, Berlin, Germany 3 Yandex, Moscow, Russia
4
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia
5
HSE University, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Martijn
Gösgens <research@martijngosgens.nl>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to be densely interconnected. Clustering is used across
various applications, including text mining, online advertisement, anomaly detection, and many others (Xu & Tian,
2015; Allahyari et al., 2017).
To measure the quality of a clustering algorithm, one can
use either internal or external measures. Internal measures
evaluate the consistency of the clustering result with the data
being clustered, e.g., Silhouette, Hubert-Gamma, Dunn indices or modularity in network analysis (Newman & Girvan,
2004). Unfortunately, it is often unclear whether optimizing
any of these measures would translate into improved quality in practical applications. External (cluster similarity)
measures compare the candidate partition with a reference
one (obtained, e.g., by human assessors). A comparison
with such a gold standard partition, when it is available, is
more reliable. There are many tasks where external evaluation is applicable: text clustering (Amigó et al., 2009),
topic modeling (Virtanen & Girolami, 2019), Web categorization (Wibowo & Williams, 2002), face clustering (Wang
et al., 2019), news aggregation (see Section 3), and others.
Often, when there is no reference partition available, it is
possible to let a group of experts annotate a subset of items
and compare the algorithms on this subset.
Dozens of cluster similarity measures exist and which one
should be used is a subject of debate (Lei et al., 2017). In
this paper, we systematically analyze the problem of choosing the best cluster similarity index. We start with a series of
experiments demonstrating the importance of the problem
(Section 3). First, we construct simple examples showing
the inconsistency of all pairs of different similarity indices.
Then, we demonstrate that such disagreements often occur
in practice when well-known clustering algorithms are applied to real datasets. Finally, we illustrate how an improper
choice of a similarity index can affect the performance of
production systems.
So, the question is: how to compare cluster similarity indices
and decide which one is best for a particular application?
Ideally, we would want to choose an index for which good
similarity scores translate to good real-world performance.
However, opportunities to experimentally perform such a
validation of validation indices are rare, typically expensive,
and do not generalize to other applications. In contrast, we

