ChaCha for Online AutoML
Qingyun Wu 1 Chi Wang 1 John Langford 1 Paul Mineiro 1 Marco Rossi 1

Abstract
We propose the ChaCha (ChampionChallengers) algorithm for making an online
choice of hyperparameters in online learning
settings.
ChaCha handles the process of
determining a champion and scheduling a set of
‘live’ challengers over time based on sample complexity bounds. It is guaranteed to have sublinear
regret after the optimal configuration is added
into consideration by an application-dependent
oracle based on the champions. Empirically, we
show that ChaCha provides good performance
across a wide array of datasets when optimizing
over featurization and hyperparameter decisions.

1. Introduction
Motivation Online learning services (for example the Personalizer Azure cognitive service (Per, 2019)) have a natural need for "autoML" style learning which automatically
chooses hyperparameter configurations over some set of
possible choices. The well-studied setting of offline autoML strategies (Bergstra et al., 2015; Feurer et al., 2015; Li
et al., 2017; Falkner et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019; Elsken
et al., 2019; Real et al., 2020) do not satisfy several natural
constraints imposed by the online setting.
1. In online settings, computational constraints are more
sharply bounded. Partly, this is for budgetary concerns
and partly this is because any functioning online system
must keep up with a constantly growing quantity of
data. Hence, we seek approaches which require at most
a constant factor more computation and more generally
requires that the online learning algorithm keeps up
with the associated data stream.
2. Instead of having a fixed dataset, online learning settings naturally have a specified data source with unbounded, and sometimes very fast, growth. For example, it is natural to have datasets growing in the
terabytes/day range. On the other hand, many data
1

Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Qingyun Wu
<qxw5138@psu.edu>, John Langford <jcl@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

sources are also at much lower volumes, so we naturally seek approaches which can handle vastly different
scales of data volume.
3. Instead of evaluating the final quality of the model produced by a learning process, online learning settings
evaluate a learning algorithm constantly, implying that
an algorithm must be ready to answer queries at all
times, and that the relevant performance of the algorithm is the performance at all of those evaluations.

It is not possible to succeed in online autoML by naively
applying an existing offline autoML algorithm on the data
collected from an online source. First, this approach does
not address the computational constraint, as direct use of
offline autoML is impractical when the dataset is terascale
or above. Operating on subsets of the data would be necessary, but the dramatic potential performance differences
in learning algorithms given different dataset sizes suggests
that the choice of subset size is critical and data-dependent.
Automating that choice is non-trivial in general. Second,
this approach does not address the issue of online evaluation,
as offline autoML algorithms are assessed on the quality of
the final configuration produced. It is also not possible to
succeed in online autoML via naive application of existing
regret-minimizing online algorithms (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006): Instantiating a no-regret algorithm over all sets
of possible configurations is computationally prohibitive.
How then can we best design an efficient online automated
machine learning algorithm?
In the online setting there are no natural points for stopping training, evaluating a configuration, and trying the next
configuration. If we keep evaluating a fixed set of configurations, other configurations are denied experience, which
could lead to linearly increasing total regret. Exploration
is however delicate because an unknown quantity of data
may be necessary for a configuration to exhibit superior
performance. Given this, a simple exploration approach
which periodically switches between configurations in a
batched epsilon-greedy style may also incur large total regret. A method that can allocate the limited computational
power (at any time point) to learning models while maintaining good online performance (i.e., low regret) and working
despite an unknown required example threshold is needed.

