Robust Learning for Data Poisoning Attacks

Yunjuan Wang 1 Poorya Mianjy 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract
We investigate the robustness of stochastic approximation approaches against data poisoning
attacks. We focus on two-layer neural networks
with ReLU activations and show that under a specific notion of separability in the RKHS induced
by the infinite-width network, training (finitewidth) networks with stochastic gradient descent
is robust against data poisoning attacks. Interestingly, we find that in addition to a lower bound
on the width of the network, which is standard
in the literature, we also require a distributiondependent upper bound on the width for robust
generalization. We provide extensive empirical
evaluations that support and validate our theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models based on neural networks power
the state-of-the-art systems for various real-world applications, including self-driving autonmous vehicles (Grigorescu et al., 2020), speech recognition (Afouras et al.,
2018), reinforcement learning (Li, 2017), etc. Neural networks trained using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) perform well both in terms of optimization (training) and
generalization (prediction). However, with great power
comes great responsibility, and as several recent studies
indicate, systems based on neural networks admit vulnerabilities in the form of adversarial attacks. Especially in overparametrized settings (wherein the number of parameters is
much larger than training sample size), which is typical in
most applications, neural networks remain extraordinarily
fragile and amenable to depart from their expected behavior
due to strategically induced perturbations in data. One such
limitation is due to arbitrary adversarial corruption of data
at the time of training, commonly referred to as data poisoning. Such attacks present a challenging problem, especially
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Raman Arora
<arora@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

in settings where an adversary can affect any part of the
training data. Therefore, in this paper, we are interested in
quantifying the maximal adversarial noise that is tolerable
by SGD when training wide ReLU networks.
One of the earliest works to consider provably tolerant algorithms to a quantifiable error in training examples was that
of Valiant (1985), motivated by a need to understand the
limitations of the PAC learning framework. This was followed by a series of works that considered computationally
unbounded adversaries and posed the question of bounding
the error rate tolerable by a learning algorithm in a worst
case model of errors (Kearns & Li, 1993; Guruswami &
Raghavendra, 2009). These hardness results were later complemented by positive results (Klivans et al., 2009; Awasthi
et al., 2014; Diakonikolas et al., 2019a), which give learning algorithms that enjoy information theoretically optimal
noise tolerance. Much of this prior work focuses on learning
halfspaces (i.e., linear separators) in Valiant’s PAC learning model (Valiant, 1984). Instead, we consider Vapnik’s
general learning, and are interested in convex learning problems and over-parametrized neural networks with ReLU
activations. While our theoretical understanding of deep
learning has increased vastly in the last few years with several results characterizing the ability of gradient descent to
achieve small training loss in over-parameterized regime,
our understanding of robustness of such methods to attacks
such as data poisoning remains limited.
Arguably, a simplest model of data poisoning is one in
which the input features are perturbed, additively, by normbounded vectors. A more challenging scenario is where both
input features and labels can be corrupted – this is essentially the noise model considered by Valiant (1985); Kearns
& Li (1993); Awasthi et al. (2014). A related model studied by Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2011) is one where the learner
observes only a noisy version of the data, in a streaming setting, with noise distribution changing arbitrarily after each
round. A yet another poisoning attack, studied extensively
in the literature, is where the adversary can plant a fraction
of the training data; for example, consider movie ratings
contributed by malicious users in matrix completion. Recent
works have studied numerous other practical data poisoning
methods including backdoor attacks, data injection, clean
label attacks, and flip-label attacks (we discuss these further
in related work).

