Enhancing Robustness of Neural Networks through Fourier Stabilization

Netanel Raviv 1 Aidan Kelley 1 Michael Guo 1 Yevgeny Vorobeychik 1

Abstract
Despite the considerable success of neural networks in security settings such as malware detection, such models have proved vulnerable to
evasion attacks, in which attackers make slight
changes to inputs (e.g., malware) to bypass detection. We propose a novel approach, Fourier
stabilization, for designing evasion-robust neural networks with binary inputs. This approach,
which is complementary to other forms of defense, replaces the weights of individual neurons
with robust analogs derived using Fourier analytic
tools. The choice of which neurons to stabilize in
a neural network is then a combinatorial optimization problem, and we propose several methods for
approximately solving it. We provide a formal
bound on the per-neuron drop in accuracy due to
Fourier stabilization, and experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
in boosting robustness of neural networks in several detection settings. Moreover, we show that
our approach effectively composes with adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network models demonstrate humantranscending capabilities in many applications, but are
often vulnerable to attacks that involve small (in `p -norm)
adversarial perturbations to inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2017). This issue
is particularly acute in security applications, where a
common task is to determine whether a particular input
(e.g., executable, twitter post) is malicious or benign. In
these settings, malicious parties have a strong incentive
to redesign inputs (such as malware) in order to evade
detection by deep neural network-based detectors, and there
have now been a series of demonstrations of successful
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63103.
Correspondence to: Netanel Raviv <netanel.raviv@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

evasion attacks (Grosse et al., 2016; Li & Vorobeychik,
2018; Laskov et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2016). In response, a
number of approaches have been proposed to create models
that are more robust to evasion attacks (Cohen et al., 2019;
Lecuyer et al., 2019; Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong
& Kolter, 2018; Wong et al., 2018), with methods using
adversarial training—where models are trained by replacing
regular training inputs with their adversarially perturbed
variants—remaining the state of the art (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2017; Tong et al., 2019; Vorobeychik
& Kantarcioglu, 2018). Nevertheless, despite considerable
advances, increasing robustness of deep neural networks to
evasion attacks typically entails a considerable decrease in
accuracy on unperturbed (clean) inputs (Madry et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2020).
We propose a novel approach for enhancing robustness
of deep neural networks with binary inputs to adversarial
evasion that leverages Fourier analysis of Boolean functions (O’Donnell, 2014). Unlike most prior approaches
for boosting robustness, which aim to refactor the entire
deep neural network, say, through adversarial training, our
approach is more fine-grained, applied at the level of individual neurons. Specifically, we start by treating neurons as
linear classifiers over binary inputs, and considering their robustness as the problem of maximizing the average distance
of all inputs in the input space from the neuron’s decision
boundary. We then derive a closed-form solution to this
optimization problem; the process of replacing the original
weights by their more robust variants, given by this solution,
is called Fourier stabilization of neurons. Further, a bound
for the per-neuron drop in accuracy due to this process is
derived.
This idea applies to most common activation functions, such
as logistic, tanh, erf, and ReLU (treating activation as a
binary decision). Finally, we determine which subset of
neurons in a neural network to stabilize. While this is a
difficult combinatorial optimization problem, we develop
several effective algorithmic approaches for it.
Our full approach, which we call Fourier stabilization of a
neural network (abbrv. stabilization), applies only to neural
networks with binary inputs, and is targeted at security applications, where binary inputs are common and, indeed, it is
often the case that binarized inputs outperform real-valued

