MC-LSTM: Mass-Conserving LSTM

Pieter-Jan Hoedt * 1 Frederik Kratzert * 1 Daniel Klotz 1 Christina Halmich 1 Markus Holzleitner 1
Grey Nearing 2 Sepp Hochreiter 1 3 Günter Klambauer 1

Abstract
The success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) in computer vision is mainly driven by
their strong inductive bias, which is strong enough
to allow CNNs to solve vision-related tasks with
random weights, meaning without learning. Similarly, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) has a
strong inductive bias toward storing information
over time. However, many real-world systems
are governed by conservation laws, which lead to
the redistribution of particular quantities — e.g.
in physical and economical systems. Our novel
Mass-Conserving LSTM (MC-LSTM) adheres to
these conservation laws by extending the inductive bias of LSTM to model the redistribution of
those stored quantities. MC-LSTMs set a new
state-of-the-art for neural arithmetic units at learning arithmetic operations, such as addition tasks,
which have a strong conservation law, as the sum
is constant over time. Further, MC-LSTM is applied to traffic forecasting, modeling a damped
pendulum, and a large benchmark dataset in hydrology, where it sets a new state-of-the-art for
predicting peak flows. In the hydrology example,
we show that MC-LSTM states correlate with real
world processes and are therefore interpretable.

1. Introduction
Inductive biases enabled the success of CNNs and
LSTMs. One of the greatest success stories of deep
learning are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
(Fukushima, 1980; LeCun & Bengio, 1998; Schmidhuber,
2015; LeCun et al., 2015), whose proficiency can be attributed to their strong inductive bias toward visual tasks
*

Equal contribution 1 ELLIS Unit Linz, LIT AI Lab, Institute
for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria 2 Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA 3 Institute of
Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI). Correspondence to: Pieter-Jan Hoedt <hoedt@ml.jku.at>, Frederik Kratzert
<kratzert@ml.jku.at>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Cohen & Shashua, 2017; Gaier & Ha, 2019). The effect of this inductive bias has been demonstrated by CNNs
that solve vision-related tasks with random weights, meaning without learning (He et al., 2016; Gaier & Ha, 2019;
Ulyanov et al., 2020). Another success story is Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter, 1991; Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), which has a strong inductive bias toward storing information through its memory cells. This
inductive bias allows LSTM to excel at speech, text, and
language tasks (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bohnet et al., 2018;
Kochkina et al., 2017; Liu & Guo, 2019), as well as timeseries prediction. Even with random weights and only
a learned linear output layer, LSTM is better at predicting timeseries than reservoir methods (Schmidhuber et al.,
2007). In a seminal paper on biases in machine learning,
Mitchell (1980) stated that “biases and initial knowledge
are at the heart of the ability to generalize beyond observed
data”. Therefore, choosing an appropriate architecture and
inductive bias for neural networks is key to generalization.
Mechanisms beyond storing are required for real-world
applications. While LSTM can store information over
time, real-world applications require mechanisms that go
beyond storing. Many real-world systems are governed
by conservation laws related to mass, energy, momentum,
charge, or particle counts, which are often expressed through
continuity equations. In physical systems, different types
of energies, mass or particles have to be conserved (Evans
& Hanney, 2005; Rabitz et al., 1999; van der Schaft et al.,
1996), in hydrology it is the amount of water (Freeze &
Harlan, 1969; Beven, 2011), in traffic and transportation
the number of vehicles (Vanajakshi & Rilett, 2004; Xiao &
Duan, 2020; Zhao et al., 2017), and in logistics the amount
of goods, money or products. A real-world task could be
to predict outgoing goods from a warehouse based on a
general state of the warehouse, i.e., how many goods are in
storage, and incoming supplies. If the predictions are not
precise, then they do not lead to an optimal control of the
production process. For modeling such systems, certain inputs must be conserved but also redistributed across storage
locations within the system. We will refer to conserved inputs as mass, but note that this can be any type of conserved
quantity. We argue that for modeling such systems, specialized mechanisms should be used to represent locations &

