Targeted Data Acquisition for Evolving Negotiation Agents

Minae Kwon 1 Siddharth Karamcheti 1 Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar 2 Dorsa Sadigh 1

Abstract
Successful negotiators must learn how to balance
optimizing for self-interest and cooperation. Yet
current artificial negotiation agents often heavily
depend on the quality of the static datasets they
were trained on, limiting their capacity to fashion
an adaptive response balancing self-interest and
cooperation. For this reason, we find that these
agents can achieve either high utility or cooperation, but not both. To address this, we introduce
a targeted data acquisition framework where we
guide the exploration of a reinforcement learning agent using annotations from an expert oracle.
The guided exploration incentivizes the learning
agent to go beyond its static dataset and develop
new negotiation strategies. We show that this enables our agents to obtain higher-reward and more
Pareto-optimal solutions when negotiating with
both simulated and human partners compared to
standard supervised learning and reinforcement
learning methods. This trend additionally holds
when comparing agents using our targeted data acquisition framework to variants of agents trained
with a mix of supervised learning and reinforcement learning, or to agents using tailored reward
functions that explicitly optimize for utility and
Pareto-optimality.

1. Introduction
Many real-world interactions are mixed-incentive, where
agents have partially aligned goals. These examples abound;
consider an employee asking for a raise, lawyers arguing
over how to settle a case, or even manufacturers determining
how to best allocate their sparse resources. As AI agents
become embedded in society, it is critical they learn to
coordinate with their partners to achieve equitable outcomes.
Of the skills necessary to do this, negotiation is paramount
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 2 School of Law, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to: Minae Kwon <minae@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Baarslag et al., 2016; Le et al., 2018). Consider a standard
non-cooperative negotiation game (Deming et al., 1944;
Nash, 1950; 1951) as shown in Fig. 1 where two agents –
Alice and Bob – are trying to agree on an allocation of shared
resources. Both have high utility associated with the hats
and balls, though Alice also cares about books. Effectively
employing negotiation is crucial, and is the only way to
reach an equitable outcome – dividing the hats and balls
evenly, while giving Alice the book. Even where negotiating
agents have incentives that make it challenging for them to
cooperate, it would be difficult to imagine that negotiation
could be useful to agents over time –– let alone society ––
if agents were incapable of cooperating to achieve equitable
outcomes where their incentives made that possible.
Effective negotiators therefore need to optimize for their
own self-interest while also being able to compromise where
it makes sense for them to do so. Agents that blindly maximize their own reward risk becoming coercive, which can
result in unfair or forced deals (Dafoe et al., 2020) and ultimately discourage continued negotiation. But the difficulty
of explicitly optimizing for both immediate self-interest
and compromise is nontrivial. As we show in Sec. 7, designing reward functions that balance these objectives is
difficult and requires manual reward engineering. With this
in mind, we list our concrete desiderata for a class of negotiation agents capable of making negotiation useful to
society: agents should (D1) optimize for their self-interest
while also (D2) optimizing for Pareto-optimal outcomes (i.e.
outcomes where neither agent’s reward can be improved
without hurting the other’s).
Existing work tackles the problem of learning negotiation
agents either via supervised learning (SL) on datasets of
human-human negotiations or performing reinforcement
learning (RL) on top of supervised learning models (Lewis
et al., 2017; He et al., 2018; Yarats & Lewis, 2018). Unfortunately, the performance of these agents is tied to the quality
of their datasets. Building large-scale negotiation datasets
is challenging; for one, poor incentive structures during
crowd-sourcing can incentivize humans to opt for shorter,
“easy” negotiations to save time (Geva et al., 2019; Karamcheti et al., 2020; Vries et al., 2020). Additionally, these
negotiations are not representative of the diverse behaviors
we see in real life – the lack of repeated interaction and
the ability to remain anonymous online can skew datasets

