Differentially Private Query Release Through Adaptive Projection

Sergul Aydore 1 William Brown 1 2 Michael Kearns 1 3 Krishnaram Kenthapadi 1
Luca Melis 1 Aaron Roth 1 3 Ankit Siva 1

Abstract
We propose, implement, and evaluate a new algorithm for releasing answers to very large numbers
of statistical queries like k-way marginals, subject to differential privacy. Our algorithm makes
adaptive use of a continuous relaxation of the Projection Mechanism, which answers queries on the
private dataset using simple perturbation, and then
attempts to find the synthetic dataset that most
closely matches the noisy answers. We use a continuous relaxation of the synthetic dataset domain
which makes the projection loss differentiable,
and allows us to use efficient ML optimization
techniques and tooling. Rather than answering all
queries up front, we make judicious use of our
privacy budget by iteratively finding queries for
which our (relaxed) synthetic data has high error,
and then repeating the projection. Randomized
rounding allows us to obtain synthetic data in the
original schema. We perform experimental evaluations across a range of parameters and datasets,
and find that our method outperforms existing
algorithms on large query classes.

1. Introduction
A basic problem in differential privacy is to accurately answer a large number m of statistical queries (also known
as linear and counting queries), which have the form,
“how many people in private dataset D have property P ?”
Marginal queries (also known as conjunctions) — which
ask how many people in the dataset have particular combinations of feature values — are one of the most useful
and most studied special cases. The simplest technique for
answering such queries is to compute each answer on the
private dataset, and then perturb them with independent
1
Amazon Web Services AI/ML 2 Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 3 University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
William
Brown <w.brown@columbia.edu>, Ankit Siva <ankitsiv@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Gaussian noise.
 a dataset of size n, this results in error
 √ For
m
scaling as Õ n (Dwork et al., 2006a). This simple technique is useful for answering small numbers of queries. But
it has been known since (Blum et al., 2008) that in principle,
it is possible to privately and accurately answer very large
classes of queries (of size exponential in n), and that an
attractive way of doing so is to encode the answers in a synthetic dataset. Synthetic datasets have several advantages:
most basically, they are a concise way of representing the answers to large numbers of queries. But they also permit one
to evaluate queries other than those that have been explicitly
answered by the mechanism, and to take advantage of generalization. Unfortunately, it is also known that improving
on the error of the simple Gaussian perturbation technique
is computationally hard in the worst case (Ullman, 2016).
Moreover, constructing synthetic datasets is hard even when
it would be possible to provide accurate answers with simple
perturbation (Ullman & Vadhan, 2011) for simple classes of
queries such as the set of all d2 marginal queries restricted
to 2 out of d binary features (so-called 2-way marginals). As
a result we cannot hope for a differentially private algorithm
that can provably answer large numbers of statistical queries
or generate interesting synthetic data in polynomial time.
Nevertheless, there has been a resurgence of interest in private synthetic data generation and large-scale private queries
due to the importance of the problem. Recent methods offer
provable privacy guarantees, but have run-time and accuracy
properties that must be evaluated empirically.
1.1. Our Contributions
Our starting point is the (computationally inefficient) projection mechanism of (Nikolov et al., 2013), which is informally described as follows. We begin with a dataset D ∈
X n . First, the values of each of the m queries of interest qi
are computed on the private dataset: a = q(D) ∈ [0, 1]m .
Next, a privacy preserving vector of noisy answers â ∈ Rm
is computed using simple Gaussian perturbation. Finally,
the vector of noisy answers â is projected into the set of answer vectors that are consistent with some dataset to obtain
a final vector of answers a0 — i.e., the projection guarantees
that a0 = q(D0 ) for some D0 ∈ X n . This corresponds to
solving the optimization problem of finding the synthetic

