Unsupervised Part Representation by Flow Capsules

Sara Sabour 1 2 Andrea Tagliasacchi 1 2 Soroosh Yazdani 1 Geoffrey E. Hinton 1 2 David J. Fleet 1 2

Abstract
Capsule networks aim to parse images into a hierarchy of objects, parts and relations. While
promising, they remain limited by an inability to
learn effective low level part descriptions. To address this issue we propose a way to learn primary
capsule encoders that detect atomic parts from a
single image. During training we exploit motion
as a powerful perceptual cue for part definition,
with an expressive decoder for part generation
within a layered image model with occlusion. Experiments demonstrate robust part discovery in
the presence of multiple objects, cluttered backgrounds, and occlusion. The part decoder infers
the underlying shape masks, effectively filling
in occluded regions of the detected shapes. We
evaluate FlowCapsules on unsupervised part segmentation and unsupervised image classification.

1. Introduction
Humans learn to perceive shapes in terms of parts and their
spatial relationships (Singh & Hoffman, 2001). Studies
show that infants form early object perception by dividing visual inputs into units that move rigidly and separately (Spelke, 1990), and they do so in a largely unsupervised way. Inspired by this and recent work on part
discovery, we propose a self-supervised way to learn visual
part descriptors for Capsule networks (Hinton et al., 2011).
Capsule networks represent objects in terms of primary part
descriptors, in a local canonical frame, and coordinate transformations between parts and the whole. As a result of their
architecture, they are robust to various challenges, including
viewpoint changes and adversarial attacks. Stacked capsule network architectures (SCAE) (Kosiorek et al., 2019)
have shown promising results on a number of simple image
datasets. Nevertheless, because they are trained with an image reconstruction loss, foreground-background separation
and part discovery in cluttered images remain challenging.
1

Google Research, Brain Team. 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Sara Sabour
<sasabour@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Self-supervised training for learning primary
capsules: An image encoder is trained to decompose the
scene into a collection of primary capsules. Learning is
accomplished in an unsupervised manner, using flow estimation from capsule shapes and poses as a proxy task.
This paper introduces a way to learn encoders for object
parts (aka., primary capsules) to address these challenges.
The encoder takes as input a single image (see Fig. 1),
but for training part discovery, it uses motion-based selfsupervision (Bear et al., 2020; Mahendran et al., 2018). Like
the classical literature on perceptual organization and common fate in Gestalt psychology (Spelke, 1990; Wagemans
et al., 2012), we exploit the fact that regions of the image
that move together often belong together. This is a strong
perceptual cue that facilitates foreground-background segmentation and part discovery, and allows one to disentangle
texture and other aspects of appearance from shape.
The proposed part encoder captures the underlying part
shapes, their relative poses, and their relative depth ordering
(see Fig. 2). The introduction of depth ordering is particularly useful in order to account for occlusion, as it is in
layered motion models (Wang & Adelson, 1994). In this
way, learning aggregates information about shape over many
images, even though a given part may rarely be visible in its
entirety in any single frame. In essence, the model prefers
simple part-based descriptions, where many variations in
appearance can be explained by a coordinate transform or
by occlusion, rather than by changes in shape per se.
We demonstrate the FlowCapsules approach on several
datasets showcasing challenges due to texture, occlusions,
scale, and instance variation. We compare FlowCapsules
to recent related work including PSD (Xu et al., 2019) and
R-NEM (Van Steenkiste et al., 2018), where part masks and
dynamics are learnt using motion. FlowCapsules provide

