Stochastic Sign Descent Methods: New Algorithms and Better Theory

Mher Safaryan 1 Peter Richtárik 1 2

Abstract
Various gradient compression schemes have been
proposed to mitigate the communication cost
in distributed training of large scale machine
learning models. Sign-based methods, such as
signSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018), have recently
been gaining popularity because of their simple
compression rule and connection to adaptive gradient methods, like ADAM. In this paper, we analyze sign-based methods for non-convex optimization in three key settings: (i) standard single node,
(ii) parallel with shared data and (iii) distributed
with partitioned data. For single machine case,
we generalize the previous analysis of signSGD
relying on intuitive bounds on success probabilities and allowing even biased estimators. Furthermore, we extend the analysis to parallel setting
within a parameter server framework, where exponentially fast noise reduction is guaranteed with
respect to number of nodes, maintaining 1-bit
compression in both directions and using small
mini-batch sizes. Next, we identify a fundamental issue with signSGD to converge in distributed
environment. To resolve this issue, we propose a
new sign-based method, Stochastic Sign Descent
with Momentum (SSDM), which converges under
standard bounded variance assumption with the
optimal asymptotic rate. We validate several aspects of our theoretical findings with numerical
experiments.

1. Introduction
One of the key factors behind the success of modern machine learning models is the availability of large amounts
of training data (Bottou & Le Cun, 2003; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Schmidhuber, 2015). However, the state-of-the-art
deep learning models deployed in industry typically rely on
datasets too large to fit the memory of a single computer, and
1

KAUST, Saudi Arabia 2 MIPT, Russia. Correspondence to:
Mher Safaryan <mher.safaryan@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

hence the training data is typically split and stored across
a number of compute nodes capable of working in parallel.
Training such models then amounts to solving optimization
problems of the form
1
min f (x) := M

x∈Rd

M
P

fn (x),

(1)

n=1

where fn : Rd → R represents the non-convex loss of
a deep learning model parameterized by x ∈ Rd associated with data stored on node n. Arguably, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Vaswani
et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2019) in of its many variants
(Kingma & Ba, 2015; Duchi et al., 2011; Schmidt et al.,
2017; Zeiler, 2012; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013) is the most popular algorithm for solving (1). In its basic implementation, all workers n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M } in parallel compute
a random approximation ĝ n (xk ) of ∇fn (xk ), known as
the stochastic gradient. These approximations are then
sent to a master
which performs the aggregation
PM node
1
n
ĝ(xk ) := M
ĝ
(x
k ). The aggregated vector is subsen=1
quently broadcast back to the nodes, each of which performs
an update of the form
xk+1 = xk − γk ĝ(xk ),
updating their local copies of the parameters of the model.
1.1. Gradient Compression
Typically, communication of the local gradient estimators
ĝ n (xk ) to the master forms the bottleneck of such a system
(Seide et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018). In an
attempt to alleviate this communication bottleneck, a number of compression schemes for gradient updates have been
proposed and analyzed (Alistarh et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2018; Wen et al., 2017; Khirirat et al., 2018; Mishchenko
et al., 2019). A compression scheme is a (possibly randomized) mapping Q : Rd → Rd , applied by the nodes
to ĝ n (xk ) (and possibly also by the master to aggregated
update in situations when broadcasting is expensive as well)
in order to reduce the number of bits of the communicated
message.
Sign-based compression. Although most of the existing
theory is limited to unbiased compression schemes, i.e.,
EQ(x) = x, biased schemes such as those based on communicating signs of the update entries only often perform

