HyperHyperNetworks for the Design of Antenna Arrays

Shahar Lutati 1 Lior Wolf 1 2

Abstract
We present deep learning methods for the design
of arrays and single instances of small antennas.
Each design instance is conditioned on a target
radiation pattern and is required to conform to
specific spatial dimensions and to include, as part
of its metallic structure, a set of predetermined
locations. The solution, in the case of a single antenna, is based on a composite neural network that
combines a simulation network, a hypernetwork,
and a refinement network. In the design of the antenna array, we add an additional design level and
employ a hypernetwork within a hypernetwork.
The learning objective is based on measuring the
similarity of the obtained radiation pattern to the
desired one. Our experiments demonstrate that
our approach is able to design novel antennas and
antenna arrays that are compliant with the design
requirements, considerably better than the baseline methods. We compare the solutions obtained
by our method to existing designs and demonstrate a high level of overlap. When designing the
antenna array of a cellular phone, the obtained
solution displays improved properties over the
existing one. We share our implementation here.

1. Introduction
Since electronic devices are getting smaller, the task of
designing suitable antennas is becoming increasingly important (Anguera et al., 2013). However, the design of small
antennas, given a set of structural constraints and the desired radiation pattern, is still an iterative and tedious task
(Miron & Miron, 2014). Moreover, to cope with an increasing demand for higher data rates in dynamic communication
channels, almost all of the current consumer devices include
antenna arrays, which adds a dimension of complexity to
the design problem (Bogale & Le, 2016).
1
Tel Aviv University 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Shahar Lutati <shahar761@gmail.com>, Lior Wolf
<liorwolf@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Designing antennas is a challenging inverse problem: while
mapping the structure of the antenna to its radiation properties is possible (but inefficient) by numerically solving
Maxwell’s equations, the problem of obtaining a structure that produces the desired radiation pattern, subject
to structural constraints, can only be defined as an optimization problem, with a large search space and various
trade-offs (Wheeler, 1975). Our novel approach for designing a Printed Circuit Board (PCB) antenna that produces
the desired radiation pattern, resides in a 3D bounding box,
and includes a predefined set of metallic locations. We then
present a method for the design of an antenna array that
combines several such antennas.
The single antenna method first trains a simulation network
h that replaces the numerical solver, based on an initial
training set obtained using the solver. This network is used
to rapidly create a larger training set for solving the inverse
problem, and, more importantly, to define a loss term that
measures the fitting of the obtained radiation pattern to the
desired one. The design networks that solve the inverse
problem include a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016) f that is
trained to obtain an initial structure, which is defined by the
functional g. This structure is then refined by a network
t that incorporates the metallic locations and obtains the
final design. For the design of an antenna array, on top
of the parameters of each antenna, it is also necessary to
determine the number of antennas and their position. For
this task, we introduce the hyper-hypernetwork framework,
in which an outer hypernetwork q determines the weights
of an inner hypernetwork f , which determines the weights
of the primary network g.
Our experiments demonstrate the success of the trained models in producing solutions that comply with the geometric
constraints and achieve the desired radiation pattern. We
demonstrate that both the hypernetwork f and the refinement network t are required for the design of a single antenna and that the method outperforms the baseline methods.
In the case of multiple antennas, the hyperhypernetwork,
which consists of networks q, f, g, outperforms the baseline
methods on a realistic synthetic dataset. Furthermore, it is
able to predict the structure of real-world antenna designs
(Chen & Lin, 2018; Singh, 2016) and to suggest an alternative design that has improved array directivity for the iPhone
11 Pro Max.

