Object Segmentation Without Labels with Large-Scale Generative Models

Andrey Voynov 1 Stanislav Morozov 1 Artem Babenko 1

Abstract
The recent rise of unsupervised and selfsupervised learning has dramatically reduced the
dependency on labeled data, providing effective
image representations for transfer to downstream
vision tasks. Furthermore, recent works employed
these representations in a fully unsupervised setup
for image classification, reducing the need for human labels on the fine-tuning stage as well. This
work demonstrates that large-scale unsupervised
models can also perform a more challenging object segmentation task, requiring neither pixellevel nor image-level labeling. Namely, we show
that recent unsupervised GANs allow to differentiate between foreground/background pixels, providing high-quality saliency masks. By extensive
comparison on standard benchmarks, we outperform existing unsupervised alternatives for object
segmentation, achieving new state-of-the-art. Our
model and implementation are available online2 .

1. Introduction
Reducing the reliance on labeled data is a long-standing
goal of machine learning research. The recent studies on
unsupervised and self-supervised learning for both discriminative (Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020;
Grill et al., 2020) and generative (Donahue & Simonyan,
2019; Chen et al., 2020a) models have demonstrated that
one does not need labeled data on the pretraining stage
to produce image representations for typical computer vision problems. While these representations require some
labeled data to finetune to a particular downstream task,
recent works (Van Gansbeke et al., 2020; Zheltonozhskii
et al., 2020) exploit these representations to solve the image
classification problem without labels at all.
This paper employs state-of-the-art unsupervised generative
1

Yandex, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Andrey Voynov
<an.voynov@yandex.ru>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
2
https://github.com/anvoynov/
BigGANsAreWatching

models to perform label-free object segmentation, where
groundtruth pixel-level labels are expensive to collect because of labor-intensive human efforts. This problem currently receives much research attention and is typically addressed by methods based on GANs (Chen et al., 2019;
Bielski & Favaro, 2019; Benny & Wolf, 2020). However,
training high-quality GANs can be both time-consuming
and unstable. Moreover, the protocols in (Chen et al., 2019;
Bielski & Favaro, 2019; Benny & Wolf, 2020) typically
include a large number of hyperparameters that are tricky to
tune in the completely unsupervised setup when a labeled
validation set is not available. In contrast, we propose an
alternative, much simpler approach that does not require adversarial training or heavy hyperparameter tuning for each
particular segmentation task.
Our work is partially inspired by the findings from Voynov
& Babenko (2020), which has shown that the latent space
of BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019) possess the direction “responsible” for the background removal, and this direction
can be used to produce training data for saliency detection.
However, the approach (Voynov & Babenko, 2020) is not
unsupervised since (i) BigGAN is trained with known Imagenet labels, therefore, it is not an unsupervised model; (ii) it
requires manual inspecting of several latent transformations.
This paper eliminates external supervision mentioned above
and demonstrates that large off-the-shelf GANs can segment
images, being completely unsupervised. As a main technical
novelty, we introduce an automatic procedure identifying
the “segmenting” latent directions in the pretrained GANs.
This procedure reveals such directions in the state-of-theart publicly available BigBiGAN (Donahue & Simonyan,
2019), which is trained on the Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009)
without labels. These directions allow to distinguish object/background pixels in the generated images, providing
decent segmentation masks. These masks are then used to
supervise a discriminative U-Net model (Ronneberger et al.,
2015), which is stable and easy to train. As another advantage, our approach also provides a straightforward way to
tune hyperparameters. Since an amount of synthetic data is
unlimited, its hold-out subset can be used as validation.
Our work confirms the promise of using GANs to produce
synthetic training data, which is a long-standing goal of
research on generative modeling. In extensive experiments,

