Generative Adversarial Transformers
Drew A. Hudson§ 1 C. Lawrence Zitnick 2

Abstract
We introduce the GANsformer, a novel and efficient type of transformer, and explore it for the
task of visual generative modeling. The network
employs a bipartite structure that enables longrange interactions across the image, while maintaining computation of linear efficiency, that can
readily scale to high-resolution synthesis. It iteratively propagates information from a set of latent
variables to the evolving visual features and vice
versa, to support the refinement of each in light of
the other and encourage the emergence of compositional representations of objects and scenes. In
contrast to the classic transformer architecture, it
utilizes multiplicative integration that allows flexible region-based modulation, and can thus be seen
as a generalization of the successful StyleGAN
network. We demonstrate the model’s strength
and robustness through a careful evaluation over
a range of datasets, from simulated multi-object
environments to rich real-world indoor and outdoor scenes, showing it achieves state-of-theart results in terms of image quality and diversity, while enjoying fast learning and better dataefficiency. Further qualitative and quantitative
experiments offer us an insight into the model’s
inner workings, revealing improved interpretability and stronger disentanglement, and illustrating
the benefits and efficacy of our approach. An implementation of the model is available at https:
//github.com/dorarad/gansformer.

1. Introduction
The cognitive science literature speaks of two reciprocal
mechanisms that underlie human perception: the bottom-up
processing, proceeding from the retina up to the cortex, as
local elements and salient stimuli hierarchically group together to form the whole (Gibson, 2002), and the top-down
processing, where surrounding context, selective attention
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, CA, USA
Facebook AI Research, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Drew A.
Hudson <dorarad@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Sample images generated by the GANsformer, along
with a visualization of the model attention maps.

and prior knowledge inform the interpretation of the particular (Gregory, 1970). While their respective roles and
dynamics are being actively studied, researchers agree that it
is the interplay between these two complementary processes
that enables the formation of our rich internal representations, allowing us to perceive the world in its fullest and
create vivid imageries in our mind’s eye (Intaitė et al., 2013).
Nevertheless, the very mainstay and foundation of computer
vision over the last decade – the Convolutional Neural Network, surprisingly does not reflect this bidirectional nature
that so characterizes the human visual system, and rather
displays a one-way feed-forward progression from raw sensory signals to higher representations. Their local receptive
field and rigid computation reduce their ability to model
long-range dependencies or develop holistic understanding
of global shapes and structures that goes beyond the brittle
reliance on texture (Geirhos et al., 2019), and in the generative domain especially, they are linked to considerable
optimization and stability issues (Zhang et al., 2019) due
to their fundamental difficulty in coordinating between fine
details across a generated scene. These concerns, along
with the inevitable comparison to cognitive visual processes,
beg the question of whether convolution alone provides a
complete solution, or some key ingredients are still missing.
§
I wish to thank Christopher D. Manning for the fruitful discussions and constructive feedback in developing the bipartite
transformer, especially when explored for language, as well as for
the kind financial support that allowed this work to happen.

