SG-PALM: a Fast Physically Interpretable Tensor Graphical Model

Yu Wang 1 Alfred Hero 1

Abstract
We propose a new graphical model inference procedure, called SG-PALM, for learning conditional
dependency structure of high-dimensional tensorvariate data. Unlike most other tensor graphical
models the proposed model is interpretable and
computationally scalable to high dimension. Physical interpretability follows from the Sylvester
generative (SG) model on which SG-PALM is
based: the model is exact for any observation
process that is a solution of a partial differential equation of Poisson type. Scalability follows
from the fast proximal alternating linearized minimization (PALM) procedure that SG-PALM uses
during training. We establish that SG-PALM converges linearly (i.e., geometric convergence rate)
to a global optimum of its objective function. We
demonstrate the scalability and accuracy of SGPALM for an important but challenging climate
prediction problem: spatio-temporal forecasting
of solar flares from multimodal imaging data.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional tensor-variate data arise in computer vision (video data containing multiple frames of color images),
neuroscience (EEG measurements taken from different sensors over time under various experimental conditions), and
recommending system (user preferences over time). Due
to the non-homogeneous nature of these data, second-order
information that encodes (conditional) dependency structure
within the data is of interest. Assuming the data are drawn
from a tensor normal distribution, a straightforward way to
estimate this structure is to vectorize the tensor and estimate
the underlying Gaussian graphical model associated with
the vector. However, such an approach ignores the tensor
structure and requires estimating a rather high dimensional
precision matrix, often with insufficient sample size. For
instance, in the aforementioned EEG application the sample
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. Correspondence to: Yu Wang <wayneyw@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

size is one if we aim to estimate the dependency structure
across different sensors, time and experimental conditions
for a single subject. To address such sample complexity
challenges, sparsity is often imposed on the covariance Σ or
the inverse covariance Ω, e.g., by using a sparse Kronecker
product (KP) or Kronecker sum (KS) decomposition of Σ
or Ω. The earliest and most popular form of sparse structured precision matrix estimation approaches represent Ω,
equivalently Σ, as the KP of smaller precision/covariance
matrices (Allen & Tibshirani, 2010; Leng & Tang, 2012; Yin
& Li, 2012; Tsiligkaridis et al., 2013; Zhou, 2014; Lyu et al.,
2019). The KP structure induces a generative representation
for the tensor-variate data via a separable covariance/inverse
covariance model. Alternatively, Kalaitzis et al. (2013);
Greenewald et al. (2019) proposed to model inverse covariance matrices using a KS representation. Rudelson &
Zhou (2017); Park et al. (2017) proposed KS-structured covariance model which corresponds to an errors-in-variables
model. The KS (inverse) covariance structure corresponds
to the Cartesian product of graphs (Kalaitzis et al., 2013;
Greenewald et al., 2019), which leads to more parsimonious
representations of (conditional) dependency than the KP.
However, unlike the KP model, KS lacks an interpretable
generative representation for the data. Recently, Wang et al.
(2020) proposed a new class of structured graphical models, called the Sylvester graphical models, for tensor-variate
data. The resulting inverse covariance matrix has the KS
structure in its square-root factors. This square-root KS
structure is hinted in the paper to have a connection with
certain physical processes, but no illustration is provided.
A common challenge for structured tensor graphical models
is the efficient estimation of the underlying (conditional)
dependency structures. KP-structured models are generally estimated via extension of GLasso (Friedman et al.,
2008) that iteratively minimize the `1 -penalized negative
likelihood function for the matrix-normal data with KP covariance. This procedure was shown to converge to some
local optimum of the penalized likelihood function (Yin &
Li, 2012; Tsiligkaridis et al., 2013). Similarly, Kalaitzis et al.
(2013) further extended GLasso to the KS-structured case
for 2-way tensor data. Greenewald et al. (2019) extended
this to multiway tensors, exploiting the linearity of the space
of KS-structured matrices and developing a projected proximal gradient algorithm for KS-structured inverse covari-

