Learning Interaction Kernels for Agent Systems on Riemannian Manifolds

Mauro Maggioni 1 2 Jason Miller 1 Hongda Qiu 1 Ming Zhong 1

Abstract
Interacting agent and particle systems are extensively used to model complex phenomena in science and engineering. We consider the problem
of learning interaction kernels in these dynamical systems constrained to evolve on Riemannian manifolds from given trajectory data. The
models we consider are based on interaction kernels depending on pairwise Riemannian distances
between agents, with agents interacting locally
along the direction of the shortest geodesic connecting them. We show that our estimators converge at a rate that is independent of the dimension
of the state space, and derive bounds on the trajectory estimation error, on the manifold, between
the observed and estimated dynamics. We demonstrate the performance of our estimator on two
classical first order interacting systems: Opinion
Dynamics and a Predator-Swarm system, with
each system constrained on two prototypical manifolds, the 2-dimensional sphere and the Poincaré
disk model of hyperbolic space.

1. Introduction
Dynamical systems of interacting agents, where “agents”
may represent atoms, particles, neurons, cells, animals,
people, robots, planets, etc..., are an important modeling
tool in many disciplines, including Physics, Biology, Chemistry, Economics and Social Sciences. It is a fundamental
challenge to learn the governing equations of these systems. Often, agents are either associated with state variables
which belong to non-Euclidean spaces, e.g., phase variables
considered in various Kuramoto models (Kuramoto, 1975;
Strogatz, 2000), or constrained to move on non-Euclidean
spaces, for example (Ahn et al., 2020). This has motivated
a growing body of research considering interacting agent
1
Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Johns Hopkins University 2 Department of Mathematics, Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Mathematical Institute for Data
Science, Johns Hopkins University.. Correspondence to: Ming
Zhong <mzhong5@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

systems on various manifolds (Lee et al., 2018; Caponigro
et al., 2014; Sarlette & Sepulchre, 2008), including opinion
dynamics (Aydoğdu et al., 2017), flocking models (Ahn
et al., 2020) and a classical aggregation model (C. Fetecau
& Zhang, 2019). Further recent approaches for interacting
agents on manifolds include (Yang et al., 2020; Soize &
Ghanem, 2020).
In this work, we offer a nonparametric and inverse-problembased learning approach to infer the governing structure of
interacting agent dynamics, in the form of Ẋ t = f (X t ),
constrained on Riemannian manifolds, from observations of
trajectories. Our method is different from others introduced
to learn ODEs/PDEs from observations, that aim to infer f
directly, and would be cursed by the high-dimension of the
state space of X (Lu et al., 2019b). Instead, we exploit the
form of the function f , special to the class of interacting
agent systems under consideration, which is determined by
an interaction kernel function φ of one variable only, and
learn φ, with minimal assumptions on φ. By exploiting
invariance of the equations under permutation of the agents
as well as the radial symmetry of φ, we are able to avoid
the curse of dimensionality. We also demonstrate how our
approach can perform transfer learning in section 5.
The research on inferring a suitable dynamical system of
interacting agents from observation data has been a longstanding problem in science and engineering; see (Lukeman
et al., 2010; Katz et al., 2011; Cui et al., 2014; Tran & Ward,
2017) and references therein. Many recent approaches in
machine learning have been developed for inferring general
dynamical systems, including multistep methods (Keller &
Du, 2019), optimization (Wróbel et al., 2013), sparse regression (Brunton et al., 2016; Rudy et al., 2017; Schaeffer
et al., 2013), Bayesian regression (Zhang & Lin, 2018), and
deep learning (Raissi et al., 2018; Rudy et al., 2019). In a
different direction, the generalization of traditional machine
learning algorithms in Euclidean settings to Riemannian
manifolds, and the development of new algorithms designed
to work on Riemannian manifolds, has been attracting increased attention; for example in variational calculus (Soize
& Ghanem, 2020), reinforcement learning (Riccio et al.,
2018), deep learning (Chen et al., 2020) and theoretical CS
(Monte-Alto et al., 2020).
Let (M, g) be a connected, smooth, and geodesically-

