Message Passing Adaptive Resonance Theory
for Online Active Semi-supervised Learning

Taehyeong Kim 1 2 Injune Hwang 1 Hyundo Lee 2 Hyunseo Kim 2
Won-Seok Choi 2 Joseph J. Lim 1 3 Byoung-Tak Zhang 2

Abstract
Active learning is widely used to reduce labeling
effort and training time by repeatedly querying
only the most beneficial samples from unlabeled
data. In real-world problems where data cannot
be stored indefinitely due to limited storage or
privacy issues, the query selection and the model
update should be performed as soon as a new data
sample is observed. Various online active learning
methods have been studied to deal with these challenges; however, there are difficulties in selecting
representative query samples and updating the
model efficiently without forgetting. In this study,
we propose Message Passing Adaptive Resonance
Theory (MPART) that learns the distribution and
topology of input data online. Through message
passing on the topological graph, MPART actively
queries informative and representative samples,
and continuously improves the classification performance using both labeled and unlabeled data.
We evaluate our model in stream-based selective
sampling scenarios with comparable query selection strategies, showing that MPART significantly
outperforms competitive models.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep learning in the field of visual object recognition and speech recognition is largely attributed
to the massive amount of labeled data. However, most of the
data samples in the real-world are not labeled, so it takes a
lot of time and effort to label and use them for deep learning.
In addition, in many countries, the collection and storage of
medical data or data from personal robots are prohibited due
to privacy concerns. This burden impedes the widespread
1

AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics, Seoul, Republic
of Korea 2 Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3
University of Southern California, California, USA. Correspondence to: Byoung-Tak Zhang <btzhang@bi.snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

use of deep learning in real-world applications such as medical AI, home appliances and robotics, and separates the best
solutions from becoming the best real-world solutions.
From this point of view, active learning is a promising field
of machine learning. The goal of active learning is to reduce
the labeling cost by querying labels for only a small portion
of the entire unlabeled dataset. The query selection is made
according to which samples are most beneficial, i.e. both informative and representative (Settles, 2009). In most active
learning algorithms, samples are selected from a large pool
of data for querying (Settles, 2011; Gal et al., 2017; Sener &
Savarese, 2017; Beluch et al., 2018). Once the queried data
is labeled, it is accumulated in the training dataset and the
entire model is trained again. This process is repeated, typically assuming that all the data can be stored and the model
can access the data again at any time. In the aforementioned
real-world problems, however, it is impossible to store a
massive amount of data due to limited storage or privacy
issues. In addition, it is highly inefficient to repeatedly train
the entire model with large data and review all the unlabeled
data for querying whenever a new label is acquired.
In contrast, the active learning paradigm in an online manner
does not assume that data samples can be accessed repeatedly but instead, the input data is given as a continuous
stream (Lughofer, 2017). This entails that uncertainty estimation of input samples and the decision of whether to
query or not should be made online. The result of querying and training with one sample affects the uncertainty
of subsequent input samples. Therefore, the model update
should be done on-the-fly so that the new uncertainty distribution is estimated for the next query. In such scenarios,
it is difficult to select a query sample that is representative
as well as informative because all data samples cannot be
reviewed at the same time. Moreover, since the labeling cost
is expensive and the oracle is often unavailable, the number
of queries may be limited (Hao et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018; Serrao & Spiliopoulou, 2018). Catastrophic forgetting is another issue to overcome when learning data online
(Lee et al., 2017). This online active learning process, while
more suitable for real-world problems, is therefore more
challenging than offline active learning.

