Faster Kernel Matrix Algebra via Density Estimation

Arturs Backurs * 1 Piotr Indyk * 2 Cameron Musco * 3 Tal Wagner * 4

Abstract
We study fast algorithms for computing fundamental properties of a positive semidefinite kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n corresponding to n points
x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd . In particular, we consider estimating the sum of kernel matrix entries, along
with its top eigenvalue and eigenvector. We show
that the sum of matrix entries can be estimated
to 1 +  relative error in time sublinear in n and
linear in d for many popular kernels, including the
Gaussian, exponential, and rational quadratic. For
these kernels, we also show that the top eigenvalue
(and an approximate eigenvector) can be approximated to 1 +  relative error in time subquadratic
in n and linear in d. Our results represent significant advances in the best known runtimes for
these problems. They leverage the positive definiteness of the kernel matrix, along with a recent
line of work on efficient kernel density estimation.

1. Introduction
Kernels are a ubiquitous notion in statistics, machine learning, and other fields. A kernel is a function k : Rd ×Rd → R
that measures the similarity1 between two d-dimensional
vectors. Many statistical and machine learning methods,
such as support vector machines, kernel ridge regression
and kernel density estimation, rely on appropriate choices
of kernels. A prominent example of a kernel function is the
Radial Basis Function, a.k.a. Gaussian kernel, defined as
k(x, y) = exp(−kx − yk2 ).
Other popular choices include the Laplace kernel, exponential kernel, etc. See Shawe-Taylor et al. (2004); Hofmann
*
Equal contribution 1 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA 3 University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Amherst, MA, USA 4 Microsoft Research Redmond, Redmond, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Arturs Backurs <backurs@ttic.edu>, Piotr Indyk <indyk@mit.edu>, Cameron Musco
<cmusco@umass.edu>, Tal Wagner <talw@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
This should be contrasted with distance functions that measure
the dissimilarity between two vectors.

et al. (2008) for an overview.
Kernel methods typically operate using a kernel matrix.
Given n vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd , the kernel matrix K ∈
Rn×n is defined as Ki,j = k(xi , xj ). For most popular
kernels, e.g., the Gaussian kernel, k is a positive definite
function, and so K is positive semidefinite (PSD). Furthermore, it is often the case that K’s entries are in the range
[0,1], with 1’s on the diagonal – we assume this throughout.
Although popular, the main drawback of kernel methods is
their efficiency. Most kernel-based algorithms have running
times that are at least quadratic in n; in fact, many start by explicitly materializing the kernel matrix K in the preprocessing stage. This quadratic runtime is likely necessary as long
as exact (or high-precision) answers are desired. Consider
perhaps the simplest kernel problem, where the P
goal is to
compute the sum of matrix entries, i.e., s(K) = i,j Ki,j .
It was shown in Backurs et al. (2017) that, for the Gaussian
kernel, computing s(K) up to 1 +  relative error requires
n2−o(1) time under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis
(SETH), as long as the dimension d is at least polylogarithmic in n, and  = exp(−ω(log2 n)). The same limitations
were shown to apply to kernel support vector machines,
kernel ridge regression, and other kernel problems.
Fortunately, the aforementioned lower bound does not preclude faster algorithms for larger values of  (say,  = Θ(1)).
Over the last decade many such algorithms have been proposed. In our context, the most relevant ones are those
solving kernel density evaluation (Charikar & Siminelakis,
2017; Backurs et al., 2018; 2019; Siminelakis et al., 2019;
Charikar et al., 2020). Here, we are given two sets of vectors X = {x1 , . . . , xm }, and Y = {y1 , . . . , yP
m }, and the
1
goal is to compute the values of k(yi ) = m
j k(xj , yi )
for i = 1, . . . , m. For the Gaussian kernel, the best known
algorithm, due to Charikar et al. (2020), estimates these values to 1 +  relative error in time O(dm/(µ0.173+o(1) 2 )),
where µ is a lower bound on k(xi ).
Applying this algorithm directly to approximating the
Gaussian kernel sum yields a runtime of roughly
O(dn1.173+o(1) /2 ), since we can set µ = 1/n and still
achieve (1 + ) approximation as k(xi , xi ) = 1 for all xi .
It is a natural question whether this bound can be improved
and if progress on fast kernel density estimation can be
extended to other fundamental kernel matrix problems.

