MetaCURE: Meta Reinforcement Learning with
Empowerment-Driven Exploration

Jin Zhang * 1 Jianhao Wang * 1 Hao Hu 1 Tong Chen 1 Yingfeng Chen 2 Changjie Fan 2 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
Meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) extracts
knowledge from previous tasks and achieves fast
adaptation to new tasks. Despite recent progress,
efficient exploration in meta-RL remains a key
challenge in sparse-reward tasks, as it requires
quickly finding informative task-relevant experiences in both meta-training and adaptation. To
address this challenge, we explicitly model an exploration policy learning problem for meta-RL,
which is separated from exploitation policy learning, and introduce a novel empowerment-driven
exploration objective, which aims to maximize information gain for task identification. We derive a
corresponding intrinsic reward and develop a new
off-policy meta-RL framework, which efficiently
learns separate context-aware exploration and exploitation policies by sharing the knowledge of
task inference. Experimental evaluation shows
that our meta-RL method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on various sparsereward MuJoCo locomotion tasks and more complex sparse-reward Meta-World tasks.

1. Introduction
Human intelligence is able to transfer knowledge across
tasks and acquire new skills within limited experiences.
Current reinforcement learning (RL) agents often require a
far more amount of experiences to achieve human-level performance (Hessel et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019; Hafner
et al., 2019). To enable sample-efficient learning, meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) methods have been proposed,
which automatically extract prior knowledge from previous
tasks and achieve fast adaptation in new tasks (Schmidhuber, 1995; Finn et al., 2017). Despite fast progress, meta-RL
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China 2 Fuxi AI Lab,
NetEase, China.
Correspondence to: Jin Zhang <jinzhan20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

with sparse rewards remains challenging, as task-relevant information is scarce in such settings, and efficient exploration
is required to quickly find the most informative experiences
in both meta-training and fast adaptation.
The problem of learning effective exploration strategies
has been extensively studied for meta-RL with dense rewards, such as E-MAML (Stadie et al., 2018), ProMP
(Rothfuss et al., 2019) and VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019).
Recently, several works have investigated learning to explore in sparse-reward tasks. For example, MAESN (Gupta
et al., 2018) learns temporally-extended exploration behaviors by injecting structured noises into the exploration policy. PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019) explores by posterior
sampling (Thompson, 1933; Osband et al., 2013), which
is optimal in asymptotic performance (Leike et al., 2016).
However, both methods assume access to dense rewards
during meta-training.
To address the challenge of meta-RL with sparse rewards,
in this paper, we explicitly model the problem of learning
to explore, and separate it from exploitation policy learning. This separation allows the learned exploration policy to
purely focus on collecting the most informative experiences
for enabling efficient meta-training and adaptation. As the
common task-inference component in context-based metaRL algorithms extracts task information from experiences
(Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2019; Humplik et al.,
2019), the exploration policy should collect experiences
that contain rich task-relevant information and support efficient task inference. By leveraging this insight, we design a
novel empowerment-driven exploration objective that aims
to maximize the mutual information between exploration
experiences and task identification. We then derive an insightful intrinsic reward from this objective, which is related
to model prediction.
To incorporate our efficient exploration method, we develop
a new off-policy meta-RL framework, called Meta-RL with
effiCient Uncertainty Reduction Exploration (MetaCURE).
MetaCURE performs probabilistic task inference, and learns
separate context-aware exploration and exploitation policies.
As both context-aware policies depend on task information
extracted from the context, MetaCURE shares a common
component of task inference for their learning, greatly im-

