SKIing on Simplices: Kernel Interpolation on the Permutohedral Lattice for
Scalable Gaussian Processes
Sanyam Kapoor * 1 Marc Finzi * 1 Ke Alexander Wang 2 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for scalable Gaussian
processes use iterative algorithms, requiring fast
matrix vector multiplies (MVMs) with the covariance kernel. The Structured Kernel Interpolation (SKI) framework accelerates these MVMs
by performing efficient MVMs on a grid and interpolating back to the original space. In this
work, we develop a connection between SKI
and the permutohedral lattice used for highdimensional fast bilateral filtering. Using a
sparse simplicial grid instead of a dense rectangular one, we can perform GP inference exponentially faster in the dimension than SKI. Our
approach, Simplex-GP, enables scaling SKI to
high dimensions, while maintaining strong predictive performance. We additionally provide
a CUDA implementation of Simplex-GP, which
enables significant GPU acceleration of MVM
based inference.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are widely used where uncertainty is critical to the task at hand (Deisenroth et al., 2013;
Frazier, 2018; Balandat et al., 2019). At the same time,
datasets in machine learning applications are growing in
not only size but also dimensionality (Deng et al., 2009;
Brown et al., 2020). To address the cubic complexity of exact inference with GPs, past works have proposed a myriad
of approximation methods (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2007;
Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013; 2015b;a; Salimbeni
& Deisenroth, 2017; Izmailov et al., 2018; Gardner et al.,
2018a; Liu et al., 2020). Structured Kernel Interpolation
(SKI), proposed by Wilson & Nickisch (2015), is particularly effective on large datasets (Wilson et al., 2015).
SKI tiles the data space with a dense rectangular grid of
*
Equal contribution 1 New York University, NY, USA
Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Sanyam
Kapoor <sanyam@nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison of the number of grid points required in
SKI (Wilson & Nickisch, 2015) against our method. SKI requires
exponentially more number of grid points due to its dense lattice
construction. Simplex-GP on the other hand can get away with
only a sparse set of points on the permutohedral lattice.

inducing points. By interpolating kernels to the grid, and
exploiting structure in the matrices, SKI greatly reduces
the computational cost of inference to be only linear in the
dataset size and sub-quadratic in the number of grid points.
The powerful grid structure of SKI, however, is also its
downfall in high dimensional settings, since SKI requires
at least 2d grid points for a d-dimensional dataset. Thus,
SKI requires time and memory exponential in the dataset
dimensionality, making it unsuitable for datasets with more
than ⇠ 5 dimensions. Building on SKI, Gardner et al.
(2018b) proposed SKIP, which reuses a one-dimensional
grid across all dimensions and builds up low rank approximations to the covariance matrices, reducing inference time
to be linear in n as well as d. However, even with these
improvements, SKIP is limited to d ⇠ 10 to 30 for large
datasets since the method uses memory equivalent to storing ⇠ 20 · d copies of the training dataset, and the low rank
approximation can sometimes be limiting.
Dimensionality is not a challenge in GP inference alone. In
image filtering, a broad class of non-linear edge-preserving
filters including the bilateral filter, non-local means, and
other related filters have found growing importance (Aurich & Weule, 1995; Tomasi & Manduchi, 1998; Paris
& Durand, 2006). Such filters map a set of vector values {yi } ✓ Rn (typically the pixel values in an image) to
{y0i } ✓ Rn where each y0i is a Gaussian weighted linear

