NeRF-VAE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model

Adam R. Kosiorek * 1 Heiko Strathmann * 1 Daniel Zoran 1 Pol Moreno 1 Rosalia Schneider 1 Soňa Mokrá 1
Danilo J. Rezende 1

Abstract
We propose NeRF - VAE, a 3D scene generative
model that incorporates geometric structure via
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and differentiable
volume rendering. In contrast to NeRF, our model
takes into account shared structure across scenes,
and is able to infer the structure of a novel scene—
without the need to re-train—using amortized inference. NeRF - VAE’s explicit 3D rendering process further contrasts previous generative models
with convolution-based rendering which lacks geometric structure. Our model is a VAE that learns
a distribution over radiance fields by conditioning them on a latent scene representation. We
show that, once trained, NeRF - VAE is able to infer and render geometrically-consistent scenes
from previously unseen 3D environments of synthetic scenes using very few input images. We
further demonstrate that NeRF - VAE generalizes
well to out-of-distribution cameras, while convolutional models do not. Finally, we introduce and
study an attention-based conditioning mechanism
of NeRF - VAE’s decoder, which improves model
performance.

1

Introduction

The ability to infer the structure of scenes from visual inputs,
and to render high quality images from different viewpoints,
has vast implications for computer graphics and virtual reality.
This problem has traditionally been tackled with 3D
reconstruction-based on matching visual keypoints, e. g.
Lowe (2004); Schönberger & Frahm (2016). While these
methods incorporate structure through multi-view geometry
(Hartley & Zisserman, 2003), very few existing methods
adopt learned scene-priors such as types of objects or statis*
1
Equal contribution
DeepMind, London.
Correspondence to:
ARK <adamrk@deepmind.com>, HS
<strathmann@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tics of the background. The resulting representations are
usually discrete: they consist of meshes (Dai et al., 2017),
point clouds (Engel et al., 2014), or discretized volumes
(Ulusoy et al., 2016), and are difficult to integrate with
neural networks. An alternative approach to scene generation uses light-field rendering (Levoy & Hanrahan, 1996;
Srinivasan et al., 2017) and multiplane image representations (Zhou et al., 2018; Mildenhall et al., 2019). While
these methods allow image-based rendering, they do not
estimate scene geometry. Hence, they are not directly useful
for the purpose of 3D scene understanding. More recent
deep-learning-based novel view synthesis methods have the
advantages of end-to-end training, and producing distributed
representations that can be easily used in other neural-netbased downstream tasks. These models, however, often have
little embedded geometrical knowledge (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2014) and are either geometrically inconsistent (NguyenPhuoc et al., 2020) or provide insufficient visual quality
(Tatarchenko et al., 2015). Moreover, many of these methods are deterministic and cannot manage uncertainty in the
inputs (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Trevithick & Yang, 2021).
This work attempts to address these shortcomings. We
introduce NeRF - VAE—a deep generative model with the
knowledge of 3D geometry as well as complex scene priors.
Our work builds on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF, Mildenhall et al. (2020)). NeRF combines implicit neural network
representations of radiance fields, or scene functions, with
a volumetric rendering process. NeRF needs to undergo a
lengthy optimization process on many views of each single
scene separately and does not generalize to novel scenes.
In contrast, NeRF - VAE—a variational auto-encoder (VAE)—
models multiple scenes, while its constant-time amortized
inference allows reasoning about novel scenes. Unlike NeRF,
our model is also generative, and therefore capable of handling missing data and imagining completely new scenes. In
that, our work closely follows Generative Query Networks
(GQN, Eslami et al. (2018)). Like GQN, NeRF - VAE defines
a distribution over scene functions. Once sampled, a scene
function allows rendering arbitrary views of the underlying
scene. Where GQN relies on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) with no knowledge of 3D geometry, leading to geometrical inconsistencies, NeRF - VAE achieves consistency by
leveraging NeRF’s implicit representations and volumetric

