HEMET: A Homomorphic-Encryption-Friendly Privacy-Preserving Mobile
Neural Network Architecture
Qian Lou 1 Lei Jiang 1

Abstract
Recently Homomorphic Encryption (HE) is used
to implement Privacy-Preserving Neural Networks (PPNNs) that perform inferences directly
on encrypted data without decryption. Prior
PPNNs adopt mobile network architectures such
as SqueezeNet for smaller computing overhead,
but we find naïvely using mobile network architectures for a PPNN does not necessarily achieve
shorter inference latency. Despite having less parameters, a mobile network architecture typically
introduces more layers and increases the HE multiplicative depth of a PPNN, thereby prolonging
its inference latency. In this paper, we propose
a HE-friendly privacy-preserving Mobile neural
nETwork architecture, HEMET. Experimental
results show that, compared to state-of-the-art
(SOTA) PPNNs, HEMET reduces the inference
latency by 59.3% ∼ 61.2%, and improves the
inference accuracy by 0.4% ∼ 0.5%.

1. Introduction
Clients feel reluctant to upload their sensitive data, e.g.,
health or financial records, to untrusted servers in the cloud.
To protect clients’ privacy, privacy-preserving neural networks (PPNNs) (Juvekar et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2020;
Brutzkus et al., 2019; Gilad-Bachrach et al., 2016; Dathathri
et al., 2019) are built to perform inferences directly on encrypted data. An interactive PPNN (Juvekar et al., 2018;
Mishra et al., 2020) uses homomorphic encryption (HE)
for linear layers, and adopts secure multi-party computation (MPC) to process activation layers. However, huge
volumes of data between the client and the server have to
be exchanged during an inference of an interactive PPNN.
For instance, DELPHI (Mishra et al., 2020) has to transmit
2GB data for only a ResNet-32 inference on a single encrypted CIFAR-10 image. On the contrary, non-interactive
1

Indiana University Bloomington. Correspondence to: Lei
Jiang <jiang60@iu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

PPNNs (Brutzkus et al., 2019; Dathathri et al., 2019; 2020)
approximate their activations by a degree-2 polynomial, and
compute an entire inference via HE. They do not require
high network bandwidth, but still can obtain competitive
inference accuracy (Dathathri et al., 2020). Thereafter (except Section 2.2), when we mention a PPNN, we indicate a
non-interactive PPNN.
Unfortunately, PPNN inferences are time-consuming. An
inference of a typical PPNN (Dathathri et al., 2019) requires > 2 seconds on an encrypted MNIST image, and
consumes > 70 seconds on an encrypted CIFAR-10 image.
There is a ×106 latency gap between a PPNN inference
and a unencrypted inference. To mitigate the gap, recent
work (Dathathri et al., 2020; 2019) adopts mobile neural
network architectures such as SqueezeNet (Iandola et al.,
2016) and InceptionNet (Szegedy et al., 2016) to implement
PPNNs. However, we find naïvely adopting mobile neural network architectures for PPNNs does not necessarily
achieves shorter inference latency. Mobile neural network
models (Szegedy et al., 2016; Iandola et al., 2016) reduce
the total number of parameters but still maintain competitive
inference accuracy by adding more linear layers. In spite of
less parameters, if a PPNN adopts a mobile neural network
architecture, its deeper architecture with more layers greatly
increases the HE multiplicative depth, thereby decelerating
each HE operations of the PPNN, where the multiplicative depth means the number of HE multiplications on the
critical path.
In this paper, we propose a Homomorphic-Encryptionfriendly privacy-preserving Mobile neural network architecture, HEMET, to achieve shorter inference latency and
higher inference accuracy. Our contributions can be summarized as the following.
• We first identify that naïvely applying a mobile neural
network architecture on a PPNN may even prolong its
inference latency. Although the mobile network architecture reduces HE operations of the PPNN, but it greatly
increases the multiplicative depth and decelerates each
HE operation of the PPNN.
• We propose a simple, greedy HE-friendly mobile network
architecture search algorithm to evaluate whether a block
should adopt a regular convolutional layer or a mobile

