A Wasserstein Minimax Framework for Mixed Linear Regression

Theo Diamandis * 1 Yonina C. Eldar 2 Alireza Fallah 1 Farzan Farnia 1 Asuman Ozdaglar 1

Abstract
Multi-modal distributions are commonly used to
model clustered data in statistical learning tasks.
In this paper, we consider the Mixed Linear Regression (MLR) problem. We propose an optimal
transport-based framework for MLR problems,
Wasserstein Mixed Linear Regression (WMLR),
which minimizes the Wasserstein distance between the learned and target mixture regression
models. Through a model-based duality analysis, WMLR reduces the underlying MLR task
to a nonconvex-concave minimax optimization
problem, which can be provably solved to find
a minimax stationary point by the Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) algorithm. In the special
case of mixtures of two linear regression models, we show that WMLR enjoys global convergence and generalization guarantees. We prove
that WMLR’s sample complexity grows linearly
with the dimension of data. Finally, we discuss the
application of WMLR to the federated learning
task where the training samples are collected by
multiple agents in a network. Unlike the Expectation Maximization algorithm, WMLR directly
extends to the distributed, federated learning setting. We support our theoretical results through
several numerical experiments, which highlight
our framework’s ability to handle the federated
learning setting with mixture models.

1. Introduction
Learning mixture models which describe data collected from
multiple subpopulations has been a basic task in the machine learning literature. Multi-modal distributions typically
emerge in distributed learning settings where the training
data are gathered from a heterogeneous group of users. For
*
The authors are in alphabetical order. 1 Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, MIT, USA 2 Faculty of Math
and Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Correspondence to: Theo Diamandis <tdiamand@mit.edu>, Alireza
Fallah <afallah@mit.edu>, Farzan Farnia <farnia@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

example, speech data or genetic data may exhibit a clustered
distribution based on language and ethnicity, respectively.
Such settings require learning methods that can efficiently
learn an underlying multi-modal distribution in both a centralized and a distributed setting.
In this paper, we specifically focus on Mixed Linear Regression (MLR) problems. In the MLR problem, the output
variable for every user is a randomized linear function of the
feature variables, generated according to one of k unknown
linear regression models. This structured model provides
a simple but expressive framework to analyze multimodal
labeled data. The clustered structure of MLR appears in
several supervised learning applications. For example, users
of a recommendation engine usually have unknown yet clustered sets of preferences which leads to multiple regression
models. In genetic datasets, the underlying cell-type of
collected samples is a latent variable that can result in different linear regression models. Under such scenarios, the
cluster identity is an unknown latent variable that should be
estimated along with the linear regression models.
To address the MLR problem, we propose an optimal
transport-based learning framework, which we refer to as
Wasserstein Mixed Linear Regression (WMLR). We revisit
optimal transport theory to formulate the centralized MLR
task as a minimax optimization problem solved by the
WMLR algorithm. The formulated minimax problem is
the dual problem of minimizing the Wasserstein distance
between the target and learned mixture regression models.
Because the original minimax problem formulated by applying the standard Kantorovich duality (Villani, 2008) incurs
significant computational and statistical costs, we reduce the
minimax learning task to a tractable problem by a modelbased simplification of the dual maximization variables.
For a general MLR problem, we prove that the proposed
minimax problem can be reduced to a nonconvex-concave
optimization problem for which the gradient descent ascent
(GDA) algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a stationary minimax solution. Furthermore, under the well-studied
benchmark of a mixture of two symmetric linear regression models, we theoretically support our framework by
providing global convergence and generalization guarantees.
In particular, we show that our framework can provably
converge to the global minimax solution and properly gen-

