Functional Space Analysis of Local GAN Convergence
Valentin Khrulkov 1 Artem Babenko 1 2 Ivan Oseledets 3

Abstract
Recent work demonstrated the benefits of studying continuous-time dynamics governing the
GAN training. However, this dynamics is analyzed in the model parameter space, which results
in finite-dimensional dynamical systems. We propose a novel perspective where we study the local
dynamics of adversarial training in the general
functional space and show how it can be represented as a system of partial differential equations.
Thus, the convergence properties can be inferred
from the eigenvalues of the resulting differential
operator. We show that these eigenvalues can be
efficiently estimated from the target dataset before
training. Our perspective reveals several insights
on the practical tricks commonly used to stabilize
GANs, such as gradient penalty, data augmentation, and advanced integration schemes. As an
immediate practical benefit, we demonstrate how
one can a priori select an optimal data augmentation strategy for a particular generation task.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) allow for efficient learning of complicated probability distributions from samples. However, training such
models is notoriously complicated: the dynamics can exhibit
oscillatory behavior, and the convergence can be very slow.
To alleviate this, a number of practical tricks, including
the usage of data augmentation (Karras et al., 2020a; Zhao
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020) and optimization methods
inspired by numerical integration schemes for ODEs (Qin
et al., 2020) have been proposed. Nevertheless, the theory
explaining the success of these methods is only starting to
catch up with practice.
The standard way of training a GAN is to use simultane-

ous gradient descent. In Nagarajan & Kolter (2017) it was
shown that under mild assumptions, this method is locally
convergent. The authors Mescheder et al. (2018) demonstrated that when these assumptions are not satisfied, the
usage of regularization methods such as the gradient penalty
(Roth et al., 2017) or consensus optimization (Mescheder
et al., 2017) is required to achieve convergence. In Balduzzi
et al. (2018); Nie & Patel (2020); Liang & Stokes (2019)
the local convergence is studied based on the eigenvalues
of the Jacobian of the dynamics near the equilibrium. Such
analysis involves the parameterization of the generator and
the discriminator by neural networks and usually does not
take into account the properties of the target distribution.
Our key idea is that this dynamics can be efficiently analyzed
in the functional space. This is achieved by constructing a
local quadratic approximation of the GAN training objective and writing down the dynamics as a system of partial
differential equations (PDEs). The differential operator underlying this system has a remarkably simple form, and
its spectrum can be analyzed in terms of the fundamental
properties of the target distribution. Furthermore, we show
that the convergence of the dynamics is determined by the
Poincaré constant of this distribution. Intuitively, this constant describes the connectivity properties of a distribution;
for instance, it is smaller for multimodal datasets with disconnected modes, where GAN convergence is known to
be slower. This connection is practically important since
the Poincaré constant of a dataset can be easily estimated a
priori, and the larger it is, the better is the expected convergence of GAN. Thus, we can analyze common techniques
that alter the train set in terms of their effect on the Poincaré
constant. For instance, one can choose a proper augmentation strategy that increases the Poincaré constant the most.
The main contributions of our paper are:
• We develop a linearized GAN training model in the
functional space in the form of a PDE.

Yandex, Russia National Research University Higher School
of Economics, Moscow, Russia 3 Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Valentin
Khrulkov <khrulkov.v@gmail.com>.

• We derive explicit formulas connecting the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the resulting PDE operator
with the target distribution properties. This connection
provides a theoretical justification for common GAN
stabilization techniques.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• We describe an efficient, practical recipe for choosing optimal parameters for gradient penalty and data

1

2

