Sparsity-Agnostic Lasso Bandit
Min-hwan Oh 1 Garud Iyengar 2 Assaf Zeevi 2

Abstract
We consider a stochastic contextual bandit problem where the dimension d of the feature vectors
is potentially large, however, only a sparse subset
of features of cardinality s0 ⌧ d affect the reward function. Essentially all existing algorithms
for sparse bandits require a priori knowledge of
the value of the sparsity index s0 . This knowledge is almost never available in practice, and
misspecification of this parameter can lead to severe deterioration in the performance of existing
methods. The main contribution of this paper is to
propose an algorithm that does not require prior
knowledge of the sparsity index s0 and establish
tight regret bounds on its performance under mild
conditions. We also comprehensively evaluate our
proposed algorithm numerically and show that it
consistently outperforms existing methods, even
when the correct sparsity index is revealed to them
but is kept hidden from our algorithm.

1. Introduction
In classical multi-armed bandits (MAB), one of the arms
is pulled in each round and a reward corresponding to the
chosen arm is revealed to the decision-making agent. The rewards are, typically, independent and identically distributed
samples from an arm-specific distribution. The goal of the
agent is to devise a strategy for pulling arms that maximizes
cumulative rewards, suitably balancing between exploration
and exploitation. Linear contextual bandits (Abe & Long,
1999; Auer, 2002; Chu et al., 2011) and generalized linear
contextual bandits (Filippi et al., 2010; Li et al., 2017) are
more recent important extensions of the basic MAB setting,
where each arm a is associated with a known feature vector
xa 2 Rd , and the expected payoff of the arm is a (typically,
⇤
monotone increasing) function of the inner product x>
a
⇤
d
for a fixed and unknown parameter vector
2 R . Unlike
*
Equal contribution 1 Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea 2 Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the traditional MAB problem, here pulling any one arm
provides some information about the unknown parameter
vector, and hence, insight into the average reward of all the
other arms. These contextual bandit algorithms are applicable in a variety of problem settings, such as recommender
systems, assortment selection in online retail, and healthcare
analytics (Li et al., 2010; Oh & Iyengar, 2019; Tewari &
Murphy, 2017), where the contextual information can be
used for personalization and generalization.
In most application domains highlighted above, the feature space is high-dimensional (d
1), yet typically only
a small subset of the features influence the expected reward. That is, the unknown parameter vector is sparse
with only elements corresponding to the relevant features
being non-zero, i.e., the sparsity index s0 = k ⇤ k0 ⌧ d,
where the zero norm kxk0 counts non-zero entries in the
vector x. There is an emerging body of literature on contextual bandit problems with sparse linear reward functions
(Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012; Gilton & Willett, 2017; Bastani & Bayati, 2020; Wang et al., 2018; Kim & Paik, 2019)
which propose methods to exploit the sparse structure under
various conditions. However, there is a crucial shortcoming
in almost all of these approaches: the algorithms require
prior knowledge of the sparsity index s0 , information that
is almost never available in practice. In the absence of
such knowledge, the existing algorithms fail to fully leverage the sparse structure, and their performance does not
guarantee the improvements in dimensionality-dependence
which can be realized in the sparse problem setting (and
can lead to extremely poor performance if s0 is underspecified). The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that a
relatively simple contextual bandit algorithm that exploits
`1 -regularized regression using Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) in
a sparsity-agnostic manner, is provably near-optimal insofar
as its regret performance (under suitable regularity). Our
contributions are as follows:
(a) We propose the first general sparse bandit algorithm
that does not require prior knowledge of the sparsity
index s0 .
(b) We establish thatpthe regret bound of our proposed algorithm is O(s0 T log(dT )) for the two-armed case,
which affords the most accessible exposition of the key
analytical ideas. (Extensions to the general K-armed

