Improved Algorithms for Agnostic Pool-based Active Classification

Julian Katz-Samuels 1 Jifan Zhang 2 Lalit Jain 2 Kevin Jamieson 2

Abstract
We consider active learning for binary classification in the agnostic pool-based setting. The
vast majority of works in active learning in the
agnostic setting are inspired by the CAL algorithm where each query is uniformly sampled
from the disagreement region of the current version space. The sample complexity of such algorithms is described by a quantity known as the
disagreement coefficient which captures both the
geometry of the hypothesis space as well as the
underlying probability space. To date, the disagreement coefficient has been justified by minimax lower bounds only, leaving the door open
for superior instance dependent sample complexities. In this work we propose an algorithm that,
in contrast to uniform sampling over the disagreement region, solves an experimental design problem to determine a distribution over examples
from which to request labels. We show that the
new approach achieves sample complexity bounds
that are never worse than the best disagreement
coefficient-based bounds, but in specific cases
can be dramatically smaller. From a practical
perspective, the proposed algorithm requires no
hyperparameters to tune (e.g., to control the aggressiveness of sampling), and is computationally efficient by means of assuming access to an
empirical risk minimization oracle (without any
constraints). Empirically, we demonstrate that our
algorithm is superior to state of the art agnostic
active learning algorithms on image classification
datasets.

1. Introduction
Most applications of machine learning have an enormous
amount of unlabeled data. Yet, many powerful machine
1

University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 2 Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA. Correspondence to: Kevin Jamieson
<jamieson@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

learning methods require that this data be labeled and reliable labels are costly since they require human intervention.
The cost of providing labels has become one of the main
bottlenecks in applications of machine learning, generating
much interest in the problem of active classification where
the learner is given an unlabeled pool of examples and her
goal is to identify an accurate hypothesis using the minimum
number of labels possible (Settles, 2011).
One of the most popular algorithmic paradigms is
disagreement-based active classification (Hanneke et al.,
2014). Under this approach, after observing k labels a
version space Vk of the most promising classifiers is maintained, and the learner queries an example x if there are
two hypotheses h1 and h2 belonging to Vk that disagree on
the label of x. This approach has received much attention
because it applies to generic hypothesis classes, it can be
made robust to label noise, and it can be efficient by using a
constrained cost-sensitive classification oracle, a problem
for which there are many reasonable heuristics (Agarwal
et al., 2018; Beygelzimer et al., 2010).
However, disagreement-based active classification suffers
from two significant shortcomings. First, it queries uniformly any example on which there is disagreement even
though intuitively some of these examples may be much
more informative than others. Second, disagreement-based
active classification algorithms tend to take a naive union
bound over all hypotheses, which ignores many of the dependencies among the hypotheses. Indeed, recent work
in pure exploration combinatorial and linear bandits has
shown that such naive union bounds can be highly suboptimal and have a significant impact on empirical performance
(Cao & Krishnamurthy, 2019; Jain & Jamieson, 2019; KatzSamuels et al., 2020). Given that these naive union bounds
are very loose and appear in the confidence bounds used
by the algorithms, in practice, many works instead replace
these union bounds with a constant that can be tuned to
control the aggressiveness of the algorithm (Beygelzimer
et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2015). Unfortunately, this constant
introduces a hyperparameter to the active learning algorithm
that is difficult to set before seeing lots of data.
We design a new algorithm for pool-based active classification that addresses these shortcomings. It optimizes
a novel experimental design objective that finds the best

