Learning to Price Against a Moving Target

Renato Paes Leme 1 Balasubramanian Sivan 1 Yifeng Teng 2 Pratik Worah 1

Abstract
In the Learning to Price setting, a seller posts
prices over time with the goal of maximizing revenue while learning the buyer’s valuation. This
problem is very well understood when values are
stationary (fixed or iid). Here we study the problem where the buyer’s value is a moving target,
i.e., they change over time either by a stochastic
process or adversarially with bounded variation.
In either case, we provide matching upper and
lower bounds on the optimal revenue loss. Since
the target is moving, any information learned soon
becomes out-dated, which forces the algorithms
to keep switching between exploring and exploiting phases.

1. Introduction
Inspired by applications in electronic commerce, we study
a problem where a seller repeatedly interacts with a buyer
by setting prices for an item and observing whether the
buyer purchases or not. These problems are characterized
by two salient features: (i) binary feedback: we only observe
if the buyer purchased or not, at the price we posted; (ii)
discontinuous loss function: pricing just below the buyer’s
valuation incurs a small loss while pricing just above it
incurs a large loss since it results in a no-sale.
This problem has been studied with many different assumptions on how the buyer valuation vt changes over time: fixed
over time and i.i.d. draws each round were studied in (Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003; Devanur et al., 2019; Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2019), deterministic contextual (Amin et al., 2014;
Cohen et al., 2016; Lobel et al., 2017; Leme & Schneider,
2018; Liu et al., 2021), contextual with parametric noise
(Javanmard & Nazerzadeh, 2019) and contextual with non*

parametric noise (Shah et al., 2019; Krishnamurthy et al.,
2020). All those models are stationary in the sense that the
buyer’s model is i.i.d. across time. The exceptions to this
are algorithms that consider valuations that are drawn adversarially (Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003), but that work still
compares with the best single price in hindsight. I.e., even
though the buyer model is non-stationary, the benchmark
still is.
Our main goal in this paper is to explore settings where
both the buyer model and the benchmark are non-stationary.
We will compare our revenue with the first-best benchmark,
namely, the sum of the buyer’s value at every single step.
We will however assume that the buyer’s valuation moves
slowly.

Motivation Our main motivation for this study is online
advertising. Display ads are mostly sold through first price
auctions with reserve prices (Paes Leme et al., 2020). In
many market segments, the auctions are thin, i.e., there is
just one buyer, who bids just above the reserve when his
value exceeds the reserve (to both pay as little as possible,
and not reveal their true value) and doesn’t bid otherwise.
This scenario effectively offers just binary feedback, and
also makes reserve price the only pricing tool (i.e., not much
auction competition). To see why buyer value changes are
typically slow, and unknown to the seller: the effective value
of a buyer, even for two identical queries, is similar but not
exactly the same due to factors such as remaining budget. A
common scenario is that a buyer has a spend target stating
a target θt of their daily budget to be spent by time t. Bids
often become a function of the ratio between the actual
spend and the target spend. The auction platform doesn’t
know the targets/bidding formula, but it can use the fact
that both target and actual spend, and hence the bids, will
change smoothly over time.

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, NY, USA
Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Renato Paes
Leme <renatoppl@google.com>, Balasubramanian Sivan <balusivan@google.com>, Yifeng Teng <yifengt@cs.wisc.edu>,
Pratik Worah <pworah@google.com>.

Another important motivation is to effectively price buyers who are learning about their own valuation. This is a
common setup in finance (Shreve, 2004) where traders constantly acquire new information about the products they are
trading, and update their valuations accordingly.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Our results and techniques are presented in Section 3 after
we formally define our model in Section 2.

2

