BasisDeVAE: Interpretable Simultaneous Dimensionality Reduction and
Feature-Level Clustering with Derivative-Based Variational Autoencoders

Dominic Danks 1 2 Christopher Yau 2 3 4

Abstract
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) performs effective nonlinear dimensionality reduction in a
variety of problem settings. However, the blackbox neural network decoder function typically employed limits the ability of the decoder function to
be constrained and interpreted, making the use of
VAEs problematic in settings where prior knowledge should be embedded within the decoder. We
present DeVAE, a novel VAE-based model with a
derivative-based forward mapping, allowing for
greater control over decoder behaviour via specification of the decoder function in derivative space.
Additionally, we show how DeVAE can be paired
with a sparse clustering prior to create BasisDeVAE and perform interpretable simultaneous dimensionality reduction and feature-level clustering. We demonstrate the performance and scalability of the DeVAE and BasisDeVAE models on
synthetic and real-world data and present how the
derivative-based approach allows for expressive
yet interpretable forward models which respect
prior knowledge.

1. Introduction
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) have become ubiquitous in modern machine learning
and are applied in a wide range of settings, including the
generation and disentangled latent coding of images (Gregor et al., 2015; Higgins et al., 2017; Kumar et al., 2018),
text generation (Bowman et al., 2016a; Xu et al., 2020) and
semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al., 2014; Maaløe et al.,
2016). They have also played an important role in interpret-

ing high-dimensional biological data, such as that produced
in genomics settings (Lopez et al., 2018; Simidjievski et al.,
2019; Qiu et al., 2020).
1.1. Extensions of VAEs
The standard VAE integrates Bayesian latent variable modelling, deep neural networks (DNNs) and variational inference, the combination of which results in a probabilistic
encoder which maps a (high-dimensional) input onto a (lowdimensional) latent space and a corresponding probabilistic
decoder which maps each position in the latent space onto a
distribution in the observation space.
Many variants of the standard VAE have been developed, including the conditional VAE (cVAE) (Sohn et al., 2015)
which conditions the behaviour of the encoder and decoder on additional fixed inputs, the neural decomposition
VAE (Märtens & Yau, 2020) which imposes a functional
ANOVA structure on the decoder, and the beta-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017) which incorporates additional regularisation to encourage latent variable disentanglement. Recently,
an approach that combines dimensionality reduction and
feature-level clustering within a VAE framework (BasisVAE) has been developed (Märtens & Yau, 2020). This
type of model is of particular utility on tabular datasets
where each feature may have a distinct standalone meaning
(e.g. it represents a protein, gene or age). BasisVAE groups
subsets of features together whose behaviour is similar over
the latent dimensions. Figure 1 demonstrates the overall
pipeline of such a simultaneous dimensionality reduction
and feature-level clustering method. It can be seen that the
application of dimensionality reduction via a standard VAE
uncovers structure only in the rows (samples) of tabular data
X ∈ RN ×d , whereas simultaneous dimensionality reduction and feature-level clustering aims to uncover structure
in both the rows (samples) and columns (features).

1

Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 3 Division of Informatics, Imaging & Data Sciences,
Unversity of Manchester, Manchester, UK 4 Health Data Research UK, London, UK. Correspondence to: Dominic Danks
<ddanks@turing.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

These developments recognise the benefit of introducing additional structure into the flexible VAE framework in order
to encourage desirable model behaviour. However, specifying particular functional characteristics with current VAE
decoders remains an open challenge. For example, BasisVAE allows us to identify features which share exactly the
same functional shape or dynamics, but it does not provide

