Provable Robustness of Adversarial Training
for Learning Halfspaces with Noise

Difan Zou * 1 Spencer Frei * 2 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
We analyze the properties of adversarial training for learning adversarially robust halfspaces
in the presence of agnostic label noise. Denoting OPTp,r as the best robust classification error
achieved by a halfspace that is robust to perturbations of `p balls of radius r, we show that adversarial training on the standard binary cross-entropy
loss yields adversarially robust p
halfspaces up
to (robust) classification error e
O( OPT2,r ) for
p
e 1/4 OPT∞,r + d1/2 OPT∞,r )
p = 2, and O(d
when p = ∞. Our results hold for distributions
satisfying anti-concentration properties enjoyed
by log-concave isotropic distributions among others. We additionally show that if one instead uses
a nonconvex sigmoidal loss, adversarial training
yields halfspaces with an improved robust classification error of O(OPT2,r ) for p = 2, and
O(d1/4 OPT∞,r ) when p = ∞. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to show that
adversarial training provably yields robust classifiers in the presence of noise.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning models are powerful but brittle: standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD) training of deep
neural networks can lead to remarkable performance as
measured by the classification accuracy on the test set, but
this performance rapidly degrades if the metric is instead
adversarially robust accuracy. This brittleness is most apparent for image classification tasks, where neural networks
trained by gradient descent achieve state-of-the-art classification accuracy on a number of benchmark tasks, but where
imperceptible (adversarial) perturbations of an image can
force the neural network to get nearly all of its predictions
incorrect (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, UCLA
Department of Statistics, UCLA. Correspondence to: Quanquan
Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

To formalize the above comment, let us define the robust error of a classifier. Let D be a distribution over
(x, y) ∈ Rd × {±1}, and let f : Rd → {±1} be a hypothesis classifier. For p ∈ [1, ∞] and perturbation radius
r > 0, the `p robust error for radius r is given by
 0

0
0
errp,r
D (f ) = P(x,y)∼D ∃x : kx−x kp ≤ r, and y 6= f (x )
(1.1)
The standard accuracy of a classifier f is given by
errD (f ) = P(x,y)∼D (y 6= f (x)), and is equivalent to the
robust accuracy at radius r = 0. That SGD produces neural
networks f with high classification accuracy but low robust
accuracy means that errD (f ) ≈ 0 but errp,r
D (f ) ≈ 1, even
when r is an extremely small number.
The vulnerability of SGD-trained neural networks to adversarial examples has led researchers to introduce a number
of methods aimed at improving the robustness of neural networks to adversarial examples (Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry
et al., 2018; Tramèr et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019a;b). One notable approach is known as adversarial training, where the standard SGD algorithm is modified
so that data samples are perturbed x 7→ x + δ with the aim
of increasing the robust accuracy. In the same way that one
minimizes the standard classification error by minimizing a
surrogate loss, adversarial training seeks to minimize
Lp,r
D (f ) = E(x,y)∼D

sup

`(yf (x0 )),

(1.2)

x0 :kx0 −xkp ≤r

where `(·) is some convex surrogate for the 0-1 loss.
Unfortunately, the inner maximization problem is typically intractable, especially when f comes from a neural network function class. Indeed, it is often difficult to
calculate any nontrivial upper bound for the robust loss
supx0 :kx−x0 kp ≤r `(yf (x0 )) for a fixed sample x. A number
of recent works have focused on developing upper bounds
for the robust loss that are computationally tractable, which
enables end-users to certify the robustness of learned classifiers by evaluating the upper bound on test samples (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong & Kolter, 2018; Cohen et al.,
2019). Additionally, upper bounds for the robust loss can
then be used as a new objective function to be minimized
as an alternative to the intractable robust loss. This approach has seen impressive results in improving the adversarial robustness of classifiers, but unfortunately these

