Approximation Theory Based Methods for RKHS Bandits

Sho Takemori 1 Masahiro Sato 1

Abstract
The RKHS bandit problem (also called kernelized multi-armed bandit problem) is an online optimization problem of non-linear functions with
noisy feedback. Although the problem has been
extensively studied, there are unsatisfactory results for some problems compared to the wellstudied linear bandit case. Specifically, there is no
general algorithm for the adversarial RKHS bandit problem. In addition, high computational complexity of existing algorithms hinders practical application. We address these issues by considering
a novel amalgamation of approximation theory
and the misspecified linear bandit problem. Using
an approximation method, we propose efficient algorithms for the stochastic RKHS bandit problem
and the first general algorithm for the adversarial
RKHS bandit problem. Furthermore, we empirically show that one of our proposed methods has
comparable cumulative regret to IGP-UCB and
its running time is much shorter.

1. Introduction
The RKHS bandit problem (also called kernelized multiarmed bandit problem) is an online optimization problem
of non-linear functions with noisy feedback. Srinivas et al.
(2010) studied a multi-armed bandit problem where the reward function belongs to the reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS) associated with a kernel. In this paper, we
call this problem the (stochastic) RKHS bandit problem.
Although the problem has been studied extensively, some
issues are not completely solved yet. In this paper, we
focus on mainly two issues: non-existence of general algorithms for the adversarial RKHS bandit problem and high
computational complexity for the stochastic RKHS bandit
algorithms.
First, as a non-linear generalization of the classical adversarial linear bandit problem, Chatterji et al. (2019) proposed
1

FUJIFILM Business Innovation, Kanagawa, Japan. Correspondence to: Sho Takemori <sho.takemori.py@fujifilm.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the adversarial RKHS bandit problem, where a learner interacts with a sequence of any functions from the RKHS with
bounded norms. However, they only consider the kernel
loss, i.e., a loss function of the form x 7→ K(x, x0 ), where
x0 is a fixed point. Considering functions in the RKHS
can be represented as infinite linear combinations of such
functions, kernel loss is a very special function in the RKHS.
Therefore, there are no algorithms for the adversarial RKHS
bandits with general loss (or reward) functions.
Next, we discuss the efficiency of existing methods for the
stochastic RKHS bandit problem. We note that most of
the existing methods have regret guarantees at the cost of
high computational complexity. For example, IGP-UCB
(Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017) requires matrix-vector multiplication of size t for each arm at each round t = 1, . . . , T .
Therefore, the total computational complexity up to round
T is given as O(|A|T 3 ), where A is the set of arms. To
address the issue, Calandriello et al. (2020) proposed BBKB
and proved its total computational complexity is given as
e
O(|A|T
γT2 + γT4 ), where A ⊂ Ω is the set of arms, Ω is
a subset of a Euclidean space Rd , and γT is the maximum
information gain (Srinivas et al., 2010). If the kernel is a
d
e
squared exponential kernel, then since γT = O(log
(T ))1
(Srinivas et al., 2010), ignoring the polylogarithmic factor,
BBKB’s computational complexity is nearly linear in T .
However, the coefficient |A| in the term is large in general.
In this paper, we address these two issues by considering
a novel amalgamation of approximation theory (Wendland,
2004) and the misspecified linear bandit problem (Lattimore
et al., 2020). That is, we approximately reduce the RKHS
bandit problem to the well-studied linear bandit problem.
Here, because of an approximation error, the model is a misspecified linear model. Ordinary approximation methods
(such as Random Fourier Features or Nyström embedding)
basically aim to approximate kernel K(x, y) by an inner
product of finite dimensional vectors. However, to reduce
the RKHS bandits to the linear bandits, we want to approximate a function f in the RKHS HK (Ω) by a function φ in a
finite dimensional subspace so that kf − φkL∞ (Ω) is small.
Since the usual approximation methods are not appropriate
for the purpose, in this paper, we utilize a method developed
1
e notation to ignore logc (T ) factor,
In this paper, we use O
where c is a universal constant.

