On-the-Fly Rectification for Robust Large-Vocabulary Topic Inference

Moontae Lee 1 Sungjun Cho 2 Kun Dong 3 David Mimno 4 David Bindel 5

Abstract
Across many data domains, co-occurrence statistics about the joint appearance of objects are
powerfully informative. By transforming unsupervised learning problems into decompositions
of co-occurrence statistics, spectral algorithms
provide transparent and efficient algorithms for
posterior inference such as latent topic analysis
and community detection. As object vocabularies
grow, however, it becomes rapidly more expensive
to store and run inference algorithms on co-occurrence statistics. Rectifying co-occurrence, the key
process to uphold model assumptions, becomes
increasingly more vital in the presence of rare
terms, but current techniques cannot scale to large
vocabularies. We propose novel methods that simultaneously compress and rectify co-occurrence
statistics, scaling gracefully with the size of vocabulary and the dimension of latent space. We
also present new algorithms learning latent variables from the compressed statistics, and verify
that our methods perform comparably to previous
approaches on both textual and non-textual data.

1. Introduction
Understanding the underlying geometry of noisy and complex data is a fundamental problem of unsupervised learning.
Probabilistic models explain data generation processes in
terms of low-dimensional latent variables. Inferring a posterior distribution for these latent variables provides us with
a compact representation for various exploratory analyses
and downstream tasks (Bengio et al., 2013). However, exact
inference is often intractable due to entangled interactions
1

Information and Decision Sciences, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA (also affiliated in Microsoft Research at Redmond, Redmond, Washington, USA) 2 Computational
Science and Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
3
Applied Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
4
Information Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
5
Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Moontae Lee <moontae@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

between the latent variables (Blei et al., 2003; Airoldi et al.,
2008; A. Erosheva, 2003; Pritchard et al., 2000). Variational
inference transforms the posterior approximation into an
optimization problem over simpler distributions with independent parameters (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008; Blei et al., 2017), while Markov Chain Monte
Carlo enables users to sample from the desired posterior
distribution (Neal, 1993; Neal et al., 2011; Robert & Casella,
2013). However, these likelihood-based methods require
numerous iterations without any guarantee beyond local
improvement at each step (Kulesza et al., 2014).
When the data consists of collections of discrete objects,
co-occurrence statistics summarize interactions between
objects. Collaborative filtering learns low-dimensional representations of individual items, which are useful for recommendation systems, by explicitly decomposing the co-occurrence of items that are jointly consumed by certain users
(Lee et al., 2015; Liang et al., 2016). Word-vector models learn low-dimensional embeddings of individual words,
which encode useful linguistic biases for neural networks,
by implicitly decomposing the co-occurrence of words that
appear together in contexts (Pennington et al., 2014; Levy &
Goldberg, 2014). If co-occurrence provides a rich enough
set of unbiased moments about an underlying generative
model, spectral methods can provably learn posterior configurations from co-occurrence information alone, without
iterating through individual training examples (Arora et al.,
2013; Anandkumar et al., 2012c; Hsu et al., 2012; Anandkumar et al., 2012b).
However, two major limitations hinder users from taking
advantage of spectral inference based on co-occurrence.
First, the second-order co-occurrence matrix already grows
quadratically in the number of words (e.g. objects, items,
products). Pruning the vocabulary is an option, but for a
retailer selling millions of long-tailed products, learning
representations of only a subset of the products is inadequate. Second, inference quality is poor in real data that
does not necessarily follow our generative model. Whereas
likelihood-based methods (Blei et al., 2003; Airoldi et al.,
2008; A. Erosheva, 2003; Pritchard et al., 2000) have an
intrinsic capability to fit the data to the model despite their
mismatch, sample noise can easily destroy the performance
of spectral methods even if the data is synthesized from the
model (Kulesza et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2015).

