Near-Optimal Confidence Sequences for Bounded Random Variables

Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla * 1 Qinqing Zheng * 2

Abstract
Many inference problems, such as sequential decision problems like A/B testing, adaptive sampling schemes like bandit selection, are often online in nature. The fundamental problem for online inference is to provide a sequence of confidence intervals that are valid uniformly over the
growing-into-infinity sample sizes. To address
this question, we provide a near-optimal confidence sequence for bounded random variables by
utilizing Bentkus’ concentration results. We show
that it improves on the existing approaches that
use the Cramér-Chernoff technique such as the
Hoeffding, Bernstein, and Bennett inequalities.
The resulting confidence sequence is confirmed
to be favorable in synthetic coverage problems,
adaptive stopping algorithms, and multi-armed
bandit problems.

1. Introduction
The abundance of data over the decades has increased the
demand for sequential algorithms and inference procedures
in statistics and machine learning. For instance, when the
data is too large to fit in a single machine, it is natural to split
data into small batches and process one at a time. Besides,
many industry or laboratory data, like user behaviors on
a website, patient records, temperature histories, are naturally generated and available in a sequential order. In both
scenarios, the collection or processing of new data can be
costly, and practitioners often would like to stop data sampling when a required criterion is satisfied. This gives the
pressing call for algorithms that minimize the number of
sequential samples subject to the prescribed accuracy of the
estimator is satisfied.

sequential hypothesis testing problems such as testing positiveness of the mean (Zhao et al., 2016), testing equality
of distributions and testing independence (Balsubramani &
Ramdas, 2016; Yang et al., 2017), A/B testing (Johari et al.,
2015; 2017), sequential probability ratio test (Wald, 2004),
best arm identification for multi-arm bandits (MAB) (Zhao
et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017), etc. All these applications
require confidence sequences to determine the number of
samples required for a certain guarantee.
A simple example to start from is estimating the mean of a
random variable from sequentially available data. This is a
classic problem in statistics and widely applied to various
p is said to be pε, δq-accurate
applications. An estimator µ
for the mean µ if Pp|p
µ{µ ´ 1| ď εq ě 1 ´ δ (Dagum et al.,
2000; Mnih et al., 2008; Huber, 2019). This means that the
estimator has a relative error of at most ε with probability at
least 1 ´ δ. In the sequential setting, one important question
we would like to answer is how many samples are needed
to obtain an estimator of the mean that is pε, δq accurate?
Mnih et al. (2008) shows the answer can be derived from a
confidence sequence.
Definition 1. Let Y1 , Y2 , . . . be independent real-valued
random variables, available sequentially, with mean µ P
R. Given δ P r0, 1s, a 1 ´ δ confidence sequence
is a sequence of confidence intervals ConfSeqpδq “
tCI1 pδq, CI2 pδq, . . .u, where CIn pδq is constructed on-thefly after observing data sample pY1 , . . . , Yn q, such that
P pµ P CIn pδq for all n ě 1q ě 1 ´ δ.

(1)

For the pε, δq-mean estimation problem above, suppose one
can construct a 1 ´ δ confidence sequence of µ:
ConfSeqpδq “ tCIn pδq “ rYsn ´ Qn , Ysn ` Qn s,

n ě 1u,

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Carnegie Mellon University. 2 Facebook AI Research. Part of the
work was done before the author joined FAIR. Correspondence
to: Arun Kumar Kuchibhotla <arunku@stat.cmu.edu>, Qinqing
Zheng <zhengqinqing@gmail.com>.

where Ysn is the empirical mean of the first n samples.
Mnih et al. (2008) shows that with number of samples
N “ mintn : p1 ´ εqUBn ď p1 ` εqLBn u, where UBn
and LBn are two simple functions of the radius of the conp “ p1{2qsignpYsN qrp1 ´
fidence intervals, the estimator µ
εqUBN ` p1 ` εqLBN s is pε, δq-accurate. See Algorithm 1
in Section 4.2 for details.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The need for sequential algorithms has triggered a surge of
interest in developing sharp confidence sequences. Unlike

Many important problems fit into this framework, including

