Learning Stochastic Behaviour from Aggregate Data

Shaojun Ma 1 Shu Liu 1 Hongyuan Zha 2 Haomin Zhou 1

Abstract
Learning nonlinear dynamics from aggregate data
is a challenging problem because the full trajectory of each individual is not available, namely,
the individual observed at one time may not be
observed at the next time point, or the identity of
individual is unavailable. This is in sharp contrast
to learning dynamics with full trajectory data, on
which the majority of existing methods are based.
We propose a novel method using the weak form
of Fokker Planck Equation (FPE) — a partial
differential equation — to describe the density
evolution of data in a sampled form, which is then
combined with Wasserstein generative adversarial
network (WGAN) in the training process. In such
a sample-based framework we are able to learn
the nonlinear dynamics from aggregate data without explicitly solving FPE. We demonstrate our
approach in the context of a series of synthetic
and real-world data sets.

1. Introduction
In the context of dynamical systems, Aggregate data refers
to a data format in which the full trajectory of each individual modeled by the evolution of state is not available,
but rather a sample from the distribution of state at a certain time point is available. Typical examples include data
sets collected for DNA evolution, social gathering, density in control problems, and bird migration, during the
evolution of which it is impossible to follow an individual
inter-temporally. In those applications, some observed individuals at one time point may be un-observable at the
next time spot, or when the individual identities are blocked
or unavailable due to various technical and ethical reasons.
Rather than inferring the exact information for each individ1

Department of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 2 School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China, the research of Hongyuan Zha is supported in
part by a grant from Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data.
Correspondence to: Shaojun Ma <shaojunma@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ual, the main objective of learning dynamics in aggregate
data is to recover and predict the evolution of distribution
of all individuals together. Trajectory data, in contrast, is
a kind of data that we are able to acquire the information
of each individual all the time. Although some studies also
considered the case that partial trajectories are missing, the
identities of those individuals, whenever they are observable, are always assumed available. For example, stock
price, weather, customer behaviors and most training data
sets for computer vision and natural language processing
are considered as trajectory data. There are many existing
models to learn dynamics of full-trajectory data. Typical
ones include Hamiltonian neural networks (Greydanus et al.,
2019), Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Alshamaa et al.,
2019; Eddy, 1996), Kalman Filter (KF) (Farahi & Yazdi,
2020; Harvey, 1990; Kalman, 1960) and Particle Filter (PF)
(Santos et al., 2019; Djuric et al., 2003), as well as the models built upon HMM, KF and PF (Deriche et al., 2020; Fang
et al., 2019; Hefny et al., 2015; Langford et al., 2009). They
require full trajectories of each individual, which may not
be applicable in the aggregate data situations. On the other
side, only a few methods are proposed on aggregated data
in the recent learning literature. In the work of Hashimoto
et al. (2016), authors assumed that the hidden dynamic of
particles follows a stochastic differential equation (SDE), in
particular, they used a recurrent neural network to parameterize the drift term. Furthermore, Wang et al. (2018) improved
traditional HMM model by using an SDE to describe the
evolving process of hidden states and Singh et al. (2020)
updated HMM parameters through aggregate observations.
We propose to learn the dynamics of density through the
weak form of Fokker Planck Equation (FPE), which is
a parabolic partial differential equation (PDE) governing
many dynamical systems subject to random noise perturbations, including the typical SDE models in existing studies.
Our learning is accomplished by minimizing the Wasserstein
distance between predicted distribution given by FPE and
the empirical distribution from data samples. Meanwhile
we utilize neural networks to handle higher dimensional
cases. More importantly, by leveraging the framework of
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) (Arjovsky et al., 2017), our model is capable of approximating
the distribution of samples at different time points without
solving the SDE or FPE. More specifically, we treat the drift

