On Linear Identifiability of Learned Representations

Geoffrey Roeder 1 Luke Metz 2 Diederik P. Kingma 2

Abstract
Identifiability is a desirable property of a statistical model: it implies that the true model parameters may be estimated to any desired precision,
given sufficient computational resources and data.
We study identifiability in the context of representation learning: discovering nonlinear data representations that are optimal with respect to some
downstream task. When parameterized as deep
neural networks, such representation functions
lack identifiability in parameter space, because
they are overparameterized by design. In this
paper, building on recent advances in nonlinear
Independent Components Analysis, we aim to rehabilitate identifiability by showing that a large
family of discriminative models are in fact identifiable in function space, up to a linear indeterminacy. Many models for representation learning in
a wide variety of domains have been identifiable
in this sense, including text, images and audio,
state-of-the-art at time of publication. We derive
sufficient conditions for linear identifiability and
provide empirical support for the result on both
simulated and real-world data.

1. Introduction
An increasingly common methodology in machine learning
is to improve performance on a primary down-stream task
by first learning a high-dimensional representation of the
data on a related, proxy task. In this paradigm, training
a model reduces to fine-tuning the learned representations
for optimal performance on a particular sub-task (Erhan
et al., 2010). Deep neural networks (DNNs), as flexible
function approximators, have been surprisingly successful
in discovering effective high-dimensional representations
for use in downstream tasks such as image classification
(Sharif Razavian et al., 2014), text generation (Radford
1
Princeton University 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to:
Geoffrey Roeder <roeder@princeton.edu>, Diederik P. Kingma
<durk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018), and sequential decision
making (Oord et al., 2018).
When learning representations for downstream tasks, it
would be useful if the representations were reproducible,
in the sense that every time a network relearns the representation function on the same data distribution, they were
approximately the same, regardless of small deviations in
the initialization of the parameters or the optimization procedure. In some applications, such as learning real-world
causal relationships from data, such reproducible learned
representations are crucial for accurate and robust inference
(Johansson et al., 2016; Louizos et al., 2017). A rigorous way to achieve reproducibility is to choose a model
whose representation function is identifiable in function
space. Informally speaking, identifiability in function space
is achieved when, in the limit of infinite data, there exists
a single, global optimum in function space. Interestingly,
Figure 1 exhibits learned representation functions that appear to be the same up to a linear transformation, even on
finite data and optimized without convergence guarantees
(see Appendix A.1 for training details).
In this paper, we account for Figure 1 by making precise the
relationship it exemplifies. We prove that a large class of
discriminative and autoregressive models are identifiable in
function space, up to a linear transformation. Our results extend recent advances in the theory of nonlinear Independent
Components Analysis (ICA), which have recently provided
strong identifiability results for generative models of data
(Hyvärinen et al., 2018; Khemakhem et al., 2019; 2020;
Sorrenson et al., 2020). Our key contribution is to bridge
the gap between these results and discriminative models,
commonly used for representation learning (e.g., (Hénaff
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020)).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we describe a general discriminative model family, defined
by its canonical mathematical form, which generalizes many
supervised, self-supervised, and contrastive learning frameworks. In Section 3, we prove that learned representations
in this family have an asymptotic property desirable for representation learning: equality up to a linear transformation.
In Section 4, we show that this family includes a number of
highly performant models, state-of-the-art at publication for
their problem domains, including CPC (Oord et al., 2018),

