Spectral Vertex Sparsifiers and Pair-Wise Spanners Over Distributed Graphs

Chun Jiang Zhu 1 Qinqing Liu 2 Jinbo Bi 2

Abstract
Graph sparsification is a powerful tool to approximate an arbitrary graph and has been used in
machine learning over graphs. As real-world
networks are becoming very large and naturally
distributed, distributed graph sparsification has
drawn considerable attention. In this work, we
design communication-efficient distributed algorithms for constructing spectral vertex sparsifiers,
which closely preserve effective resistance distances on a subset of vertices of interest in the original graphs, under the well-established message
passing communication model. We prove that
the communication cost approximates the lower
bound with only a small gap. We further provide
algorithms for constructing pair-wise spanners
which approximate the shortest distances between
each pair of vertices in a target set, instead of
all pairs, and incur communication costs that are
much smaller than those of existing algorithms in
the message passing model. Experiments are performed to validate the communication efficiency
of the proposed algorithms under the guarantee
that the constructed sparsifiers have a good approximation quality.

1. Introduction
Vertex sparsifiers and edge sparsifiers of a graph are a
smaller graph that has a reduced number of vertices and
a reduced number of edges respectively, but preserving important properties such as the spectral property, flow/cut
values or distances of the input graph. Recently they have
been used to improve the computational or communication
complexity of machine learning methods (Chen et al., 2016;
Loukas & Vandergheynst, 2018; Loukas, 2019; Zhu et al.,
2019a; Bravo Hermsdorff & Gunderson, 2019; Rong et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Chun Jiang Zhu <chunjiang.zhu@uncg.edu>, Jinbo Bi <jinbo.bi@uconn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2020; Zheng et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020).
Given a graph G(V, E) where V and E denote the sets of
vertices and edges, a subset of terminal vertices T ⊆ V
represents the vertices of interest in the graph G. In practice,
a community with a shared interest in social networks, or
abnormal nodes in communication networks, can form the
terminal set T for the respective graphs. The effective resistance between two vertices u and v is the voltage differential
between them when we regard the graph as an electrical network of resistors with one unit of current injected at u and
extracted at v. Effective resistances can be defined based
on graph Laplacian and are useful in many applications that
seek to cluster nodes in a network (von Luxburg et al., 2014).
For example, they have deep connections to random walks
on graphs (Tetali, 1991). The Schur complement1 (Zhang,
2005) of the Laplacian L of G with respect to (w.r.t.) T
is a pivotal concept, and can help calculate a spectral vertex sparsifier H(T, E 0 ) of G w.r.t. T (Durfee et al., 2019)
that preserves effective resistance between the vertices in
T . The concept of Schur complement is also used in solving Laplacian linear systems Lx = b when only a portion
of b is concerned. Schur complements have found a wide
range of applications including semi-supervised learning,
Markov chains and finite-element analysis, and computer
vision (Wagner et al., 2018; Kyng et al., 2016; Koutis et al.,
2011; Dorfler & Bullo, 2013; Zhang, 2005).
Similar to Schur complements that preserve crucial properties only for pairs of terminals in T , another research thread
works on constructing graph structures which preserve distances for pre-specified pairs of vertices, instead of all pairs.
For a set of vertex pairs P ⊆ V × V , a P -pairwise spanner
F (V, E 0 ⊆ E) of G only approximates distances between
pairs (u, v) ∈ P in G up to a small stretch. For example,
a P -pairwise spanner of stretch (+2) (or called (+2)-P pairwise spanner) of G, is a subgraph F of G where the
distance between every pair in P is at most their distance
in G plus two. When P has certain special structures, there
might be better trade-offs between the stretch and the size
(the number of edges) of the spanner. There exist two main
variants: S-sourcewise spanners for a subset of vertices
1

We will use Schur complements and spectral vertex sparsifiers interchangably, although strictly speaking, the former is the
Laplacian of the latter.

