SCC: an Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning Agent
Mastering the Game of StarCraft II

Xiangjun Wang * 1 Junxiao Song * 1 Penghui Qi * 1 Peng Peng 1 Zhenkun Tang 1 Wei Zhang 1 Weimin Li 1
Xiongjun Pi 1 Jujie He 1 Chao Gao 1 Haitao Long 1 Quan Yuan 1

Abstract
AlphaStar, the AI that reaches GrandMaster level
in StarCraft II, is a remarkable milestone demonstrating what deep reinforcement learning can
achieve in complex Real-Time Strategy (RTS)
games. However, the complexities of the game, algorithms and systems, and especially the tremendous amount of computation needed are big obstacles for the community to conduct further research in this direction. We propose a deep reinforcement learning agent, StarCraft Commander
(SCC). With order of magnitude less computation,
it demonstrates top human performance defeating GrandMaster players in test matches and top
professional players in a live event. Moreover, it
shows strong robustness to various human strategies and discovers novel strategies unseen from
human plays. In this paper, we’ll share the key
insights and optimizations on efficient imitation
learning and reinforcement learning for StarCraft
II full game.

1. Introduction
Games as research platforms have fueled a lot of recent
advances in reinforcement learning research. The success
of Atari (Mnih et al., 2013), AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016),
OpenAI Five (Berner et al., 2019) and AlphaStar (Vinyals
et al., 2019b) have demonstrated the remarkable results
deep reinforcement learning can achieve in various game
environments.
As the game complexity increases, those advances come
with extremely large computational overhead. For example,
in order to train OpenAI Five that reaches Dota 2 professional level, it utilized thousands of GPUs over multiple
months (Berner et al., 2019). AlphaStar also trained on
*

Equal contribution 1 inspir.ai, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xiangjun Wang <xj@inspirai.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

hundreds of TPUs for months (Vinyals et al., 2019b).
StarCraft, one of the most popular and complex Real-Time
Strategy (RTS) games, is considered as one of the grand
challenges for reinforcement learning. The reinforcement
learning algorithms need to make real-time decisions from
combinatorial action spaces, under partially observable information, plan over thousands of decision makings, and
deal with a large space of cyclic and counter strategies.
Competing with human players is especially challenging because humans excel at reacting to game plays and exploiting
opponents’ weaknesses.
In this paper, we propose StarCraft Commander (SCC). Similar to AlphaStar, it comprises two training stages, starting
with imitation learning, followed by league style reinforcement learning. We’ll describe what it takes to train a reinforcement learning agent to play at top human performance
with constrained compute resources, as well as the analysis
and key insights of model training and model behaviors.
First, we conduct extensive neural network architecture experiments to squeeze the performance gain while reducing
memory footprint. For example, reducing the input minimap
size from 128 × 128 to 64 × 64 reduces the sample data
size almost by half with almost identical performance in
the supervised learning stage. We also observed additional
performance improvements with various techniques such
as group transformer, attention based pooling, conditioned
concat attention, etc.
Second, we evaluated the effect of data size and quality for
imitation learning. To our surprise, we were able to get most
of the performance using only a small number of replays
(4,638) compared to the full dataset (105,034 replays). The
additional performance gain of large dataset only comes
with large batch size. The best result can be obtained with
large dataset training with large batch size and fine tuning
with small dataset of high quality replays. In the end, the
supervised learning model can beat the built-in elite bot with
97% win rate consistently.
Third, during the reinforcement learning stage, due to game
theoretic design of StarCraft, there exist vast spaces of strategies and cyclic counter strategies. It’s crucial to have both

