Dense for the Price of Sparse: Improved Performance of Sparsely Initialized
Networks via a Subspace Offset

Ilan Price 1 2 Jared Tanner 1 2

Abstract
That neural networks may be pruned to high sparsities and retain high accuracy is well established.
Recent research efforts focus on pruning immediately after initialization so as to allow the computational savings afforded by sparsity to extend to
the training process. In this work, we introduce a
new ‘DCT plus Sparse’ layer architecture, which
maintains information propagation and trainability even with as little as 0.01% trainable kernel
parameters remaining. We show that standard
training of networks built with these layers, and
pruned at initialization, achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy for extreme sparsities on a variety of
benchmark network architectures and datasets.
Moreover, these results are achieved using only
simple heuristics to determine the locations of the
trainable parameters in the network, and thus without having to initially store or compute with the
full, unpruned network, as is required by competing prune-at-initialization algorithms. Switching
from standard sparse layers to DCT plus Sparse
layers does not increase the storage footprint of a
network and incurs only a small additional computational overhead.

1. Introduction
It is well established that neural networks can be pruned extensively while retaining high accuracy; see (Blalock et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2020) for recent reviews. Sparse networks
have significant potential benefits in terms of the memory
and computational costs of training and applying large networks, as well as the cost of communication between servers
and edge devices in the context of federated learning. Consequently research on pruning techniques has garnered significant momentum over the last few years.
1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Ilan
Price <ilan.price@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1.1. Competing Priorities for Sparse Networks
Traditional pruning algorithms, which prune after or during training, result in a final network with a small storage
footprint and fast inference (Gale et al., 2019). However,
since these methods initialize networks as dense, and initially train them as such (only to slowly reduce the number
of parameters), the overall storage and computational costs
of training remain approximately those of a dense network.
For the benefits of sparsity to extend to training, the network
must be pruned before training starts. In (Frankle & Carbin,
2019), and many works since (Frankle et al., 2020; Malach
et al., 2020), researchers have shown the existence of ‘lottery
tickets’ – sparse sub-networks of randomly initialized dense
networks, that can be trained on their own from scratch to
achieve accuracy similar to that of the full network. This has
inspired a surge in recent work on techniques to efficiently
prune networks directly at initialization, to identify these
trainable, sparse sub-networks.
Research on prune-at-initialization (PaI) methods has progressed rapidly and achieved impressive test accuracy with
well below 1% of the network parameters, see (Tanaka et al.,
2020; de Jorge et al., 2021) and Section 5. However, almost
all current PaI algorithms involve the computation of ‘sensitivity scores’ (or a comparable metric) for all candidate
parameters in the dense network, which are then used to
decide which parameters to prune. Thus, despite a less computationally demanding training procedure, these methods
still require the capacity to store, and compute with, the full
network on the relevant device (see Table 1).
Ideally, starting with dense networks which are then pruned
would be avoided entirely, and only those parameters to
be trained would be initialized. The only PaI method to
date that can achieve this is random pruning, since it is
equivalent to initializing a sparse network with randomly selected sparse support. For high sparsities, however, random
pruning achieves significantly lower accuracy than other
methods, for details see Section 5.
An alternative approach to training sparse networks from
scratch is Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) (Mocanu et al.,
2018; Mostafa & Wang, 2019). In DST methods, the network is initialized as sparse according to some heuristic

