Scalable Certified Segmentation via Randomized Smoothing

Marc Fischer 1 Maximilian Baader 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
We present a new certification method for image
and point cloud segmentation based on randomized smoothing. The method leverages a novel
scalable algorithm for prediction and certification
that correctly accounts for multiple testing, necessary for ensuring statistical guarantees. The
key to our approach is reliance on established
multiple-testing correction mechanisms as well
as the ability to abstain from classifying single
pixels or points while still robustly segmenting
the overall input. Our experimental evaluation on
synthetic data and challenging datasets, such as
Pascal Context, Cityscapes, and ShapeNet, shows
that our algorithm can achieve, for the first time,
competitive accuracy and certification guarantees
on real-world segmentation tasks. We provide an
implementation at https://github.com/
eth-sri/segmentation-smoothing.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation and point cloud part segmentation are important problems in many safety critical domains including medical imaging (Perone et al., 2018) and
autonomous driving (Deng et al., 2017). However, deep
learning models used for segmentation are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks (Xie et al., 2017; Arnab et al., 2018; Xiang et al., 2019), preventing their application to such tasks.
This vulnerability is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the task is to
segment the (adversarially attacked) image shown in Fig. 1a.
We see that the segmentation of the adversarially attacked
image is very different from the ground truth depicted in
Fig. 1b, potentially causing unfavorable outcomes. While
provable robustness to such adversarial perturbations is well
studied for classification (Katz et al., 2017; Gehr et al., 2018;
Wong & Kolter, 2018; Cohen et al., 2019), the investigation
of certified segmentation just begun recently (Lorenz et al.,
2021; Tran et al., 2021).
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Marc Fischer <marc.fischer@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) Attacked image

(b) Ground truth segmentation

(c) Attacked segmentation

(d) Certified segmentation

Figure 1. In semantic segmentation, a model segments an input (a)
by classifying each pixel. While the result should match (b), a
non-robust model predicts (c) as the input (a) was perturbed by
additive `2 noise (PGD). Our model is certifiably robust to this
perturbation (d) by abstaining from ambiguous pixels (white). The
model abstains where multiple classes meet, causing ambiguity.
We provide technical details and further examples in App. C.

Certifiably robust segmentation is a challenging task, as the
classification of each component (e.g., a pixel in an image)
needs to be certified simultaneously. Many datasets and
models in this domain are beyond the reach of current deterministic verification methods while probabilistic methods
need to account for accumulating uncertainty over the large
number of individual certifications.
In this work we propose a novel method to certify the robustness of segmentation models via randomized smoothing
(Cohen et al., 2019), a probabilistic certification method able
to certify `2 robustness around large images. As depicted
in Fig. 1d, our method enables the certification of challenging segmentation tasks by certifying each component
individually, abstaining from unstable ones that cause naive
algorithms to fail. This abstention mechanism also provides strong synergies with the multiple testing correction,
required for the soundness of our approach, thus enabling
high certification rates.
While we focus in our evaluation on `2 robustness, our
method is general and can also combined with randomized smoothing methods that certify robustness to other
`p -bounded attacks or parametrized transformations like
rotations (Fischer et al., 2020).

