Reward Identification in Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Kuno Kim 1 Kirankumar Shiragur 1 Shivam Garg 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
We study the problem of reward identifiability
in the context of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL). The reward identifiability question is
critical to answer when reasoning about the effectiveness of using Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) as computational models of real world
decision makers in order to understand complex
decision making behavior and perform counterfactual reasoning. While identifiability has been
acknowledged as a fundamental theoretical question in IRL, little is known about the types of
MDPs for which rewards are identifiable, or even
if there exist such MDPs. In this work, we formalize the reward identification problem in IRL and
study how identifiability relates to properties of
the MDP model. For deterministic MDP models
with the MaxEntRL objective, we prove necessary and sufficient conditions for identifiability.
Building on these results, we present efficient algorithms for testing whether or not an MDP model
is identifiable.

1. Introduction
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is the process of estimating a reward function from demonstrations of optimal
behavior. In general, the demonstrator is assumed to behave
optimally with respect to an underlying Markov Decision
Process (MDP). A key component of the MDP is the reward function which encapsulates the underlying incentives
driving the behavior of the optimal demonstrator. A fundamental, yet unsolved question in the field of IRL is reward
identifiability: given the optimal behavior, can the reward
motivating the behavior be identified up to a reasonable
equivalence class?
The reward identifiability question is heavily motivated by
real world use cases of IRL. One such area is in applying
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University, Palo Alto, USA. Correspondence to: Kuno Kim
<khkim@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

MDPs to build computational models (Niv, 2009) of realworld, rational decision makers such as investors (Dixit
et al., 1994; Rust, 1994), farmers (Nielsen and Kristensen,
2015), doctors (Heckman and Navarro, 2007), and animals
(Montague et al., 1995; Doya and Sejnowski, 1998). Given
demonstrations of how these decision makers behave, one
can apply IRL to extract the underlying reward which can
then be studied to better interpret and understand economic,
healthcare, and ecological systems. In order for the MDP
model to be an effective modeling choice, it should be sufficiently flexible so that there exists an MDP that induces
complex, realistic behaviors and identifiable so that the extracted reward function can be interpreted. If the MDP
model is unidentifiable, this fact implies that a large number
of arbitrarily different rewards rationalize the demonstrations equally well under the MDP model. As a result, no
meaningful understanding of the decision maker can be
obtained by IRL.
Another important application of IRL is in counterfactual
reasoning (Kalouptsidi et al., 2015; Christensen and Connault, 2019), such as a financial institution attempting to predict the change in behavior of its customer base in response
to changes in the economic climate amongst other environmental factors (Rust, 1994). Assuming that the only factor
that has changed is the environment and not the customer’s
incentives, IRL can be used to deduce a set of plausible reward functions describing the customer’s incentives and the
modeler can choose a reward to re-optimize in a different
environment that simulates the change in economic climate.
In this scenario, identifiability is a desirable property since
often times the modeler’s will examine the extracted rewards
and choose the one which is most likely to transfer well to
the new environment. If the MDP model is unidentifiable,
it’s unlikely that the modeler can effectively select a transfer
reward as a large set of vastly different plausible rewards
cannot be interpretted.
Despite the importance of the reward identifiability question,
it is heavily under-explored in the Machine Learning (ML)
literature. Little known about the types of MDP models for
which the reward are identifiable, or even if there exist such
MDP models. Many prior works raise concerns that IRL is
an ill-posed problem due to identifiability issues (Ng et al.,
2000; Ziebart et al., 2011; Ziebart, 2010; Dvijotham and
Todorov, 2010; Fu et al., 2017; Geng et al., 2020), often pro-

