Scalable Variational Gaussian Processes via Harmonic Kernel Decomposition

Shengyang Sun 1 2 Jiaxin Shi 3 Andrew Gordon Wilson 4 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract

t=0

2

t=2

t=1

t=3

1

We introduce a new scalable variational Gaussian process approximation which provides a high
fidelity approximation while retaining general applicability. We propose the harmonic kernel decomposition (HKD), which uses Fourier series to
decompose a kernel as a sum of orthogonal kernels. Our variational approximation exploits this
orthogonality to enable a large number of inducing points at a low computational cost. We demonstrate that, on a range of regression and classification problems, our approach can exploit input
space symmetries such as translations and reflections, and it significantly outperforms standard
variational methods in scalability and accuracy.
Notably, our approach achieves state-of-the-art
results on CIFAR-10 among pure GP models.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are flexible Bayesian nonparametric models which enable
principled reasoning about distributions of functions and
provide rigorous uncertainty estimates (Srinivas et al., 2010;
Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011). Unfortunately, exact inference in GPs is impractical for large datasets because of the
O(N 3 ) computational cost (for a dataset of size N ). To overcome the computational roadblocks, sparse Gaussian processes (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Quinonero-Candela
& Rasmussen, 2005) use M inducing points to approximate the kernel function, reducing the computational cost
to O(N M 2 + M 3 ). However, these approaches are prone
to overfitting since all inducing points are hyperparameters.
Sparse variational Gaussian Processes (SVGPs) (Titsias,
2009; Hensman et al., 2015) offer an effective protection
against overfitting by framing a posterior approximation using the inducing points and optimizing them with variational
inference. Still, the O(M 3 ) complexity prevents SVGPs
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Microsoft Research New England 4 New York University. Correspondence to:
Shengyang Sun <ssy@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

0
−1
−2
−2

−1

0

1

2 −2

−1

0

1

2 −2

−1

0

1

2 −2

−1

0

1

2

Figure 1. Visualizing the harmonic kernel decomposition.
We deP
compose a 2-dimensional RBF kernel as k = 3t=0 kt using the
symmetry group of 90o rotations. We plot the real part of random
functions sampled from each GP(0, kt ). Notice that GP(0, k0 ) is
invariant to 90o rotations; GP(0, k1 ) takes opposite values under
180o rotations; GP(0, k2 ) is invariant to 180o rotations but has
opposite values under 90o rotations.

from scaling beyond a few thousand inducing points, creating difficulties in improving the quality of approximation.
Several approaches impose structure on the inducing points
to increase the approximation capacity. Structured kernel
interpolation (SKI) (Wilson & Nickisch, 2015; Wilson et al.,
2015) approximates the kernel by placing inducing points
over a Euclidean grid and exploiting fast structured matrix
operations. SKI can use millions of inducing points, but
is limited to low-dimensional problems because the grid
size grows exponentially with the input dimension. Other
approaches define approximate posteriors using multiple
sets of inducing points. Cheng & Boots (2017); Salimbeni
et al. (2018) propose to decouple the inducing points for
modelling means and covariances, leading to a linear complexity with respect to the number of mean inducing points.
SOLVE-GP (Shi et al., 2020) reformulates a GP as the sum
of two orthogonal processes and uses distinct groups of inducing points for each; this has the benefit of improving the
approximation at a lower cost than standard SVGPs.
In this paper, we introduce a more scalable variational approximation for GPs via the proposed harmonic kernel decomposition (HKD), which decomposes
the kernel as a sum
PT −1
of orthogonal kernels, k(x, x0 ) = t=0 kt (x, x0 ), using
Fourier series. The HKD reformulates the Gaussian process
into an additive GP, where each subprocess models a Fourier
component of the function (see Figure 1 for a visualization).
We then propose the Harmonic Variational Gaussian Process (HVGP), which uses separate sets of inducing points
for the subprocesses. Compared to a standard variational
approximation, HVGPs allow us to use a large number of

