Group-Sparse Matrix Factorization for
Transfer Learning of Word Embeddings

Kan Xu 1 Xuanyi Zhao 1 Hamsa Bastani 1 Osbert Bastani 1

Abstract
Sparse regression has recently been applied to
enable transfer learning from very limited data.
We study an extension of this approach to unsupervised learning—in particular, learning word
embeddings from unstructured text corpora using
low-rank matrix factorization. Intuitively, when
transferring word embeddings to a new domain,
we expect that the embeddings change for only a
small number of words—e.g., the ones with novel
meanings in that domain. We propose a novel
group-sparse penalty that exploits this sparsity to
perform transfer learning when there is very little text data available in the target domain—e.g.,
a single article of text. We prove generalization
bounds for our algorithm. Furthermore, we empirically evaluate its effectiveness, both in terms of
prediction accuracy in downstream tasks as well
as the interpretability of the results.1

1. Introduction
While machine learning algorithms have proven to be
tremendously effective at solving supervised and unsupervised problems, achieving good performance typically requires large training datasets. Yet, in many domains, there
is very little data available for training. Thus, there has been
a great deal of interest in transfer learning, where the goal
is to leverage knowledge in a data-rich source domain to
improve performance in a data-poor target domain.
A surprisingly effective transfer learning strategy is to simply fine-tune a model trained on data from the source domain (which we call the proxy data) on data from the target domain (which we call the gold data). For instance,
1

University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Kan Xu <kanxu@sas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
We encourage readers to consult our extended paper at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08928, which includes
proofs and additional results. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/kanxu526/GroupTLWordEmbedding.

this strategy has been used in transferring image classification models (Esteva et al., 2017), healthcare decisionmaking (Bastani, 2020), and word embeddings (Dingwall
& Potts, 2018). Intuitively, stochastic gradient descent has
regularization properties similar to `2 regularization (Ali
et al., 2020), so this strategy can be interpreted as regularizing the parameters towards those of the proxy model—i.e.,
adopting a loss function of the form
e Xg , θbp ) = `(θ; Xg ) + kθ − θbp k2 ,
`(θ;
2
where Xg is the gold training data, `(θ; Xg ) is the unregularized loss, and θbp are the parameters estimated using the
proxy training data.
With this viewpoint, a natural strategy is to leverage alternative regularization strategies towards the source domain,
instead of the `2 norm. Recent work has investigated using
the `1 norm in the setting of (generalized) linear regression (Bastani, 2020)—i.e.,
e
`(θ; Xg , Yg , θbp ) = kYg − Xg θk22 + λ · kθ − θbp k1 .
Intuitively, `1 regularization enables efficient learning in
domains with very little data (Tibshirani, 1996; Chen et al.,
1995; Candes & Tao, 2007; Bickel et al., 2009). The key
assumption for this approach to work is that the values of
the true parameters θg (for the target domain) must differ
from θp (for the source domain) in only a few components—
i.e., θg − θp is sparse. If this assumption holds, then they
prove that their strategy can learn from O(s log d) samples
instead of O(d) samples, where d is the dimension of θg
and s = kθg − θp k0 is the sparsity. A natural question
is whether these techniques can be leveraged beyond the
setting of generalized linear regression.
In this paper, we apply this approach to matrix factorization,
which underlies one of the most basic unsupervised learning
algorithms—namely, learning word embeddings from largescale unlabeled text corpora such as Wikipedia (Pennington
et al., 2014). While more sophisticated techniques have
been developed (Devlin et al., 2018), approaches based on
generalizations of matrix factorization remain competitive
and widely used, and also tend to be more interpretable since
we can visualize vector embeddings of individual words.

