Cross-model Back-translated Distillation
for Unsupervised Machine Translation

Xuan-Phi Nguyen 1 2 Shafiq Joty 1 3 Thanh-Tung Nguyen 1 2 Wu Kui 2 Ai Ti Aw 2

Abstract
Recent unsupervised machine translation (UMT)
systems usually employ three main principles:
initialization, language modeling and iterative
back-translation, though they may apply them
differently. Crucially, iterative back-translation
and denoising auto-encoding for language
modeling provide data diversity to train the
UMT systems.
However, the gains from
these diversification processes have seemed to
plateau. We introduce a novel component to the
standard UMT framework called Cross-model
Back-translated Distillation (CBD), that is aimed
to induce another level of data diversification
that existing principles lack. CBD is applicable
to all previous UMT approaches.
In our
experiments, CBD achieves the state of the
art in the WMT’14 English-French, WMT’16
English-German and English-Romanian bilingual
unsupervised translation tasks, with BLEU scores
of 38.2, 30.1, and 36.3, respectively. It also yields
1.5 – 3.3 BLEU improvements in IWSLT EnglishFrench and English-German tasks. Through
extensive experimental analyses, we show that
CBD is effective because it embraces data
diversity while other similar variants do not.

1. Introduction
Machine translation (MT) is a core task in natural language
processing that involves both language understanding and
generation. Recent neural approaches (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2019) have advanced the state of the art with near
human-level performance (Hassan et al., 2018). However,
they continue to rely heavily on large parallel data. As a
result, the search for unsupervised alternatives using only
1

2
Nanyang
Technological
University
Institute
2
3
for Infocomm Research (I R), A*STAR
Salesforce
Research Asia.
Correspondence to: Xuan-Phi Nguyen
<nguyenxu002@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

monolingual data has been active. While Ravi & Knight
(2011) and Klementiev et al. (2012) proposed various
unsupervised techniques for statistical MT (SMT), Lample
et al. (2018a;c) established a general framework for modern
unsupervised MT (UMT) that works for both SMT and
neural MT (NMT) models. The framework has three main
principles: model initialization, language modeling and
iterative back-translation. Model initialization bootstraps
the model with a knowledge prior like word-level crosslingual transfer (Lample et al., 2018b). Language modeling,
which takes the form of denoising auto-encoding (DAE) in
NMT (Lample et al., 2018c), trains the model to generate
plausible sentences in a language. Meanwhile, iterative
back-translation (IBT) facilitates cross-lingual translation
training by generating noisy source sentences for original
target sentences. The recent approaches differ on how
they apply each of these three principles. For instance,
Lample et al. (2018a) use an unsupervised word translation
model (Lample et al., 2018b) for model initialization, while
Conneau & Lample (2019) use a pre-trained cross-lingual
masked language model (XLM).
In this paper, we focus on a different aspect of the UMT
framework, namely, its data diversification process. In
this context, we refer data diversification as only sentence
level variations, and not contextual topics or genres. If we
look from this view, the DAE and IBT steps of the UMT
framework also perform some form of data diversification
to train the model. Specifically, the noise model in the DAE
process generates new, but noised, versions of the input
data, which are used to train the model with a reconstruction
objective. Likewise, the IBT step involves the same UMT
model to create synthetic parallel pairs (with the source
being synthetic), which are then used to train the model.
Since the NMT model is updated with DAE and IBT
simultaneously, the model generates fresh translations in
each back-translation step. Overall, thanks to DAE and IBT,
the model gets better at translating by iteratively training on
the newly created and diversified data whose quality also
improves over time. This argument also applies to statistical
UMT, except for the lack of the DAE (Lample et al., 2018c).
However, we conjecture that these diversification methods
may have reached their limit as the performance does not
improve further the longer we train the UMT models.

