Inverse Decision Modeling:
Learning Interpretable Representations of Behavior

Daniel Jarrett 1 * Alihan Hüyük 1 * Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract

Consider the “lifecycle” of decision analysis [9] in the real
world. First, normative analysis deals with modeling rational decision-making. It asks the question: What constitutes
ideal behavior? To this end, a prevailing approach is given
by von Neumann-Morgenstern’s expected utility theory, and
the study of optimal control is its incarnation in sequential
decision-making [10]. But judgment rendered by real-world
agents is often imperfect, so prescriptive analysis deals with
improving existing decision behavior. It asks the question:
How can we move closer toward the ideal? To this end, the
study of decision engineering seeks to design “human-in-theloop” techniques that nudge or assist decision-makers, such
as medical guidelines and best practices [11]. Importantly,
however, this first requires a quantitative account of current
practices and the imperfections that necessitate correcting.

Decision analysis deals with modeling and enhancing decision processes. A principal challenge in
improving behavior is in obtaining a transparent
description of existing behavior in the first place.
In this paper, we develop an expressive, unifying
perspective on inverse decision modeling: a framework for learning parameterized representations
of sequential decision behavior. First, we formalize the forward problem (as a normative standard),
subsuming common classes of control behavior.
Second, we use this to formalize the inverse problem (as a descriptive model), generalizing existing
work on imitation/reward learning—while opening up a much broader class of research problems
in behavior representation. Finally, we instantiate
this approach with an example (inverse bounded
rational control), illustrating how this structure
enables learning (interpretable) representations of
(bounded) rationality—while naturally capturing
intuitive notions of suboptimal actions, biased beliefs, and imperfect knowledge of environments.

To take this crucial first step, we must therefore start with
descriptive analysis—that is, with understanding observed
decision-making from demonstration. We ask the question:
What does existing behavior look like—relative to the ideal?
Most existing work on imitation learning (i.e. to replicate expert actions) [12] and apprenticeship learning (i.e. to match
expert returns) [13] offers limited help, as our objective is instead in understanding (i.e. to interpret imperfect behavior).
In particular, beyond the utility-driven nature of rationality
for agent behaviors, we wish to quantify intuitive notions of
boundedness—such as the apparent flexibility of decisions,
tolerance for surprise, or optimism in beliefs. At the same
time, we wish that such representations be interpretable—
that is, that they be projections of observed behaviors onto
parameterized spaces that are meaningful and parsimonious.

1. Introduction
Modeling and enhancing decision-making behavior is a fundamental concern in computational and behavioral science,
with real-world applications to healthcare [1], economics [2],
and cognition [3]. A principal challenge in improving decision processes is in obtaining a transparent understanding of
existing behavior to begin with. In this pursuit, a key complication is that agents are often boundedly rational due to
biological, psychological, and computational factors [4–8],
the precise mechanics of which are seldom known. As such,
how can we intelligibly characterize imperfect behavior?
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK; 2 Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of California, Los Angeles, USA. ⇤ Authors contributed
equally. Correspondence to: <daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Contributions In this paper, our mission is to explicitly
relax normative assumptions of optimality when modeling
decision behavior from observations.3 First, we develop an
expressive, unifying perspective on inverse decision modeling: a general framework for learning parameterized representations of sequential decision-making behavior. Specifically, we begin by formalizing the forward problem F (as
3

Our terminology is borrowed from economics: By “descriptive”
models, we refer to those that capture observable decision-making
behavior as-is (e.g. an imitator policy in behavioral cloning), and
by “normative” models, we refer to those that specify optimal decision-making behavior (e.g. with respect to some utility function).

