Adversarial Multiclass Learning under Weak Supervision
with Performance Guarantees
Alessio Mazzetto * 1 Cyrus Cousins * 1 Dylan Sam 1 Stephen H. Bach 1 Eli Upfal 1

Abstract
We develop a rigorous approach for using a set
of arbitrarily correlated weak supervision sources
in order to solve a multiclass classification task
when only a very small set of labeled data is available. Our learning algorithm provably converges
to a model that has minimum empirical risk with
respect to an adversarial choice over feasible labelings for a set of unlabeled data, where the feasibility of a labeling is computed through constraints
defined by rigorously estimated statistics of the
weak supervision sources. We show theoretical
guarantees for this approach that depend on the
information provided by the weak supervision
sources. Notably, this method does not require
the weak supervision sources to have the same
labeling space as the multiclass classification task.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
with experiments on various image classification
tasks.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, deep neural networks have been applied
to accurately solve a wide range of classification tasks in different domains, but the supervised learning of these models
requires a considerable amount of labeled data. An alternative strategy is to learn from weak supervision, i.e., sources
of labels that are noisy or heuristic. Examples include handwritten rules (Ratner et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Safranchik
et al., 2020) and classifiers trained for related tasks (Varma
et al., 2017; Bach et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019). Even if
these sources of information are noisy, results show that
they can lead to high-quality models, particularly when the
outputs from many weak sources are combined.
A key technical challenge in such work is how to combine multiple sources of weak supervision, since they might
*

Equal contribution , authorship order decided by coin flip.
1
Department of Computer Science, Brown University. Correspondence to: Alessio Mazzetto <alessio mazzetto@brown.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

conflict with one another. We assume access to only a
small amount of ground-truth labeled data. Much prior
work on aggregating noisy labels (Dawid & Skene, 1979;
Zhang et al., 2016; Gao & Zhou, 2013; Karger et al., 2014;
Ghosh et al., 2011; Dalvi et al., 2013; Ratner et al., 2016;
2019) assumes that the sources make independent errors,
which is a very strong assumption. Some recent work (Bach
et al., 2017; Varma et al., 2019) attempts to learn more
sophisticated distributions, but still relies on parametric
assumptions that make conditional independence assumptions. Such independence assumptions in models of weak
supervision sources are hard to verify and limiting in practice. Furthermore, many useful weak supervision sources,
particularly ones learned from related datasets, can be arbitrarily correlated, as there may be systematic differences
between the target classification task and the mildly related
tasks used to learn them. For example, if all the labelers are
fine-tuned from the same pretrained model, they are likely
to inherit some of the same biases.
Recent work has addressed the problem of combining weak
labelers without distributional assumptions by taking an
adversarial approach. For binary classification, Balsubramani & Freund (2015) formulate the problem as minimax
optimization, where the goal is to find the labels of an unlabeled dataset that minimize the error with respect to the
worst-case assignment to the unknown ground-truth labels,
while satisfying statistical constraints on the individual error of the weak labelers. This minimax problem can be
optimally solved for a large family of loss functions (Balsubramani & Freund, 2016). The adversarial label learning
(ALL) framework (Arachie & Huang, 2019) uses a similar
minimax optimization to learn a model that minimizes risk
using the worst-case assignment to the unknown groundtruth labels, and was later extended to the multiclass setting
(Arachie & Huang, 2021), but it does not optimally solve
the minimax optimization problem, and provides no generalization guarantees for the models it learns.
Another recent work, performance guaranteed majority vote
(PGMV) (Mazzetto et al., 2021), takes an alternative approach for the binary hard classification setting. Instead of
working with an adversarial choice of the ground-truth labels, it uses both a small amount of labeled data and a large
amount of unlabeled data to empirically estimate properties

