Information Obfuscation of Graph Neural Networks

Peiyuan Liao * 1 Han Zhao * 2 Keyulu Xu * 3
Tommi Jaakkola Geoffrey Gordon 1 Stefanie Jegelka 3 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1
3

Abstract
While the advent of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) has greatly improved node and graph
representation learning in many applications, the
neighborhood aggregation scheme exposes additional vulnerabilities to adversaries seeking to extract node-level information about sensitive attributes. In this paper, we study the problem of
protecting sensitive attributes by information obfuscation when learning with graph structured
data. We propose a framework to locally filter out
pre-determined sensitive attributes via adversarial
training with the total variation and the Wasserstein distance. Our method creates a strong defense against inference attacks, while only suffering small loss in task performance. Theoretically,
we analyze the effectiveness of our framework
against a worst-case adversary, and characterize
an inherent trade-off between maximizing predictive accuracy and minimizing information leakage.
Experiments across multiple datasets from recommender systems, knowledge graphs and quantum
chemistry demonstrate that the proposed approach
provides a robust defense across various graph
structures and tasks, while producing competitive
GNN encoders for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have brought about performance gains in various tasks involving graph-structured
data (Scarselli et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2019b). A typical
example includes movie recommendation on social networks (Ying et al., 2018). Ideally, the recommender system
makes a recommendation not just based on the description
of an end user herself, but also those of her close friends in
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT). Correspondence to: Peiyuan Liao
<peiyuanl@andrew.cmu.edu>, Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>,
Keyulu Xu <keyulu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the social network. By taking the structured information of
friendship in social network into consideration, more accurate prediction is often achieved (Xu et al., 2018; Hamilton
et al., 2017). However, with better utility comes more vulnerability to potential information leakage. For example,
to gain sensitive information about a specific user in the
network, malicious adversaries could try to infer sensitive
information not just only based on the information of the
user of interest, but also information of her friends in the network. Such scenarios are increasingly ubiquitous with the
rapid growth of users in common social network platforms,
especially in the distributed/federated setting where data
are transmitted from local nodes to centralized servers and
the goal of malicious adversaries is to reveal users’ sensitive data by eavesdropping during the transmission process.
Hence, the above problem poses the following challenge:
How could we protect sensitive information of
users in the network from malicious inference attacks while maintaining the utility of service? Furthermore, can we quantify the potential trade-off
between these two goals?
In this paper, we provide answers to both questions. We propose a simple yet effective algorithm to achieve the first goal
through adversarial training of GNNs, a general framework
which we term as Graph AdversariaL Networks (GAL). In a
nutshell, the proposed algorithm learns node representations
in a graph by simultaneously preserving rich information
about the target task and filtering information from the representations that is related to the sensitive attribute via a
minimax game (Figure 1). While the minimax formulation
is not new and has been applied broadly in image generation, domain adaptation and robustness (Goh & Sim, 2010;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2018), we are the first to formulate this problem on graphs
for information obfuscation, and to demonstrate that minimax optimization is effective for GNNs in these settings,
both theoretically and empirically.
At a high level, for the purpose of information obfuscation of
certain sensitive attributes, we propose a method to locally
filter out these attributes by learning GNN encoders that
could confuse a strong malicious adversary. In particular,
the learned GNN encoders will generate node representa-

