Dissecting Supervised Constrastive Learning
Florian Graf 1 Christoph D. Hofer 1 Marc Niethammer 2 Roland Kwitt 1

Abstract
Minimizing cross-entropy over the softmax scores
of a linear map composed with a high-capacity
encoder is arguably the most popular choice for
training neural networks on supervised learning
tasks. However, recent works show that one can
directly optimize the encoder instead, to obtain
equally (or even more) discriminative representations via a supervised variant of a contrastive
objective. In this work, we address the question
whether there are fundamental differences in the
sought-for representation geometry in the output
space of the encoder at minimal loss. Specifically, we prove, under mild assumptions, that
both losses attain their minimum once the representations of each class collapse to the vertices
of a regular simplex, inscribed in a hypersphere.
We provide empirical evidence that this configuration is attained in practice and that reaching
a close-to-optimal state typically indicates good
generalization performance. Yet, the two losses
show remarkably different optimization behavior.
The number of iterations required to perfectly fit
to data scales superlinearly with the amount of
randomly flipped labels for the supervised contrastive loss. This is in contrast to the approximately linear scaling previously reported for networks trained with cross-entropy.

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning, neural networks have become
the prevalent choice to parametrize maps from a complex
input space X to some target space Y. In supervised learning
tasks, where the output space is a set of discrete labels,
Y = {1, . . . , K}, it is common to implement predictors of
the form
f = argmax ◦ W ◦ ϕ .
(1)
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Salzburg,
Austria 2 UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence to: Florian Graf
<florian.graf@sbg.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this construction, f is realized as the composition of
an encoder ϕ : X → Z ⊆ Rh , a linear map/classifier
W : Rh → RK and the argmax operation which handles
the transition from continuous output to discrete label space.
Despite myriad advances in designing networks that implement ϕ, such as (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016a;
Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Huang et al., 2017), the
training routine rarely deviates from minimizing the crossentropy (CE) between softmax scores of W ◦ ϕ and one-hot
encoded discrete labels. Assuming sufficient encoder capacity, it is clear that, at minimal loss, the representations of
training instances, i.e., their images under ϕ, are in a linearly
separable configuration (as the classifier is implemented as a
linear map). Remarkably, this behavior is not only observed
on real data with semantically meaningful labels, but also on
real data with randomly flipped labels (Zhang et al., 2017).
Alternatively, one could aim for directly learning an encoder that is compatible with a linear classifier and the
argmax decision rule. Recent works (Khosla et al., 2020;
Han et al., 2020) have shown that this is indeed possible
via a supervised variant of a contrastive loss (Chopra et al.,
2005; Hadsell et al., 2006) that has full access to label information. Informally, this supervised contrastive (SC) loss
comprises two competing dynamics: an attraction and a
repulsion force. The former pulls representations from the
same class (positives) closer together, the latter pushes representations from different classes (negatives) away from
each other. A similar mechanic underpins the triplet loss
(Weinberger & Saul, 2009), the N -pairs loss (Sohn, 2016),
or the soft nearest-neighbor loss (Salakhutdinov & Hinton,
2007; Frosst et al., 2019) and contributes to the the success
of self-supervised learning, framed as an instance discrimination task (van den Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020;
Hénaff et al., 2020). In the context of the latter, positives are
typically defined as different views of the same instance.
Most notably, predictors obtained by first learning ϕ via
the supervised contrastive loss, followed by a composition
with a linear map, not only yield state-of-the-art results on
popular benchmarks, but show increased robustness towards
input corruptions and hyperparameter choices (Khosla et al.,
2020). This warrants a closer analysis of the underlying
effects. While we focus on the formulation of Khosla et al.
(2020), a similar analysis most likely holds for related vari-

