GRAND: Graph Neural Diffusion

Benjamin P. Chamberlain * 1 James Rowbottom * 1 Maria Gorinova 1 Stefan Webb 1 Emanuele Rossi 1
Michael M. Bronstein 1 2 3

Abstract
We present Graph Neural Diffusion (GRAND)
that approaches deep learning on graphs as a continuous diffusion process and treats Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) as discretisations of an underlying PDE. In our model, the layer structure and
topology correspond to the discretisation choices
of temporal and spatial operators. Our approach
allows a principled development of a broad new
class of GNNs that are able to address the common plights of graph learning models such as
depth, oversmoothing, and bottlenecks. Key to
the success of our models are stability with respect to perturbations in the data and this is addressed for both implicit and explicit discretisation schemes. We develop linear and nonlinear
versions of GRAND, which achieve competitive
results on many standard graph benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning on graphs and graph neural networks
(GNNs) have been shown to be successful in a broad
range of problems across different domains, extending way
beyond machine learning. Important results have been
achieved in the physical sciences (Li et al., 2020a;b), where
partial differential equations (PDEs) have traditionally been
the dominant modelling paradigm.
GNNs are in fact intimately connected to differential equations. The seminal work of Scarselli et al. (2009) was concerned with finding the fixed points of differential equations using the Almeida-Pineda algorithm (Almeida, 1987;
Pineda, 1987). The currently predominant message passing
paradigm (Gilmer et al., 2017) can be modelled as a differential equation. More recently, diffusion processes have
been shown to be an effective preprocessing step for graph
learning (Klicpera et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 Twitter Inc., London, UK 2 Imperial College London, UK 3 IDSIA/USI, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Ben Chamberlain <bchamberlain@twitter.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

PDEs are among the most studied mathematical constructions, with a vast literature dating back at least to Leonhard
Euler in the eighteenth century. This includes various discretisation schemes, numerical methods for approximate
solutions, and theorems for their existence and stability. Historically, PDE-based methods have been used extensively
in signal and image processing (Perona & Malik, 1990),
computer graphics (Sun et al., 2009), and more recently, in
machine learning (Chen et al., 2018).
Our goal is to show that the tools of PDEs can be used to
understand existing GNN architectures and as a principled
way to develop a broad class of new methods. We focus on
GNN architectures that can be interpreted as information
diffusion on graphs, modelled by the diffusion equation.
In doing so, we show that many popular GNN architectures can be derived from a single mathematical framework
by different choices of the form of diffusion equation and
discretisation schemes. Standard GNNs are equivalent to
the explicit single-step Euler scheme that is inefficient and
requires small step sizes. We show that more advanced,
adaptive multi-step schemes such as Runge-Kutta perform
significantly better and using implicit schemes, which are
unconditionally stable, amounts to larger multi-hop diffusion operators. Choosing different spatial discretisation
amounts to graph rewiring, a technique recently used to
improve the performance of GNNs (Klicpera et al., 2019;
Alon & Yahav, 2021). We show that appropriate choices
within our framework allow the design of deep GNN architectures with tens of layers. This is a feat hard to achieve
otherwise due to feature oversmoothing (NT & Maehara,
2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and bottlenecks (Alon & Yahav, 2021) – phenomena that are recognised as a common
plight of most graph learning architectures.

Main contributions We describe a broad new class of
GNNs based on the discretised diffusion PDE on graphs
and study different numerical schemes for their solution.
Second, we provide stability conditions for these schemes.
Finally, based on our model, we develop linear and nonlinear
Graph Neural Diffusion (GRAND) architectures that perform competitively on many popular benchmark datasets.
We show detailed ablation studies shedding light on the
choice of numerical schemes and parameters.

