OptiDICE: Offline Policy Optimization via
Stationary Distribution Correction Estimation

Jongmin Lee 1 * Wonseok Jeon 2 3 * Byung-Jun Lee 4 Joelle Pineau 2 3 5 Kee-Eung Kim 1 6

Abstract
We consider the offline reinforcement learning
(RL) setting where the agent aims to optimize
the policy solely from the data without further
environment interactions. In offline RL, the distributional shift becomes the primary source of difficulty, which arises from the deviation of the target
policy being optimized from the behavior policy
used for data collection. This typically causes
overestimation of action values, which poses severe problems for model-free algorithms that use
bootstrapping. To mitigate the problem, prior
offline RL algorithms often used sophisticated
techniques that encourage underestimation of action values, which introduces an additional set of
hyperparameters that need to be tuned properly.
In this paper, we present an offline RL algorithm
that prevents overestimation in a more principled
way. Our algorithm, OptiDICE, directly estimates
the stationary distribution corrections of the optimal policy and does not rely on policy-gradients,
unlike previous offline RL algorithms. Using an
extensive set of benchmark datasets for offline RL,
we show that OptiDICE performs competitively
with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale datasets has been one of the
important factors contributing to the recent success in machine learning for real-world tasks such as computer vision (Deng et al., 2009; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2019). The standard
workflow in developing systems for typical machine learning tasks is to train and validate the model on the dataset,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, KAIST 2 Mila,
Quebec AI Institute 3 School of Computer Science, McGill University 4 Gauss Labs Inc. 5 Facebook AI Research 6 Graduate
School of AI, KAIST. Correspondence to: Jongmin Lee <jmlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr>, Wonseok Jeon <jeonwons@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and then to deploy the model with its parameter fixed when
we are satisfied with training. This offline training allows
us to address various operational requirements of the system without actual deployment, such as acceptable level of
prediction accuracy rate once the system goes online.
However, this workflow is not straightforwardly applicable
to the standard setting of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) because of the online learning assumption: the RL agent needs to continuously explore the environment and learn from its trial-and-error experiences to
be properly trained. This aspect has been one of the fundamental bottlenecks for the practical adoption of RL in
many real-world domains, where the exploratory behaviors
are costly or even dangerous, e.g. autonomous driving (Yu
et al., 2020b) and clinical treatment (Yu et al., 2020a).
Offline RL (also referred to as batch RL) (Ernst et al., 2005;
Lange et al., 2012; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al.,
2020) casts the RL problem in the offline training setting.
One of the most relevant areas of research in this regard
is the off-policy RL (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al.,
2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018), since we need to deal with the
distributional shift resulting from the trained policy being
deviated from the policy used to collect the data. However, without the data continuously collected online, this
distributional shift cannot be reliably corrected and poses
a significant challenge to RL algorithms that employ bootstrapping together with function approximation: it causes
compounding overestimation of the action values for modelfree algorithms (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019),
which arises from computing the bootstrapped target using
the predicted values of out-of-distribution actions. To mitigate the problem, most of the current offline RL algorithms
have proposed sophisticated techniques to encourage underestimation of action values, introducing an additional set of
hyperparameters that needs to be tuned properly (Fujimoto
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Jaques et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020).
In this paper, we present an offline RL algorithm that essentially eliminates the need to evaluate out-of-distribution
actions, thus avoiding the problematic overestimation of
values. Our algorithm, Offline Policy Optimization via Stationary DIstribution Correction Estimation (OptiDICE),

