GLSearch: Maximum Common Subgraph Detection via Learning to Search

Yunsheng Bai * 1 Derek Xu * 1 Yizhou Sun 1 Wei Wang 1

Abstract
Detecting the Maximum Common Subgraph
(MCS) between two input graphs is fundamental for applications in drug synthesis, malware
detection, cloud computing, etc. However, MCS
computation is NP-hard, and state-of-the-art MCS
solvers rely on heuristic search algorithms which
in practice cannot find good solution for large
graph pairs given a limited computation budget.
We propose GLS EARCH, a Graph Neural Network (GNN) based learning to search model. Our
model is built upon the branch and bound algorithm, which selects one pair of nodes from the
two input graphs to expand at a time. We propose a novel GNN-based Deep Q-Network (DQN)
to select the node pair, making the search process much faster. Experiments on synthetic and
real-world graph pairs demonstrate that our model
learns a search strategy that is able to detect significantly larger common subgraphs than existing
MCS solvers given the same computation budget. GLS EARCH can be potentially extended to
solve many other combinatorial problems with
constraints on graphs.

1. Introduction
Graphs gain increasing attention recently due to their expressive nature in representing real-world data and recent
successes in addressing challenging graph tasks via learning, represented by graph neural networks. Among various
graph tasks, detecting the largest subgraph that is commonly
present in both input graphs, known as Maximum Common
Subgraph (MCS) (Bunke & Shearer, 1998) (as shown in Figure 1), is an important yet particularly hard task. MCS naturally encodes the degree of similarity between two graphs,
is domain-agnostic, and thus has broad utilities in many
domains such as software analysis (Park et al., 2013), graph
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Yunsheng Bai <yba@ucla.edu>, Derek Xu
<derekqxu@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

O

N

C
C

C

C

C

C

C
C

C
C

C
P

G1

C

S

G2

Figure 1: For graph pair (G1 , G2 ) with node labels, the
induced connected Maximum Common Subgraph (MCS) is
the five-member ring structure highlighted in circle.
database systems (Yan et al., 2005) and cloud computing
platforms (Cao et al., 2011). For example, in drug synthesis, finding similar substructures in compounds with similar
properties can reduce manual labor (Ehrlich & Rarey, 2011).
MCS detection is NP-hard in its nature and is thus very
challenging. The state-of-the-art exact MCS detection algorithms, which use a powerful branch and bound search
framework, still run in exponential time in the worst
case (Liu et al., 2019). These algorithms aim to provably extract the MCS by exhausting the search space as efficiently
as possible. However, in large real-world graphs, exhausting
the search space is not computationally tractable. What is
worse, they rely on several heuristics on how to explore the
search space. For example, M C S P (McCreesh et al., 2017)
uses node degree as its heuristic by choosing high-degree
nodes to visit first, but in many cases the true MCS contains
low-degree nodes.
Recently, there are some related efforts from the learning
community; however, these methods fall short in tackling
the constraint posed by the MCS definition that the two
extracted subgraphs must be isomorphic to each other. For
example, Wang et al. (2019) aims to detect a soft matching
matrix between nodes in two input graphs, which, however, cannot be easily transformed into the discrete matched
subgraph. Bai et al. (2020b) is the first attempt to use learning based approach to directly output MCS. However, it
heavily relies on labeled MCS instances, which requires
pre-computation of MCS results by running exact solvers.
In this paper, we present GLS EARCH (Graph Learning to
Search), a general framework for MCS detection combining
the advantages of search and deep Reinforcement Learning (RL). GLS EARCH learns to search by adopting a Deep

