SimAM: A Simple, Parameter-Free Attention Module for
Convolutional Neural Networks

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) trained on
large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015)) have greatly boosted the performance on many vision
tasks, such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016b; Huang
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China 2 Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 3 Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence
and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China 4 Institute of Psychology and Behavioral Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
6
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Xiaohua Xie <xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

+ SE

In this paper, we propose a conceptually simple
but very effective attention module for Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets). In contrast to
existing channel-wise and spatial-wise attention
modules, our module instead infers 3-D attention weights for the feature map in a layer without adding parameters to the original networks.
Specifically, we base on some well-known neuroscience theories and propose to optimize an energy function to find the importance of each neuron.
We further derive a fast closed-form solution for
the energy function, and show that the solution
can be implemented in less than ten lines of code.
Another advantage of the module is that most of
the operators are selected based on the solution to
the defined energy function, avoiding too many efforts for structure tuning. Quantitative evaluations
on various visual tasks demonstrate that the proposed module is flexible and effective to improve
the representation ability of many ConvNets. Our
code is available at Pytorch-SimAM.

+ SimAM

Abstract

ResNet-50

Lingxiao Yang 1 2 3 Ru-Yuan Zhang 4 5 Lida Li 6 Xiaohua Xie 1 2 3

steel_arch_bridges

mountain_tent

grey_whale

lipstick

Figure 1. Visualization of feature activations obtained by different networks. All compared networks are trained on ImageNet
(Russakovsky et al., 2015) under a consistent setting. The features
are extracted on the validation set and shown by Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017). Our SimAM helps the network focus on some
primary regions which are close to the image labels shown below.

et al., 2017; Szegedy et al., 2015; Sandler et al., 2018), object detection (Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016; He et al.,
2017), and video understanding (Feichtenhofer et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2018a). Multiple studies have demonstrated
that a better ConvNet structure can significantly improve
performance on various problems. Therefore, constructing
a strong ConvNet is an essential task in vision research.
A modern ConvNet typically has multiple stages, and each
stage consists of a few blocks. Such block is constructed
by several operators like convolution, pooling, activation or
some customized meta-structure (referred as module in this
paper). Recently, instead of designing the whole architecture
as (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), many works focus on building
advanced blocks to improve the representational power of
ConvNets. Stacked convolutions (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014), residual units (He et al., 2016b;a; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Sandler et al., 2018), and dense connections
(Huang et al., 2017; 2018) are the most representative ones
that have been widely applied in existing architectures. However, designing those blocks requires rich expert knowledge
and enormous time. To circumvent this, many researchers
seek for some search strategies to automatically build archi-

