Non-Negative Bregman Divergence Minimization
for Deep Direct Density Ratio Estimation

Masahiro Kato 1 Takeshi Teshima 2

Abstract
Density ratio estimation (DRE) is at the core of
various machine learning tasks such as anomaly
detection and domain adaptation. In existing studies on DRE, methods based on Bregman divergence (BD) minimization have been extensively
studied. However, BD minimization when applied with highly flexible models, such as deep
neural networks, tends to suffer from what we call
train-loss hacking, which is a source of overfitting
caused by a typical characteristic of empirical BD
estimators. In this paper, to mitigate train-loss
hacking, we propose a non-negative correction
for empirical BD estimators. Theoretically, we
confirm the soundness of the proposed method
through a generalization error bound. Through
our experiments, the proposed methods show a
favorable performance in inlier-based outlier detection.

1. Introduction
Density ratio estimation (DRE) has attracted a great deal
of attention as an essential task in various machine learning problems, such as regression under a covariate shift
(Shimodaira, 2000; Reddi et al., 2015), learning with noisy
labels (Liu & Tao, 2014; Fang et al., 2020), anomaly detection (Smola et al., 2009; Hido et al., 2011; Abe & Sugiyama,
2019), two-sample testing (Keziou & Leoni-Aubin, 2005;
Kanamori et al., 2010; Sugiyama et al., 2011a), causal inference (Uehara et al., 2020), change point detection (Kawahara & Sugiyama, 2009), and binary classification only from
positive and unlabeled data (PU learning; Kato et al., 2019).
For instance, anomaly detection is not easy to apply based
on standard machine learning methods since anomalous data
are often scarce; however, we can solve this by estimating
1

CyberAgent Inc., Tokyo, Japan 2 The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Masahiro
Kato <masahiro kato@cyberagent.co.jp>, Takeshi Teshima
<teshima@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the density ratio when anomaly-free unlabeled test data are
available (Hido et al., 2008).
Among the various approaches to DRE, we focus on the
Bregman divergence (BD) minimization framework (Bregman, 1967; Sugiyama et al., 2011b), which is a general
framework that unifies various DRE methods, such as moment matching (Huang et al., 2007; Gretton et al., 2009),
probabilistic classification (Qin, 1998; Cheng & Chu, 2004),
density matching (Nguyen et al., 2010), and density-ratio
fitting (Kanamori et al., 2009). Kato et al. (2019) proposed
using the risk of PU learning for DRE, which also falls
within this framework (Appendix A).
Existing methods have mainly adopted linear-in-parameter
models for DRE (Kanamori et al., 2012). On the other hand,
recent studies in machine learning have suggested that deep
neural networks achieve significantly high performances for
various tasks, such as computer vision (CV) (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) and natural language processing (NLP) (Bengio
et al., 2001). These findings motivate us to use deep neural
networks for DRE.
However, when using deep neural networks in combination
with empirical BD minimization, we often observe a serious overfitting problem as experimentally demonstrated in
Figure 2 of Section 5.1 and Figure 4 of Appendix F.1.1. We
observe that this is mainly because a model of the density
q(X)
ratio r(X) = p(X)
between two probability densities p and
q becomes large for high-dimensional data when using a
flexible model. As the intuition behind this phenomenon,
a flexible model can overfit the samples generated from
p(X) as if there were no common support between p(X)
and q(X) (Figure 1). This hypothesis is inspired by Kiryo
et al. (2017), which reports a similar problem in PU learning. In the case of DRE through BD minimization, we
conjecture that this phenomenon is caused by the objective
function that monotonically decreases with respect to r(X),
misleading the model r(X) to take on as large a value as
possible on the specific data points X. Note that even if
r(X) is bounded, this phenomenon still manifests as the
model takes on the largest possible value within its output
range. Rhodes et al. (2020) and Ansari et al. (2020) independently found related problems in DRE. Whereas Kiryo et al.
(2017) and Rhodes et al. (2020) call their phenomena over-

