Generalization Bounds in the Presence of Outliers: a Median-of-Means Study

Pierre Laforgue 1 Guillaume Staerman 2 Stephan Clémençon 2

Abstract
In contrast to the empirical mean, the Median-ofMeans (MoM) is an estimator of the mean θ of a
square integrable r.v. Z, around which accurate
nonasymptotic confidence bounds can be built,
even when Z does not exhibit a sub-Gaussian
tail behavior. Thanks to the high confidence it
achieves on heavy-tailed data, MoM has found
various applications in machine learning, where it
is used to design training procedures that are not
sensitive to atypical observations. More recently,
a new line of work is now trying to characterize
and leverage MoM’s ability to deal with corrupted
data. In this context, the present work proposes a
general study of MoM’s concentration properties
under the contamination regime, that provides a
clear understanding of the impact of the outlier
proportion and the number of blocks chosen. The
analysis is extended to (multisample) U -statistics,
i.e. averages over tuples of observations, that
raise additional challenges due to the dependence
induced. Finally, we show that the latter bounds
can be used in a straightforward fashion to derive
generalization guarantees for pairwise learning in
a contaminated setting, and propose an algorithm
to compute provably reliable decision functions.

1. Introduction
There are undoubtedly two major reasons for the success
of modern machine learning techniques: on the one hand,
the increasing availability of massive datasets, on the other,
the existence of computationally efficient and statistically
accurate estimation procedures. If the constant improvement
of data acquisition technologies, such as the Internet of
Things (IoT), enables today to collect considerable datasets
in an automatic fashion, it also raises numerous challenges
on the estimation side, due to the heterogeneity and possible
1
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy 2 LTCI, Télécom Paris,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France. Correspondence to: Pierre
Laforgue <pierre.laforgue@unimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

corruption of the observations acquired. From a statistical
perspective, two frameworks have been introduced to model
these aspects: (1) the heavy-tailed framework, where only
low-order moments are assumed to be finite for the data
distribution, (2) the ε-contamination model (Huber, 1964),
where the available dataset is supposed to be corrupted by a
proportion ε of outliers.
Univariate mean estimation plays a critical role in many
statistical learning problems, ranging from classification
and regression to ranking or generative modeling. Although
the empirical mean appears as a natural candidate, it has
been unfortunately shown to dramatically fail under either
of the two models discussed above. Consider a sample
Sn = {Z1 , . . . , Zn } composed of n independent identically
distributed (i.i.d.) realizations of the real-valued random
variable Z, with distribution P .P
It is well known that for
n
the empirical mean θ̂ = (1/n) i=1 Zi to exhibit a subGaussian tail behavior, it is required that distribution P
must also be sub-Gaussian, i.e. there exists ρ > 0 such that
2 2
EP [eλZ ] ≤ eλ ρ /2 for all λ ∈ R. In contrast, in the heavytailed model, one is rather interested by estimates enjoying
similar guarantees but under much weaker assumptions,
such as having only a finite variance, see the following
assumption supposed to be verified throughout this paper.
Assumption 1. There exist θ and σ 2 < +∞ such that
EP [Z] = θ, and VarP (Z) = σ 2 .
The Median-of-Means (MoM) is one of the mean estimators
that achieve a sub-Gaussian behavior under Assumption 1.
Independently introduced during the 1980s (Nemirovsky
and Yudin, 1983; Jerrum et al., 1986), the Median-of-Means
is a mean estimator that is easy to compute, while exhibiting
attractive robustness properties. For a predefined level of
confidence 1 − δ, with δ ∈ [e1−n/2 , 1), the MoM estimator
is built as follows. Set K = dlog(1/δ)e ≤ n, denoting by
x ∈ R 7→ dxe the ceiling function, and partition at random,
independently from the data, the sample Sn into K disjoint
blocks B1 , . . . , BK of size B = bn/Kc, denoting by
x ∈ R 7→ bxc the floor function. For k ≤ K, compute the
P
empirical mean based on block Bk : θ̂k = (1/B) i∈Bk Zi .
The Median-of-Means θ̂MoM is obtained by computing the
median of the block averages (see also Figure 1):
θ̂MoM = median(θ̂1 , . . . , θ̂K ).

(1)

