Provably Efficient Algorithms for Multi-Objective Competitive RL

Tiancheng Yu 1 Yi Tian 1 Jingzhao Zhang 1 Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract
We study multi-objective reinforcement learning
(RL) where an agent’s reward is represented as
a vector. In settings where an agent competes
against opponents, its performance is measured
by the distance of its average return vector to a
target set. We develop statistically and computationally efficient algorithms to approach the associated target set. Our results extend Blackwell’s
approachability theorem (Blackwell, 1956) to tabular RL, where strategic exploration becomes essential. The algorithms presented are adaptive;
their guarantees hold even without Blackwell’s
approachability condition. If the opponents use
fixed policies, we give an improved rate of approaching the target set while also tackling the
more ambitious goal of simultaneously minimizing a scalar cost function. We discuss our analysis
for this special case by relating our results to previous works on constrained RL. To our knowledge,
this work provides the first provably efficient algorithms for vector-valued Markov games and our
theoretical guarantees are near-optimal.

1. Introduction
What can a player expect to achieve in competitive games
when pursuing multiple objectives? If the player has a single
objective, the answer is clear from von Neumann’s minimax
theorem (Neumann, 1928): the player can follow a fixed
strategy to ensure that its cost is no worse than a certain
threshold, the minimax value of the game, no matter how
the opponents play. But if the player has multiple objectives,
the answer is less clear and it must define some tradeoffs.
One important way to capture tradeoffs is to define a certain
target set of vectors, and then to ensure that player’s vector
of returns lies in this set. The player’s performance can then
be measured via the distance of its reward vector from the
target set. In 1956, Blackwell showed that in a repeated
game, the player of interest can make the distance of its

average return to a target set small as long as this set satisfies
a condition called approachability (Blackwell, 1956).
The approachability theorem applies to multi-objective
games with a decision horizon of a single time step. However, in many practical domains such as robotics, selfdriving, video games, and recommendation systems, the
decision horizons span multiple time steps. For example, in
a robot control task, we may hope the robot arm reaches a
certain region in a 3D space; while, in self-driving, we may
hope the car takes care of speed, safety and comfort simultaneously. In these problems, the state of the decision process
transitions based on both the actions taken by the players and
the unknown dynamics. Though a generalization (Assumption 3) of Blackwell’s approachability condition Blackwell
(1956) is relatively direct, efficient exploration and the need
to learn the unknown transitions is what poses a challenge
in the multiple time step setting.
This challenge motivates us to ask: How can a player approach a target set that satisfies a generalized notion of
approachability? We answer this question by modeling
multi-objective competitive reinforcement learning (RL) as
an online learning problem in a vector-valued Markov game
(MG), for which we provide efficient algorithms as instances
of a generic meta-algorithm that we propose.
Going one step further, we can ask a more ambitious question: Can we minimize a scalar cost function while also
satisfying approachability? Our answer is affirmative if
the opponents play fixed policies; equivalently, if the agent
interacts with a fixed environment (without opponents), in
which case the model reduces to a vector-valued Markov
decision process (MDP). In this setting, the target set can be
viewed as a set of constraints, and our results improve on
the rich literature on constrained MDP in multiple aspects.
In Table 1 we give a comparison of different multi-objective
RL settings. Our work can be seen as a generalization of
both (Blackwell, 1956) and (Agrawal & Devanur, 2014) to
cases with an H step horizon.
Summary of our contributions.

1

Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence
to: Suvrit Sra <suvrit@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

I

For online learning in vector-valued Markov games, we
propose two provably efficient algorithms to approach
a target set under a generic framework. Strategic exploration is essential to obtain statistical efficiency (Theo-

