A Free Lunch From ANN:
Towards Efficient, Accurate Spiking Neural Networks Calibration

Yuhang Li * 1 2 Shikuang Deng * 1 Xin Dong 3 Ruihao Gong 4 Shi Gu 1

Abstract
Spiking Neural Network (SNN) has been recognized as one of the next generation of neural networks. Conventionally, SNN can be converted
from a pre-trained ANN by only replacing the
ReLU activation to spike activation while keeping the parameters intact. Perhaps surprisingly,
in this work we show that a proper way to calibrate the parameters during the conversion of
ANN to SNN can bring significant improvements.
We introduce SNN Calibration, a cheap but extraordinarily effective method by leveraging the
knowledge within a pre-trained Artificial Neural Network (ANN). Starting by analyzing the
conversion error and its propagation through layers theoretically, we propose the calibration algorithm that can correct the error layer-by-layer. The
calibration only takes a handful number of training data and several minutes to finish. Moreover,
our calibration algorithm can produce SNN with
state-of-the-art architecture on the large-scale ImageNet dataset, including MobileNet and RegNet.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our algorithm. For example,
our advanced pipeline can increase up to 69% top1 accuracy when converting MobileNet on ImageNet compared to baselines. Codes are released
at a GitHub repo.

1. Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are based on the spiking
neural behavior in biological neurons (Hodgkin & Huxley,
1952; Izhikevich, 2003). Each neuron in SNNs elicits a
spike when its accumulated membrane potential exceeds a
threshold, otherwise, it would stay inactive in the current
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Yale University 3 Harvard University 4 SenseTime
Research. Correspondence to: Yuhang Li <yuhang.li@yale.edu>,
Shi Gu <gus@uestc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Features

Training

Conversion

Calibration

Accuracy(T ≤ 100)
Scalability
Training Speed
# Required Data
Inference Speed

High
Tiny
Slow
Full-set
Fast

Low
Large
Fast
1000
Slow

High
Large
Fast
1000
Fast

Table 1. Features comparison between SNN direct training, ANNSNN conversion and our SNN calibration.

time step. Compared with ANNs, the activation values in
SNNs are binarized (i.e., neuromorphic computing (Roy
et al., 2019b)), thus resulting in an advantage of energy efficiency for SNNs. Existing works reveal that on specialized
hardware, SNNs can save energy by orders of magnitude
compared with ANNs (Roy et al., 2019a; Deng et al., 2020).
Another vital attribute of SNN is its ability to make inferences in a spatial-temporal paradigm. Specifically, the
forwarding pass in SNN is repeated for T steps to get the
final result, where the final result is the expectation of the
ultimate layer’s output across T steps. This allows the flexibility of adjusting T to balance between the latency and
accuracy of SNNs for different application scenarios.
Conventionally, there are two distinct routes to obtain a
functional SNN: (1) training SNN from scratch (Shrestha
& Orchard, 2018; Kheradpisheh et al., 2018), and (2) converting a pretrained ANN to SNN (Cao et al., 2015; Diehl
et al., 2015). For training from scratch, it is hard to adopt
gradient-based optimization methods because of the nondifferentiability of the binary activation function in SNNs
(Neftci et al., 2019). Although several approaches like surrogate gradients (Wu et al., 2018; Shrestha & Orchard, 2018)
and synaptic plasticity (Kheradpisheh et al., 2018) are proposed to mitigate this problem, training SNN from scratch
still lacks the scalability to obtain an effective SNN on the
ImageNet dataset. Another notable problem is the tremendous resources required to complete the training process.
The binary acceleration cannot be employed in GPU training
since no CUDA instructions support this kind of computation. As a result, training an SNN may require T × more
time than ANN training.
Besides directly training SNNs from scratch, another family

