When All We Need is a Piece of the Pie:
A Generic Framework for Optimizing Two-way Partial AUC

Zhiyong Yang 1 2 Qianqian Xu 3 Shilong Bao 1 2 Yuan He 4 Xiaochun Cao 1 2 Qingming Huang 3 5 6 7

Abstract
The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is a crucial metric for machine learning, which evaluates the average performance over all possible
True Positive Rates (TPRs) and False Positive
Rates (FPRs). Based on the knowledge that a
skillful classifier should simultaneously embrace
a high TPR and a low FPR, we turn to study a
more general variant called Two-way Partial AUC
(TPAUC), where only the region with TPR ≥
α, FPR ≤ β is included in the area. Moreover, a
recent work shows that the TPAUC is essentially
inconsistent with the existing Partial AUC metrics
where only the FPR range is restricted, opening
a new problem to seek solutions to leverage high
TPAUC. Motivated by this, we present the first
trial in this paper to optimize this new metric. The
critical challenge along this course lies in the difficulty of performing gradient-based optimization
with end-to-end stochastic training, even with a
proper choice of surrogate loss. To address this issue, we propose a generic framework to construct
surrogate optimization problems, which supports
efficient end-to-end training with deep-learning.
Moreover, our theoretical analyses show that: 1)
the objective function of the surrogate problems
will achieve an upper bound of the original problem under mild conditions, and 2) optimizing the
surrogate problems leads to good generalization
performance in terms of TPAUC with a high probability. Finally, empirical studies over several
benchmark datasets speak to the efficacy of our
1

State Key Laboratory of Info. Security (SKLOIS), Inst. of Info.
Engin., CAS, Beijing, China. 2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 3 Key Lab of
Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China.
4
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China. 5 School of Computer Science
and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China. 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. 7 BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming
Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

framework.

1. Introduction
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristics) curve is a wellknown tool to evaluate classification performance at varying
threshold levels. More precisely, as shown in Fig.1-(a), it
captures the relationship between True Positive Rate (TPR)
and False Positive Rate (FPR) as a function of the classification thresholds. AUC (Area Under the ROC Curve),
summarizes the average performance of a given classifier
by calculating its area. More intuitively, as shown in (Hanley & McNeil, 1982), AUC is equivalent to the possibility
that a positive instance has a higher predicted score to be
positive than a negative instance. Any skillful classifier that
can produce well-separated scores for positive and negative instances will enjoy a high AUC value, no matter how
skewed the class distribution is. As a natural result, AUC is
more appropriate than accuracy for long-tail classification
problems such as disease prediction (Hao et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2020) and rare event detection (Liu et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2019), due to this
appealing property (Fawcett, 2006; Hand & Till, 2001).

Figure 1. Comparisons of different AUC variants: (a) The entire
area of ROC curve; (b) The One-way Partial AUC (OPAUC) which
measures the area of a local region of ROC within an FPR range;
(c) The Two-way Partial AUC (TPAUC).

Over the past two decades, the importance of AUC has
raised a new wave to directly optimize AUC, which has
achieved tremendous success. A partial list of the related
studies includes (Alan & Raskutti, 2004; Joachims, 2005;
2006; Calders & Jaroszewicz, 2007; Narasimhan & Agarwal,
2013a; Gao et al., 2013; Narasimhan & Agarwal, 2017a).

