The Power of Log-Sum-Exp: Sequential Density Ratio Matrix Estimation for
Speed-Accuracy Optimization

Taiki Miyagawa 1 Akinori F. Ebihara 1

Abstract
We propose a model for multiclass classification
of time series to make a prediction as early and as
accurate as possible. The matrix sequential probability ratio test (MSPRT) is known to be asymptotically optimal for this setting, but contains a
critical assumption that hinders broad real-world
applications; the MSPRT requires the underlying probability density. To address this problem,
we propose to solve density ratio matrix estimation (DRME), a novel type of density ratio estimation that consists of estimating matrices of
multiple density ratios with constraints and thus
is more challenging than the conventional density ratio estimation. We propose a log-sum-exptype loss function (LSEL) for solving DRME and
prove the following: (i) the LSEL provides the
true density ratio matrix as the sample size of
the training set increases (consistency); (ii) it assigns larger gradients to harder classes (hard class
weighting effect); and (iii) it provides discriminative scores even on class-imbalanced datasets
(guess-aversion). Our overall architecture for
early classification, MSPRT-TANDEM, statistically significantly outperforms baseline models
on four datasets including action recognition, especially in the early stage of sequential observations. Our code and datasets are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Classifying an incoming time series as early and as accurately as possible is challenging yet crucial, especially when
the sampling cost is high or when a delay results in serious
consequences (Xing et al., 2009; 2012; Mori et al., 2015;
1

NEC Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan. Correspondence to:
Taiki Miyagawa <miyagawataik@nec.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/TaikiMiyagawa/
MSPRT-TANDEM

Mori et al., 2018). Early classification of time series is a
multi-objective optimization problem, and there is usually
no ground truth indicating when to stop observation and
classify a sequence.
The MSPRT is a provably optimal algorithm for early multiclass classification and has been developed in mathematical statistics (Armitage, 1950; Chernoff, 1959; Kiefer &
Sacks, 1963; Lorden, 1967; 1977; Pavlov, 1984; Dragalin,
1987; Pavlov, 1991; Baum & Veeravalli, 1994; Dragalin
& Novikov, 1999). The MSPRT uses a matrix of loglikelihood ratios (LLRs), the (k, l)-entry of which is the
LLR of hypothesis Hk to hypothesis Hl and depends on
the current time t through consecutive observations of sequential data X (1,t) (Figure 1). A notable property of the
MSPRT is that it is asymptotically optimal (Tartakovsky,
1998): It achieves the minimum stopping time among all the
algorithms with bounded error probabilities as the thresholds go to infinity, or equivalently, as the error probabilities
go to zero or the stopping time goes to infinity (Appendix
A). Therefore, the MSPRT is a promising approach to early
multiclass classification with strong theoretical support.
However, the MSPRT has a critical drawback that hinders
its real-world applications in that it requires the true LLR
matrix, which is generally inaccessible. To address this problem, we propose to solve density ratio matrix estimation
(DRME); i.e., we attempt to estimate the LLR matrix from
a dataset. DRME has yet to be explored in the literature but
can be regarded as a generalization of the conventional density ratio estimation (DRE), which usually focuses on only
two densities (Sugiyama et al., 2012). The difficulties with
DRME come from simultaneous optimization of multiple
density ratios; the training easily diverges when the denominator of only one density ratio is small. In fact, a naive
application of conventional binary DRE-based loss functions does not generalize well in this setting, and sometimes
causes instability and divergence of the training (Figure 2
Top).
Therefore, we propose a novel loss function for solving
DRME, the log-sum-exp loss (LSEL). We prove three properties of the LSEL, all of which contribute to enhancing
the performance of the MSPRT. (i) The LSEL is consistent;
i.e., by minimizing the LSEL, we can obtain the true LLR

