Federated Learning under Arbitrary Communication Patterns

Dmitrii Avdyukhin 1 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2

Abstract
Federated Learning is a distributed learning setting where the goal is to train a centralized model
with training data distributed over a large number of heterogeneous clients, each with unreliable and relatively slow network connections. A
common optimization approach used in federated learning is based on the idea of local SGD:
each client runs some number of SGD steps locally and then the updated local models are averaged to form the updated global model on the
coordinating server. In this paper, we investigate
the performance of an asynchronous version of
local SGD wherein the clients can communicate
with the server at arbitrary time intervals. Our
main result shows that for smooth strongly convex and smooth nonconvex functions we achieve
convergence rates that match the synchronous
version that requires all clients to communicate
simultaneously.

1. Introduction

The canonical federated learning problem involves learning
a single, global statistical model from data stored on lots
of remote devices. In particular, the goal is typically to
minimize the following objective function:
N

min f (x) where f (x) =
x

1 X (i)
f (x),
N i=1

(1)

where each f (i) is based on data available on client i. Here,
N is the number of clients. Federated learning brings
in some unique characteristics in solving the optimization
problem posed in (1), which also makes the federated learning distinct from traditional distributed learning.
(i) Communication is a critical bottleneck in federated settings. Federated networks are potentially comprised of
a massive number of devices, and communication in the
network can be slower than local computation by many
orders of magnitude (Kairouz et al., 2019).
(ii) Devices frequently generate and collect data in a varied manner, e.g., mobile phone users may use language
differently which might affect the next word prediction task. This means that the training data are nonidentically distributed, that is, a device’s local data cannot be regarded as samples drawn from the overall distribution.

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
setting that aims to collaboratively train a model under
the orchestration of a central server. Practical applications (iii) One fnal difference is that unlike traditional distributed
learning systems, in the FL setting the server has no conof FL range from cross-device scenarios, where a huge
trol over users’ devices. For example, when a WiFi acnumber of typically unreliable clients with small quantities
cess on a device is temporarily unavailable, the device
of data per client participate, to cross-silo scenarios with
may not communicate with the server for many rounds.
smaller numbers of reliable clients, each possessing larger
quantities of data (Kairouz et al., 2019). Typically, in a FL
1.1. Our Model and Results
application the clients perform most of the computation,
and a central parameter server updates the model parameWe propose a federated learning algorithm that tries to adters using the information returned by the clients. Without
dresses all the three challenges laid above. In particular,
explicit sharing of data from clients, FL can mitigate some
we get away from commonly used two impractical assumpof the privacy risks associated with traditional distributed
tions: (a) identical data distribution across clients and (b)
learning techniques.
all clients can synchronize and communicate periodically
or as demanded by the server.
1

Department of Computer Science, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN, USA 2 Amazon, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Dmitrii Avdyukhin <davdyukh@iu.edu>, Shiva
Kasiviswanathan <kasivisw@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

With the goal of increasing the compute to communication
ratio, a common idea in federated/distributed setup is that
instead of keeping the iterates on different clients in sync,
we allow them to evolve locally on each machine, independent from each other, and only average the sequences

