Wasserstein Distributional Normalization For
Robust Distributional Certification of Noisy Labeled Data

Sung Woo Park 1 Junseok Kwon 1

Abstract
We propose a novel Wasserstein distributional
normalization method that can classify noisy labeled data accurately. Recently, noisy labels have
been successfully handled based on small-loss
criteria, but have not been clearly understood
from the theoretical point of view. In this paper, we address this problem by adopting distributionally robust optimization (DRO). In particular, we present a theoretical investigation of
the distributional relationship between uncertain
and certain samples based on the small-loss criteria. Our method takes advantage of this relationship to exploit useful information from uncertain
samples. To this end, we normalize uncertain
samples into the robustly certified region by introducing the non-parametric Ornstein-Ulenbeck
type of Wasserstein gradient flows called Wasserstein distributional normalization, which is cheap
and fast to implement. We verify that network confidence and distributional certification
are fundamentally correlated and show the concentration inequality when the network escapes
from over-parameterization. Experimental results
demonstrate that our non-parametric classification
method outperforms other parametric baselines
on the Clothing1M and CIFAR-10/100 datasets
when the data have diverse noisy labels.

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks in supervised classification tasks is heavily dependent on accurate and high-quality
label information. Nevertheless, annotating large-scale
datasets is an extremely expensive and time-consuming task.
Thus, most conventional studies obtain large-scaled training
data using crowd-sourcing platforms (Yu et al., 2018), which
inevitably results in noisy labels in the annotated samples.
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence to: Sung Woo Park <pswkiki@gmail.com>, Junseok Kwon <jskwon@cau.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While there are several methods that can deal with noisylabeled data, recent methods typically adopt the small-loss
criterion, which helps to construct classification models that
are not susceptible to noise corruption. In this learning
scheme, a classification network is trained using easy samples first during the early stages of training. Gradually, as
training proceeds, more complex samples are selected to
train mature models. For example, collaborative learning
models (Jiang et al., 2018) have been proposed, in which a
mentor network delivers the data-driven curriculum loss to a
student network. Dual networks (Han et al., 2018; Yu et al.,
2019) generate gradient information jointly using easy samples and then employ this information to allow the networks
to teach each other. A disagreement strategy (Wei et al.,
2020) updates the gradient information based on disagreement values between dual networks. Accumulated gradients
(Han et al., 2020) have been used to escape optimization
processes from over-parameterization and obtain more generalized results. These methods have given empirical insight
regarding network behavior under noisy labels. However,
they have not extensively investigated theoretical aspects of
noisy labels.
In contrast, we provide theoretical explanations to understand the network behavior under noisy labels. In particular,
we present an in-depth analysis of small-loss criteria in a
probabilistic sense. For this, we exploit stochastic properties
of noisy-labeled data and develop probabilistic descriptions
of data under the small-loss criteria, as follows. Let P be a
probability measure for pre-softmax logits of training samples, l be an objective function for classification, and 1{·}
be an indicator function. Then, we define uncertain and
certain samples defined in the pre-softmax feature space
(i.e., X and Y , respectively), as follows.
1{X;l(Y )≤ζ} P
,
P[l(Y ) ≤ ζ]
(1)
where µ and ξ denote the probability measures of uncertain
and certain samples, respectively, and ζ is a constant. In (1),
X and Y are sampled from µ|ζ and ξ|ζ, respectively. Intuitively, uncertain samples X can be considered as samples
that produce losses larger than pre-fixed scalar ζ in each
mini-batch. While previous works focus on the usage of Y
and the sampling strategy of ζ, they do not thoroughly invesX ∼ µ|ζ =

1{X;l(X)>ζ} P
,
P[l(X) > ζ]

Y ∼ ξ|ζ =

