Few-shot Language Coordination by Modeling Theory of Mind
Hao Zhu 1 Graham Neubig 1 Yonatan Bisk 1

Abstract
No man is an island. Humans communicate with
a large community by coordinating with different interlocutors within short conversations. This
ability has been understudied by the research
on building neural communicative agents. We
study the task of few-shot language coordination: agents quickly adapting to their conversational partners’ language abilities. Different from
current communicative agents trained with selfplay, we require the lead agent to coordinate with
a population of agents with different linguistic
abilities, quickly adapting to communicate with
unseen agents in the population. This requires
the ability to model the partner’s beliefs, a vital
component of human communication. Drawing
inspiration from theory-of-mind (ToM; Premack
& Woodruff (1978)), we study the effect of the
speaker explicitly modeling the listeners’ mental states. The speakers, as shown in our experiments, acquire the ability to predict the reactions
of their partner, which helps it generate instructions that concisely express its communicative
goal. We examine our hypothesis that the instructions generated with ToM modeling yield better
communication performance in both a referential
game and a language navigation task. Positive
results from our experiments hint at the importance of explicitly modeling communication as a
socio-pragmatic progress. Code can be found at
https://github.com/CLAW-Lab/ToM.

1. Introduction
Natural language is an ubiquitous communication medium
between human interlocutors, and is shaped by the desire
to efficiently cooperate and achieve communicative goals
(Gibson et al., 2019). Because of this, there has been interest
in creating artificial agents that mimic this communication
1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Hao Zhu <zhuhao@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

process, with a wide variety of works examining communication between agents via either completely artificial emergent language (Wagner et al., 2003; Bouchacourt & Baroni,
2018; Li & Bowling, 2019; Kharitonov et al., 2020), or
through natural language such as English (Lazaridou et al.,
2016; Lowe et al., 2019a). In general, these methods model
interaction between a pair of agents, a speaker and a listener
that attempt to jointly achieve a goal where the language
use is learned to optimize success with respect to a collaborative task (for example, in Fig. 1 the speaker instructs an
embodied agent to perform a task in an environment).
However, in contrast to this setup, human speakers interact
with not a single listener, but many different conversational
partners. In doing so, they also adapt to each other’s language within short conversations. One of the representative
phenomena is entrainment, in which interlocutors align their
language on both acoustic-prosodic and lexical dimensions
during communication (Brennan & Clark, 1996; Levitan
et al., 2018). These issues remain mostly unattested in previous work on multi-agent communication — it remains
an open question how to train an agent which can adapt to
communicating with novel partners quickly.
We define this adaptive communication problem as few-shot
language coordination. As shown in Fig. 1, within a few
rounds of the game, the speaker must adapt its language
based on the responses from the listener to achieve the communicative goal of helping the listener perform the correct
actions as many times as possible. This few-shot coordination setting provides the agents with the pressure to adapt
on-the-fly – something that current models generally cannot
achieve, even those that model pragmatics, e.g. the rational
speech act model (Frank & Goodman, 2012).
Developmental psychology argues for the importance of
Theory of Mind (ToM), the understanding of others’ mental
states, and also the ability of interlocutors to act upon others
mental states to achieve desired effects (Tomasello, 2018).
In this paper, we study the importance of modeling the
beliefs of one’s conversational partner to achieve few-shot
language coordination. In particular, we train a model that
quickly adapts to predict the actions of the listeners in real
time. At each time step, the speaker predicts the listener’s
likely next action given all possible instructions and the
listener’s previous actions. This is essentially a few-shot

