Efficient Statistical Tests: A Neural Tangent Kernel Approach

Sheng Jia 1 2 Ehsan Nezhadarya 3 Yuhuai Wu 1 2 Jimmy Ba 1 2

Abstract
For machine learning models to make reliable
predictions in deployment, one needs to ensure
the previously unknown test samples need to be
sufficiently similar to the training data. The commonly used shift-invariant kernels do not have
the compositionality and fail to capture invariances in high-dimensional data in computer vision. We propose a shift-invariant convolutional
neural tangent kernel (SCNTK) based outlier detector and two-sample tests with maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD) that is O(n) in the number of
samples due to using the random feature approximation. On MNIST and CIFAR10 with various
types of dataset shifts, we empirically show that
statistical tests with such compositional kernels,
inherited from infinitely wide neural networks,
achieve higher detection accuracy than existing
non-parametric methods. Our method also provides a competitive alternative to adaptive kernel
methods that require a training phase.1

1. Introduction
In the two-sample hypothesis testing task, given two sets
of sampled data, we are interested in knowing whether
they come from the same distribution. In the extreme case
when either set has a sample size of 1, such testing can
be regarded as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection. For
two-sample tests, one of the simplest methods is to evaluate
the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) statistics (Gretton
et al., 2012). MMD measures the distance between the
kernel mean embeddings of two distributions (Muandet
et al., 2016) in the reproducing kernel hilbert space (RKHS)
(Berlinet & Thomas-Agnan, 2004).
As the choice of kernel and associated hyperparameters can largely affect the efficacy of the MMD-based
method, there have been methods that optimize the kernel
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 LG Electronics. Correspondence to: Sheng Jia <sheng@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for maximizing the test power (Liu et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2020). These methods have been shown to empirically
work well for image data. Since the distributions of
high-dimensional data are expected to have complex
function form, deep kernel based methods are becoming
popular (Wilson et al., 2016; Sutherland et al., 2016; Li
et al., 2017; Jean et al., 2018; Wenliang et al., 2019). A
common deep kernel approach is to train a network to
extract features under different criteria, such as the test
power maximization. Extracted features are then fed into a
simple Gaussian kernel (Liu et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020).
One disadvantage of the deep kernel approach is
that the method hinges on the generalization of the feature
extractor to the new “test” data. Using a portion of the test
samples as “training” data (or for fine-tuning) also means
that less “test” samples become available. Besides, in online
scenarios, nonparametric methods that optimize kernel
parameters are not computationally scalable. To address
these issues, we investigate an orthogonal direction to see
whether the compositional kernels associated with randomly
initialized convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide a
better inductive bias than existing kernels for statistical tests
in image domains. The hope is that fast testing with their
random feature approximation (Rahimi & Recht, 2008;
Cho & Saul, 2009) is competitive to deep kernel methods
that use naive Gaussian kernels. Our motivation comes
from the recent surge of interests in neural tangent kernel
(Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Bietti & Mairal, 2019)
and its empirical success in CIFAR10 classification task
(Arora et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019). We summarize our
contributions below:
1. We show the explicit conditions under which the neural
tangent kernel for certain fully-connected and convolutional neural networks are shift-invariant and characteristic, which makes it a valid kernel for two-sample tests
with MMD statistics. Shift-invariance also makes the
kernel applicable for kernel density estimation (KDE)based out-of-distribution detection.
2. We show how the proposed shift- invariant convolutional neural tangent kernel (SCNTK) is used to compute the MMD statistic for two-sample tests and the
1

Source code https://github.com/Sheng-J/scntk

