Robust Unsupervised Learning via L-Statistic Minimization

Andreas Maurer 1 Daniela A. Parletta 1 2 Andrea Paudice 1 3 Massimilano Pontil 1 4

Abstract
Designing learning algorithms that are resistant to
perturbations of the underlying data distribution
is a problem of wide practical and theoretical importance. We present a general approach to this
problem focusing on unsupervised learning. The
key assumption is that the perturbing distribution
is characterized by larger losses relative to a given
class of admissible models. This is exploited by
a general descent algorithm which minimizes an
L-statistic criterion over the model class, weighting small losses more. Our analysis characterizes
the robustness of the method in terms of bounds
on the reconstruction error relative to the underlying unperturbed distribution. As a byproduct,
we prove uniform convergence bounds with respect to the proposed criterion for several popular
models in unsupervised learning, a result which
may be of independent interest. Numerical experiments with KMEANS clustering and principal
subspace analysis demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach.

restrict attention to “a sufficient portion of the data in good
agreement with one of the hypothesized models”.
To implement the above idea, we propose using Lestimators (Serfling, 1980), which are formed by a weighted
average of the order statistics. That is, given a candidate
model, we first rank its losses on the empirical data and
than take a weighted average which emphasizes small losses
more. An important example of this construction is the
average of a fraction of the smallest losses. However, our
observations apply to general classes of weight functions,
which are only restricted to be non-increasing and in some
cases Lipschitz continuous.
We highlight that although L-statistics have a long tradition,
a key novelty of this paper is to use them as objective functions based on which to search for a robust model. This
approach is general in nature and can be applied to robustify
any learning method, supervised or unsupervised, based
on empirical risk minimization. In this paper we focus on
unsupervised learning, and our analysis includes KMEANS
clustering, principal subspace analysis and sparse coding,
among others.
This paper makes the following contributions:

1. Introduction
Making learning methods robust is a fundamental problem
in machine learning and statistics. In this work we proposes
an approach to unsupervised learning which is resistant to
unstructured contaminations of the underlying data distribution. As noted by Hampel (Hampel, 2001), “outliers” are
an ill-defined concept, and an approach to robust learning,
which relies on rules for the rejection of outliers (see Ord,
1996, and references therein) prior to processing may be
problematic, since the hypothesis class of the learning process itself may determine which data is to be regarded as
structured or unstructured. Instead of the elimination of
outliers – quoting Hampel “data that don’t fit the pattern set
by the majority of the data” – in this paper we suggest to

• A theoretical analysis of the robustness of the proposed
method (Theorem 1). Under the assumption that the
data-distribution is a mixture of an unperturbed distribution adapted to our model class and a perturbing
distribution, we identify conditions under which we
can bound the reconstruction error, when the minimizer
of the proposed objective trained from the perturbed
distribution is tested on the unperturbed distribution.
• An analysis of generalization (Theorems 4–6). We
give dimension-free uniform bounds in terms of
Rademacher averages as well as a dimension- and
variance-dependent uniform bounds in terms of covering numbers which can outperform the dimension-free
bounds under favorable conditions.

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2 University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy 3 University of Milan, Milan, Italy 4 University
College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Andrea Paudice <and.paudice@gmail.com>.

• A meta-algorithm operating on the empirical objective which can be used whenever there is a descent
algorithm for the underlying loss function (Theorem
9).

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give
a brief overview of unsupervised (representation) learning.

1

