Homomorphic Sensing: Sparsity and Noise

Liangzu Peng 1 Boshi Wang 1 Manolis C. Tsakiris 1
Assuming the existence of a k-sparse solution x∗ to (1),
the first question is whether x∗ is unique. The answer is
typically characterized via two frequently used notions, the
spark (Donoho & Elad, 2003) or the Kruskal rank (Kruskal,
1977), and has played a major role in the theoretical foundations of compressed sensing, where x∗ is typically viewed as
a sparse signal and A as a measurement matrix. Specifically,
for a generic1 A ∈ Rm×n , x∗ is the unique sparsest solution
to (1) if m ≥ 2k. Conversely, for any A ∈ Rm×n , there are
multiple sparsest solutions to (1) whenever m < 2k < n.
Later efforts considered the equivalence between the `0
semi-norm minimization (1) and its `1 relaxation known as
basis pursuit, typically studied via the nullspace property
(Cohen et al., 2009) or the restricted isometry property (Candes & Tao, 2005). Built upon those theoretical grounds are
efficient convex optimization algorithms that solve the `1
basis pursuit problem. For a modern account of compressed
sensing the reader is referred to the relevant chapters in
Theodoridis (2020); Wright & Ma (2020).

Abstract
Unlabeled sensing is a recent problem encompassing many data science and engineering applications and typically formulated as solving linear
equations whose right-hand side vector has undergone an unknown permutation. It was generalized
to the homomorphic sensing problem by replacing
the unknown permutation with an unknown linear
map from a given finite set of linear maps. In this
paper we present tighter and simpler conditions
for the homomorphic sensing problem to admit a
unique solution. We show that this solution is locally stable under noise, while under a sparsity assumption it remains unique under less demanding
conditions. Sparsity in the context of unlabeled
sensing leads to the problem of unlabeled compressed sensing, and a consequence of our general
theory is the existence under mild conditions of
a unique sparsest solution. On the algorithmic
level, we solve unlabeled compressed sensing by
an iterative algorithm validated by synthetic data
experiments. Finally, under the unifying homomorphic sensing framework we connect unlabeled
sensing to other important practical problems.

1.2. Unlabeled Sensing
Recently, increasing research efforts have concentrated on
the unlabeled sensing problem, proposed by Unnikrishnan
et al. (2015); Unnikrishnan et al. (2018) in signal processing
contexts. With Sm the set of m × m permutation matrices, Π∗ ∈ Sm an unknown permutation, and y = Π∗ Ax∗ ,
unlabeled sensing is concerned with solving the equations2

1. Introduction
1.1. Compressed Sensing

y = ΠAx,

The beginning of the 21st century has witnessed the birth
of compressed sensing, a subject, as written by Theodoridis
(2020), whose starting point is to develop conditions for the
solution of an underdetermined linear system of equations.
In an attempt at finding a sparsest solution of the linear equations y = Ax with A ∈ Rm×n , researchers have focused
on the optimization problem
min x 0 s.t. y = Ax.

x∈Rn

(1)

1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence
to: Liangzu Peng, Boshi Wang, Manolis C. Tsakiris
<penglz,wangbsh,mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Π ∈ Sm ,

x ∈ Rn

(2)

in the unknown x from the given data y, A. The connection
of unlabeled sensing with compressed sensing is that both
problems can be cast as subspace classification problems.
In both cases
S the given data can be thought of as a union of
subspaces i∈[`] Vi ⊂ Rm together with a point y in that
union, and the problem is to determine which subspace Vi
the point y belongs to. In compressed
sensing, the Vi ’s arise

as the images of the ` = nk k-dimensional coordinate subspaces of Rn under the measurement matrix A; in unlabeled
sensing there are ` = m! subspaces R(ΠA) obtained as Π
1

For now it is safe to think of “generic” as “random”, and “for
a generic A ∈ Rm×n ” as “for almost all A ∈ Rm×n ” (see §2.1).
2
In fact Unnikrishnan et al. (2018) considered the even more
challenging problem where only a subset of the entries of y =
Π∗ Ax∗ is given; see also §4.

