GP-Tree: A Gaussian Process Classifier for Few-Shot Incremental Learning

Idan Achituve 1 Aviv Navon 1 Yochai Yemini 1 Gal Chechik 1 2 Ethan Fetaya 1

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are non-parametric,
flexible, models that work well in many tasks.
Combining GPs with deep learning methods via
deep kernel learning (DKL) is especially compelling due to the strong representational power
induced by the network. However, inference in
GPs, whether with or without DKL, can be computationally challenging on large datasets. Here,
we propose GP-Tree, a novel method for multiclass classification with Gaussian processes and
DKL. We develop a tree-based hierarchical model
in which each internal node of the tree fits a GP
to the data using the Pòlya-Gamma augmentation scheme. As a result, our method scales
well with both the number of classes and data
size. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method against other Gaussian process training
baselines, and we show how our general GP approach achieves improved accuracy on standard
incremental few-shot learning benchmarks.

of training examples. This can limit exact inference on large
datasets, especially when combined with DKL where the
kernel needs to be re-computed at each iteration. A common
approach to handle large datasets is to learn a small set of
inducing points, which act as a proxy for the training data
(Silverman, 1985; Quinonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005;
Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006).

1. Introduction

While extensive work has been done on handling these challenges for Gaussian process regression, comparatively little
has been done on how to scale Gaussian process classification (see Liu et al., 2020a, for a recent review). This is partly
because the categorical distribution on the target variable
results in non-Gaussian posteriors and we no longer have a
closed-form marginal likelihood. One appealing approach
to address this obstacle is the Pólya-Gamma augmentation
(Polson et al., 2013). In the Pólya-Gamma augmentation,
the posterior becomes Gaussian when conditioned on the
augmented Pólya-Gamma variable. However, this augmentation was designed for binary classification tasks. Since
then, several extensions to multi-class classification have
been proposed (Linderman et al., 2015; Galy-Fajou et al.,
2020; Snell & Zemel, 2021). However, as we will show
empirically their performance degrades as the number of
target classes increases.

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a popular Bayesian nonparametric approach that enjoys a closed-form marginal
likelihood, thus avoiding one of the major computational
difficulties of many Bayesian approaches. However, due
to several obstacles, successfully applying GPs to certain
problems may be challenging. First, the performance of GP
models heavily depends on the kernel function being used.
In domains such as images, where common kernels are not
a good measure of semantic similarity, this can hinder the
performance. This problem is commonly addressed by deep
kernel learning (DKL) where GPs are combined with modern neural networks to learn a useful kernel function from
the data (Calandra et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016a).

In this study, we present a novel method for Gaussian process classification (GPC) that is designed to handle both
small and large datasets. Importantly, it is also designed to
handle a large number of classes. We develop a tree-based
model in which each node solves a binary classification task
using a Gaussian process and the Pólya-Gamma augmentation scheme. We term our method GP-Tree. GP-Tree has
great flexibility as it allows us to take samples from the posterior with Gibbs sampling, or apply variational inference
and use the inducing points approximation. To train GPTree on large-scale image classification tasks, we further
combine it with DKL and we show how in this setup as well
it is superior to popular GPC methods.

Second, computing the marginal likelihood involves storing
and inverting an n × n kernel matrix, where n is the number

Finally, we apply GP-Tree to incremental few-shot learning
challenges (Tao et al., 2020). In incremental few-shot learning, we assume that the data come sequentially. Initially,
the learner is presented with many samples from some base
classes. Then, at each new iteration, it has access only to a
new, small, dataset that originated from a set of novel classes

1

Bar-Ilan University, Israel 2 Nvidia, Israel. Correspondence to:
Idan Achituve <idan.achituve@biu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

