Efficient Iterative Amortized Inference for Learning Symmetric and
Disentangled Multi-Object Representations

Patrick Emami 1 Pan He 1 Sanjay Ranka 1 Anand Rangarajan 1

Abstract
Unsupervised multi-object representation learning depends on inductive biases to guide the discovery of object-centric representations that generalize. However, we observe that methods for
learning these representations are either impractical due to long training times and large memory
consumption or forego key inductive biases. In
this work, we introduce EfficientMORL, an efficient framework for the unsupervised learning
of object-centric representations. We show that
optimization challenges caused by requiring both
symmetry and disentanglement can in fact be addressed by high-cost iterative amortized inference
by designing the framework to minimize its dependence on it. We take a two-stage approach to inference: first, a hierarchical variational autoencoder
extracts symmetric and disentangled representations through bottom-up inference, and second,
a lightweight network refines the representations
with top-down feedback. The number of refinement steps taken during training is reduced following a curriculum, so that at test time with zero
steps the model achieves 99.1% of the refined decomposition performance. We demonstrate strong
object decomposition and disentanglement on the
standard multi-object benchmark while achieving
nearly an order of magnitude faster training and
test time inference over the previous state-of-theart model.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has produced impressive results across multiple domains by taking advantage of enormous amounts of
data and compute. However, it has become clear that the
representations these models learn have fundamental limitations. Consider the problem of inferring a representation
1

University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Correspondence
to: Patrick Emami <pemami@ufl.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for a multi-object scene. Most humans can observe a scene
and then manipulate the individual objects in their mind—
perhaps imagining that a chair has suddenly flipped upside
down. This example illustrates that the common approach
of summarizing an entire scene as a single distributed representation (Hinton et al., 1986) is likely insufficient. It has
been shown that this approach fails on simple generalization
tasks such as processing novel numbers of objects (Eslami
et al., 2016; Watters et al., 2019a; Mao et al., 2019).
Alternatively, a scene can be encoded as a set of distributed
object-centric representations using object detection (Zhou
et al., 2019) or instance segmentation (He et al., 2017).
While sets can handle arbitrary numbers of objects, these
methods require ground truth supervision which limits
reusability and generalization. Unsupervised approaches
bring the promise of better generalization at the expense of
relying on inductive biases to implicitly define the scene representation. In this paper, we aim to develop such a method
that incorporates three key inductive biases that have been
argued previously as being essential for object-centric reasoning and addressing the binding problem within deep
neural networks (Greff et al., 2015; 2017; 2019; Locatello
et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2020).
• Symmetry Multiple distributed representations are inferred for a single scene, each sharing a common format with the others (Greff et al., 2019; Locatello et al.,
2020). This eases relational and compositional reasoning, e.g. for learning dynamics models (van Steenkiste
et al., 2018; Veerapaneni et al., 2019).
• Unordered Any latent representation can take responsibility for any single object (Greff et al., 2019). Typically, a randomized iterative process is used to decide
the assignment.
• Disentangled Manipulating one dimension of an object representation changes a single object property and
leaves all else invariant (Schmidhuber, 1992; Higgins
et al., 2017; 2018).
Prior attempts to incorporate all three inductive biases have
been unsuccessful for a variety of reasons. Some do not enforce symmetry to avoid solving for the assignment (Burgess

