The Logical Options Framework

Brandon Araki 1 Xiao Li 1 Kiran Vodrahalli 2 Jonathan DeCastro 3 J. Micah Fry 4 Daniela Rus 1

Abstract
Learning composable policies for environments
with complex rules and tasks is a challenging problem. We introduce a hierarchical reinforcement
learning framework called the Logical Options
Framework (LOF) that learns policies that are satisfying, optimal, and composable. LOF effciently
learns policies that satisfy tasks by representing
the task as an automaton and integrating it into
learning and planning. We provide and prove conditions under which LOF will learn satisfying,
optimal policies. And lastly, we show how LOF’s
learned policies can be composed to satisfy unseen tasks with only 10-50 retraining steps on our
benchmarks. We evaluate LOF on four tasks in
discrete and continuous domains, including a 3D
pick-and-place environment.

1. Introduction
To operate in the real world, intelligent agents must be
able to make long-term plans by reasoning over symbolic
abstractions while also maintaining the ability to react to
low-level stimuli in their environment (Zhang & Sridharan,
2020). Many environments obey rules that can be represented as logical formulae; e.g., the rules a driver follows
while driving, or a recipe a chef follows to cook a dish.
Traditional motion and path planning techniques struggle
to plan over these long-horizon tasks, but hierarchical approaches such as hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL)
can solve lengthy tasks by planning over both the high-level
rules and the low-level environment. However, solving these
problems involves trade-offs among multiple desirable properties, which we identify as satisfaction, optimality, and
composability (described below). Today’s hierarchical planning algorithms lack at least one of these objectives. For
example, Reward Machines (Icarte et al., 2018) are satisfy1
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York City, NY, USA 3 Toyota Research Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Brandon Araki <araki@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ing and optimal, but not composable; the options framework
(Sutton et al., 1999) is composable and hierarchically optimal, but cannot satisfy specifcations. An algorithm that
achieves all three of these properties would be very powerful because it would enable a model learned on one set
of rules to generalize to arbitrary rules. We introduce the
Logical Options Framework, which builds upon the options
framework and aims to combine symbolic reasoning and
low-level control to achieve satisfaction, optimality, and
composability with as few compromises as possible. Furthermore, we demonstrate that models learned with our
framework generalize to arbitrary sets of rules without any
further learning, and we also show that our framework is
compatible with arbitrary domains and planning algorithms,
from discrete domains and value iteration to continuous
domains and proximal policy optimization (PPO).
Satisfaction: An agent operating in an environment governed by rules must be able to satisfy the specifed rules.
Satisfaction is a concept from formal logic, in which the
input to a logical formula causes the formula to evaluate to
True. Logical formulae can encapsulate rules and tasks
like the ones described in Fig. 1, such as “pick up the groceries” and “do not drive into a lake”. In this paper, we state
conditions under which our method is guaranteed to learn
satisfying policies.
Optimality: Optimality requires that the agent maximize
its expected cumulative reward for each episode. In general,
satisfaction can be achieved by rewarding the agent for satisfying the rules of the environment. In hierarchical planning
there are several types of optimality, including hierarchical optimality (optimal with respect to the hierarchy) and
optimality (optimal with respect to everything). We prove
in this paper that our method is hierarchically optimal and,
under certain conditions, optimal.
Composability: Our method is also composable – once it
has learned the low-level components of a task, the learned
model can be rearranged to satisfy arbitrary tasks. More
specifcally, the rules of an environment can be factored into
liveness and safety properties, which we discuss in Sec. 3.
The learned model has high-level actions called options that
can be composed to satisfy new liveness properties. A shortcoming of many RL models is that they are not composable
– trained to solve one specifc task, they are incapable of han-

