Examining and Combating Spurious Features under Distribution Shift

Chunting Zhou 1 Xuezhe Ma 2 Paul Michel 1 Graham Neubig 1

Abstract
A central goal of machine learning is to learn
robust representations that capture the causal relationship between inputs features and output labels.
However, minimizing empirical risk over finite or
biased datasets often results in models latching
on to spurious correlations between the training
input/output pairs that are not fundamental to the
problem at hand. In this paper, we define and
analyze robust and spurious representations using the information-theoretic concept of minimal
sufficient statistics. We prove that even when
there is only bias of the input distribution (i.e. covariate shift), models can still pick up spurious
features from their training data. Group distributionally robust optimization (DRO) provides
an effective tool to alleviate covariate shift by
minimizing the worst-case training loss over a
set of pre-defined groups. Inspired by our analysis, we demonstrate that group DRO can fail
when groups do not directly account for various
spurious correlations that occur in the data. To
address this, we further propose to minimize the
worst-case losses over a more flexible set of distributions that are defined on the joint distribution
of groups and instances, instead of treating each
group as a whole at optimization time. Through
extensive experiments on one image and two language tasks, we show that our model is significantly more robust than comparable baselines
under various partitions. Our code is available
at https://github.com/violet-zct/
group-conditional-DRO.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning models that minimize the average
training loss via empirical risk minimization (ERM) are
1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Information Sciences Institute, University
of Southern California, Log Angeles, USA. Correspondence to:
Chunting Zhou <chuntinz@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) ERM
(average=93.3% robust=83.4%)

(b) Group DRO [clean]
(average=96.5% robust=95.8%)

(c) Group DRO [imperfect]
(average=93.3%, robust=83.1%)

(d) Our Method [imperfect]
(average=94.0%, robust=93.8%)

Figure 1. Consider data points x in R2 with two classes y. The
vertical axis of x is a spurious feature that highly correlates with
y, and the horizontal axis is the robust feature. There are two
subclasses in each class, where the top-right and lower-left are
two minority subclasses. The robust accuracy is test worst-case
accuracy over the four subclasses. We train a linear classifier with
different methods. For models trained with the clean partitions,
each subclass is a group. For the imperfect partitions, dots with
the same shape is a group (best viewed in color).

trained and evaluated on randomly shuffled and split training and test sets. However, such in-distribution learning
setups can hide critical issues: models that achieve high
accuracy on average often underperform when the test distribution drifts away from the training one (Hashimoto et al.,
2018; Koenecke et al., 2020; Koh et al., 2020). Such models are often “right for the wrong reasons” due to reliance
on spurious correlations (or “dataset biases”) (Torralba &
Efros, 2011; Goyal et al., 2017; McCoy et al., 2019; Gururangan et al., 2018), heuristics that hold for most training
examples but are not inherent to the task of interest, such as
strong associations between the presence of green pastures
background with the label “cows” in image classification.
Naturally, models that use such features will fail when tested
on data where the correlation does not hold.
Recent work has investigated how models trained with ERM
learn spurious features that do not generalize, from the
points of view of causality (Arjovsky et al., 2019), understanding model overparameterization (Sagawa et al., 2020b)

