Consensus Control for Decentralized Deep Learning

Lingjing Kong 1 * Tao Lin 1 * Anastasia Koloskova 1 Martin Jaggi 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1

Abstract
Decentralized training of deep learning models
enables on-device learning over networks, as well
as efficient scaling to large compute clusters. Experiments in earlier works reveal that, even in
a data-center setup, decentralized training often
suffers from the degradation in the quality of the
model: the training and test performance of models trained in a decentralized fashion is in general
worse than that of models trained in a centralized
fashion, and this performance drop is impacted by
parameters such as network size, communication
topology and data partitioning.
We identify the changing consensus distance between devices as a key parameter to explain the
gap between centralized and decentralized training. We show in theory that when the training consensus distance is lower than a critical quantity,
decentralized training converges as fast as the centralized counterpart. We empirically validate that
the relation between generalization performance
and consensus distance is consistent with this theoretical observation. Our empirical insights allow the principled design of better decentralized
training schemes that mitigate the performance
drop. To this end, we provide practical training
guidelines and exemplify its effectiveness on the
data-center setup as the important first step.

1. Introduction
The impressive successes of machine learning, witnessed in
the last decade, have been accompanied by a steady increase
in the size, complexity, and computational requirements of
training systems. In response to these challenges, distributed
training algorithms (i.e. data-parallel large mini-batch SGD)
have been developed for the use in data-centers (Goyal et al.,
2017; You et al., 2018; Shallue et al., 2018). These stateof-the-art (SOTA) training systems rely on the All-Reduce
communication primitive to perform exact averaging on the
*

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Tao Lin <tao.lin@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

local mini-batch gradients computed on different subsets
of the data, for the later synchronized model update. However, exact averaging with All-Reduce is sensitive to the
communication hardware of the training system, causing
the bottleneck in efficient deep learning training. To address
this issue, decentralized training has become an indispensable training paradigm for efficient large scale training in
data-centers (Assran et al., 2019), alongside its orthogonal
benefits on preserving users’ privacy for edge AI (Bellet
et al., 2018; Kairouz et al., 2019).
Decentralized SGD (D-SGD) implementations trade off
the exactness of the averaging provided by All-Reduce,
with more efficient, but inexact, communication over sparse
typologies. However, this often results in a severe drop in
the training and/or test performance (i.e. generalization gap),
even after hyper-parameter fine-tuning (see our Table 1 as
well as Tables 1–3 in Assran et al., 2019). This phenomenon
is poorly understood even in relatively straightforward i.i.d.
data distribution scenarios (i.e. the data-center case), to
which very few works are dedicated (in fact none of them
provide insights into the generalization performance).
Table 1: Significant generalization gap for decentralized training on a sparse ring topology (ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10 with
n ∈ {16, 32, 64} workers). Decentralized SGD (D-SGD) communicates model parameters through the gossip averaging. Test top-1
accuracies averaged over three seeds with fine-tuned learning rates.

n=16
n=32
n=64

AllReduce (complete)

D-SGD (ring)

92.91 ± 0.12
92.82 ± 0.27
92.71 ± 0.11

92.40 ± 0.10
91.81 ± 0.09
89.58 ± 0.20

In this work, we investigate the trade-off between the
train/test performance and the exactness of the averaging,
measured in terms of consensus distance, i.e. the average
discrepancy between each node and the mean of model
parameters over all machines. We identify this consensus
distance as the key parameter that captures the joint effect
of decentralization.
While one might suspect that a smaller consensus distance
would improve performance in any case, we identify several
interesting phenomena. (i) We identify a diminishing return
phenomenon: if the consensus distance stays below a critical
value (critical consensus distance), decreasing the consensus
distance further does not yield any additional performance

