Inferring serial correlation with dynamic backgrounds

Song Wei 1 Yao Xie 1 Dobromir Rahnev 2

Abstract
Sequential data with serial correlation and an unknown, unstructured, and dynamic background
is ubiquitous in neuroscience, psychology, and
econometrics. Inferring serial correlation for such
data is a fundamental challenge in statistics. We
propose a Total Variation (TV) constrained least
square estimator coupled with hypothesis tests
to infer the serial correlation in the presence of
unknown and unstructured dynamic background.
The TV constraint on the dynamic background
encourages a piecewise constant structure, which
can approximate a wide range of dynamic backgrounds. The tuning parameter is selected via
the Ljung-Box test to control the bias-variance
trade-off. We establish a non-asymptotic upper
bound for the estimation error through variational
inequalities. We also derive a lower error bound
via Fano’s method and show the proposed method
is near-optimal. Numerical simulation and a real
study in psychology demonstrate the excellent
performance of our proposed method compared
with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Serial correlation and serial dependence have been central
to time series analysis (Hong, 2010). Modern time-series
data from neuroscience, psychology, and economics usually
contain both a substantial serial dependence and a nonstationary drift (Akrami et al., 2018; Wexler et al., 2015;
Moskowitz et al., 2012; Fischer & Whitney, 2014; Cicchini
et al., 2018; McIlhagga, 2008; Rahnev et al., 2015). A wellknown example comes from human reaction times, which
are thought to be autocorrelated but also drift throughout
an experiment (Laming, 1968). The drift can be due to
many factors such as becoming better on the task, increased
tiredness, and attention or arousal fluctuations. None of

these influences take a specific parametric form. While
some (e.g., learning or fatigue) are likely to be monotonic,
others (e.g., fluctuations in attention) can be expected to
waver unpredictably. This non-stationary background drift
is thus typically considered a nuisance variable.
It is typically of strong scientific interest to infer the presence and/or assess serial correlation’s strength with an unknown and unstructured dynamic background. The magnitude of autocorrelation has direct implications for many
scientific theories. For example, Fischer & Whitney (2014)
proposed that the human brain creates a “perceptual continuity field” where the subjective percept at one point of
time directly influences the percept within a subsequent
15-second window. Such effects are known as “serial dependence” and are an active area of research within psychology
and neuroscience. Progress in this and related endeavors
depends on one’s ability to estimate the magnitude of autocorrelation in certain time series, even in the presence of
substantial unstructured drift.
The most popular tool to handle the serial correlation is the
autoregressive (AR) time series. However, the presence of
even a small drift can induce strong biases in the estimated
AR coefficients. For example, unmodeled background drift
can masquerade as autocorrelation, as illustrated in the first
panel in Figure 1. This issue has been pointed out before
by Dutilh et al. (2012), but no solution exists to date. Techniques have been developed for tracking the unknown dynamic background with minimum structural assumptions
(Hodrick & Prescott, 1997; Kim et al., 2009; Harchaoui &
Lévy-Leduc, 2010) but these approaches do not estimate
the serial correlation. Thus, we currently lack an efficient
method to capture the autocorrelation strength in a time
series in the presence of highly unstructured dynamic drifts.
Motivated by this, we consider the following problem. Assume a sequence of observations x1 , . . . , xT over time
horizon T , which are generated from the underlying nonstationary AR(p) time series model:

1

School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Tech,
School of Psychology, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>, Song Wei
<song.wei@gatech.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

xi = fi +

p
X

αj xi−j + εi ,

i = 1, . . . , T,

(1)

j=1

where ε1 , . . . , εT are i.i.d. sub-Gaussian random noise
with zero mean and variance σ02 , α1 , . . . , αp are AR coefficients, f1 , . . . , fT are deterministic dynamic backgrounds

