Unsupervised Co-part Segmentation through Assembly

Qingzhe Gao 1 2 Bin Wang 2 Libin Liu 3 Baoquan Chen 3

Abstract
Co-part segmentation is an important problem
in computer vision for its rich applications. We
propose an unsupervised learning approach for
co-part segmentation from images. For the training stage, we leverage motion information embedded in videos and explicitly extract latent representations to segment meaningful object parts.
More importantly, we introduce a dual procedure of part-assembly to form a closed loop
with part-segmentation, enabling an effective selfsupervision. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach with a host of extensive experiments,
ranging from human bodies, hands, quadruped,
and robot arms. We show that our approach can
achieve meaningful and compact part segmentation, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches on
diverse benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Part-structure provides a compact and meaningful intermediate shape representation of articulated objects. Co-part
segmentation, which aims to label semantic part belonging
for each pixel of the objects in an image, is an important
problem in computer vision. Such capability can directly
serve various higher-level tasks such as marker-less motion
tracking, action recognition and prediction, robot manipulation, and human-machine interaction.
With the advent of deep learning, and the availability of large
amount of annotated motion datasets, supervised learningbased approaches have led to superior performances over
traditional part segmentation methods; the most success
has been achieved for human pose estimation, e.g., (Güler
et al., 2018; Kanazawa et al., 2018). However, this approach
assumes significant domain knowledge, and highly depends
on the specific dataset used for training, thus making it

difficult to generalize to objects with different appearance,
lighting or pose, not to mention unseen subjects.
A video sequence is viewed as a spatio-temporal intensity
volume that contains all structural and motion information
of the action, including poses of the subject at any time as
well as the dynamic transitions between the poses. Our goal
in this research is to extract a general part-based representation from videos. Compared with single image-based segmentation, our work intends to aggregate shape correlation
information from multiple images to improve the segmentation of individual images. The capability of consistently
detecting object parts are important for motion tracking of
creatures of various topology, and ultimately extracting their
skeletal structures.
A successful line of recent works in this direction formulates
the task as an image generation problem, where segmented
parts are globally warped to form the final image. There,
part-segmentation becomes the essential intermediate step,
because: the better you can segment (parts), the better you
can generate (the image). In this paper, we follow the same
image-generation concept, but introduce a dual procedure of
part-assembly to form a closed loop with part-segmentation,
which ensures more consistent, also more compact and
meaningful part segmentation. Specifically, we generate
the final image through blending each part’s warped image,
instead of a global image warping. In essence, our image
based assembly operation effectively constrains the manifold of each individual part, resulting in improved results.
We take an unsupervised learning approach. Like many
recent works about unsupervised / self-supervised part segmentation, we believe shape correlation information between different frames can be leveraged for achieving semantic consistency. Our approach is similar to PSD (Xu
et al., 2019), Motion Co-part (Lathuilière et al., 2020) and
Flow Capsule (Sabour et al., 2020), in the use of motion
cues embedded in different frames for co-part segmentation.
We go beyond the existing techniques in multiple ways:

1

Shandong University, Qingdao, Shandong, China 2 AICFVE,
Beijing Film Academy, Beijing, China 3 CFCS, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Baoquan Chen <baoquan@pku.edu.cn>.

(1) In our method, the supervision is attained by introducing
a novel dual-procedure of part-assembly to form a close
loop with part-segmentation.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(2) The learned parts and their transformation have clear
explainable physical meaning.

