Data-Free Knowledge Distillation for Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Zhuangdi Zhu 1 Junyuan Hong 1 Jiayu Zhou 1

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized
machine-learning paradigm in which a global
server iteratively aggregates the model parameters
of local users without accessing their data. User
heterogeneity has imposed significant challenges
to FL, which can incur drifted global models that
are slow to converge. Knowledge Distillation has
recently emerged to tackle this issue, by refining the server model using aggregated knowledge
from heterogeneous users, other than directly aggregating their model parameters. This approach,
however, depends on a proxy dataset, making it
impractical unless such prerequisite is satisfied.
Moreover, the ensemble knowledge is not fully
utilized to guide local model learning, which may
in turn affect the quality of the aggregated model.
In this work, we propose a data-free knowledge
distillation approach to address heterogeneous FL,
where the server learns a lightweight generator
to ensemble user information in a data-free manner, which is then broadcasted to users, regulating
local training using the learned knowledge as an
inductive bias. Empirical studies powered by theoretical implications show that, our approach facilitates FL with better generalization performance
using fewer communication rounds, compared
with the state-of-the-art1 .

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an effective machine learning approach that enables the decentralization of computing and data resources. Classical FL, represented by
F EDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017), obtains an aggregated
model by iteratively averaging the parameters of distributed
local user models, therefore omits the need of accessing their data. Serving as a communication-efficient and
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan
State University, Michigan, USA. Correspondence to: Zhuangdi
Zhu <zhuzhuan@msu.edu>, Jiayu Zhou <jiayuz@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/zhuangdizhu/FedGen

privacy-preserving learning scheme, FL has shown its potential to facilitate real-world applications, including healthcare (Sheller et al., 2020), biometrics (Aggarwal et al.,
2021), and natural language processing (Hard et al., 2018;
Ammad-Ud-Din et al., 2019), to name just a few.
Along with its promising prospect, FL faces practical challenges from data heterogeneity (Li et al., 2020b), in that user
data from real-world is usually non-iid distributed, which
inherently induces deflected local optimum (Karimireddy
et al., 2020). Moreover, the permutation-invariant property
of deep neural networks has further increased the heterogeneity among user models (Yurochkin et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2020b). Thus, performing element-wise averaging of
local models, as adopted by most existing FL approaches,
may not induce an ideal global model (Li et al., 2020c;b).
A variety of efforts have been made to tackle user heterogeneity, mainly from two complementary perspectives: one
focuses on stabilizing local training, by regulating the deviation of local models from a global model over the parameter
space (Li et al., 2020b; Dinh et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al.,
2020). This approach may not fully leverage the underlying
knowledge across user models, whose diversity suggests
informative structural differences of their local data and
thus deserves more investigation. Another aims to improve
the efficacy of model aggregation (Yurochkin et al., 2019;
Chen & Chao, 2021), among which knowledge distillation
has emerged as an effective solution (Lin et al., 2020; Li
& Wang, 2019). Provided with an unlabeled dataset as the
proxy, knowledge distillation alleviates the model drift issue
induced by heterogeneity, by enriching the global model
with the ensemble knowledge from local models, which is
shown to be more effective than simple parameter-averaging.
However, the prerequisite of a proxy data can leave such
an approach infeasible for many applications, where a carefully engineered dataset may not always be available on
the server. Moreover, by only refining the global model,
the inherent heterogeneity among user models is not fully
addressed, which may in turn affect the quality of the knowledge ensemble, especially if they are biased due to limited
local data (Khoussainov et al., 2005), which is a typical case
for FL.
Observing the challenge in the presence of user heterogeneity and the limitations of prior art, in this work, we propose a

