Model-Targeted Poisoning Attacks with Provable Convergence

Fnu Suya 1 Saeed Mahloujifar 2 Anshuman Suri 1 David Evans 1 Yuan Tian 1

Abstract
In a poisoning attack, an adversary who controls
a small fraction of the training data attempts to
select that data, so a model is induced that misbehaves in a particular way. We consider poisoning
attacks against convex machine learning models
and propose an efficient poisoning attack designed
to induce a model specified by the adversary. Unlike previous model-targeted poisoning attacks,
our attack comes with provable convergence to
any attainable target model. We also provide a
lower bound on the minimum number of poisoning points needed to achieve a given target model.
Our method uses online convex optimization and
finds poisoning points incrementally. This provides more flexibility than previous attacks which
require an a priori assumption about the number
of poisoning points. Our attack is the first modeltargeted poisoning attack that provides provable
convergence for convex models. In our experiments, it either exceeds or matches state-of-the-art
attacks in terms of attack success rate and distance
to the target model.

1. Introduction
Machine learning often requires extensive labeled training
data, often collected from untrusted sources. A typical
application is email spam filtering: a spam detector filters
messages based on features (e.g., presence of certain words)
and trains the model using emails labeled by users. In such
a setting, spammers can generate spam messages that inject
benign words likely to occur in legitimate emails. Models
trained on these spam messages observe significant drops in
filtering accuracy (Nelson et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2011).
Such attacks are known as poisoning attacks, and a training
process that uses labels or data from untrusted sources is
potentially vulnerable to them.
1
University of Virginia 2 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Fnu Suya <suya@virginia.edu>, Saeed Mahloujifar
<sfar@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Most work on poisoning attacks has considered one of two
extremal attacker objectives: indiscriminate attacks, where
the adversary’s goal is simply to decrease the overall accuracy of the model (Biggio et al., 2012; Xiao et al., 2012;
Mei & Zhu, 2015b; Steinhardt et al., 2017; Koh et al., 2018);
and instance attacks, where the goal is to induce a classifier
that misclassifies a particular input (Shafahi et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2019; Koh & Liang, 2017; Geiping et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2020). Recently, Jagielski et al. (2019) introduced a richer attacker objective known as a subpopulation
attack, where the goal is to increase the error rate or obtain a
particular output for a defined subset of the data distribution.
Depending on the general approach, poisoning attacks
can be categorized as objective-driven or model-targeted.
Objective-driven poisoning attacks have a specified attacker
objective (such as reducing the overall accuracy of the victim model), and aim to induce a model that maximizes
that objective. Model-targeted attacks have a specific target
model in mind (that satisfies some attacker objective) and
aim to induce a victim model as close as possible to that
target model. Objective-driven attacks are most commonly
studied in the existing literature, and indeed, it is natural
to think about attacks in terms of an adversary’s goals. We
argue, though, that breaking poisoning attacks into the two
steps of first finding a model to target and then selecting
poisoning points to induce that model has significant advantages. This view leads to improvements in our understanding of poisoning attacks and simplifies the task of designing
effective attacks for various objectives. Importantly, it can
also lead to more effective poisoning attacks.
For objective-driven attacks, gradient-based local optimization is most commonly used to construct poisoning points
for a particular attacker objective (Biggio et al., 2012; Xiao
et al., 2012; Mei & Zhu, 2015b; Koh & Liang, 2017; Shafahi
et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019). These attacks can also be
modified to fit other attacker objectives. However, since they
are based on local optimization techniques, they often get
stuck into bad local optima and fail to find effective sets of
poisoning points (Steinhardt et al., 2017; Koh et al., 2018).
The min-max attack by Steinhardt et al. (2017) circumvents
the issue of local optima by adopting online learning but
only applies to the indiscriminate setting. In contrast, modeltargeted attacks can incorporate any attacker objective into
a target model. Thus, the same model-targeted attack meth-

