Prediction-Centric Learning of Independent Cascade Dynamics
from Partial Observations
Mateusz Wilinski 1 Andrey Y. Lokhov 1

Abstract
Spreading processes play an increasingly important role in modeling for diffusion networks, information propagation, marketing and opinion
setting. We address the problem of learning of a
spreading model such that the predictions generated from this model are accurate and could be
subsequently used for the optimization, and control of diffusion dynamics. We focus on a challenging setting where full observations of the dynamics are not available, and standard approaches
such as maximum likelihood quickly become intractable for large network instances. We introduce a computationally efficient algorithm, based
on a scalable dynamic message-passing approach,
which is able to learn parameters of the effective
spreading model given only limited information
on the activation times of nodes in the network.
The popular Independent Cascade model is used
to illustrate our approach. We show that tractable
inference from the learned model generates a better prediction of marginal probabilities compared
to the original model. We develop a systematic
procedure for learning a mixture of models which
further improves the prediction quality.

This motivates the development of efficient algorithms that
can infer the effective spreading models from incomplete
information.

1
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los
Alamos, USA. Correspondence to: Mateusz Wilinski <mateusz@lanl.gov>, Andrey Y. Lokhov <lokhov@lanl.gov>.

In the recent years, the problem of diffusion model recovery from full observations has been extensively addressed
through a series of works focusing on heuristic and exact
algorithms, largely based on maximum likelihood type approaches (Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012; Gomez-Rodriguez
et al., 2012; Gripon & Rabbat, 2013; Abrahao et al., 2013;
Pouget-Abadie & Horel, 2015; Braunstein et al., 2019).
These methods allow one to recover the parameters of the
model, as well as the structure of the diffusion graph. Comparably, much less has been done on the side of parameter
recovery in the case of partial observations. This is primarily due to the hardness of the estimation in this case,
where maximum likelihood marginalized over the hidden
observations quickly becomes computationally prohibitive
with the number of hidden nodes (Lokhov, 2016). The work
(Amin et al., 2014) primarily considered the case of tree
graphs, and studied the network reconstruction problem
for the case where only the initial and the final states of
the dynamics are observed. This setting was further developed in (Supeesun & Fakcharoenphol, 2017) and very
recently in (Han et al., 2020) for more general graphs. In
a different setting, (Sefer & Kingsford, 2015) addressed
the structure learning problem in the case of missing information in time through relaxation optimization techniques
under the assumption that the full probabilistic trace for
each vertex is available. The case of noise in time data was
analysed in (Hoffmann & Caramanis, 2019) and (Trouleau
et al., 2019), where the latter assumed a Hawkes process
driving the dynamics. An algorithm for learning model parameters based on estimating marginal probabilities through
a dynamic message-passing approach has been suggested
in (Lokhov, 2016). Although this method provides a low
estimation error and is computationally efficient compared
to the marginalized likelihood, it still suffers from a computational complexity that scales quadratically in the system
size for each step of the gradient descent, which limits the
applicability of the method to small systems with an order
of dozens of nodes only.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Much of the work above focuses on an accurate estimation
of model parameters. However, in many applications the

1. Introduction
Spreading processes on networks have seen an increasing
interest in the domains related to modeling of infectious
diseases, regulatory networks, marketing and opinion dynamics. In a realistic setting, the model and parameters,
as well as propagation paths are unknown, and one is left
at most with several observed diffusion traces in a form of
nodes’ activation times. Moreover, even this information
is not fully available since the time-stamps of node activations may not be available from each node in the network.

