A Riemannian Block Coordinate Descent Method for Computing the
Projection Robust Wasserstein Distance

Minhui Huang 1 Shiqian Ma 2 Lifeng Lai 1

Abstract
The Wasserstein distance has become increasingly
important in machine learning and deep learning.
Despite its popularity, the Wasserstein distance
is hard to approximate because of the curse of
dimensionality. A recently proposed approach to
alleviate the curse of dimensionality is to project
the sampled data from the high dimensional probability distribution onto a lower-dimensional subspace, and then compute the Wasserstein distance
between the projected data. However, this approach requires to solve a max-min problem over
the Stiefel manifold, which is very challenging
in practice. In this paper, we propose a Riemannian block coordinate descent (RBCD) method
to solve this problem, which is based on a novel
reformulation of the regularized max-min problem over the Stiefel manifold. We show that the
complexity of arithmetic operations for RBCD to
obtain an -stationary point is O(−3 ), which is
significantly better than the complexity of existing methods. Numerical results on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that our method is
more efficient than existing methods, especially
when the number of sampled data is very large.

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein distance measures the closeness of two
probability distributions on a given metric space. It has a
broad range of applications in machine learning problems,
including the latent mixture models (Ho & Nguyen, 2016),
representation learning (Ozair et al., 2019), reinforcement
learning (Bellemare et al., 2017) and stochastic optimization
(Nagaraj et al., 2019). Intuitively, the Wasserstein distance
is the minimum cost of turning one distribution into the
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA, USA 2 Department of Mathematics,
University of California, Davis, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Shiqian Ma <sqma@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

other. To calculate the Wasserstein distance, one is required
to solve an optimal transport (OT) problem, which has been
widely adopted in machine learning and data science.
However, it is known that the sample complexity of approximating Wasserstein distances using only samples can
grow exponentially in dimension (Dudley, 1969; Fournier
& Guillin, 2015; Weed & Bach, 2019; Lei, 2020). This
leads to very large-scale OT problems that are challenging
to solve using traditional approaches. As a result, this has
motivated research on mitigating this curse of dimensionality when approximating Wasserstein distance using OT.
One approach for reducing the dimensionality is the sliced
approximation of OT proposed by (Rabin et al., 2011). This
approach projects the clouds of points from two probability
distributions onto a given line, and then computes the OT
cost between these projected values as an approximation
to the original OT cost. This idea has been further studied in (Kolouri et al., 2016; Bonneel et al., 2015; Kolouri
et al., 2019; Deshpande et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2021a;b)
for defining kernels, computing barycenters, and training
generative models. Recently, motivated by the sliced approximation of OT, (Paty & Cuturi, 2019) and (Niles-Weed
& Rigollet, 2019) proposed to project the distance measures
onto k-dimensional subspaces. The k-dimensional subpsaces are obtained by maximizing the Wasserstein distance
between two measures after projection. The approach is
called Wasserstein projection pursuit (WPP), and the largest
Wasserstein distance between the two measures after projection onto the k-dimensional subspaces is called the projection robust Wasserstein distance (PRW). As proved in (NilesWeed & Rigollet, 2019) and (Lin et al., 2020b), WPP/PRW
indeed reduces the sample complexity and resolves the issue
of curse of dimensionality for the spiked transport model.
However, computing PRW requires solving a nonconvex
max-min problem over the Stiefel manifold, which demands
efficient algorithms. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm that can compute PRW efficiently and faithfully.
In the case of discrete probability measures, one is given
two sets of finite number atoms, {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd
and {y1 , y2 ,P
. . . , yn } ⊂ Rd , and two
Pnprobability distribun
tions µn = i=1 ri δxi and νn = j=1 cj δyj . Here r =
(r1 , r2 , . . . , rn )> ∈ ∆n and c = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cn )> ∈ ∆n ,

