Cooperative Exploration for Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning

Iou-Jen Liu 1 Unnat Jain 1 Raymond A. Yeh 1 Alexander G. Schwing 1

Abstract
Exploration is critical for good results in deep reinforcement learning and has attracted much attention. However, existing multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms still use mostly
noise-based techniques. Very recently, exploration methods that consider cooperation among
multiple agents have been developed. However,
existing methods suffer from a common challenge: agents struggle to identify states that are
worth exploring, and hardly coordinate exploration efforts toward those states. To address
this shortcoming, in this paper, we propose cooperative multi-agent exploration (CMAE): agents
share a common goal while exploring. The goal
is selected from multiple projected state spaces
via a normalized entropy-based technique. Then,
agents are trained to reach this goal in a coordinated manner. We demonstrate that CMAE
consistently outperforms baselines on various
tasks, including a sparse-reward version of the
multiple-particle environment (MPE) and the
Starcraft multi-agent challenge (SMAC).

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an increasingly important field. Indeed, many real-world problems
are naturally modeled using MARL techniques. For instance, tasks from areas as diverse as robot fleet coordination (Swamy et al., 2020; Hüttenrauch et al., 2019) and
autonomous traffic control (Bazzan, 2008; Sunehag et al.,
2018) fit MARL formulations.
To address MARL problems, early work followed independent single-agent reinforcement learning work (Tampuu et al., 2015; Tan, 1993; Matignon et al., 2012). However, more recently, specifically tailored techniques such
as monotonic value function factorization (QMIX) (Rashid
et al., 2018), multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Iou-Jen Liu <iliu3@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(MADDPG) (Lowe et al., 2017), and counterfactual multiagent policy gradients (COMA) (Foerster et al., 2018) have
been developed. Those methods excel in a multi-agent
setting because they address the non-stationary issue of
MARL via a centralized critic. Despite those advances and
the resulting reported performance improvements, a common issue remains: all of the aforementioned methods use
exploration techniques from classical algorithms. Specifically, these methods employ noise-based exploration, i.e.,
the exploration policy is a noisy version of the actor policy (Rashid et al., 2020a; Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al.,
2016; Rashid et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018).
It was recently recognized that use of classical exploration
techniques is sub-optimal in a multi-agent reinforcement
learning setting. Specifically, Mahajan et al. (2019) show
that QMIX with ϵ-greedy exploration results in slow exploration and sub-optimality. Mahajan et al. (2019) improve
exploration by conditioning an agent’s behavior on a shared
latent variable controlled by a hierarchical policy. Even
more recently, Wang et al. (2020) encourage coordinated
exploration by considering the influence of one agent’s behavior on other agents’ behaviors.
While all of the aforementioned exploration techniques
for multi-agent reinforcement learning significantly improve results, they suffer from two common challenges: (1)
agents struggle to identify states that are worth exploring.
Identifying under-explored states is particularly challenging when the number of agents increase, since the state
and action space grows exponentially with the number of
agents. (2) Agents don’t coordinate their exploration efforts toward under-explored states. To give an example,
consider a Push-Box task, where two agents need to jointly
push a heavy box to a specific location before observing a
reward. In this situation, instead of exploring the environment independently, agents need to coordinate pushing the
box within the environment to find the specific location.
To address both challenges, we propose cooperative multiagent exploration (CMAE). To identify states that are worth
exploring, we observe that, while the state space grows
exponentially, the reward function typically depends on a
small subset of the state space. For instance, in the aforementioned Push-Box task, the state space contains the location of agents and the box while the reward function only

