PHEW : Constructing Sparse Networks that Learn Fast
and Generalize Well Without Training Data

Shreyas Malakarjun Patil 1 Constantine Dovrolis 1

Abstract
Methods that sparsify a network at initialization
are important in practice because they greatly improve the efficiency of both learning and inference.
Our work is based on a recently proposed decomposition of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
that has decoupled the dynamics of the training
process into a data-dependent component and an
architecture-dependent kernel – the latter referred
to as Path Kernel. That work has shown how
to design sparse neural networks for faster convergence, without any training data, using the
Synflow-L2 algorithm. We first show that even
though Synflow-L2 is optimal in terms of convergence, for a given network density, it results in
sub-networks with “bottleneck” (narrow) layers –
leading to poor performance as compared to other
data-agnostic methods that use the same number
of parameters. Then we propose a new method
to construct sparse networks, without any training data, referred to as Paths with Higher-Edge
Weights (PHEW). PHEW is a probabilistic network formation method based on biased random
walks that only depends on the initial weights. It
has similar path kernel properties as Synflow-L2
but it generates much wider layers, resulting in
better generalization and performance. PHEW
achieves significant improvements over the dataindependent SynFlow and SynFlow-L2 methods
at a wide range of network densities.

1. Introduction
Generating sparse neural networks through pruning has recently led to a major reduction in the number of parameters,
while having minimal loss in performance. Conventionally,
pruning methods operate on pre-trained networks. Gen1
School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Constantine Dovrolis <constantine@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

erally, such methods use an edge scoring mechanism for
eliminating the less important connections. Popular scoring
mechanisms include weight magnitudes (Han et al., 2015b;
Janowsky, 1989; Park* et al., 2020), loss sensitivity with respect to units (Mozer & Smolensky, 1989) and with respect
to weights (Karnin, 1990), Hessian (LeCun et al., 1990;
Hassibi & Stork, 1993), and first and second order Taylor
expansions (Molchanov et al., 2019b;a). More recent approaches use more sophisticated variants of these scores
´ &
(Han et al., 2015a; Guo et al., 2016; Carreira-Perpinan
Idelbayev, 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2017; Guo
et al., 2016).
Further analysis of pruning has shown the existence of
sparse subnetworks at initialization which, when trained, are
capable of matching the performance of the fully-connected
network (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Frankle et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2019; Frankle et al., 2020). However, identifying such
“winning ticket” networks requires expensive training and
pruning cycles. More recently, SNIP (Lee et al., 2019b),
(You et al., 2019) and GraSP (Wang et al., 2019) showed
that it is possible to find “winning tickets” prior to training –
but still having access to at least some training data to compute initial gradients. Furthermore, other work has shown
that such subnetworks generalize well across datasets and
tasks (Morcos et al., 2019).
Our goal is to identify sparse subnetworks that perform almost as well as the fully connected network without any
training data. The closest methods that tackle the same problem with our work are SynFlow (Tanaka et al., 2020) and
SynFlow-L2 (Gebhart et al., 2021). The authors of (Tanaka
et al., 2020) introduced the concept of “layer collapse” in
pruning – the state when all edges in a layer are eliminated
while there are edges in other layers that can be pruned.
They also proved that iterative pruning based on positive
gradient-based scores avoids layer collapse and introduced
an iterative algorithm (SynFlow) and a loss function that
conserves information flow and avoids layer collapse.
A branch of recent work focuses on the convergence and
generalization properties of deep neural networks using linear approximations of the training dynamics (Jacot et al.,
2018; Lee et al., 2019a; Arora et al., 2019). Under the
infinite-width assumption, (Jacot et al., 2018) showed how

