Private Stochastic Convex Optimization:
Optimal Rates in `1 Geometry

Hilal Asi 1 Vitaly Feldman 2 Tomer Koren 3 Kunal Talwar 2

Abstract
Stochastic convex optimization over an `1 bounded domain is ubiquitous in machine learning applications such as LASSO but remains
poorly understood when learning with differential privacy. We show that, up to logarithmic factors the optimal excess population loss
of
private optimizer is
p any (ε, δ)-differentially
√
log(d)/n + d/εn. The upper bound is based
on a new algorithm that combines the iterative
localization approach of Feldman et al. (2020a)
with a new analysis of private regularized mirror
descent. It applies to `p bounded domains for
p ∈ [1, 2] and queries at most n3/2 gradients improving over the best previously known algorithm
for the `2 case which needs n2 gradients. Further, we show that when the loss functions satisfy
additional smoothness assumptions, the excess
losspis upper bounded (up to logarithmic factors)
by log(d)/n + (log(d)/εn)2/3 . This bound is
achieved by a new variance-reduced version of the
Frank-Wolfe algorithm that requires just a single
pass over the data. We also show that the lower
bound in this case is the minimum of the two rates
mentioned above.

1. Introduction
Convex optimization is one of the most well-studied problems in private data analysis. Existing works have largely
studied optimization problems over `2 -bounded domains.
However several machine learning applications, such as
LASSO and minimization over the probability simplex, involve optimization over `1 -bounded domains. In this work
we study the problem of differentially private stochastic
convex optimization (DP-SCO) over `1 -bounded domains.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Apple 3 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, and Google Research Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Hilal Asi
<asi@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this problem (DP-SCO), given n i.i.d. samples z1 , . . . , zn
from a distribution P , we wish to release a private solution x ∈ X ⊆ Rd that minimizes the population loss
F (x) = Ez∼P [f (x; z)] for a convex function f over x. The
algorithm’s performance is measured using the excess population loss of the solution x, that is F (x) − miny∈X F (y).
The optimal algorithms and rates for this problem—even
without privacy—have a crucial dependence on the geometry of the constraint set X and in this work we focus on
sets with bounded `1 -diameter. Without privacy constraints,
there exist standard and efficient algorithms, such as mirror descent and exponentiated
p gradient decent, that achieve
the optimal excess loss O( log(d)/n) (Shalev-Shwartz &
Ben-David, 2014). The landscape of the problem, however,
with privacy constraints is not fully understood yet.
Most prior work on private convex optimization has focused
Pn on minimization of the empirical loss F̂ (x) =
1
i=1 f (x; zi ) over `2 -bounded domains (Chaudhuri
n
et al., 2011; Bassily et al., 2014; 2019). Bassily et al.
(2014) show √
that the optimal excess empirical loss in this
setting is Θ( d/εn) up to log factors. More recently,
Bassily
√ et√al. (2019) give an asymptotically tight bound of
1/ n + d/(εn) on the excess population loss in this setting using noisy gradient descent. Under mild smoothness
assumptions, Feldman et al. (2020a) develop algorithms that
achieve the optimal excess population loss using n gradient
computations.
In contrast, existing results for private optimization in `1 geometry do not achieve the optimal rates for the excess
population loss (Kifer et al., 2012; Jain & Thakurta, 2014;
Talwar et al., 2015). For the empirical loss, Talwar et al.
2/3
e
(2015) develop private algorithms with O(1/(nε)
) excess empirical loss for smooth functions and provide tight
lower bounds when the dimension d is sufficiently high.
These bounds can be converted into bounds on the excess population loss using standard techniques of uniform
convergence of empirical loss to population loss, however
these techniques can lead to suboptimal bounds as there
are settings
p where uniform convergence is lower bounded
by Ω( d/n) (Feldman, 2016). Moreover, the algorithm
of Talwar et al. (2015) has runtime O(n5/3 ) in the moderate
privacy regime (ε = Θ(1)) which is prohibitive in practice.

