Decentralized Single-Timescale Actor Critic on Zero-Sum Two-Player
Stochastic Games
Hongyi Guo 1 Zuyue Fu 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract
We study the global convergence and global optimality of the actor-critic algorithm applied for the
zero-sum two-player stochastic games in a decentralized manner. We focus on the single-timescale
setting where the critic is updated by applying
the Bellman operator only once and the actor is
updated by policy gradient with the information
from the critic. Our algorithm is in a decentralized manner, as we assume that each player has
no access to the actions of the other one, which, in
a way, protects the privacy of both players. Moreover, we consider linear function approximations
for both actor and critic, and we prove that the sequence of joint policy generated by our decentralized linear algorithm converges to √
the minimax
equilibrium at a sublinear rate O( K), where
K is the number of iterations. To the best of our
knowledge, we establish the global optimality and
convergence of our decentralized actor-critic algorithm on zero-sum two-player stochastic games
with linear function approximations for the first
time.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
promoted the research of various areas, and has achieved
phenomenal empirical successes with the power of deep
neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al.,
2016). Examples include video games (Mnih et al., 2015;
Vinyals et al., 2019), autonomous driving (Bojarski et al.,
2016; Codevilla et al., 2018), robotics (Levine & Abbeel,
2014; Akkaya et al., 2019), and artistic creation (Jaques
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2019). RL is typically modeled
1
Northwestern University 2 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Hongyi Guo <hongyiguo2025@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zuyue Fu <zuyuefu2022@u.northwestern.edu>, Zhuoran
Yang <zryang1993@gmail.com>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

as Markov decision process (Puterman, 2014, MDP), where
an agent aims to learn an optimal policy via interaction with
the environment. However, a wild range of real-world complex problems has a multi-agent nature, where more than
one decision maker has to interact with each other, which
motivates the research on multi-agent RL (MARL) (Busoniu et al., 2008). A wealth of works have been published
on MARL, including both theoretical analysis (Wai et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018) and empirical training frameworks
(Lowe et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018), in domains such as
team-battle video games (Peng et al., 2017), autonomous
driving (Zhou et al., 2020), and trading strategy analysis
(Bao & Liu, 2019). See Zhang et al. (2019) for a detailed
survey.
MARL is typically modeled as stochastic games (SGs)
(Shapley, 1953), which generalizes the MDP framework.
In stochastic games, agents (or players) may have different
pay-offs (or rewards) that they aim to maximize. We focus
on a specific multi-agent setting named zero-sum two-player
stochastic games, where two players try to maximize opposite rewards. MARL plays a critical role in solving zero-sum
two-player stochastic games, and a wealth of MARL algorithms and theoretical analysis are proposed in this area, e.g.
(Pérolat et al., 2015; 2017; 2018; Xie et al., 2020; Bai & Jin,
2020; Wei et al., 2017; Sidford et al., 2020). In contrast to
most existing works that assume players can observe each
other’s action and estimate a global value function, we consider a fully-decentralized setting, where each player has no
access to the actions made by the other, even from previous
timesteps, and each player maintains its own value function
estimator, which protects the privacy of both players.
In our paper, we propose a decentralized single-timescale
actor critic algorithm on zero-sum two-player stochastic
games. In each iteration, each player learns the best response towards the other player’s policy, so that their policies approach the minimax equilibrium at the end of training. We adopt the canonical actor critic (Konda & Tsitsiklis,
2000) scheme, where we let each player maintain its own
critic function with the belief that the other player adopts
the best response policy. Such decentralization enables our
algorithm to handle zero-sum n-player (n > 2) stochastic
games as well. In addition, we adopt linear function approximations in our algorithm for generalization, so that our

