Training Data Subset Selection for Regression
With Controlled Generalization Error
Durga Sivasubramanian 1 Rishabh Iyer 2 Ganesh Ramakrishnan 1 Abir De 1

Abstract
Data subset selection from a large number of training instances has been a successful approach toward efficient and cost-effective machine learning.
However, models trained on a smaller subset may
show poor generalization ability. In this paper,
our goal is to design an algorithm for selecting
a subset of the training data, so that the model
can be trained quickly, without significantly sacrificing on accuracy. More specifically, we focus
on data subset selection for L2 regularized regression problems and provide a novel problem
formulation which seeks to minimize the training
loss with respect to both the trainable parameters and the subset of training data, subject to
error bounds on the validation set. We tackle
this problem using several technical innovations.
First, we represent this problem with simplified
constraints using the dual of the original training
problem and show that the objective of this new
representation is a monotone and α-submodular
function, for a wide variety of modeling choices.
Such properties lead us to develop S EL C ON, an
efficient majorization-minimization algorithm for
data subset selection, that admits an approximation guarantee even when the training provides
an imperfect estimate of the trained model. Finally, our experiments on several datasets show
that S EL C ON trades off accuracy and efficiency
more effectively than the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Data-driven estimation of the underlying statistical model
is the central challenge in any supervised machine learning
(ML) problem. Thanks to the law of large numbers (Casella
& Berger, 2002), such a training procedure often demands
a huge number of training examples to ensure statistical
1
CSE Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 2 CS
Department, University of Texas at Dallas. Correspondence to:
Durga Sivasubramanian <durgas@cse.iitb.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

reliability of the learned model. Therefore, the success of
several machine learning models can be attributed to the
availability of a massive amount of data and thus to the
high performance computing infrastructures, e.g., GPUs,
multicore processors, high storage disks, etc., which are required to store and process such data. These computational
resources involve large expenses, additional energy utilization and maintenance costs. Mitigation of such overheads
without sacrificing the accuracy of the predictive model is
a challenging task, which often entails a careful selection
of a smaller number of training instances, so that the training algorithm can be run in an environment with limited
resources (Lucic et al., 2017; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020;
Boutsidis et al., 2013; Kaushal et al., 2019; Killamsetty
et al., 2021b; Wei et al., 2014a; Liu et al., 2015; Bairi et al.,
2015; Kirchhoff & Bilmes, 2014). However, current data
selection techniques do not explicitly account for the generalization error which may be exacerbated in the presence of
a small sized training dataset. As a consequence, they can
suffer from high generalization error, especially for large
datasets.
1.1. Present work
In response to the above limitations, our goal is to select a
subset from training data in such a way that the model can
be quickly trained in an environment with limited resources,
while at the same time, provide good predictive power. More
specifically, we make the following contributions.
Novel formulation of data selection. In this work, we focus on the regression problem and introduce a novel problem
formulation (Section 2) - which encodes the task of data
selection for regression, while ensuring that the error on
validation set remains below an acceptable level. Such an
explicit use of the validation set during training improves
the generalization ability of the inferred model, as indicated
in (Ren et al., 2018; Killamsetty et al., 2021b).
More specifically, given a model class and a fixed validation set, we seek to minimize an L2 regularized constrained
squared error loss with respect to both the parameter vector and the subset of training data, subject to a set of error
bounds on different portions of the validation set. The use
of such error bounds as optimization constraints enhances
the generalization ability of the inferred model in the face

