EL-Attention: Memory Efficient Lossless Attention for Generation

Yu Yan 1 Jiusheng Chen 1 Weizhen Qi * 2 Nikhil Bhendawade * 1 Yeyun Gong * 3 Nan Duan 3 Ruofei Zhang 4

Abstract
Transformer model with multi-head attention requires caching intermediate results for efficient
inference in generation tasks. However, cache
brings new memory-related costs and prevents
leveraging larger batch size for faster speed.
We propose memory-efficient lossless attention
(called EL-attention) to address this issue. It
avoids heavy operations for building multi-head
keys and values, cache for them is not needed.
EL-attention constructs an ensemble of attention
results by expanding query while keeping key
and value shared. It produces the same result
as multi-head attention with less GPU memory
and faster inference speed. We conduct extensive
experiments on Transformer, BART, and GPT-2
for summarization and question generation tasks.
The results show EL-attention speeds up existing
models by 1.6x to 5.3x without accuracy loss.

1. Introduction
Transformer model with multi-head attention achieves success in various generation tasks, such as text generation (Raffel et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2020), image generation (Parmar et al., 2018;
Cho et al., 2020), and music generation (Huang et al., 2018).
However, inference speed is a serious problem in generation
models. Recently, a variety of methods have been proposed
for the speed up of Transformer and variant models. Many
methods focus on reducing complexity on sequence length,
like restricting tokens which can be looked at (Zaheer et al.,
2020; Beltagy et al., 2020), using sort (Tay et al., 2020)
or hash technology (Kitaev et al., 2020), keeping cumulative states (Katharopoulos et al., 2020), and compressing
dimension (Goyal et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a). Others study reducing model size to accelerate inference by
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA
University of Science and Technology of China 3 Microsoft Research Asia 4 Microsoft, Sunnyvale, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Yu Yan <yyua@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

pruning layer (Fan et al., 2019) or training a smaller student model (Shleifer & Rush, 2020). Another way is nonautoregressive generation (Gu et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018;
Qi et al., 2020) which generates all tokens at once, instead of
predicting the next token step by step. While these excellent
methods can effectively speed up the models, they require
users to train a new model, and it is hard to apply them to
an existing model directly. Moreover, most of them suffer
more or less accuracy loss (Tay et al., 2021).
In this paper, we explore generation speedup by optimizing
cache size and memory movement rather than reducing computational complexity. This choice is based on an insight
from studying the generation process. Multi-head attention
needs to convert query, key, and value to their multi-head
format for assembling attention results. Under the context
of incremental generation, a query is a feature vector belonging to Rdm , while key and value are sequences of n feature
vectors with shape Rn×dm . Changes in key and value are
minimal during an incremental decoding step, and they are
usually cached to avoid complex and duplicated computation. With cache, overall speed is much faster than without
cache, but cache maintenance cost is still non-trivial. There
is a significant room to achieve quicker speed by reducing
memory complexity.
We present a new memory-efficient lossless attention, called
EL-attention. It can speed up inference by reducing cache
size and memory movement complexity. Memory used for
caching input related model states is reduced from O(Ldm )
to O(dm ) where L is number of decoder layers and dm is
model dimension. EL-attention further reduces memory
movement when using beam search or other search methods
to produce many candidates for each input. We achieve this
by only expanding query when constructing an ensemble
of attention results. Our method avoids converting key and
value to multi-head format. All queries from different heads
and beams share the same key and value. Despite the change
of attention, our method can be compatible with multi-head
attention via a particular converted form of query. By taking
advantage of the saved memory movement, our method can
accelerate inference under the same setting as the baseline.
Also, our method saves a massive amount of memory. This
saved memory can be harvested in multiple ways, like fitting
a bigger model in GPU, or using a larger batch size for
further speed up.

