Black-box density function estimation using recursive partitioning

Erik Bodin 1 Zhenwen Dai 2 Neill D. F. Campbell 3 Carl Henrik Ek 4

Abstract
We present a novel approach to Bayesian inference and general Bayesian computation that is
defined through a sequential decision loop. Our
method defines a recursive partitioning of the sample space. It neither relies on gradients nor requires any problem-specific tuning, and is asymptotically exact for any density function with a
bounded domain. The output is an approximation to the whole density function including the
normalisation constant, via partitions organised
in efficient data structures. Such approximations
may be used for evidence estimation or fast posterior sampling, but also as building blocks to
treat a larger class of estimation problems. The
algorithm shows competitive performance to recent state-of-the-art methods on synthetic and realworld problems including parameter inference for
gravitational-wave physics.

1. Introduction
Bayesian methods require the computation of posterior densities, expectations, and model evidence. In all but the simplest conjugate models, these calculations are intractable
and require numerical approximations to be made. In many
application areas, multiple computational tasks are carried
out on the same distribution or model of interest. Using
traditional methods, this typically involves specialised algorithms and expertise for different tasks, reducing ease-of-use
of the overall methodology, and there is often a need for
many expensive computations. The individual computations
can have low utilisation of past results, increasing the total
computational burden and slowing down experimentation.
The shared object on which the methods and computations
operate is a density function, typically being an unnormalised joint distribution of parameters and fixed data. What
1

University of Bristol, United Kingdom 2 Spotify, United
Kingdom 3 University of Bath, United Kingdom 4 University of
Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Erik Bodin
<mail@erikbodin.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

is preventing tractable computations is that the density function does not have an amenable functional form. An ideal
functional form would allow us properties that are typically only associated with specific families of parametric
distributions, such as fast proportional sampling, tractable
expectations of functions, deriving conditional and marginal
densities, and compute quantities like divergences. There
are families of methods dedicated to approximating the
density function with a function of such form. However,
these methods either assume specific original functional
forms, require known gradients, or can be prohibitively expensive. This is today a challenge often even for problems
which are moderate in the number of random variables 1 ,
as many applications areas entail joint distributions with
difficult properties. Such areas include the physical sciences, hyperparameter inference, and active learning, such
as approximating distributions of inputs to functions.
In this work, we construct approximations which are
amenable for tractable computation. The approximation
is a tree structure which can be computed ahead of time, and
from which we can produce piecewise constant approximations amenable for respective task. We present an efficient
algorithm to produce such trees, driving a recursive partitioning of the domain. The algorithm is designed for black-box
settings, does not rely on gradients nor a known form, and
addresses challenges such as multi-modality, discontinuous
structures, and zero density regions. Our approach is asymptotically exact and has no sensitive free parameters; this
leads to an algorithm that accommodates general density
functions of moderate dimension, and that is easy to use.
The method defines a sequential decision loop sampling
the integrand, prioritising regions of high probability mass
within a recursive refinement of the approximation. The
decision loop has similar algorithmic efficiency as MCMC
and nested sampling, with a time complexity allowing for
sub-millisecond decision times and scalability to a large
number of observations to obtain sufficient precision. It is
competitive to recent state-of-the-art implementations of
these methods for their individually supported tasks, whilst
in contrast to these methods produce a density function approximation defined over the whole domain, useful for many
down-stream tasks beyond efficient sampling and evidence
estimation. This algorithm we refer to as DEnsity Function
1

Such as constituting up to around ten random variables.

