Implicit Regularization in Tensor Factorization

Noam Razin 1 * Asaf Maman 1 * Nadav Cohen 1

Abstract
Recent efforts to unravel the mystery of implicit
regularization in deep learning have led to a theoretical focus on matrix factorization — matrix
completion via linear neural network. As a step
further towards practical deep learning, we provide the first theoretical analysis of implicit regularization in tensor factorization — tensor completion via certain type of non-linear neural network.
We circumvent the notorious difficulty of tensor
problems by adopting a dynamical systems perspective, and characterizing the evolution induced
by gradient descent. The characterization suggests a form of greedy low tensor rank search,
which we rigorously prove under certain conditions, and empirically demonstrate under others.
Motivated by tensor rank capturing the implicit
regularization of a non-linear neural network, we
empirically explore it as a measure of complexity,
and find that it captures the essence of datasets on
which neural networks generalize. This leads us to
believe that tensor rank may pave way to explaining both implicit regularization in deep learning,
and the properties of real-world data translating
this implicit regularization to generalization.

1

Introduction

The ability of neural networks to generalize when having
far more learnable parameters than training examples, even
in the absence of any explicit regularization, is an enigma
lying at the heart of deep learning theory. Conventional
wisdom is that this generalization stems from an implicit
regularization — a tendency of gradient-based optimization
to fit training examples with predictors whose “complexity”
is as low as possible. The fact that “natural” data gives rise
to generalization while other types of data (e.g. random) do
not, is understood to result from the former being amenable
*

Equal contribution 1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Noam
Razin <noam.razin@cs.tau.ac.il>, Asaf Maman <asafmaman@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to fitting by predictors of lower complexity. A major challenge in formalizing this intuition is that we lack definitions
for predictor complexity that are both quantitative (i.e. admit
quantitative generalization bounds) and capture the essence
of natural data (in the sense of it being fittable with low complexity). Consequently, existing analyses typically focus on
simplistic settings, where a notion of complexity is apparent.
A prominent example of such a setting is matrix completion.
In matrix completion, we are given a randomly chosen sub0
set of entries from an unknown matrix W ∗ ∈ Rd,d , and
our goal is to recover unseen entries. This can be viewed
as a prediction problem, where the set of possible inputs is
X = {1, ... , d}×{1, ... , d0 }, the possible labels are Y = R,
and the label of (i, j) ∈ X is [W ∗ ]i,j . Under this viewpoint, observed entries constitute the training set, and the
average reconstruction error over unobserved entries is the
test error, quantifying generalization. A predictor, i.e. a
function from X to Y, can then be seen as a matrix, and a
natural notion of complexity is its rank. It is known empirically (cf. Gunasekar et al. (2017); Arora et al. (2019)) that
this complexity measure is oftentimes implicitly minimized
by matrix factorization — linear neural network1 trained
via gradient descent with small learning rate and near-zero
initialization. Mathematically characterizing the implicit
regularization in matrix factorization is a highly active area
of research. Though initially conjectured to be equivalent
to norm minimization (see Gunasekar et al. (2017)), recent
studies (Arora et al., 2019; Razin & Cohen, 2020; Li et al.,
2021) suggest that this is not the case, and instead adopt a
dynamical view, ultimately establishing that (under certain
conditions) the implicit regularization in matrix factorization is performing a greedy low rank search.
A central question that arises is the extent to which the study
of implicit regularization in matrix factorization is relevant
to more practical settings. Recent experiments (see Razin
& Cohen (2020)) have shown that the tendency towards
low rank extends from matrices (two-dimensional arrays)
to tensors (multi-dimensional arrays). Namely, in the task
of N -dimensional tensor completion, which (analogously
1
That is, parameterization of learned predictor (matrix) as a
product of matrices. With such parameterization it is possible
to explicitly constrain rank (by limiting shared dimensions of
multiplied matrices), but the setting of interest is where rank is
unconstrained, meaning all regularization is implicit.

