P RO G RA ML: A Graph-based Program Representation for Data Flow Analysis
and Compiler Optimizations

Chris Cummins * 1 Zacharias V. Fisches * 2 Tal Ben-Nun 2 Torsten Hoefler 2 Michael O’Boyle 3 Hugh Leather 1

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) is increasingly seen as a
viable approach for building compiler optimization heuristics, but many ML methods cannot
replicate even the simplest of the data flow analyses that are critical to making good optimization
decisions. We posit that if ML cannot do that,
then it is insufficiently able to reason about programs. We formulate data flow analyses as supervised learning tasks and introduce a large open
dataset of programs and their corresponding labels from several analyses. We use this dataset
to benchmark ML methods and show that they
struggle on these fundamental program reasoning tasks. We propose P RO G RA ML – Program
Graphs for Machine Learning – a languageindependent, portable representation of program
semantics. P RO G RA ML overcomes the limitations of prior works and yields improved performance on downstream optimization tasks.

1. Introduction
Compiler implementation is a complex and expensive activity (Cooper & Torczon, 2012). For this reason, there
has been significant interest in using machine learning to
automate various compiler tasks (Allamanis et al., 2018).
Most works have restricted their attention to selecting compiler heuristics or making optimization decisions (Leather
& Cummins, 2020). Whether learned or engineered by human experts, these decisions naturally require reasoning
about the program and its behavior. Human experts most
often rely upon data flow analyses (Kildall, 1973; Kam &
Ullman, 1976). These are algorithms on abstract interpretations of the program, propagating information of interest
through the program’s control-flow graph until a fixed point
is reached (Kam & Ullman, 1977). Two examples out of
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, USA 2 ETH
Zürich, Switzerland 3 University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Chris Cummins <cummins@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Output
Executable

Input Program
Compiler
Intermediate
Representation
PROGRAML
Representation

Optimization
Pass
Message Passing
Neural Networks

Figure 1: Our proposed approach for compiler analyses
driven by graph-based deep learning.

many data flow analyses are: liveness – determining when
resources become dead (unused) and may be reclaimed;
and available expressions – discovering which expressions
have been computed on all paths to points in the program.
Prior machine learning works, on the other hand, have typically represented the entirety of the program’s behavior as
a fixed-length, statically computed feature vector (Ashouri
et al., 2018). Typical feature values might be the number of
instructions in a loop or the dependency depth. The demonstrable weakness of these techniques is that they are trivially confused by the addition of dead code, which changes
their feature vectors without changing the program’s behavior or its response to optimizations. Such learning algorithms are unable to learn their own abstract interpretations
of the program and so cannot avoid these pitfalls or more
subtle versions thereof (Barchi et al., 2019).
Recently, there have been attempts to develop representations that allow finer-grain program reasoning. Many, however, are limited both by how inputs are represented as
well as how inputs are processed. Representations based
on source code and its direct artifacts (e.g., AST) (Alon
et al., 2018a; Yin et al., 2018; Haj-Ali et al., 2020; Cummins et al., 2017b) put unnecessary emphasis on naming
and stylistic choices that may not correlate with the functionality of the code (e.g., Fig. 2a). Approaches based on
intermediate representations (IR) (Ben-Nun et al., 2018;
Mirhoseini et al., 2017; Brauckmann et al., 2020) remove
such noise but fail to capture information about the program that is important for analysis (e.g., Fig. 2b variables,
Fig. 2c commutativity). In both cases, models are expected

