Conjugate Energy-Based Models

Hao Wu * 1 Babak Esmaeili * 1 Michael Wick 2 Jean-Baptiste Tristan 3 Jan-Willem van de Meent 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose conjugate energy-based
models (CEBMs), a new class of energy-based
models that define a joint density over data and
latent variables. The joint density of a CEBM
decomposes into an intractable distribution over
data and a tractable posterior over latent variables. CEBMs have similar use cases as variational autoencoders, in the sense that they learn
an unsupervised mapping from data to latent variables. However, these models omit a generator
network, which allows them to learn more flexible notions of similarity between data points. Our
experiments demonstrate that conjugate EBMs
achieve competitive results in terms of image modelling, predictive power of latent space, and outof-domain detection on a variety of datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models approximate a data distribution
by combining a prior over latent variables with a neural
generator, which maps latent variables to points on a data
manifold. It is common to evaluate these models in terms
of their ability to generate realistic examples, or their estimated densities for unseen data. However, an arguably
more important use case for these models is unsupervised
representation learning. If a generator can faithfully represent the data in terms of a lower-dimensional set of latent
variables, then we hope that these variables will encode a
set of semantically meaningful factors of variation that will
be relevant to a broad range of downstream tasks.
Guiding a model towards a semantically meaningful representation requires some form of inductive bias. A large
body of work on variational autoencoders (VAEs, (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014)) has explored the
use of priors as inductive biases. Relatively mild biases in
*
Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Sciences,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Oracle Labs, MA,
USA 3 Computer Science department, Boston College, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Hao Wu <wu.hao10@northeastern.edu>,
Babak Esmaeili <esmaeili.b@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the form of conditional independence are common in the
literature on disentangled representations (Higgins et al.,
2016; Kim & Mnih, 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Esmaeili et al.,
2019). More generally, recent work has shown that defining
priors that reflect the structure of the underlying data will
lead to representations that are easier to interpret and generalize better. Examples include priors that represent objects
in an image (Eslami et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2020b; Engelcke
et al., 2019; Crawford & Pineau, 2019b), or moving objects
in video (Crawford & Pineau, 2019a; Kosiorek et al., 2018;
Wu et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020a).
Despite steady progress, work on disentangled representations and structured VAEs still predominantly considers
synthetic data. VAEs employ a neural generator that is optimized to reconstruct examples in the training set. For complex natural scenes, learning a generator that can produce
pixel-perfect reconstructions poses fundamental challenges,
given the combinatorial explosion of possible inputs. This is
not only a problem for generation, but also from the perspective of the learned representation; a VAE must encode all
factors of variation that give rise to large deviations in pixel
space, regardless of whether these factors are semantically
meaningful (e.g. presence and locations of objects) or not
(e.g. shadows of objects in the background of the image).
The motivating question that we consider in this paper is
whether it is possible to train latent-variable models without
minimizing pixel-level discrepancies between an image and
its reconstruction. Instead, we would like to design an objective that minimizes the discrepancy between the encoding of
an image and the latent variables, which will in general be in
a lower-dimensional space compared to the input. Our hope
is that doing so will allow a model to learn more abstract
representations, in the sense that it becomes easier to discard
factors of variation that give rise to variation in pixel space,
but should be considered noise.
In this paper, we consider energy-based models (EBMs)
with latent variables as a particular instantiation of this general idea. EBMs with latent variables are by no means new;
they have a long history in the context of restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) and related models (Smolensky,
1986; Hinton, 2002; Welling et al., 2004). Our motivation
in the present work is to design a class of EBMs that retain
the desirable features of VAEs, but employ a discriminative

