Narrow Margins: Classification, Margins and Fat Tails

Francois Buet-Golfouse 1

Abstract
It is well-known that, for separable data, the regularised two-class logistic regression or support
vector machine re-normalised estimate converges
to the maximal margin classifier as the regularisation hyper-parameter λ goes to 0. The fact
that different loss functions may lead to the same
solution is of theoretical and practical relevance
as margin maximisation allows more straightforward considerations in terms of generalisation and
geometric interpretation. We investigate the case
where this convergence property is not guaranteed
to hold and show that it can be fully characterised
by the distribution of error terms in the latent
variable interpretation of linear classifiers. In particular, if errors follow a regularly varying distribution, then the regularised and re-normalised
estimate does not converge to the maximal margin
classifier. This shows that classification with fat
tails has a qualitatively different behaviour, which
should be taken into account when considering
real-life data.

Introduction
Margin maximisation, see for instance (Hastie et al., 2009;
Vapnik, 1998), is an important concept that defines a property of finite sample optimality linked to separability between points from two different classes. However as the
sample size grows, this property is less relevant in the sense
that the dataset is unlikely to be separable.
But margin maximisation and separating hyperplanes are
still appealing for (at least) two reasons: first, they are an
intuitive concept and are a benchmark in any classification
task, and, second, using boosting or kernel SVM in a higher
dimensional space can enable separability.
(Rosset et al., 2003; 2004), building on previous work by
(Bartlett et al., 2006; Freund and Schapire, 1997; Fried1

Department of Mathematics, University College London,
London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Francois BuetGolfouse <ucahfbu@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

man et al., 2000; Schapire et al., 1997) and (Mangasarian,
1999), consider the case of a linear classifier (e.g., logistic
regression or support vector machine) and investigate the
convergence of a regularised estimator to a margin maximising hyperplane when data is separable. Intriguingly, they
established that under an apparently mild criterion (see Eq.
(3)) on the loss function, this convergence was guaranteed.
This was an important result from a couple standpoints: first,
it established a relationship between regularised classifiers
and margin maximisation, and, second, it showed that usual
loss functions shared that property, leading to the exact
choice of a link function being of second order.
The key results of our work are the (partial) answer to the
open question and conjecture in (Rosset et al., 2003), on
the one hand, and the link between the non convergence
to a margin maximising classifier and regular variation (cf.
(Bingham et al., 1987)) of the loss function, on the other
hand. While margin maximisation is quite specific to the
linear setting, deriving analytical properties of loss functions
that are also used in other settings, such as deep learning,
is particularly interesting to understand choices for loss
functions and their implications.
We establish a connection between this problem and heavy
tails; (Taleb, 2020) offers a wide-ranging review of heavy
tails in multiple applications, (Ibragimov et al., 2015) consider more specifically the role of heavy tails in finance and
inference, and applications in supervised learning (mainly
regression) are described in (Brownlees et al., 2015; Hsu
and Sabato, 2016; Lugosi and Mendelson, 2019). Earlier
approaches such as (Chatterjee and Hadi, 1986; Huber and
Ronchetti, 2009; Wang et al., 2007) considered heavy tails
through the lens of robust estimation. Additional research
in classification tasks under a heavy-tail regime is warranted
to refine the current state of understanding.
Contributions Our contributions in this paper can be articulated around three questions:
• Is there a converse statement to (Rosset et al., 2003)’s
sufficient condition? In other words, if a normalised
and regularised estimator converges to a marginmaximising hyperplane, must the loss function satisfy the same criterion? We show that, under some
additional assumptions, namely the convexity and dif-

