On the Random Conjugate Kernel and Neural Tangent Kernel

Zhengmian Hu 1 Heng Huang 1

Abstract
We investigate the distributions of Conjugate Kernel (CK) and Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) for
ReLU networks with random initialization. We
derive the precise distributions and moments of
the diagonal elements of these kernels. For a feedforward network, these values converge in law to
a log-normal distribution when the network depth
d and width n simultaneously tend to infinity and
the variance of log diagonal elements is proportional to d/n. For the residual network, in the
limit that number of branches m increases to infinity and the width n remains fixed, the diagonal
elements of Conjugate Kernel converge in law to
a log-normal distribution where the variance of
log value is proportional to 1/n, and the diagonal
elements of NTK converge in law to a log-normal
distributed variable times the conjugate kernel of
one feedforward network. Our new theoretical
analysis results suggest that residual network remains trainable in the limit of infinite branches
and fixed network width. The numerical experiments are conducted and all results validate the
soundness of our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully
applied to numerous applications such as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2017; He et al., 2016), natural language processing (Bahdanau et al., 2014) and speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), where DNNs often achieved
superior performance compared to conventional machine
learning algorithms and can also be used as a feature extractor (representation learning) for other methods.
Despite the extensive success, the DNN training process
and mechanism of generalization are not fully understood
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhengmian Hu <huzhengmian@gmail.com>, Heng Huang
<henghuanghh@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

due to the difficulties raised by the non-convexity of the loss
function and the complication of optimization methods.
One way to simplify the DNNs analysis is to only train
parameter in one layer while keep the parameters of other
layers as fixed. Jarrett et al. (2009) demonstrated that only
training last layer of a neural network can achieve competitive performance. Since all parameters of previous layers
are fixed, the outputs at the last hidden layer F (x, θ) of
non-linear DNNs are considered as a random feature vector
whose inner product is known as Conjugate Kernel (CK)
(Cho & Saul, 2009; Daniely et al., 2016; Poole et al., 2016;
Schoenholz et al., 2016): Σ(x, y) = F (x, θ)> F (y, θ).
The other way to simplify the DNNs analysis is using infinitesimal step size to conduct continuous time analysis
(Arora et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019b; Su et al., 2014). The
training process of parameters θ and neural network output F (x, θ) turns into two first order ordinary differential
equations (ODE):
dθi
∂L ∂F (x, θ)
=−
dt
∂F (x, θ) ∂θi

(1)

>

dF (y, θ) X ∂F (y, θ) ∂F (x, θ)
∂L
=
.
dt
∂θ
∂θ
∂F
(x, θ)
i
i
i

(2)

The first ODE shows that the dynamics of parameters θ
follows the gradient descent of a highly non-convex loss
function L(F (x, θ)). However, the dynamics of the output
F (y, θ) enjoys the form of kernel gradient descent where
the loss L is usually convex. The neural tangent kernel
(NTK) is therefore defined as follows (Jacot et al., 2018):
K(x, y) =

X ∂F (y, θ) ∂F (x, θ) >
i

∂θi

∂θi

.

(3)

Both CK and NTK depend on the inputs and parameters of
the neural network. They are potentially complicated due
to the randomness of parameters at initialization and the
changing of parameters during the training process.
One line of research bypass this complexity by conducting
the analysis in the infinite-width limit with fixed depth. Neal
(2012); Williams (1997); Lee et al. (2018); de G. Matthews

