Learning Gradient Fields for Molecular Conformation Generation

Chence Shi * 1 2 Shitong Luo * 3 Minkai Xu 1 2 Jian Tang 1 4 5

Abstract
We study a fundamental problem in computational chemistry known as molecular conformation generation, trying to predict stable 3D structures from 2D molecular graphs. Existing machine learning approaches usually first predict
distances between atoms and then generate a 3D
structure satisfying the distances, where noise in
predicted distances may induce extra errors during 3D coordinate generation. Inspired by the
traditional force field methods for molecular dynamics simulation, in this paper, we propose a
novel approach called ConfGF by directly estimating the gradient fields of the log density of
atomic coordinates. The estimated gradient fields
allow directly generating stable conformations
via Langevin dynamics. However, the problem
is very challenging as the gradient fields are rototranslation equivariant. We notice that estimating
the gradient fields of atomic coordinates can be
translated to estimating the gradient fields of interatomic distances, and hence develop a novel
algorithm based on recent score-based generative models to effectively estimate these gradients. Experimental results across multiple tasks
show that ConfGF outperforms previous state-ofthe-art baselines by a significant margin. The
code is available at https://github.com/
DeepGraphLearning/ConfGF.

1. Introduction
Graph-based representations of molecules, where nodes represent atoms and edges represent bonds, have been widely
applied to a variety of molecular modeling tasks, ranging
from property prediction (Gilmer et al., 2017; Hu et al.,
2020) to molecule generation (Jin et al., 2018; You et al.,
2018; Shi et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021). However, in reality
*

Equal contribution 1 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montréal,
Canada 2 University of Montréal, Montréal, Canada 3 Peking University 4 CIFAR AI Research Chair 5 HEC Montréal, Montréal,
Canada. Correspondence to: Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a more natural and intrinsic representation for molecules is
their three-dimensional structures, where atoms are represented by 3D coordinates. These structures are also widely
known as molecular geometry or conformation.
Nevertheless, obtaining valid and stable conformations for
a molecule remains a long-standing challenge. Existing
approaches to molecular conformation generation mainly
rely on molecular dynamics (MD) (De Vivo et al., 2016),
where coordinates of atoms are sequentially updated based
on the forces acting on each atom. The per-atom forces
come either from computationally intensive Density Functional Theory (DFT) (Parr, 1989) or from hand-designed
force fields (Rappé et al., 1992; Halgren, 1996) which are
often crude approximations of the actual molecular energies (Kanal et al., 2017). Recently, there are growing interests in developing machine learning methods for conformation generation (Mansimov et al., 2019; Simm & HernandezLobato, 2020; Xu et al., 2021). In general, these approaches
(Simm & Hernandez-Lobato, 2020; Xu et al., 2021) are
divided into two stages, which first predict the molecular
distance geometry, i.e., interatomic distances, and then convert the distances to 3D coordinates via post-processing
algorithms (Liberti et al., 2014). Such methods effectively
model the roto-translation equivariance of molecular conformations and have achieved impressive performance. Nevertheless, such approaches generate conformations in a twostage fashion, where noise in generated distances may affect
3D coordinate reconstruction, often leading to less accurate
or even erroneous structures. Therefore, we are seeking for
an approach that is able to generate molecular conformations within a single stage.
Inspired by the traditional force field methods for molecular
dynamics simulation (Frenkel & Smit, 1996), in this paper,
we propose a novel and principled approach called ConfGF
for molecular conformation generation. The basic idea is to
directly learn the gradient fields of the log density w.r.t. the
atomic coordinates, which can be viewed as pseudo-forces
acting on each atom. With the estimated gradient fields, conformations can be generated directly using Langevin dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011), which amounts to moving atoms
toward the high-likelihood regions guided by pseudo-forces.
The key challenge with this approach is that such gradient
fields of atomic coordinates are roto-translation equivariant,
i.e., the gradients rotate together with the molecular system

