A Distribution-Dependent Analysis of Meta-Learning

Mikhail Konobeev 1 Ilja Kuzborskij 2 Csaba Szepesvári 1 2

Abstract
A key problem in the theory of meta-learning
is to understand how the task distributions influence transfer risk, the expected error of a metalearner on a new task drawn from the unknown
task distribution. In this paper, focusing on fixed
design linear regression with Gaussian noise and
a Gaussian task (or parameter) distribution, we
give distribution-dependent lower bounds on the
transfer risk of any algorithm, while we also show
that a novel, weighted version of the so-called
biased regularized regression method is able to
match these lower bounds up to a fixed constant
factor. Notably, the weighting is derived from
the covariance of the Gaussian task distribution.
Altogether, our results provide a precise characterization of the difficulty of meta-learning in this
Gaussian setting. While this problem setting may
appear simple, we show that it is rich enough to
unify the “parameter sharing” and “representation
learning” streams of meta-learning; in particular,
representation learning is obtained as the special
case when the covariance matrix of the task distribution is unknown. For this case we propose to
adopt the EM method, which is shown to enjoy
efficient updates in our case. The paper is completed by an empirical study of EM. In particular,
our experimental results show that the EM algorithm can attain the lower bound as the number of
tasks grows, while the algorithm is also successful
in competing with its alternatives when used in a
representation learning context.

1. Introduction
In meta-learning, a learner uses data from past tasks in an
attempt to speed up learning on future tasks. Whether a
speedup is possible depends on whether the new task is
1

Computing Science Department, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 2 DeepMind, London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Mikhail Konobeev
<konobeev.michael@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

“similar” to the previous ones. In the formal framework
of statistical meta-learning of Baxter (2000), the learner is
given a sequence of training “sets”. The data in each set is
independently sampled from an unknown distribution specific to the set, or task, while each such task distribution is
independently sampled from an unknown meta-distribution,
which we shall just call the environment. The learner’s
transfer risk then is its expected prediction loss on a target
task freshly sampled from the environment. Can a learner
achieve smaller transfer risk by using data from the possibly
unrelated tasks? What are the limits of reducing transfer
risk?
As an instructive example, consider a popular approach
where each of the n tasks is associated with ground truth
parameters θi ∈ Rd , each of which is assumed to lie close to
an unknown vector α that characterizes the environment. To
estimate the unknown parameter vector of the last task, one
possibility is to employ biased regularization (Yang et al.,
2007; Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013; Pentina & Lampert,
2014), that is, solve the optimization problem


λ
min L̂n (θ) + kθ − α̂k2
θ
2
where L̂n (·) is the empirical loss on the nth task, λ > 0 is
a regularization parameter that governs the strength of the
regularization term that biases the solution towards α̂, an
estimate of α. Here, α̂ could be obtained, for example, by
averaging parameters estimated on previous tasks (Denevi
et al., 2018). This procedure implements the maxim “learn
on a new task, but stay close to what is already learned”,
which is the basis of many successful meta-learning algorithms, including the above, and MAML (Finn et al., 2017).
Early theoretical work in the area focused on studying the
generalization gap, which is the difference between the
transfer risk and its empirical counterpart. Maurer (2005)
gives an upper bound on this gap for a concrete algorithm
which is similar to the biased regularization approach discussed above. While these bounds are reassuring, they
need further work to fully quantify the benefit of metalearning, i.e., the gap between the risk of a standard (nonmeta) learner and the transfer risk of a meta-learner. Numerous other works have shown bounds on the generalization
gap when using biased regularization, in one-shot learning (Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2016), meta-learning (Pentina

