Ensemble Bootstrapping for Q-Learning

Oren Peer 1 Chen Tessler 1 Nadav Merlis 1 Ron Meir 1

Abstract
Q-learning (QL), a common reinforcement learning algorithm, suffers from over-estimation bias
due to the maximization term in the optimal
Bellman operator. This bias may lead to suboptimal behavior. Double-Q-learning tackles
this issue by utilizing two estimators, yet results in an under-estimation bias. Similar to
over-estimation in Q-learning, in certain scenarios, the under-estimation bias may degrade performance. In this work, we introduce a new
bias-reduced algorithm called Ensemble Bootstrapped Q-Learning (EBQL), a natural extension
of Double-Q-learning to ensembles. We analyze
our method both theoretically and empirically.
Theoretically, we prove that EBQL-like updates
yield lower MSE when estimating the maximal
mean of a set of independent random variables.
Empirically, we show that there exist domains
where both over and under-estimation result in
sub-optimal performance. Finally, We demonstrate the superior performance of a deep RL variant of EBQL over other deep QL algorithms for a
suite of ATARI games.

1. Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have impacted a vast range of real-world tasks, such as
robotics (Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Kober et al., 2013),
power management (Xiong et al., 2018), autonomous control (Bellemare et al., 2020), traffic control (Abdulhai et al.,
2003; Wiering, 2000), and more (Mahmud et al., 2018; Luong et al., 2019). These achievements are possible by the
ability of RL agents to learn a behavior policy via interaction with the environment while simultaneously maximizing
the obtained reward.
A common family of algorithms in RL is Q-learning
(Watkins & Dayan, 1992, QL) based algorithms, which
1
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion Institute
of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Oren Peer
<orenpeer@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

focuses on learning the value-function. The value represents
the expected, discounted, reward-to-go that the agent will
obtain. In particular, such methods learn the optimal policy via an iterative maximizing bootstrapping procedure. A
well-known property in QL is that this procedure results in
a positive estimation bias. Van Hasselt (2010) and Van Hasselt et al. (2016) argue that over-estimating the real value
may negatively impact the performance of the obtained policy. They propose Double Q-learning (DQL) and show that,
as opposed to QL, it has a negative estimation bias.
The harmful effects of any bias on value-learning are widely
known. Notably, the deadly triad (Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Van Hasselt et al., 2018) attributes the procedure of bootstrapping with biased values as one of the major causes of
divergence when learning value functions. This has been
empirically shown in multiple works (Van Hasselt et al.,
2016; 2018). Although this phenomenon is well known,
most works focus on avoiding positive-estimation instead of
minimizing the bias itself (Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2016; Hessel et al., 2018).
In this work, we tackle the estimation bias in an underestimation setting. We begin, similar to Van Hasselt (2010), by
analyzing the estimation bias when observing a set of i.i.d.
random variables (RVs). We consider three schemes for
estimating the maximal mean of these RVs. (i) The singleestimator, corresponding to a QL-like estimation scheme.
(ii) The double-estimator, corresponding to DQL, an estimation scheme that splits the samples into two equal-sized sets:
one for determining the index of the RV with the maximal
mean and the other for estimating the mean of the selected
RV. (iii) The ensemble-estimator, our proposed method,
splits the data into K sets. Then, a single set is used for
estimating the RV with the maximal-mean whereas all other
sets are used for estimating the mean of the selected RV.
We start by showing that the ensemble estimator can be
seen as a double estimator that unequally splits the samples
(Proposition 1). This enables, for instance, less focus on
maximal-index identification and more on mean estimation.
We prove that the ensemble estimator under-estimates the
maximal mean (Lemma 1). We also show, both theoretically (Proposition 2) and empirically (Fig. 1), that in order
to reduce the magnitude of the estimation error, a double
estimator with equally-distributed samples is sub-optimal.

