Graph Mixture Density Networks

Federico Errica 1 Davide Bacciu 1 Alessio Micheli 1

Abstract
We introduce the Graph Mixture Density Networks, a new family of machine learning models that can fit multimodal output distributions
conditioned on graphs of arbitrary topology. By
combining ideas from mixture models and graph
representation learning, we address a broader
class of challenging conditional density estimation problems that rely on structured data. In this
respect, we evaluate our method on a new benchmark application that leverages random graphs
for stochastic epidemic simulations. We show a
significant improvement in the likelihood of epidemic outcomes when taking into account both
multimodality and structure. The empirical analysis is complemented by two real-world regression tasks showing the effectiveness of our approach in modeling the output prediction uncertainty. Graph Mixture Density Networks open
appealing research opportunities in the study of
structure-dependent phenomena that exhibit nontrivial conditional output distributions.

1. Introduction
Approximating the distribution of a target value y conditioned on an input x is at the core of supervised learning
tasks. When trained using common losses such as Mean
Square Error for regression or Cross-Entropy for classification, supervised methods are known to approximate the
expected conditional distribution of the target given the input, that is, hy|xi (Bishop, 1994). This is standard practice
when the target distribution is unimodal and slight variations
in the target value are mostly due to random noise.
Still, when the target distribution of a regression problem
is not unimodal, most machine learning methods fail to represent it correctly by predicting an averaged value. As a
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa. Correspondence to: Federico Errica <federico.errica@phd.unipi.it>,
Davide Bacciu <bacciu@di.unipi.it>, Alessio Micheli
<micheli@di.unipi.it>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

matter of fact, a multimodal target distribution associates
more than one likely outcome with a given input sample,
and in this case one usually talks about solving a conditional
density estimation problem. To address this, the Mixture
Density Network (MDN) (Bishop, 1994) was proposed to
approximate arbitrarily complex conditional target distributions, and it finds application in robotics (Choi et al., 2018),
epidemiology (Davis et al., 2020) and finance (Schittenkopf
et al., 1998), to name a few. MDNs were designed for input
data of vectorial nature, but often real-world problems deal
with relational data where the structure substantially impacts
the possible outcomes. For instance, this is especially true
in epidemiology (Opuszko & Ruhland, 2013).
For more than twenty years, researchers have put great effort
into the adaptive processing of graphs (see recent surveys
of Bacciu et al. (2020b); Wu et al. (2020)). The goal is to
infer the best representation of a structured sample for a
given task via different neighborhood aggregation schemes,
graph coarsening, and information propagation strategies.
It is easy to find applications that benefit from the adaptive
processing of structured data, such as drug design (Podda
et al., 2020), classification in social networks (Yang et al.,
2016), and natural language processing (Beck et al., 2018).
Our main contribution is the proposal of a hybrid approach
to handle multimodal target distributions within machine
learning methods for graphs, called Graph Mixture Density Network (GMDN). This model outputs a multimodal
distribution, conditioned on an input graph, for either the
whole structure or its entities. For instance, given an observable input graph x, GMDN is trained to approximate the
(possibly multimodal) distribution associated with the target
random variable y via maximum likelihood estimation. The
likelihood is the usual metric to be optimized for density
estimation tasks (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001), and it tells us
how well the model is fitting the empirical data distribution.
Recall that, in general, it does not suffice to predict a single
output value like in “standard” regression problems (Bishop,
1994) to solve this kind of tasks; for this reason, GMDN
extends the capabilities of deep learning models for graphs
whose output is restricted to unimodal distributions.
We test GMDN on a novel benchmark application introduced in this paper, comprising large epidemiological sim-

