Parallel tempering on optimized paths

Saifuddin Syed * 1 Vittorio Romaniello * 1 Trevor Campbell 1 Alexandre Bouchard-Côté 1

Abstract
Parallel tempering (PT) is a class of Markov chain
Monte Carlo algorithms that constructs a path of
distributions annealing between a tractable reference and an intractable target, and then interchanges states along the path to improve mixing
in the target. The performance of PT depends on
how quickly a sample from the reference distribution makes its way to the target, which in turn
depends on the particular path of annealing distributions. However, past work on PT has used
only simple paths constructed from convex combinations of the reference and target log-densities.
This paper begins by demonstrating that this path
performs poorly in the setting where the reference
and target are nearly mutually singular. To address this issue, we expand the framework of PT
to general families of paths, formulate the choice
of path as an optimization problem that admits
tractable gradient estimates, and propose a flexible new family of spline interpolation paths for
use in practice. Theoretical and empirical results
both demonstrate that our proposed methodology
breaks previously-established upper performance
limits for traditional paths.

1. Introduction
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are widely
used to approximate intractable expectations with respect to
un-normalized probability distributions over general state
spaces. For hard problems, MCMC can suffer from poor
mixing. For example, faced with well-separated modes,
MCMC methods often get trapped exploring local regions
of high probability. Parallel tempering (PT) is a widely
applicable methodology (Geyer, 1991) to tackle poor mixing
of MCMC algorithms.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Saifuddin Syed <saif.syed@stat.ubc.ca>, Vittorio Romaniello <vittorio.romaniello@stat.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Suppose we seek to approximate an expectation with respect
to an intractable target density π1 . Denote by π0 a reference
density defined on the same space, which is assumed to
be tractable in the sense of the availability of an efficient
sampler. This work is motivated by the case where π0 and
π1 are nearly mutually singular. A typical case is where the
target is a Bayesian posterior distribution, the reference is
the prior—for which i.i.d. sampling is typically possible—
and the prior is misspecified.
PT methods are based on a specific continuum of densities
πt ∝ π01−t π1t , t ∈ [0, 1], bridging π0 and π1 . This path of
intermediate distributions is known as the power posterior
path in the literature, but in our framework it will be more
natural to think of these continua as a linear paths, as they
linearly interpolate between log-densities. PT algorithms
discretize the path at some 0 = t0 < · · · < tN = 1 to obtain
a sequence of densities πt0 , πt1 , . . . , πtN . See Figure 1 (top)
for an example of a linear path for two nearly mutually
singular Gaussian distributions.
Given the path discretization, PT involves running N + 1
MCMC chains that together target the product distribution
πt0 πt1 · · · πtN . Based on the assumption that the chain π0
can be sampled efficiently, PT uses swap-based interactions
between neighbouring chains to propagate the exploration
done in π0 into improved exploration in the chain of interest π1 . By designing these swaps as Metropolis–Hastings
moves, PT guarantees that the marginal distribution of the
N th chain converges to π1 ; and in practice, the rate of convergence is often much faster compared to running a single
chain (Woodard et al., 2009). PT algorithms are extensively
used in hard sampling problems arising in statistics, physics,
computational chemistry, phylogenetics, and machine learning (Desjardins et al., 2014; Ballnus et al., 2017; Kamberaj,
2020; Müller & Bouckaert, 2020).
Notwithstanding empirical and theoretical successes, existing PT algorithms also have well-understood theoretical
limitations. Earlier work focusing on the theoretical analysis
of reversible variants of PT has shown that adding too many
intermediate chains can actually deteriorate performance
(Lingenheil et al., 2009; Atchadé et al., 2011). Recent work
(Syed et al., 2019) has shown that a nonreversible variant
of PT (Okabe et al., 2001) is guaranteed to dominate its
classical reversible counterpart, and moreover that in the

