Transfer-Based Semantic Anomaly Detection

Lucas Deecke 1 Lukas Ruff 2 Robert A. Vandermeulen 3 Hakan Bilen 1

Abstract
Detecting semantic anomalies is challenging due
to the countless ways in which they may appear
in real-world data. While enhancing the robustness of networks may be sufficient for modeling
simplistic anomalies, there is no good known way
of preparing models for all potential and unseen
anomalies that can potentially occur, such as the
appearance of new object classes. In this paper,
we show that a previously overlooked strategy for
anomaly detection (AD) is to introduce an explicit
inductive bias toward representations transferred
over from some large and varied semantic task.
We rigorously verify our hypothesis in controlled
trials that utilize intervention, and show that it
gives rise to surprisingly effective auxiliary objectives that outperform previous AD paradigms.

1. Introduction
The goal of anomaly detection (AD) is the identification of
unusual samples within data (Edgeworth, 1887; Chandola
et al., 2009; Pang et al., 2020a; Ruff et al., 2021). For data
types that are semantically rich such as images, “unusualness” can be caused by a variety of high-level (or semantic)
factors, for example the appearance of new objects classes,
or unexpected shapes or poses. For these settings, there
has been continued interest in developing new deep AD
methods (Zhai et al., 2016; Schlegl et al., 2017; Sabokrou
et al., 2018; Deecke et al., 2018; Ruff et al., 2018; Golan &
El-Yaniv, 2018; Pidhorskyi et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al.,
2019b;c; Goyal et al., 2020; Tack et al., 2020) that utilize
end-to-end learning, a defining property amongst deep learning approaches (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016;
Goodfellow et al., 2016).
Because of the sheer number of factors that can potentially
cause an anomaly, there is no feasible way of a priori describing or anticipating them. As a result, for deep AD there
1
University of Edinburgh 2 Aignostics (majority of work done
while with TU Berlin) 3 ML Group, TU Berlin. Correspondence to:
Lucas Deecke <l.deecke@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

exists no established principal learning objective. Several
auxiliary solutions have been proposed: one line of work utilizes self-supervision (Golan & El-Yaniv, 2018; Hendrycks
et al., 2019c; Bergman & Hoshen, 2020; Tack et al., 2020;
Sohn et al., 2021), for example learning representations
from the task of predicting simple geometric transformations (rotations, translations, etc.) applied to non-anomalous
examples. A second popular approach broadly resembles
weak supervision, and uses large unstructured collections
of data as auxiliary anomalies (Hendrycks et al., 2019b;c;
Ruff et al., 2020a).
Considering the rather ad-hoc nature of many of these approaches, especially given the semantic richness present in
natural images, one may wonder whether they learn particularly meaningful features from such auxiliary objectives.
This is problematic since anomalies can manifest themselves
in ways that require a good semantic understanding — for
example when anomalies appear in crowded scenes (Mahadevan et al., 2010).
Here we propose a different perspective and hypothesize
that, because there is simply no way of anticipating all potential semantic anomalies for unseen images in advance, the
best bet is to follow a transfer-based approach that utilizes
the semantically rich features obtained from some semantic
task solved on a large, semantically varied dataset. We systematically evaluate different strategies to introduce such
an inductive bias in AD, and identify simple strategies that
yield surprisingly powerful AD methods.
Our work builds on the recently increased availability and
utilization of networks pretrained on semantically rich tasks
that incorporate different variations commonly seen in data
(edges, color, semantic categories, etc.). While He et al.
(2019) fundamentally questioned whether actual benefits
are achieved from the use of pretrained models, Hendrycks
et al. (2019a) painted them in a more positive light, showing
they improve robustness and uncertainty calibration.
Rich semantic representations have been shown to boost the
performance in many machine learning problems, including
image classification (Donahue et al., 2014; Guo et al., 2019),
object detection (Girshick et al., 2014; Girshick, 2015), the
transfer between large numbers of tasks (Zamir et al., 2018),
or from one domain to another (Rebuffi et al., 2017; 2018).
In another example, a surge of papers has recently elevated

