Learning Generalized Intersection Over Union for Dense Pixelwise Prediction

Jiaqian Yu 1 Jingtao Xu 1 Yiwei Chen 1 Weiming Li 1 Qiang Wang 1 Byung In Yoo 2 Jae-Joon Han 2

Abstract
Intersection over union (IoU) score, also named
Jaccard Index, is one of the most fundamental
evaluation methods in machine learning. The original IoU computation cannot provide non-zero
gradients and thus cannot be directly optimized by
nowadays deep learning methods. Several recent
works generalized IoU for bounding box regression, but they are not straightforward to adapt for
pixelwise prediction. In particular, the original
IoU fails to provide effective gradients for the nonoverlapping and location-sensitive cases, which
results in performance plateau. In this paper, we
propose PixIoU, a generalized IoU for pixelwise
prediction that is sensitive to the distance for nonoverlapping cases and the locations in prediction.
We provide proofs that PixIoU holds nice properties as the original IoU. To optimize the PixIoU,
we also propose a loss function that is proved to
be submodular, hence we can apply the Lovász
functions, the efﬁcient surrogates for submodular
functions for learning this loss. Experimental results show consistent performance improvements
by learning PixIoU over the original IoU for several different pixelwise prediction tasks on Pascal
VOC, VOT-2020 and Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Intersection over Union (IoU), also known as Jaccard Index
in statistics, is one of the most fundamental methods to compare similarity between data samples in machine learning.
In computer vision tasks, IoU is one of the core evaluation
method in various benchmarks including object detection,
object tracking, semantic segmentation, etc. In general, IoU
is deﬁned to calculate the overlap between two given set
of elements A and B: IoU = A∩B
A∪B . For example, for a
bounding box regression, A presents the ground-truth box
1
Samsung Research China - Beijing, Beijing, China 2 Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology, Suwon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jiaqian Yu <jiaqian.yu@samsung.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) Non-overlap cases

(b) Different locations

Figure 1: An illustration of the advantages of PixIoU over
IoU: dark blue for groundtruth and light blue for predictions.
In 1(a), when the prediction pixels share no overlap with
the groundtruth, the original IoU stays always zero; PixIoU
continuously decreases if the prediction is getting further
(within the ﬁnite region). In 1(b), the original IoU stays
unchanged if the numbers of pixels in intersection and in
union stay unchanged; PixIoU achieves a higher score if the
prediction is more centered to the groundtruth.
and B presents the prediction box, then the IoU in this case
can be formulated as a function of the box location which is
often presented by the coordinates of the left-top corner, the
width and the height of the bounding box.
For dense pixelwise prediction such as a semantic segmentation task, however, the evaluation is carried out on different
variables. At test time, given an image with ﬁnite pixels and
a ﬁnite set of classes C to predict, the IoU for a label c ∈ C
measures the overlap between the set of ground-truth pixels
y and the set of predicted pixels ỹ as:
IoU =

|{y = c} ∩ {ỹ = c}|
.
|{y = c} ∪ {ỹ = c}|

(1)

Following the principle of empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1995), the optimal objective to learn for an evaluation

