Dual Principal Component Pursuit for Robust Subspace Learning:
Theory and Algorithms for a Holistic Approach

Tianyu Ding 1 Zhihui Zhu 2 René Vidal 3 Daniel P. Robinson 4

Abstract
The Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP)
method has been proposed to robustly recover
a subspace of high relative dimension from corrupted data. Existing analyses and algorithms of
DPCP, however, mainly focus on finding a normal to a single hyperplane that contains the inliers. Although these algorithms can be extended
to a subspace of higher codimension through a
recursive approach that sequentially finds a new
basis element of the space orthogonal to the subspace, this procedure is computationally expensive and lacks convergence guarantees. In this
paper, we consider a DPCP approach for simultaneously computing the entire basis of the orthogonal complement subspace (we call this a holistic
approach) by solving a non-convex non-smooth
optimization problem over the Grassmannian. We
provide geometric and statistical analyses for the
global optimality and prove that it can tolerate
as many outliers as the square of the number of
inliers, under both noiseless and noisy settings.
We then present a Riemannian regularity condition for the problem, which is then used to prove
that a Riemannian subgradient method converges
linearly to a neighborhood of the orthogonal subspace with error proportional to the noise level.

1. Introduction
Robustly learning a linear subspace from high-dimensional
corrupted data has become a fundamental problem in machine learning, pattern recognition, and computer vision.
Two forms of corruption commonly appear in real data:
1
Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Denver, USA 3 Mathematical Institute for
Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA 4 Department of
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, USA. Correspondence to: Tianyu Ding <tding1@jhu.edu>, Zhihui Zhu
<zhihui.zhu@du.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

outliers and noise. Unlike inliers, which exactly lie in the
subspace, outliers are far from the subspace and do not exhibit linear structure. Noise in the data means that the inliers
are perturbed so that they lie close to or on the subspace,
i.e., they are noisy inliers. Such corruptions of the dataset
cause significant challenges to the subspace recovery task.
In the past decade, many robust subspace recovery (RSR)
methods have been proposed (Lerman & Maunu, 2018b)
with the assumption that high-dimensional data can be wellapproximated by low-dimensional structures. Among them
the representatives include robust PCA (Brooks et al., 2013;
Markopoulos et al., 2018; Vaswani & Narayanamurthy,
2018), sparse subspace clustering (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013;
You et al., 2016) and low-rank matrix methods (Rahmani
& Atia, 2017; Xu et al., 2012), which are normally solved
by convex optimization. However, the guarantees for theory and algorithms are developed for a low-dimensional
underlying structure with d  D, where d and D are the
subspace dimension and ambient dimension, respectively.
This may be violated in the high relative dimension regime
where d/D ≈ 1. For example, many computer vision applications involve learning a hyperplane (d = D − 1), such
as pose estimation in multi-view geometry (Hartley & Zisserman, 2003) and 3D point cloud analysis (Geiger et al.,
2013; Silberman et al., 2012). It is also observed that in
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) the subspace spanned by deep
features extracted from images of a single object category
is of high relative dimension, making the existing methods
for outlier detection theoretically inapplicable to ImageNet.
Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) (Tsakiris &
Vidal, 2018) is an RSR method developed to tackle the high
relative dimension regime directly since it estimates a basis
for the orthogonal complement of a subspace S ⊂ RD by
solving a non-convex `1 co-sparse problem on the sphere:
min kXe > bk1 s. t. kbk2 = 1,

b∈RD

(1)

where Xe ∈ RD×L is the dataset contaminated by outliers
and noise. In sharp contrast to the existing RSR methods
that that can tolerate at best M = O(N ) outliers with N inliers (L = M +N ), DPCP can handle M = O(N 2 ) outliers
even in the noisy case (Ding et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2018).
However, problem (1) can only find a normal to a single

