Strategic Classification in the Dark

Ganesh Ghalme * 1 Vineet Nair * 1 Itay Eilat 1 Inbal Talgam-Cohen 1 Nir Rosenfeld 1

Abstract
Strategic classification studies the interaction between a classification rule and the strategic agents
it governs. Under the assumption that the classifier is known, rational agents respond to it by manipulating their features. However, in many reallife scenarios of high-stake classification (e.g.,
credit scoring), the classifier is not revealed to the
agents, which leads agents to attempt to learn the
classifier and game it too. In this paper we generalize the strategic classification model to such
scenarios. We define the “price of opacity” as
the difference in prediction error between opaque
and transparent strategy-robust classifiers, characterize it, and give a sufficient condition for this
price to be strictly positive, in which case transparency is the recommended policy. Our experiments show how Hardt et al.’s robust classifier is
affected by keeping agents in the dark.

1. Introduction
The increasing role of machine learning in society has led
to much recent interest in learning methods that explicitly
consider the involvement of human agents. A canonical
instance is strategic classification—the study of classifiers
that are robust to gaming by self-interested agents. This line
of research was initiated by (Brückner & Scheffer, 2011;
Hardt et al., 2016), and has quickly amassed a multitude
of insightful follow-up works (see below). As a running
example, consider a firm (e.g., bank) classifying users (e.g.,
loan applicants) into two classes (e.g., “approve” or “deny”),
based on their attributes or features. Since applicants would
like their request to be approved (regardless of their true solvency), they might be inclined to spend efforts on modifying
their features to align with the bank’s decision rule. This
can lead to gaming behaviors like holding multiple credit
cards, which have nothing to do with the true chances of
*

1

Equal contribution
Technion - Israel Institute
of Technology.
Correspondence to:
Ganesh Ghalme
<ganeshg@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Vineet
Nair
<vineet@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

paying back the loan. The goal of the strategic classification
literature is to show when and how the firm can learn a
robust classifier, which is guaranteed to perform well even
when users strategically modify their features in response
to it. But to be realistically applicable, and to ensure safe
deployment in settings involving consequential decisionmaking, care must be taken as to what assumptions underlie
the theoretical guarantees.
Currently known results for strategic classification rely on a
key assumption: that users have full knowledge of the classifier and respond accordingly, or in other words, the classifier
is completely transparent. Under this assumption, the strategic classification literature aims for classifiers with performance “comparable to ones that rely on secrecy.” The literature thus treats the transparency/opaqueness of a classifier as
a dichotomy, where only the former is assumed to require a
strategy-robust learning process. However, in many real-life
scenarios of high-stake classification, the situation is more
nuanced. This point was made already in the original strategic classification paper: “Secrecy is not a robust solution to
the problem; information about a classifier may leak, and it
is often possible for an outsider to learn such information
from classification outcomes” (Hardt et al., 2016). So often
we have a hybrid situation – the users know something, not
everything, about the classifier, and use their partial knowledge to strategically respond to it. This partial knowledge is
a result of a second, smaller-scale learning process, this time
of the users themselves, based on information aggregated by
media platforms or by their own social network. As anecdotal evidence, consider the secret credit-scoring algorithms
applied in the US and elsewhere, coupled with the plethora
of online information on how to improve credit scores. In
the case of SCHUFA, the German credit-scoring algorithm,
there was even a recent crowdsourced effort in which a
data donation platform gathered samples from the public
with the goal of “reverse-engineering” the secret algorithm
(https://openschufa.de/english/).
The above scenarios demonstrate that rather than preventing
gaming, opacity leads users to attempt to learn the classifier
and game it too. How relevant is strategic classification to
such hybrid situations? What policy recommendations can
the theory make for firms whose classifier is being learned?
Our goal in this work is to adapt the strategic classification
framework to such settings, in order to examine both the-

