Few-shot Neural Architecture Search
Yiyang Zhao * 1 Linnan Wang * 2 Yuandong Tian 3 Rodrigo Fonseca 2 Tian Guo 1

Abstract
Efficient evaluation of a network architecture
drawn from a large search space remains a key
challenge in Neural Architecture Search (NAS).
Vanilla NAS evaluates each architecture by training from scratch, which gives the true performance but is extremely time-consuming. Recently, one-shot NAS substantially reduces the
computation cost by training only one supernetwork, a.k.a. supernet, to approximate the performance of every architecture in the search space
via weight-sharing. However, the performance
estimation can be very inaccurate due to the coadaption among operations (Bender et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose few-shot NAS that uses
multiple supernetworks, called sub-supernet, each
covering different regions of the search space to
alleviate the undesired co-adaption. Compared
to one-shot NAS, few-shot NAS improves the accuracy of architecture evaluation with a small increase of evaluation cost. With only up to 7 subsupernets, few-shot NAS establishes new SoTAs:
on ImageNet, it finds models that reach 80.5%
top-1 accuracy at 600 MB FLOPS and 77.5%
top-1 accuracy at 238 MFLOPS; on CIFAR10,
it reaches 98.72% top-1 accuracy without using
extra data or transfer learning. In Auto-GAN, fewshot NAS outperforms the previously published
results by up to 20%. Extensive experiments show
that few-shot NAS significantly improves various
one-shot methods, including 4 gradient-based and
6 search-based methods on 3 different tasks in
NasBench-201 and NasBench1-shot-1.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has attracted lots of interest over the past few years (Zoph et al., 2018; Tan et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Worcester Polytechnic Institute 2 Brown
University 3 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Yiyang
Zhao <yzhao10@wpi.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

One architecture

𝛀𝑩

𝛀: entire
𝛀
search space
𝛀𝑩

𝛀𝑨

𝛀𝑨 = 𝛀𝑪 ∪ 𝛀𝑫
𝛀𝑪

𝛀𝑫

𝛀𝑪

One-shot NAS:
Few-shot NAS:
Train one supernet Train one supernet for
each leaf sub-regions,
for 𝛀
e.g. 𝛀𝑩,𝑪,𝑫
inaccurate
fastest

Evaluations
Speed

𝛀𝑫
Vanilla NAS:
Train every networks
in 𝛀
accurate
slowest

Figure 1. Few-shot NAS is a tradeoff between the vanilla NAS
and one-shot NAS that intends to maintain accurate evaluations in
vanilla NAS and the speed advantages of one-shot NAS.

2019; Baker et al., 2017). Using NAS, many deep learning tasks (Chen et al., 2019b; Gong et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019a; Wang et al., 2019b;a) improve their performance
without human tuning. Vanilla NAS requires a tremendous
amount of computational costs (e.g., thousands of GPU
hours) in order to find a superior neural architecture (Zoph
et al., 2018; Baker et al., 2017; Real et al., 2019), most of
which is due to evaluating new architecture proposals by
training them from scratch. To reduce the cost, one-shot
NAS (Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b) proposes to train
a single supernet that represents all possible architectures in
the search space. With supernet, the performance of a specific architecture can be approximately evaluated by picking
the corresponding weights from the supernet (and masking
out other missing edges, see Fig. 2(a)) without training, reducing the evaluation (and thus search) cost to just a few
days (hours).
However, one-shot NAS suffers from degraded search performance due to inaccurate predictions from the supernet.
Other works also have explicitly shown that using supernet
degrades the final performance due to inaccurate performance predictions. For example, (Yu et al., 2019b) observes
that, without using the supernet, the average performance of
NAS algorithms such as ENAS and NAO is 1% higher than
using it on NASBench-101, and they also conclude that the
supernet never produces the true ranking. Besides, many

