Two Heads are Better Than One: Hypergraph-Enhanced Graph Reasoning
for Visual Event Ratiocination
Wenbo Zheng 1 2 Lan Yan 2 3 Chao Gou 4 Fei-Yue Wang 2

Abstract
Even with a still image, humans can ratiocinate
various visual cause-and-effect descriptions before, at present, and after, as well as beyond the
given image. However, it is challenging for models to achieve such task–the visual event ratiocination, owing to the limitations of time and
space. To this end, we propose a novel multimodal model, Hypergraph-Enhanced Graph
Reasoning. First it represents the contents from
the same modality as a semantic graph and mines
the intra-modality relationship, therefore breaking
the limitations in the spatial domain. Then, we introduce the Graph Self-Attention Enhancement.
On the one hand, this enables semantic graph
representations from different modalities to enhance each other and captures the inter-modality
relationship along the line. On the other hand,
it utilizes our built multi-modal hypergraphs in
different moments to boost individual semantic
graph representations, and breaks the limitations
in the temporal domain. Our method illustrates
the case of “two heads are better than one” in the
sense that semantic graph representations with
the help of the proposed enhancement mechanism
are more robust than those without. Finally, we
re-project these representations and leverage their
outcomes to generate textual cause-and-effect descriptions. Experimental results show that our
model achieves significantly higher performance
in comparison with other state-of-the-arts.

1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
Xi’an 710049, China 2 The State Key Laboratory for Management
and Control of Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3 School of Artificial
Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100190, China 4 School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. Correspondence
to: Fei-Yue Wang <feiyue.wang@ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In a classroom

Person1

Person2

Event: Person2 is looking over at Person1 with a concerned look.
Past:
Present:
Future:

Visual Inference

Hear Person1 was being bullied

Contact his school

Become suspicious of Person1

Realize Person1 isn't listening

Visual Hear Person1's parents were getting a divorce
Try to help Person1
Tell Person1 that not everything is perfect
Narrating
Realize Person1 is up to no good
Ask Person1 what is going on Lecture Person1 on what he's doing wrong

(a)
In an outdoor square

Person1

Visual Inference
Visual
Narrating

Event: Person1 is walking by looking at the commotion.
Past:
Present:
Future:

Follow the voices to the crowd
Ask others what is going on
Go out for the night
Go to the plaza

Write a story about tonight
Know what was going on
Take a ton of photos
Be nosy
Wander about looking for the problem
Get into the middle of the fighting

(b)
Figure 1. Illustration of The Visual Event Ratiocination. Given a
person in the image, the model is required to reason about À what
needed to happen before, Á intents of the people at present, and
Â what will happen next. Our model has the excellent abilities of
visual inference and visual narrating, detailed in Section 3.4 ∼ 3.5.

Visual Event Ratiocination is a novel challenging task
about a combination of language and vision. Given an
image and a description of the event in the image, it requires models to predict events that happen before/after and
the present intents of the characters in the given image. In
VisualCOMET benchmark dataset (Park et al., 2020), we
show an example in Figure 1(a), given the image of the
woman looking over at the man with a converned look in a
classroom, the model can infer and generate/narrate three
kinds of event ratiocination (a.k.a., event’s cause-and-effect

