Model-Free Reinforcement Learning:
from Clipped Pseudo-Regret to Sample Complexity
Zihan Zhang 1 Yuan Zhou 2 Xiangyang Ji 1

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of learning an ✏-optimal policy for a discounted Markov
Decision Process (MDP). Given an MDP with S
states, A actions, the discount factor P p0, 1q,
and an approximation threshold ✏ ° 0, we provide a model-free algorithm to learn an ✏-optimal
lnp1{pq 1
policy with sample complexity Õp ✏SA
2 p1´ q5.5 q
and success probability p1 ´ pq. For small enough
✏, we show an improved algorithm with sample
lnp1{pq
complexity Õp SA
✏2 p1´ q3 q. While the first bound
improves upon all known model-free algorithms
and model-based ones with tight dependence on
S, our second algorithm beats all known sample
complexity bounds and matches the information
theoretic lower bound up to logarithmic factors.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Burnetas & Katehakis, 1997)
studies the problem of how to make sequential decisions to
learn and act in unknown environments (which is usually
modeled by a Markov Decision Process (MDP)) and maximize the collected rewards. There are mainly two types
of algorithms to approach the RL problems: model-based
algorithms and model-free algorithms. Model-based RL algorithms keep explicit description of the learned model and
make decisions based on this model. In contrast, model-free
algorithms only maintain a group of value functions instead
of the complete model of the system dynamics. Due to their
space- and time-efficiency, model-free RL algorithms have
been getting popular in a wide range of practical tasks (e.g.,
DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015),
and A3C (Mnih et al., 2016)).
1

Tsinghua University 2 University of Illinois Urbana
Chanmpion.
Correspondence to: Zihan Zhang <zihanzh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yuan Zhou <yuanz@illinois.edu>,
Xiangyang Ji <xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
In this work, the notation Õp¨q hides poly-logarithmic factors
of S, A, 1{p1 ´ q, and 1{✏.

In RL theory, model-free algorithms are explicitly defined
to be the ones whose space complexity is always sublinear
relative to the space required to store the MDP parameters
(Jin et al., 2018). For tabular MDPs (i.e., MDPs with finite
number of states and actions, usually denoted by S and
A respectively), this requires that the space complexity to
be opS 2 Aq. Motivated by the empirical effectiveness of
model-free algorithms, the intriguing question of whether
model-free algorithms can be rigorously proved to perform
as well as the model-based ones has attracted much attention
and been studied in the settings such as regret minimization
for episodic MDPs (Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020)).
In this work, we study the P ROBABLY-A PPROXIMATELYC ORRECT-RL (PAC-RL) problem, i.e., to designing an
algorithm for learning an approximately optimal policy. We
will focus on designing the model-free algorithms, and under the model of discounted tabular MDPs with a discount
factor . The RL algorithm runs for infinitely many time
steps. At each time step t, the RL agent learns a policy ⇡t
based on the information collected before time t, observes
the current state st , makes an action at “ ⇡t pst q, receives
the reward rt and transits to the next state st`1 according
to the underlying environments. The goal of the agent is to
learn the policy ⇡t at each time t so as to maximize the discounted accumulative reward V ⇡t pst q. More concretely,
we wish to minimize the sample complexity for the agent to
learn an ✏-optimal policy, which is defined to be the number
of time steps that V ⇡t pst q † V ˚ pst q ´ ✏, where V ˚ is the
optimal discounted accumulative reward that starts with st ,
and the formal definitions of both V ⇡ and V ˚ can be found
in Section 2.
The PAC-RL addresses the important problem about how
many trials are required to learn a good policy. We also note
that in the PAC-RL definition, the exploration at each time
step has to align with the learned policy (i.e., at “ ⇡t pst q).
This is stronger than the usual PAC learning definition in
other online learning settings such as multi-armed bandits
(see, e.g., (Even-Dar et al., 2006)) and PAC-RL with a
simulator (see Section 1.2), where the exploration actions
can be arbitrary and may incur a large regret compared to
the optimum.

