Towards Understanding Learning in Neural Networks with Linear Teachers

Roei Sarussi 1 Alon Brutzkus 1 Amir Globerson 1

Abstract
Can a neural network minimizing cross-entropy
learn linearly separable data? Despite progress
in the theory of deep learning, this question remains unsolved. Here we prove that SGD globally optimizes this learning problem for a twolayer network with Leaky ReLU activations. The
learned network can in principle be very complex. However, empirical evidence suggests that
it often turns out to be approximately linear. We
provide theoretical support for this phenomenon
by proving that if network weights converge to
two weight clusters, this will imply an approximately linear decision boundary. Finally, we
show a condition on the optimization that leads to
weight clustering. We provide empirical results
that validate our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in
many machine learning tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Silver
et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2019). Although their success has
already transformed technology, a theoretical understanding
of how this performance is achieved is not complete. Here
we focus on one of the simplest learning settings that is
still not understood. We consider linearly separable data
(i.e., generated by a “linear teacher”) that is being learned
by a two layer neural net with leaky ReLU activations and
minimization of cross entropy loss using gradient descent
or its variants. Two key questions immediately come up in
this context:
• The Optimization Question: Will the optimization
succeed in finding a classifier with zero training error,
and arbitrarily low training loss?
• The Inductive Bias Question: With a large number of
hidden units, the network can find many solutions that
1
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv
University.
Correspondence to: Alon Brutzkus <alonbrutzkus@mail.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

will separate the data. Which of these will be found by
gradient descent?

Our work addresses these questions as follows.
The Optimization Question: We prove that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) will converge to arbitrary low training
loss. Concretely, we show that for any  > 0, SGD will
converge to  cross-entropy loss in O 12 iterations. We
consider SGD which performs multiple passes over the data
and we devise a novel variant of the perceptron proof to analyze this setting. Our analysis bounds the number of epochs
that have high loss examples, and uses this to show convergence to a low loss solution. Importantly, our result holds
for any network size and scale of initialization. Therefore,
our analysis goes beyond the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
analyses which require large network sizes and relatively
large initialization scales.
The Inductive Bias Question: We empirically observe that
when a small initialization scale is used, the learned network
converges to a decision boundary that is very close to linear.
See Figure 1b for a 2D example.1 We also observe that all
neurons cluster nicely into two sets of vectors (i.e., they
form two groups of well-aligned neurons) as in Figure 1d.
To support these empirical findings, we provide the following theoretical results:
(1) We prove that an approximate clustering of the neurons
implies that the decision boundary of the network is approximately linear. This is a result of a nice property of leaky
ReLU networks which we prove in Section 5.
(2) We provide a novel sufficient condition on the optimization path of gradient flow which implies convergence to
clustered solutions. With the result above, it implies convergence to a linear decision boundary. The condition states
that from a certain iteration on, all neurons with the same
output sign “agree” on the classification of the data. We
observe that this condition holds empirically for several synthetic and real datasets. Finally, we use the latter result to
prove that under certain assumptions, the learned network
is a solution to an SVM problem with a specific kernel.
Our results above make significant headway in understanding why optimization is tractable with linear teachers, and
why convergence is to approximately linear boundaries. We
1

See Section 5.1 and Section 6.3 for more empirical examples.

