PID Accelerated Value Iteration Algorithm

Amir-massoud Farahmand 1 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3

Abstract
The convergence rate of Value Iteration (VI), a
fundamental procedure in dynamic programming
and reinforcement learning, for solving MDPs can
be slow when the discount factor is close to one.
We propose modifications to VI in order to potentially accelerate its convergence behaviour. The
key insight is the realization that the evolution of
the value function approximations (Vk )k≥0 in the
VI procedure can be seen as a dynamical system.
This opens up the possibility of using techniques
from control theory to modify, and potentially
accelerate, this dynamics. We present such modifications based on simple controllers, such as
PD (Proportional-Derivative), PI (ProportionalIntegral), and PID. We present the error dynamics
of these variants of VI, and provably (for certain
classes of MDPs) and empirically (for more general classes) show that the convergence rate can
be significantly improved. We also propose a gain
adaptation mechanism in order to automatically
select the controller gains, and empirically show
the effectiveness of this procedure.

1. Introduction
Value Iteration (VI) is a key algorithm for solving Dynamic
Programming (DP) problems, and its sampled-based variants are the basis for many Reinforcement Learning (RL)
algorithms, e.g., TD-like sample-based asynchronous update algorithms (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton &
Barto, 2019) and Fitted Value Iteration procedures (Ernst
et al., 2005; Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Farahmand et al.,
2009; Mnih et al., 2015; Tosatto et al., 2017; Chen & Jiang,
2019). VI finds the fixed point of the Bellman T π or the
Bellman optimality T ∗ operators, which are the value or
action-value functions of policy π or the optimal policy,
by repeatedly applying the Bellman operator to the current
1

Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Toronto, Canada 3 Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Amir-massoud
Farahmand <farahmand@vectorinstitute.ai>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

approximation of the value or action-value functions, i.e.,
Vk+1 ← T π Vk or Qk+1 ← T ∗ Qk . For discounted MDPs,
the Bellman operator is a contraction, and standard fixedpoint iteration results, such as Banach fixed-point theorem,
guarantee the convergence of the sequence generated by VI
to the true value function (either the optimal one or the one
of a given policy, depending on the choice of the Bellman
operator). The convergence of VI to the value function depends on the discount factor γ < 1 and is of O(γ k ). This is
slow when γ ≈ 1. The goal of this research is to investigate
whether one might accelerate the convergence of VI, i.e.,
developing a procedure that converges to the value function
faster than the conventional VI.
This work brings tools from control theory to accelerate VI.
The goal of control theory, generally speaking, is to design
a controller for a given dynamical system in order to make it
behave in a certain desired way. Depending on the problem,
the desired behaviour can be convergence to a set-point
with a certain speed or robustness to disturbances. Casting
the VI procedure as a dynamical system, we may wonder
whether we can design a controller to modify its dynamics,
and perhaps make it faster or more robust to disturbances.
This paper investigates this question in some details. We
establish a connection between VI and dynamical systems
in Section 2. This connection allows us to take the novel
perspective of using controllers to modify, and in particular to accelerate, the dynamics of VI. We introduce accelerated variants of VI by coupling its dynamics with PD
(Proportional-Derivative), PI (Proportional-Integral), and
PID controllers (Section 3). These controllers are among
the simplest and yet most ubiquitous and effective classes
of controllers in the arsenal of control theory and engineering. We call the resulting algorithms accelerated VI, and
refer to them by PD/PI/PID VI. As an example of such
a controller, the update rule of the (simplified) PD VI is
Vk+1 = T π Vk + κd (Vk − Vk−1 ). The derivative term
(Vk − Vk−1 ) measures the rate of change in the value function. We describe the error dynamics of these accelerated
variants of VI for the policy evaluation problem (when the
Bellman operator is T π ) in Section 4. We briefly describe
the problem of choosing the controller gains in the same section, and describe four different approaches in more details
in Appendix D. Specifically, we provide an analytical solution for the class of reversible Markov chains in Appendix E.

