Detecting Rewards Deterioration in Episodic Reinforcement Learning

Ido Greenberg 1 Shie Mannor 1 2

Abstract
In many RL applications, once training ends, it is
vital to detect any deterioration in the agent performance as soon as possible. Furthermore, it often has to be done without modifying the policy
and under minimal assumptions regarding the environment. In this paper, we address this problem
by focusing directly on the rewards and testing
for degradation. We consider an episodic framework, where the rewards within each episode are
not independent, nor identically-distributed, nor
Markov. We present this problem as a multivariate mean-shift detection problem with possibly partial observations. We define the meanshift in a way corresponding to deterioration of
a temporal signal (such as the rewards), and derive a test for this problem with optimal statistical
power. Empirically, on deteriorated rewards in
control problems (generated using various environment modifications), the test is demonstrated
to be more powerful than standard tests – often
by orders of magnitude. We also suggest a novel
Bootstrap mechanism for False Alarm Rate control (BFAR), applicable to episodic (non-i.i.d)
signal and allowing our test to run sequentially in
an online manner. Our method does not rely on a
learned model of the environment, is entirely external to the agent, and in fact can be applied to
detect changes or drifts in any episodic signal.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have recently
demonstrated impressive success in a variety of sequential
decision-making problems (Badia et al., 2020; Hessel et al.,
2018). While most RL works focus on the maximization of
rewards under various conditions, a key issue in real-world
1

Department of Electric Engineering, Technion, Israel 2 Nvidia Research.
Correspondence to: Ido Greenberg
<gido@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Shie
Mannor
<shie@ee.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

RL tasks is the safety and reliability of the system (DulacArnold et al., 2019; Chan et al., 2020), arising in both offline and online settings.
In offline settings, comparing the agent performance in different environments is important for generalization (e.g.,
in sim-to-real and transfer learning). The comparison may
indicate the difficulty of the problem or help to select the
right learning algorithms. Uncertainty estimation, which
could help to address this challenge, is currently considered
a hard problem in RL, in particular for model-free methods (Yu et al., 2020).
In online settings, where a fixed, already-trained agent
runs continuously, its performance may be affected (gradually or abruptly) by changes in the controlled system
or its surroundings, or when reaching unfamiliar states.
Some works address robustness to changes (Lecarpentier &
Rachelson, 2019; Lee et al., 2020), yet performance degradation is sometimes inevitable, and should be detected as
soon as possible. The detection allows us to fall back into
manual control, send the agent to re-train, guide diagnosis, or even bring the agent to halt. This problem is inherently different from robustness to changes during training: it focuses on safety and reliability, in post-training
phase where intervention in the policy is limited or forbidden (Matsushima et al., 2020). It also operates in different
time-scales: while training may take millions of episodes,
changes should often be detected within tens of episodes,
and critical failures – within less than an episode.
Such post-training performance-awareness is essential for
any autonomous system in risk-intolerant applications,
such as autonomous driving and medical devices. For example, when an autonomous car starts acting suspiciously
with a passenger sitting inside, activating a training process and exploring for new policies is not an option. The
priority is to notice the suspicious behavior as soon as
possible, so that it can be alerted in time to save lives.
Many sequential statistical tests exist for detection of mean
degradation in a random process. However, common methods (Page, 1954; Lan, 1994; Harel et al., 2014) assume independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) samples, while
in RL the feedback from the environment is usually both
highly correlated over consecutive time-steps, and varies
over the life-time of the task (Korenkevych et al., 2019).

