Online Limited Memory Neural-Linear Bandits with Likelihood Matching

Ofir Nabati 1 Tom Zahavy 1 2 Shie Mannor 1 3

Abstract
We study neural-linear bandits for solving problems where both exploration and representation
learning play an important role. Neural-linear bandits harnesses the representation power of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) and combines it with
efficient exploration mechanisms by leveraging
uncertainty estimation of the model, designed for
linear contextual bandits on top of the last hidden
layer. In order to mitigate the problem of representation change during the process, new uncertainty estimations are computed using stored data
from an unlimited buffer. Nevertheless, when the
amount of stored data is limited, a phenomenon
called catastrophic forgetting emerges. To alleviate this, we propose a likelihood matching algorithm that is resilient to catastrophic forgetting
and is completely online. We applied our algorithm, Limited Memory Neural-Linear with Likelihood Matching (NeuralLinear-LiM2) on a variety of datasets and observed that our algorithm
achieves comparable performance to the unlimited memory approach while exhibits resilience
to catastrophic forgetting.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) can learn complex representations of data and have dramatically improved the stateof-the-art in speech recognition, visual object recognition,
object detection, and many other domains such as drug discovery and genomics (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al.,
2016). Using DNNs for function approximation in reinforcement learning (RL) enables the agent to generalize across
states without domain-specific knowledge and learn rich
domain representations from raw, high-dimensional inputs
(Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016).
Nevertheless, the question of how to perform efficient ex1
Department of Electrical-Engineering, Technion Institute of
Technology, Israel 2 DeepMind 3 Nvidia Research. Correspondence
to: Ofir Nabati <ofirnabati@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ploration during the representation learning phase is still
an open problem. The -greedy policy (Langford & Zhang,
2008) is simple to implement and widely used in practice
(Mnih et al., 2015). However, it is statistically suboptimal.
Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) uses confidence
sets to balance exploitation and exploration (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011; Auer, 2002) while Thompson Sampling (TS)
does so by choosing optimal action with respect to a sampled belief of the model. (Thompson, 1933; Agrawal &
Goyal, 2013). For DNNs, such confidence sets may not be
accurate enough to allow efficient exploration. For example,
using dropout as a posterior approximation for exploration
does not concentrate on observed data (Osband et al., 2018)
and was shown empirically to be insufficient (Riquelme
et al., 2018). Alternatively, pseudo-counts, a generalization
of the number of visits, were used as an exploration bonus
(Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017). Inspired by
tabular RL, these ideas ignore the uncertainty in the value
function approximation in each context. As a result, they
may lead to inefficient confidence sets (Osband et al., 2018).
Linear models, on the other hand, are considered more stable and provide accurate uncertainty estimates but require
substantial feature engineering to achieve good results. Additionally, they are known to work in practice only with
”medium-sized” inputs (with around 1, 000 features) due to
numerical issues. A natural attempt at getting the best of
both worlds is to learn a linear exploration policy on top of
the last hidden layer of a DNN, which we term the neurallinear approach. In RL, this approach was shown to refine
the performance of DQNs (Levine et al., 2017) and improve
exploration when combined with TS (Azizzadenesheli et al.,
2018) and OFU (O’Donoghue et al., 2018; Zahavy et al.,
2018a). For contextual bandits, Riquelme et al. (2018)
showed that neural-linear TS achieves superior performance
on multiple datasets.
A practical challenge for neural-linear bandits is that the representation (the activations of the last hidden layer) changes
after every optimization step, while linear contextual bandits
algorithms assume the features are stationary. A recent line
of work (Zhou et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2020; Domingos, 2020) analyze deep contextual bandits in
the infinite width regime, in which networks behave as a
linear kernel method. This kernel is known as the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018). Under the NTK

