Synthesizer: Rethinking Self-Attention for Transformer Models

Yi Tay 1 Dara Bahri 1 Donald Metzler 1 Da-Cheng Juan 1 Zhe Zhao 1 Che Zheng 1

Abstract
The dot product self-attention is known to be central and indispensable to state-of-the-art Transformer models. But is it really required? This
paper investigates the true importance and contribution of the dot product-based self-attention
mechanism on the performance of Transformer
models. Via extensive experiments, we find that
(1) random alignment matrices surprisingly perform quite competitively and (2) learning attention weights from token-token (query-key) interactions is useful but not that important after
all. To this end, we propose S YNTHESIZER,
a model that learns synthetic attention weights
without token-token interactions. In our experiments, we first show that simple Synthesizers
achieve highly competitive performance when
compared against vanilla Transformer models
across a range of tasks, including machine translation, language modeling, text generation and
GLUE/SuperGLUE benchmarks. When composed with dot product attention, we find that Synthesizers consistently outperform Transformers.
Moreover, we conduct additional comparisons
of Synthesizers against Dynamic Convolutions,
showing that simple Random Synthesizer is not
only 60% faster but also improves perplexity by a
relative 3.5%. Finally, we show that simple factorized Synthesizers can outperform Linformers
on encoding only tasks.

1. introduction
Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have demonstrated success across a wide range of tasks. This has
resulted in Transformers largely displacing once popular
auto-regressive and recurrent models in recent years. At the
heart of Transformer models lies the query-key-value dot
product attention. The success of Transformer models is
1

Google Research, Mountain View, California. Correspondence
to: Yi Tay <yitay@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

widely attributed to this self-attention mechanism since fully
connected token graphs, which are able to model long-range
dependencies, provide a robust inductive bias.
But is the dot product self-attention really so important? Do
we need it? Is it necessary to learn attention weights via
pairwise dot products? This paper seeks to develop a deeper
understanding of the role that the dot product self-attention
mechanism plays in Transformer models.
The fundamental role of dot product self-attention is to learn
self-alignment, i.e., to determine the relative importance
of a single token with respect to all other tokens in the
sequence. To this end, there have been memory metaphors
and analogies constructed to support this claim. Indeed,
the terms query, keys, and values imply that self-attention
emulates a content-based retrieval process which leverages
pairwise interactions at its very core.
Moving against convention, this paper postulates that we
cannot only do without dot product self-attention but also
content-based memory-like self-attention altogether. Traditionally, attention weights are learned at the instance or
sample level, where weights are produced by instance-level
pairwise interactions. As a result, these instance-specific
interactions often fluctuate freely across different instances
as they lack a consistent global context.
This paper proposes S YNTHESIZER, a new model that learns
to synthesize the self-alignment matrix instead of manually
computing pairwise dot products. We propose a diverse suite
of synthesizing functions and extensively evaluate them. We
characterize the source information that these synthesizing
functions receive, i.e., whether they receive information
from individual tokens, token-token interactions, and/or
global task information. Intuitively, different source inputs
to the synthesizing functions should capture diverse views,
which may be useful when employed in conjunction.
Aside from generalizing the standard Transformer model,
we show that it is possible to achieve competitive results
with fully global attention weights that do not consider
token-token interactions or any instance-level (local) information at all. More specifically, a random matrix S YNTHE SIZER model achieves a 27.27 BLEU score on WMT 2014
English-German1 . Via a set of rigorous experiments, we
1

The originally reported result is 27.30.

