LARNet: Lie Algebra Residual Network for Face Recognition

Xiaolong Yang 1 2 3 Xiaohong Jia 1 2 Dihong Gong 3 Dong-Ming Yan 4 2 Zhifeng Li 3 Wei Liu 3

Abstract
Face recognition is an important yet challenging
problem in computer vision. A major challenge
in practical face recognition applications lies in
significant variations between profile and frontal
faces. Traditional techniques address this challenge either by synthesizing frontal faces or by
pose invariant learning. In this paper, we propose a novel method with Lie algebra theory to
explore how face rotation in the 3D space affects
the deep feature generation process of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We prove that
face rotation in the image space is equivalent to an
additive residual component in the feature space
of CNNs, which is determined solely by the rotation. Based on this theoretical finding, we further design a Lie Algebraic Residual Network
(LARNet) for tackling pose robust face recognition. Our LARNet consists of a residual subnet for decoding rotation information from input
face images, and a gating subnet to learn rotation magnitude for controlling the strength of the
residual component contributing to the feature
learning process. Comprehensive experimental
evaluations on both frontal-profile face datasets
and general face recognition datasets convincingly
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art ones.

1. Introduction
The recent development of deep learning models and an
increasing variety of datasets have greatly advanced face
recognition technologies (Liu et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2018a; Deng et al., 2019). Although many deep learning
1
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China 3 Tencent Data
Platform, P.R.China 4 NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China. Correspondence to:
Xiaohong Jia, Zhifeng Li, and Wei Liu <xhjia@amss.ac.cn;
michaelzfli@tencent.com; wl2223@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

models are strong and robust to face recognition conducted
in unconstrained environments, there remain quite a lot of
challenges for recognizing faces across different age levels (Gong et al., 2013a; Wang et al., 2019; 2018b; Gong
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016b), different modalities (Li et al.,
2014; Gong et al., 2017; Li et al., 2016a; Gong et al., 2013b;
Luo et al., 2021), different poses (Huang et al., 2000; Cao
et al., 2018a; Masi et al., 2016a; AbdAlmageed et al., 2016),
and occlusions (Song et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2007). In
this paper, we develop a robust recognition algorithm to
address the challenges for general face recognition, with a
particular effect on matching faces across different poses
(e.g., frontal vs. profile). Since the generalization ability
of the deep model is closely related to the size of the training data, given an uneven and insufficient distribution of
frontal and profile face images, the deep features tend to
focus on frontal faces, and the learning results are only biased incomplete statistics. In order to tackle this problem,
some work has reconstructed more datasets by different
data augmentation methods. A typical way is to enrich
input sources either by the synthesis of profile faces with
appearance variations (Masi et al., 2016b) or by a set of
images as one image input (Xie & Zisserma, 2018), so that
the need for profile data is alleviated. Another way is to
combine more data information, including multi-task learning (AbdAlmageed et al., 2016; Masi et al., 2016a; Yin &
Liu, 2017) and template adaptation (Hassner et al., 2016;
Crosswhite et al., 2018). Here, multi-task learning focuses
on pose-aware targets, combined with richer information
such as illumination, expression, gender, and age, to comprehensively boost the recognition performance; while the
method based on template adaptation learning always creates a mean 3D model face, and by means of migration
and mapping it avoids processing the 3D transformation
at the image level. Nevertheless, these strategies tend to
increase the unnecessary computational burden. Some other
approaches use profile faces to synthesize frontal faces so
that they can avoid large pose variations (Tran et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020). However, these methods would suffer from artifacts caused by
occlusions and non-rigid expressions.
The above mentioned work mostly relies on additional data
sources or additional labels. A recent new work called Deep
Residual Equivalent Mapping (DREAM) (Cao et al., 2018a)

