On the Problem of Underranking in Group-Fair Ranking
Sruthi Gorantla 1 Amit Deshpande 2 Anand Louis 1

Abstract
Bias in ranking systems, especially among the top
ranks, can worsen social and economic inequalities, polarize opinions, and reinforce stereotypes.
On the other hand, a bias correction for minority groups can cause more harm if perceived as
favoring group-fair outcomes over meritocracy.
Most group-fair ranking algorithms post-process
a given ranking and output a group-fair ranking.
In this paper, we formulate the problem of underranking in group-fair rankings based on how
close the group-fair rank of each item is to its original rank, and prove a lower bound on the tradeoff achievable for simultaneous underranking and
group fairness in ranking. We give a fair ranking algorithm that takes any given ranking and
outputs another ranking with simultaneous underranking and group fairness guarantees comparable
to the lower bound we prove. Our experimental
results confirm the theoretical trade-off between
underranking and group fairness, and also show
that our algorithm achieves the best of both when
compared to the state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Search and recommendation systems have revolutionized
the way we consume an overwhelming amount of data and
find relevant information quickly (Brin & Page, 1998; Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005). They help us find relevant
documents, news, media, people, places, products and rank
them based on our interests and intent (Kofler et al., 2016;
Pei et al., 2019). Information presented through ranked lists
influences our worldview (Pariser, 2011; Tavani). Rankings not only influence the users who consume them but
also act as vehicles of opportunities for the items being
ranked. Biased ranking of news, people, products raises
1

Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. 2 Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India.. Correspondence to: Sruthi Gorantla <gorantlas@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ethical concerns and can potentially cause long-term economic and societal harm to demographics and businesses
(Noble, 2018). Many state-of-the-art rankings that maximize utility or relevance reflect existing societal biases and
are often oblivious to the societal harm they may cause by
amplifying such biases. When these systems amplify societal biases observed in their training data, they worsen
social and economic inequalities, polarize opinions, and
reinforce stereotypes (O’Neil, 2016). In addition to ethical concerns, there are also legal obligations to remove bias.
Disparate impact laws prohibit even unintentional but biased
outcomes in employment, housing, and many other areas
if one group of people belonging to a protected group is
adversely affected compared to another (Barocas & Selbst,
2016). Protected groups could vary for specific statutes and
include race, gender, age, religion, national origin, etc.
Fairness in ranking. Fairness in ranking has three broad
requirements: sufficient presence of items belonging to different groups, consistent treatment of similar individuals,
and proper representation to avoid representational harm to
members of protected groups (Castillo, 2019). The first and
the third requirements are about fairness to groups, whereas
the second requirement is about fairness to individuals. For
example, diversity alone in top ranks satisfies sufficient presence but need not provide consistent treatment and proper
representation in the way the items are ranked. Fair ranking
algorithms can be divided into two categories. Re-ranking
algorithms that modify a given ranking of high utility to
incorporate fairness constraints while trying to preserve the
original utility, and learning-to-rank algorithms that incorporate fairness and utility objectives together into learning a
ranker from training data. Re-ranking can be used to postprocess the prediction as well as to pre-process the training
data of any given ranker.
Most of the fair ranking algroithms are designed to output
group-fair ranking. Group fairness in machine learning literature has focused on outcome-based or proportion-based
definitions of fairness (e.g., demographic parity, equality
of opportunity) (Hardt et al., 2016; Barocas et al., 2019).
Although group-fairness is a desirable goal, affirmative action to achieve group-fairness is often misinterpreted as
non-meritocratic by individuals and requires a deeper understanding (Crosby, 2004). In this context, we argue that

