Matrix Sketching for Secure Collaborative Machine Learning
Mengjiao Zhang 1 Shusen Wang 1

Abstract
Collaborative learning allows participants to
jointly train a model without data sharing. To
update the model parameters, the central server
broadcasts model parameters to the clients, and
the clients send updating directions such as gradients to the server. While data do not leave a
client device, the communicated gradients and parameters will leak a client’s privacy. Attacks that
infer clients’ privacy from gradients and parameters have been developed by prior work. Simple defenses such as dropout and differential privacy either fail to defend the attacks or seriously
hurt test accuracy. We propose a practical defense which we call Double-Blind Collaborative
Learning (DBCL). The high-level idea is to apply
random matrix sketching to the parameters (aka
weights) and re-generate random sketching after
each iteration. DBCL prevents clients from conducting gradient-based privacy inferences which
are the most effective attacks. DBCL works because from the attacker’s perspective, sketching
is effectively random noise that outweighs the
signal. Notably, DBCL does not much increase
computation and communication costs and does
not hurt test accuracy at all.

1. Introduction
Collaborative learning allows multiple parties to jointly train
a model using their private data but without sharing the
data. Collaborative learning is motivated by real-world applications, for example, training a model using but without
collecting mobile user’s data.
Distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is perhaps
the simplest approach to collaborative learning. Specifically, the central server broadcasts model parameters to the
1

Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute
of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030. Correspondence to:
Mengjiao Zhang <mzhang49@stevens.edu>, Shusen Wang
<shusen.wang@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

clients, each client uses a batch of local data to compute a
stochastic gradient, and the server aggregates the stochastic gradients and updates the model parameters. Based on
distributed SGD, communication-efficient algorithms such
as federated averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017)
and FedProx (Sahu et al., 2019) have been developed and
analyzed (Li et al., 2019b; Stich, 2018; Wang & Joshi, 2018;
Yu et al., 2019; Zhou & Cong, 2017).
Collaborative learning seemingly protects clients’ privacy.
Unfortunately, this has been demonstrated not true by recent
studies (Hitaj et al., 2017; Melis et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2019). Even if a client’s data do not leave his device, important properties of his data can be disclosed from the model
parameters and gradients. To infer other clients’ data, the
attacker needs only to control one client device and access
the model parameters in every iteration; the attacker does
not have to take control of the server (Hitaj et al., 2017;
Melis et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019).
The reason why the attacks work is that model parameters
and gradients carry important information about the training data (Ateniese et al., 2015; Fredrikson et al., 2015).
Hitaj et al. (2017) used the jointly learned model as a discriminator for training a generator which generates other
clients’ data. Melis et al. (2019) used gradient for inferring
other clients’ data properties. Zhu et al. (2019) used both
model parameters and gradients for recovering other clients’
data. Judging from published empirical studies, the gradientbased attacks (Melis et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019) are more
effective than the parameter-based attack (Hitaj et al., 2017).
Our goal is to defend the gradient-based attacks.
Simple defenses, e.g., differential privacy (Dwork, 2011)
and dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), have been demonstrated not working well by (Hitaj et al., 2017; Melis
et al., 2019). While differential privacy (Dwork, 2011),
i.e., adding noise to model parameters or gradients, works
if the noise is strong, the noise inevitably hurts the accuracy and may even stop the collaborative learning from
making progress (Hitaj et al., 2017). If the noise is not
strong enough, clients’ privacy will leak. Dropout training
(Srivastava et al., 2014) randomly masks a fraction of the
parameters, making the clients have access to only part of
the parameters in each iteration. However, knowing part of
the parameters is sufficient for conducting the attacks.

