A Novel Sequential Coreset Method for Gradient Descent Algorithms

Jiawei Huang * 1 Ruomin Huang * 2 Wenjie Liu * 1 Nikolaos M. Freris 1 Hu Ding 1

Abstract
A wide range of optimization problems arising
in machine learning can be solved by gradient
descent algorithms, and a central question in this
area is how to efficiently compress a large-scale
dataset so as to reduce the computational complexity. Coreset is a popular data compression
technique that has been extensively studied before. However, most of existing coreset methods
are problem-dependent and cannot be used as a
general tool for a broader range of applications. A
key obstacle is that they often rely on the pseudodimension and total sensitivity bound that can be
very high or hard to obtain. In this paper, based on
the “locality” property of gradient descent algorithms, we propose a new framework, termed “sequential coreset”, which effectively avoids these
obstacles. Moreover, our method is particularly
suitable for sparse optimization whence the coreset size can be further reduced to be only polylogarithmically dependent on the dimension. In
practice, the experimental results suggest that our
method can save a large amount of running time
compared with the baseline algorithms.

1. Introduction
Coreset (Feldman, 2020) is a popular technique for compressing large-scale datasets so as to speed up existing algorithms. Especially for the optimization problems arising in
machine learning, coresets have been extensively studied in
recent years. Roughly speaking, given a large dataset P and
a specified optimization objective (e.g., k-means clustering),
the coreset approach is to construct a new dataset P̃ with
the size |P̃ |  |P |, such that any solution obtained over
P̃ will approximately preserve the same quality over the
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China. 2 School of Data Science, University of Science
and Technology of China, Anhui, China. Correspondence to:
Hu Ding <huding@ustc.edu.cn, http://staff.ustc.edu.
cn/˜huding/>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

original set P ; that is, we can replace P by P̃ when running
an available algorithm for solving this optimization problem. Because |P̃ |  |P |, the runtime can be significantly
reduced.
In this paper, we consider Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) problems which capture a broad range of applications
in machine learning (Vapnik, 1991). Let X and Y be the
data space and response space, respectively. Given an input
training set P = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), · · · , (xn , yn )}, where
each xi ∈ X and each yi ∈ Y, the objective is to learn
the hypothesis β (from the hypothesis space Rd ) so as to
minimize the empirical risk
n

F (β) =

1X
f (β, xi , yi ),
n i=1

(1)

where f (·, ·, ·) is the non-negative real-valued loss function.
In practice, the data size n can be very large, thus it is
instrumental to consider data compression methods (like
coresets) to reduce the computational complexity.
Let  ∈ [0, 1]. A standard -coreset is represented as a
vector W = [w1 , w2 , · · · , wn ] ∈P
Rn with the property that
n
1
the function F̃ (β) = Pn wi i=1 wi f (β, xi , yi ) must
i=1
satisfy
F̃ (β) ∈ (1 ± )F (β), ∀β ∈ Rd .

(2)

The number of non-zero entries kW k0 is the coreset size,
and thus the goal of compression is to have W to be as sparse
as possible. Suppose we have an algorithm that can achieve
c-approximation for the ERM problem (c ≥ 1). Then, we
can run the same algorithm on the -coreset, and let β̂ be the
returned c-approximation, i.e., F̃ (β̂) ≤ c · minβ∈Rd F̃ (β).
1+
minβ∈Rd F (β), thus the approxIt holds that F (β̂) ≤ c· 1−
imation ratio of β̂ for the original objective function F (·) is
only slightly worse than c when  is sufficiently small.
A large part of coreset methods are based on the “sensitivity” idea (Langberg & Schulman, 2010). First, it computes
a constant factor approximation with respect to the objective function (1); then it estimates the sensitivity σi for
each data item (xi , yi ) based on the obtained constant factor
approximation; finally, it takes a random sample (as the
coreset) over the input set P , where each data item (xi , yi )
is selected with probability proportional to its sensitivity σi ,

