Scalable Computations of Wasserstein Barycenter via
Input Convex Neural Networks

Jiaojiao Fan 1 Amirhossein Taghvaei 2 Yongxin Chen 1

Abstract
Wasserstein Barycenter is a principled approach
to represent the weighted mean of a given set
of probability distributions, utilizing the geometry induced by optimal transport. In this work,
we present a novel scalable algorithm to approximate the Wasserstein Barycenters aiming at highdimensional applications in machine learning.
Our proposed algorithm is based on the Kantorovich dual formulation of the Wasserstein-2
distance as well as a recent neural network architecture, input convex neural network, that is
known to parametrize convex functions. The distinguishing features of our method are: i) it only
requires samples from the marginal distributions;
ii) unlike the existing approaches, it represents
the Barycenter with a generative model and can
thus generate infinite samples from the barycenter
without querying the marginal distributions; iii)
it works similar to Generative Adversarial Model
in one marginal case. We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm by comparing it with the
state-of-art methods in multiple experiments. 1

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein barycenter is concerned with the (weighted)
average of multiple given probability distributions. It is
based on the natural geometry over the space of distributions induced by optimal transport (Villani, 2003) theory and
serves as a counterpart of arithmetic mean/average for data
of distribution-type. Compared to other methods, Wasserstein barycenter provides a principled approach to average
probability distributions, fully utilizing the underlying geometric structure of the data (Agueh & Carlier, 2011). During
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 University of California, Irvine.
Correspondence to:
Yongxin Chen
<yongchen@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Download Code at https://github.com/sbyebss/
Scalable-Wasserstein-Barycenter

the past few years, it has found applications in several machine learning problems. For instance, in sensor fusion,
Wasserstein barycenter is used to merge/average datasets
collected from multiple sensors to generate a single collective result (Elvander et al., 2018). The advantage of
Wasserstein barycenter is its ability to preserves the modality of the different datasets, a highly desirable property in
practice (Jiang et al., 2012). Wasserstein Barycenter has
also been observed to be effective in removing batch effects
of the sensor measurements (Yang & Tabak, 2019). It has
also found application in large scale Bayesian inference
for averaging the results from Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) Bayesian inference carried out over subsets of
the observations (Srivastava et al., 2015; Staib et al., 2017;
Srivastava et al., 2018). It has also been useful in image
processing for texture mixing (Rabin et al., 2011) and shape
interpolation (Solomon et al., 2015).
The bottleneck of utilizing Wasserstein barycenter in machine learning applications remains to be computational.
Indeed, when the data is discrete, namely, the given probability distributions are over discrete space (e.g., grid), the
Wasserstein barycenter problem can be solved using linear programming (Anderes et al., 2016). This has been
greatly accelerated by introducing an entropy term (Cuturi
& Doucet, 2014, Algorithm 1) (Solomon et al., 2015) as in
Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). However, these methods are not suitable for many machine learning applications
involving distributions over continuous space. First of all,
it requires discretization of the distribution to implement
these methods and thus doesn’t scale to high dimensional
settings. Secondly, in some applications such as MCMC
Bayesian inference (Andrieu et al., 2003; Srivastava et al.,
2018) the explicit formulas of the distributions are not accessible, which precludes these discretization-based algorithms.
When the support atoms are free to move, there are algorithms that interchangeably optimize the support weights
and locations (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014, Algorithm 2) (Luise
et al., 2019; Altschuler & Boix-Adsera, 2021) which can
also be formulated in stochastic optimization framework
(Claici et al., 2018). But these free-support methods become computationally highly expensive when the number
of support points is large.

