On the Implicit Bias of Initialization Shape:
Beyond Infinitesimal Mirror Descent

Shahar Azulay 1 Edward Moroshko 2 Mor Shpigel Nacson 2 Blake Woodworth 3 Nathan Srebro 3
Amir Globerson 1 Daniel Soudry 2

Abstract
Recent work has highlighted the role of initialization scale in determining the structure of the
solutions that gradient methods converge to. In
particular, it was shown that large initialization
leads to the neural tangent kernel regime solution, whereas small initialization leads to so called
“rich regimes”. However, the initialization structure is richer than the overall scale alone and involves relative magnitudes of different weights
and layers in the network. Here we show that
these relative scales, which we refer to as initialization shape, play an important role in determining the learned model. We develop a novel technique for deriving the inductive bias of gradientflow and use it to obtain closed-form implicit regularizers for multiple cases of interest.

1. Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) is the main optimization tool used
in deep learning. A wealth of recent work has highlighted
the key role of this specific algorithm in the generalization performance of the learned model, when it is overparameterized. Namely, the solutions that gradient descent
converges to do not merely minimize the training error, but
rather reflect the specific implicit biases of the optimization
algorithm.
In light of this role for GD, many works have attempted
to precisely characterize the implicit bias of GD in over*
Equal contribution 1 The Blavatnik School of Computer
Science, Tel Aviv University 2 Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology 3 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Correspondence to: Shahar Azulay <shaharazulay@mail.tau.ac.il>,
Edward Moroshko <edward.moroshko@gmail.com>, Mor
Shpigel Nacson <mor.shpigel@gmail.com>, Blake Woodworth <blake@ttic.edu>, Nathan Srebro <nati@ttic.edu>,
Amir Globerson <amir.globerson@gmail.com>, Daniel Soudry
<daniel.soudry@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

parameterized models. Technically, these exact characterizations amount to identifying a function Q(w) of the model
parameters w such that GD converges to a minimizer (or,
more generally, a stationary point) of Q(w) under the constraint of having zero training error. The form of Q(w)
can depend on various hyper-parameters (e.g., initialization, architecture, depth) and its dependence sheds light on
how these hyper-parameters affect the final solution. This
approach worked very well in several regimes.
The first regime is the ”Neural Tangent Kernel” (NTK)
regime, which arises in networks that have an unrealistically
large width (Du et al., 2019; Jacot et al., 2018; Nguyen,
2021) or initialization scale (Chizat et al., 2019). In this
regime, networks converge to a linear predictor where the
features are not learned, but determined by the initialization
(via the so-called “Tangent Kernel”), and in this case Q(w)
is just the RKHS norm for the linear predictor. Therefore, it
is not surprising that models trained in this regime typically
do not achieve state-of-the-art empirical performance in
challenging datasets where deep networks perform well.
Accordingly, this regime is typically considered to be less
useful for explaining the success of deep learning.
The second regime is the diametrically opposed “rich”
regime, which was analyzed specifically for classification
problems with vanishing loss (Lyu & Li, 2020b; Chizat
& Bach, 2020). In this regime, the parameters converge
to a stationary point (or sometimes a global minimum) of
the optimization problem for minimizing Q(w) = ||w||2
subject to margin constraints. This has been shown, under
various assumptions, for linear neural networks (Gunasekar
et al., 2018b; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019) and non-linear neural
networks (Nacson et al., 2019; Lyu & Li, 2020a; Chizat
& Bach, 2020). This regime is arguably more closely related to the performance of practical neural networks but, as
Moroshko et al. (2020) show, reaching this regime requires
unrealistically small loss values, even in toy problems.
Understanding the implicit bias in more realistic and practically relevant regimes remains challenging in models with
more than one weight layer. Current results are restricted to
very simple models such as diagonal linear neural networks
with shared weights in regression (Woodworth et al., 2020)

