SMG: A Shuffling Gradient-Based Method with Momentum

Trang H. Tran 1 Lam M. Nguyen 2 Quoc Tran-Dinh 3

Abstract

learning, including, but not limited to, logistic regression,
multi-kernel learning, conditional random fields, and neural
networks. Especially, (1) covers the empirical risk minimization as a special case. Solution methods for approximately
solving (1) have been widely studied in the literature under
different sets of assumptions. The most common approach
is perhaps stochastic gradient-type (SGD) methods (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Bottou et al.,
2018; Nguyen et al., 2018; 2019) and their variants.

We combine two advanced ideas widely used in
optimization for machine learning: shuffling strategy and momentum technique to develop a novel
shuffling gradient-based method with momentum,
coined Shuffling Momentum Gradient (SMG),
for non-convex finite-sum optimization problems.
While our method is inspired by momentum techniques, its update is fundamentally different from
existing momentum-based methods. We establish
state-of-the-art convergence rates of SMG for any
shuffling strategy using either constant or diminishing learning rate under standard assumptions
(i.e. L-smoothness and bounded variance). When
the shuffling strategy is fixed, we develop another
new algorithm that is similar to existing momentum methods, and prove the same convergence
rates for this algorithm under the L-smoothness
and bounded gradient assumptions. We demonstrate our algorithms via numerical simulations
on standard datasets and compare them with existing shuffling methods. Our tests have shown
encouraging performance of the new algorithms.

Motivation. While SGD and its variants rely on randomized sampling strategies with replacement, gradient-based
methods using without-replacement strategies are often easier and faster to implement. Moreover, practical evidence
(Bottou, 2009) has shown that they usually produce a faster
decrease of the training loss. Randomized shuffling strategies (also viewed as sampling without replacement) allow
the algorithm to use exactly one function component f (·; i)
at each epoch compared to SGD, which has only statistical
convergence guarantees (e.g., in expectation or with high
probability). However, very often, the analysis of shuffling
methods is more challenging than SGD due to the lack of
statistical independence.

1. Introduction
Most training tasks in supervised learning are boiled down
to solving the following finite-sum minimization:
n
n
o
1X
F (w) :=
f (w; i) ,
n i=1
w∈Rd

min

(1)

where f (·; i) : Rd → R is a given smooth and possibly
nonconvex function for i ∈ [n] := {1, · · · , n}.
Problem (1) looks simple, but covers various convex and
nonconvex applications in machine learning and statistical
1

School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 2 IBM Research,
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
3
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, The University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Correspondence to:
Lam M. Nguyen <LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In the deterministic case, single permutation (also called
shuffle once, or single shuffling) and incremental gradient
methods can be considered as special cases of the shuffling
gradient-based methods we study in this paper. One special shuffling strategy is randomized reshuffling, which is
broadly used in practice, where we use a different random
permutation at each epoch. Alternatively, in recent years,
it has been shown that many gradient-based methods with
momentum update can notably boost the convergence speed
both in theory and practice (Nesterov, 2004; Dozat, 2016;
Wang et al., 2020). These methods have been widely used
in both convex and nonconvex settings, especially, in deep
learning community. Remarkably, Nesterov’s accelerated
method (Nesterov, 1983) has made a revolution in largescale convex optimization in the last two decades, and has
been largely exploited in nonconvex problems. The developments we have discussed here motivate us to raise the
following research question:
Can we combine both shuffling strategy and momentum
scheme to develop new provable gradient-based algorithms
for handling (1)?

