Communication-Efficient Distributed Optimization
with Quantized Preconditioners

Foivos Alimisis 1 Peter Davies 2 Dan Alistarh 2 3

Abstract
We investigate fast and communication-efficient
algorithms for the classic problem of minimizing a sum of strongly convex and smooth functions that are distributed among n different nodes,
which can communicate using a limited number of
bits. Most previous communication-efficient approaches for this problem are limited to first-order
optimization, and therefore have linear dependence on the condition number in their communication complexity. We show that this dependence
is not inherent: communication-efficient methods
can in fact have sublinear dependence on the condition number. For this, we design and analyze the
first communication-efficient distributed variants
of preconditioned gradient descent for Generalized Linear Models, and for Newton’s method.
Our results rely on a new technique for quantizing
both the preconditioner and the descent direction
at each step of the algorithms, while controlling
their convergence rate. We also validate our findings experimentally, showing fast convergence
and reduced communication.

1. Introduction
Due to the sheer size of modern datasets, many practical
instances of large-scale optimization are now distributed, in
the sense that data and computation are split among several
computing nodes, which collaborate to jointly optimize the
global objective function. This shift towards distribution
induces new challenges, and many classic algorithms have
been revisited to reduce distribution costs. These costs are
usually measured in terms of the number of bits sent and
received by the nodes (communication complexity) or by
the number of parallel iterations required for convergence
(round complexity).
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Geneva,
Switzerland (work done while at IST Austria) 2 IST Austria 3 Neural Magic, US Correspondence to: Foivos Alimisis
<Foivos.Alimisis@unige.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this paper, we focus on the communication (bit) complexity of the classic empirical risk minimization problem
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

where the global d-dimensional cost function f is formed
as the average of smooth and strongly-convex local costs fi ,
each owned by a different machine, indexed by i = 1, ..., n.
This problem has a rich history. The seminal paper of Tsitsiklis & Luo (1986) considered the case n = 2, and provided
a lower bound of Ω(d log(d/)) for quadratic functions, as
well as an almost-matching upper bound for this case, within
logarithmic factors. (Here, d is the problem dimension and
 is the error-tolerance.)
The problem has concentrated significant attention, given
the surge of interest in distributed optimization and machine
learning, e.g. (Niu et al., 2011; Jaggi et al., 2014; Alistarh
et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2018; Ben-Nun & Hoefler, 2019).
In particular, a series of papers (Khirirat et al., 2018; Ye
& Abbe, 2018; Magnússon et al., 2020; Alistarh & Korhonen, 2020) continued to provide improved upper and lower
bounds for the communication complexity of this problem,
both for deterministic and randomized algorithms, as well
as examining related distributed settings and problems (Scaman et al., 2017; Jordan et al., 2018; Vempala et al., 2020;
Mendler-Dünner & Lucchi, 2020; Hendrikx et al., 2020).
The best known lower bound for solving the above problem
for deterministic algorithms and general d and n is of
Ω(nd log(d/))
total communication bits, given recently by (Alistarh & Korhonen, 2020). This lower bound can be asymptotically
matched for quadratic functions by a quantized variant of
gradient descent (Magnússon et al., 2020; Alistarh & Korhonen, 2020) using
O(ndκ log κ log(γd/))
total bits, where κ is the condition number of the problem
and γ is the smoothness bound of f .
An intriguing open question concerns the optimal dependency on the condition number for general objectives. While
existing lower bounds show no such explicit dependency,
all known algorithms have linear (or worse) dependency

