Scalable Normalizing Flows for Permutation Invariant Densities

Marin Biloš 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
Modeling sets is an important problem in machine
learning since this type of data can be found in
many domains. A promising approach defines
a family of permutation invariant densities with
continuous normalizing flows. This allows us to
maximize the likelihood directly and sample new
realizations with ease. In this work, we demonstrate how calculating the trace, a crucial step
in this method, raises issues that occur both during training and inference, limiting its practicality.
We propose an alternative way of defining permutation equivariant transformations that give closed
form trace. This leads not only to improvements
while training, but also to better final performance.
We demonstrate the benefits of our approach on
point processes and general set modeling.

1. Introduction
We say that data is exchangeable if it lacks ordering, i.e., any
permutation of random variables has the same probability.
Examples include point clouds, items in a shopping cart,
tracking household electricity consumption in a city etc.
Often, the number of elements is also a random variable,
like in locations of cellular stations or trees in a forest. We
wish to find a generative model that best describes such data.
To do that, we need to specify a symmetric density — one
that is invariant to data permutations.
A powerful framework to model densities are normalizing
flows (Kobyzev et al., 2020). They parametrize a transformation from a simple base distribution into a complex one.
To define a permutation invariant density, it is enough to
have a permutation invariant base distribution, and a permutation equivariant transformation (Papamakarios et al.,
2019). The latter is impossible to obtain with most of the
traditional architectures (Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma et al.,
2016), unless we assume the points are independent of each
other.
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence
to: <bilos@in.tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

t0
Base distribution

f

t1
Target distribution

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach. Transforming random points
from the permutation invariant base distribution with an ODE
gives a realization in the target distribution. The opposite direction
calculates the likelihood of the observed sample. The dynamics f
has to be a permutation equivariant neural network.

However, the i.i.d. assumption is a strong limitation because
the presence of one object can influence the distribution
of the others. For example, short trees grow near each
other, but are inhibited by taller trees (Ogata & Tanemura,
1985). We want to find a way to model invariant densities
that capture this behavior. A special class of flows, called
continuous normalizing flows (Chen et al., 2018), support
unrestricted transformations that allow us to directly use
permutation equivariant layers (Zaheer et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2019). The general approach is illustrated in Figure 1.
The main disadvantage of continuous flows is the requirement to calculate the trace of the Jacobian of the transformation. In practice, this is done using an unbiased estimator. In
this work, we show that this introduces additional noise during training, making it unstable. Further, for inference and in
some downstream tasks (e.g., out-of-distribution detection),
we would still have to use costly exact trace computation.
To combat this, we propose a straightforward decoupling of
permutation equivariant functions to obtain a constant trace,
i.e., we construct a volume preserving flow. We further
extend this to have exact trace computation while keeping
the original expressiveness. In the experiments we show that
our method speeds-up the training, makes it more stable,
provides better results, and scales with big datasets.
Additionally, we introduce novel models for point processes
that account for complex interactions between the points and
have closed form likelihood with easy sampling. Previous
work resorted to less expressive models or using pseudolikelihood (Besag, 1975). We tackle other use cases as well,
such as modeling point clouds.

