Robust Pure Exploration in Linear Bandits with Limited Budget

Ayya Alieva 1 Ashok Cutkosky 2 Abhimanyu Das 3

Abstract
We consider the pure exploration problem in the
fixed-budget linear bandit setting. We provide a
new algorithm that identifies the best arm with
high probability while being robust to unknown
levels of observation noise as well as to moderate levels of misspecification in the linear model.
Our technique combines prior approaches to pure
exploration in the multi-armed bandit problem
with optimal experimental design algorithms to
obtain both problem dependent and problem independent bounds. Our success probability is never
worse than that of an algorithm that ignores the
linear structure, but seamlessly takes advantage
of such structure when possible. Furthermore, we
only need the number of samples to scale with the
dimension of the problem rather than the number
of arms. We complement our theoretical results
with empirical validation.

1. Introduction
A variety of problems across disciplines involve making
decisions based on noisy observations. For example, online
ad companies need to decide which ads to show to users
based on noisy estimates of click rates, and machine learning practitioners need to tune hyperparameters based on
performance on evaluation sets. All of these situations call
for an exploration period, after which a decision is made.
In the ads setting, the exploration is a testing phase prior to
deployment. In machine learning, it is a model development
or tuning phase. Further, in all these cases, the exploration
phase is limited by a fixed budget: there is only a limited
amount of clicks ad companies can use for estimating click
rates for ads, or a hyperparameter tuning job will only have
a certain amount of resources. This limitation means that
1

Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 2 Boston
University, Boston, Massachussetts, USA 3 Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Ayya Alieva <ayya@stanford.edu>, Ashok
Cutkosky <ashok@cutkosky.com>, Abhimanyu Das <abhidas@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the exploration phase should be somehow efficient - we
wish to make the best use of our limited budget in order to
maximize the chance that our final decision is the best one.
We model this problem as a pure exploration bandit problem
(Even-Dar et al., 2002; Bubeck et al., 2009). We consider a
finite set of n possible actions1 , which we call “arms”, such
that each action x has an associated noisy reward y ∈ R.
We are allowed to take an action (or “pull an arm”) and
obtain an unbiased estimate of the corresponding reward.
We will pull arms for a given exploratory period, observe the
resulting reward estimates, and then output our best guess
for the arm with the highest reward. The goal is to maximize
the probability that our output is indeed the arm with the
highest reward.
Often, we have some knowledge about relationships between different arms which we would like to take advantage
of during the exploration phase. We model this prior knowledge by embedding our arms as x ∈ Rd in such a way that
arms that seem qualitatively similar have similar embeddings. Note that this embedding is known - we either choose
or are given the features for each arm. We then assume a
linear model for the rewards y = hθ, xi for some fixed (but
unknown) θ ∈ Rd . However, in deference to the reality
that such a model is almost certainly not perfect, we allow
for a certain amount of misspecification: y = hθ, xi + γ,
where we assume γ is unknown but not too large. This setting can be described as the misspecified linear bandit. We
provide an algorithm that, after exploring T arms, outputs a
suboptimal arm with probability at most:


T
log2 (n) exp −
2
σ log2 (n)H̃2


(1)

where H̃2 is an instance-dependent quantity (defined pred√
cisely in Section 2) that is bounded by max(∆ −
,
dγ,0)2
2
where ∆2 indicates the gap in reward y between the secondbest arm and the best arm, and σ 2 is the variance of the
observational noise.2 We also provide a lower bound that
suggests that the above expression is tight up to logarithmic
factors.
1
In Section 6 we provide a covering argument that extends to
infinite actions
2
The above expressions supress some additional constants that
appear in our formal results.

