A Theory of Label Propagation for Subpopulation Shift

Tianle Cai * 1 2 Ruiqi Gao * 1 2 Jason D. Lee * 1 Qi Lei * 1

Abstract
One of the central problems in machine learning is
domain adaptation. Unlike past theoretical work,
we consider a new model for subpopulation shift
in the input or representation space. In this work,
we propose a provably effective framework for
domain adaptation based on label propagation. In
our analysis, we use a simple but realistic expansion assumption, proposed in Wei et al. (2021).
Using a teacher classifier trained on the source
domain, our algorithm not only propagates to the
target domain but also improves upon the teacher.
By leveraging existing generalization bounds, we
also obtain end-to-end finite-sample guarantees
on the entire algorithm. In addition, we extend
our theoretical framework to a more general setting of source-to-target transfer based on a third
unlabeled dataset, which can be easily applied in
various learning scenarios. Inspired by our theory, we adapt consistency-based semi-supervised
learning methods to domain adaptation settings
and gain significant improvements.

1. Introduction
The recent success of supervised deep learning is built upon
two crucial cornerstones: That the training and test data
are drawn from an identical distribution, and that representative labeled data are available for training. However, in
real-world applications, labeled data drawn from the same
distribution as test data are usually unavailable. Domain
adaptation (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Saenko et al.,
2010) suggests a way to overcome this challenge by transferring the knowledge of labeled data from a source domain
to the target domain.
Without further assumptions, the transferability of information is not possible. Existing theoretical works have investigated suitable assumptions that can provide learning guaran*Alphabetical order. 1 Princeton University 2 Zhongguancun Haihua Institute for Frontier Information Technology. Correspondence
to: Jason D. Lee <jasonlee@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tees. Many of the works are based on the covariate shift assumption (Heckman, 1979; Shimodaira, 2000), which states
that the conditional distribution of the labels (given the input x) is invariant across domains, i.e., pS (y|x) = pT (y|x).
Traditional approaches usually utilize this assumption by
further assuming that the source domain covers the support
of the target domain. In this setting, importance weighting (Shimodaira, 2000; Cortes et al., 2010; 2015; Zadrozny,
2004) can be used to transfer information from source to
target with theoretical guarantees. However, the assumption
of covered support rarely holds in practice.
In the seminal works of Ben-David et al. (2010); Ganin
et al. (2016), the authors introduced a theory that enables
generalization to out-of-support samples via distribution
matching. They showed that the risk on the target domain
can be bounded by the sum of two terms a) the risk on the
source domain plus a discrepancy between source and target
domains, and b) the optimal joint risk that a function in
the hypothesis class can achieve. Inspired by this bound,
numerous domain-adversarial algorithms aimed at matching
the distribution of source and target domains in the feature
space have been proposed (Ajakan et al., 2014; Long et al.,
2015; Ganin et al., 2016). These methods show encouraging
empirical performance on transferring information from
domains with different styles, e.g., from colorized photos
to gray-scale photos. However, the theory of distribution
matching can be violated since only two terms in the bound
are optimized in the algorithms while the other term can be
arbitrary large (Zhao et al., 2019a; Wu et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2020). In practice, forcing the representation distribution of
two domains to match may also fail in some settings. As an
example, Li et al. (2020) gives empirical evidence of this
failure on datasets with subpopulation shift. Li et al. (2020)
describes a classification task between vehicle and person;
subpopulation shift happens when the source vehicle class
contains 50% car and 50% motorcycle, while the target
vehicle class contains 10% car and 90% motorcycle.
In real-world applications, subpopulation shift is pervasive,
and often in a fine-grained manner. The source domain
will inevitably fail to capture the diversity of the target
domain, and models will encounter unseen subpopulations
in the target domain, e.g., unexpected weather conditions
for self-driving or different diagnostic setups in medical
applications (Santurkar et al., 2021). The lack of theoretical

