Accelerating Gossip SGD with Periodic Global Averaging

Yiming Chen * 1 Kun Yuan * 1 Yingya Zhang 1 Pan Pan 1 Yinghui Xu 1 Wotao Yin 1

Abstract
Communication overhead hinders the scalability
of large-scale distributed training. Gossip SGD,
where each node averages only with its neighbors, is more communication-efficient than the
prevalent parallel SGD. However, its convergence
rate is reversely proportional to quantity 1 − β
which measures the network connectivity. On
large and sparse networks where 1 − β → 0,
Gossip SGD requires more iterations to converge,
which offsets against its communication benefit.
This paper introduces Gossip-PGA, which adds
Periodic Global Averaging into Gossip SGD. Its
transient stage, i.e., the iterations required to reach
asymptotic linear speedup stage, improves from
Ω(β 4 n3 /(1−β)4 ) to Ω(β 4 n3 H 4 ) for non-convex
problems. The influence of network topology in
Gossip-PGA can be controlled by the averaging
period H. Its transient-stage complexity is also
superior to Local SGD which has order Ω(n3 H 4 ).
Empirical results of large-scale training on image
classification (ResNet50) and language modeling
(BERT) validate our theoretical findings.

ACC .%

T IME ( HRS .)

PARALLEL SGD
G OSSIP SGD ( RING )
G OSSIP SGD ( EXPO )
G OSSIP SGD ( RING )
G OSSIP SGD ( EXPO )

120
120
120
240
240

76.26
74.86
75.34
75.62
76.18

2.22
1.56
1.55
3.02
3.03

Parallel SGD methods are leading algorithms to solve (1),
in which every node processes local training samples independently, and synchronize gradients every iteration either
using a central Parameter Server (PS) (Li et al., 2014) or the
All-Reduce communication primitive (Patarasuk & Yuan,
2009). The global synchronization in Parallel SGD either
incurs significant bandwidth cost or high latency, which
hampers the training scalability.

The scale of deep learning nowadays calls for efficient largescale distributed training across multiple computing nodes
in the data-center clusters. In distributed optimization, a
network of n nodes cooperate to solve the problem
n

1X
[fi (x) := Eξi ∼Di Fi (x; ξ i )]
x∈Rd n
i=1

E POCH

Table 1. Top-1 validation accuracy for ImageNet with 256 GPUs
connected with the ring or one-peer exponential network. Gossip
SGD takes more time to reach the same accuracy as Parallel SGD.

1. Introduction

min

M ETHOD

(1)

where each component fi is local and private to node i and
the random variable ξ i denotes the local data that follows
distribution Di . We assume each node i can locally evaluate
stochastic gradients ∇Fi (x; ξ i ) where ξ i ∼ Di , but must
communicate to access information from other nodes.
*

Equal contribution 1 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Kun Yuan <kun.yuan@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Many alternative methods have been proposed to reduce
communication overhead in distributed training. Gossip
SGD, also known as decentralized SGD (Nedic & Ozdaglar,
2009; Chen & Sayed, 2012; Lian et al., 2017; 2018; Assran et al., 2019), recently received lots of attention. This
line of work lets each node communicate with (some of)
their direct neighbors. In a sparse topology such as one-peer
exponential graph (Assran et al., 2019), each node only communicates with one neighbor each time. This gossip-style
communication is much faster than PS and All-Reduce but
the computed average can be highly inaccurate. Local SGD
(Stich, 2019; Yu et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2018) is another line
of work that increases the computation-to-communication
ratio. Local SGD lets each node to run local gradient descent for multiple rounds and only average their parameters
globally once in a while. By communicating less frequently,
Local SGD reduces the communication overhead.
The reduced communication in Gossip and Local SGDs
comes at a cost: slower convergence rate. While both algorithms are proved to have convergence linear speedup
asymptotically, they are sensitive to network topology and
synchronization period, respectively. For Gossip SGD, the
convergence rate is inversely proportional to 1 − β (β is
defined in Remark 1). Since β → 1 on the large and sparse
network topology which is most valuable for deep training,
Gossip SGD will converge very slow and require more iterations than Parallel SGD to achieve a desired solution. This

