One Pass Late Fusion Multi-view Clustering

Xinwang Liu 1 Li Liu 1 Qing Liao 2 Siwei Wang 1 Yi Zhang 1 Wenxuan Tu 1 Chang Tang 3
Jiyuan Liu 1 En Zhu 1

Abstract
Existing late fusion multi-view clustering
(LFMVC) optimally integrates a group of prespecified base partition matrices to learn a consensus one. It is then taken as the input of the widely
used k-means to generate the cluster labels. As
observed, the learning of the consensus partition
matrix and the generation of cluster labels are
separately done. These two procedures lack necessary negotiation and can not best serve for each
other, which may adversely affect the clustering
performance. To address this issue, we propose to
unify the aforementioned two learning procedures
into a single optimization, in which the consensus
partition matrix can better serve for the generation
of cluster labels, and the latter is able to guide the
learning of the former. To optimize the resultant
optimization problem, we develop a four-step alternate algorithm with proved convergence. We
theoretically analyze the clustering generalization
error of the proposed algorithm on unseen data.
Comprehensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
algorithm in terms of both clustering accuracy
and computational efficiency. It is expected that
the simplicity and effectiveness of our algorithm
will make it a good option to be considered for
practical multi-view clustering applications.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) maximally utilizes a group
of pre-calculated complementary views to improve the clustering performance (Peng et al.; Wang et al.). It has been
intensively studied and successfully applied into various
applications (Huang et al.; Wang et al., 2019). According
1
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology. 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen. 3 School of Computer Science,
China University of Geosciences. Correspondence to: Xinwang
Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to different ways in fusing views, existing MVC can be
roughly grouped into three categories: feature concatenation, multiple kernel clustering and late fusion MVC. The
methods in the first category concatenate features from different views into a high-dimensional representation, which
is then taken as the input of existing single view clustering
algorithms to generate cluster labels. Though simple and
computationally efficient, these methods usually demonstrate unsatisfying clustering performance since that the
complementary information among different views cannot
be sufficiently exploited.
By following the multiple kernel learning framework, the
second category, i.e., multiple kernel clustering, firstly calculates a similarity (kernel) matrix based on each view, and
then optimally combines these kernel matrices to learn an
optimal kernel matrix for clustering (Zhao et al., 2009).
Along this line, many variants have been developed (Yu
et al., 2012; Gönen & Margolin, 2014; Liu et al., 2016b;
Li et al., 2016). The work in (Yu et al., 2012) proposes a
three-step alternate algorithm to jointly perform kernel clustering, coefficients optimization and dimension reduction.
The work in (Gönen & Margolin, 2014) develops a localized multiple kernel k-means(MKKM) where the kernel
weight for each sample is adaptive. In (Liu et al., 2016b),
a matrix-induced regularization term is incorporated into
existing MKKM to enhance the diversity and reduce the
redundancy of the selected kernel matrices. Furthermore, a
local kernel alignment criterion (Li et al., 2016) has been
applied to multiple kernel learning to enhance the clustering performance in (Liu et al., 2016b). The methods in the
second category have been intensively studied and shown
superior clustering performance in various applications (Liu
et al., 2017b). However, their computational complexity is
usually cubic of sample number, which prohibits them from
median or large-scale clustering tasks.
To alleviate the computational cost of multiple kernel clustering algorithms, the third category proposes a different
paradigm for MVC, which is termed as late fusion MVC.
Specifically, these methods firstly calculate a clustering partition matrix Hp by performing kernel k-means with Kp ,
where Kp represents pairwise sample similarity of the p-th
view. After that, a consensus matrix is learned from Hp ’s
with linear computational complexity (Wang et al., 2019).

