Mixed Nash Equilibria in the Adversarial Examples Game
Laurent Meunier * 1 2 Meyer Scetbon * 3 Rafael Pinot 4 Jamal Atif 1 Yann Chevaleyre 1

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of adversarial examples from a game theoretic point of view. We
study the open question of the existence of mixed
Nash equilibria in the zero-sum game formed by
the attacker and the classifier. While previous
works usually allow only one player to use randomized strategies, we show the necessity of considering randomization for both the classifier and
the attacker. We demonstrate that this game has
no duality gap, meaning that it always admits approximate Nash equilibria. We also provide the
first optimization algorithms to learn a mixture of
a finite number of classifiers that approximately
realizes the value of this game, i.e. procedures to
build an optimally robust randomized classifier.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al.,
2014) are one of the most dizzling problems in machine
learning: state of the art classifiers are sensitive to imperceptible perturbations of their inputs that make them fail.
Last years, research have concentrated on proposing new
defense methods (Cohen et al.; Madry et al., 2018; MoosaviDezfooli et al., 2019) and building more and more sophisticated attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Croce & Hein,
2020; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2016). So far,
most defense strategies proved to be vulnerable to these new
attacks or are computationally intractable. This asks the
following question: can we build classifiers that are robust
against any adversarial attack?
A recent line of research argued that randomized classifiers
could help countering adversarial attacks (Dhillon et al.,
2018; Pinot et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2018).
*

1

Equal contribution
Miles Team, LAMSADE, Université
Paris-Dauphine, Paris, France 2 Facebook AI Research, Paris,
France 3 CREST, ENSAE, Paris, France 4 Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Laurent Meunier <laurentmeunier@fb.com>, Meyer Scetbon
<meyer.scetbon@ensae.fr>, Rafael Pinot <rafael.pinot@epfl.ch>,
Jamal Atif <jamal.atif@dauphine.fr>, Yann Chevaleyre
<yann.chevaleyre@dauphine.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Along this line, (Pinot et al., 2020) demonstrated, using
game theory, that randomized classifiers are indeed more robust than deterministic ones against regularized adversaries.
However, the findings of these previous works depends on
the definition of considered adversary. In particular, they did
not investigate scenarios where the adversary also uses randomized strategies, which is essential to account for if we
want to give a principled answer to the above question. Previous works studying adversarial examples from the scope
of game theory investigated the randomized framework (for
both the classifier and the adversary) in restricted settings
where the adversary is either parametric or has a finite number of strategies (Bose et al., 2021; Perdomo & Singer, 2019;
Rota Bulò et al., 2017). Our framework does not assume
any constraint on the definition of the adversary, making our
conclusions independent on the adversary the classifiers are
facing. More precisely, we answer the following questions.
Q1: Is it always possible to reach a Mixed Nash equilibrium
in the adversarial example game when both the adversary
and the classifier can use randomized strategies?
A1: We answer positively to this question. First we motivate
in Section 2 the necessity for using randomized strategies
both with the attacker and the classifier. Then, we extend
the work of (Pydi & Jog, 2020), by rigorously reformulating the adversarial risk as a linear optimization problem
over distributions. In fact, we cast the adversarial risk minimization problem as a Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) (Blanchet & Murthy, 2019) problem for a well
suited cost function. This formulation naturally leads us,
in Section 3, to analyze adversarial risk minimization as
a zero-sum game. We demonstrate that, in this game, the
duality gap always equals 0, meaning that it always admits
approximate mixed Nash equilibria.
Q2: Can we design efficient algorithms to learn an optimally
robust randomized classifier?
A2: To answer this question, we focus on learning a finite mixture of classifiers. Taking inspiration from robust
optimization (Sinha et al., 2017) and subgradient methods (Boyd, 2003), we derive in Section 4 a first oracle
algorithm to optimize a finite mixture. Then, following
the line of work of (Cuturi, 2013), we introduce an entropic
regularization to effectively compute an approximation of
the optimal mixture. We validate our findings with experi-

