The Implicit Regularization for Adaptive Optimization Algorithms on
Homogeneous Neural Networks

Bohan Wang 1 Qi Meng 1 Wei Chen 1 Tie-Yan Liu 1

Abstract
Despite their overwhelming capacity to overfit,
deep neural networks trained by specific optimization algorithms tend to generalize well to unseen
data. Recently, researchers explained it by investigating the implicit regularization effect of
optimization algorithms. A remarkable progress
is the work (Lyu & Li, 2019), which proves gradient descent (GD) maximizes the margin of homogeneous deep neural networks. Except GD,
adaptive algorithms such as AdaGrad, RMSProp
and Adam are popular owing to their rapid training process. However, theoretical guarantee for
the generalization of adaptive optimization algorithms is still lacking. In this paper, we study the
implicit regularization of adaptive optimization
algorithms when they are optimizing the logistic
loss on homogeneous deep neural networks. We
prove that adaptive algorithms that adopt exponential moving average strategy in conditioner (such
as Adam and RMSProp) can maximize the margin
of the neural network, while AdaGrad that directly
sums historical squared gradients in conditioner
can not. It indicates superiority on generalization of exponential moving average strategy in the
design of the conditioner. Technically, we provide a unified framework to analyze convergent
direction of adaptive optimization algorithms by
constructing novel adaptive gradient flow and surrogate margin. Our experiments can well support
the theoretical findings on convergent direction of
adaptive optimization algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques have been very successful in several domains, like computer vision (Voulodimos et al., 2018),
speech recognition (Deng et al., 2013) and natural language
1

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Wei Chen <wche@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

processing (Young et al., 2018). In practice, deep neural
networks (DNN) learned by optimization algorithms such
as gradient descent (GD) and its variants can generalize well
to unseen data (Witten & Frank, 2005). However, deep neural networks are non-convex. The non-convex deep neural
networks have been found to have large amount of global
minima (Choromanska et al., 2015), while only few of them
can guarantee satisfactory generalization property (Brutzkus
et al., 2018). Explaining why the highly non-convex model
trained by a specific algorithm can generalize has become
an important open question in deep learning.
Regarding the above question, one plausible explanation is
that optimization algorithms implicitly regularize the training process (Neyshabur et al., 2015). That is, the optimization algorithm tends to drive parameters to certain kinds
of global minima which generalize well, although no explicit regularization is enforced. Recently, exciting results
have been shown for vanilla gradient descent. A remarkable
progress is the work (Lyu & Li, 2019), which proves that
GD maximizes the margin of homogeneous (non-linear)
deep neural networks.
On the other hand, adaptive algorithms such as AdaGrad
(Duchi et al., 2011), RMSProp (Hinton et al., 2012), and
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) have been in spotlight these
years. These algorithms are proposed to improve the convergence rate of GD (or SGD) by using second-order moments
of historical gradients as conditioner and have been widely
applied in deep learning (Ruder, 2016). Despite the rapid
convergence of adaptive methods, numerous works have provided empirical evidence that adaptive methods may suffer
from poor generalization performance (Wilson et al., 2017;
Luo et al., 2018). Several works try to improve the performance of adaptive optimization algorithms such as AdamW
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018), AdaBound (Luo et al., 2018),
AdaBelief (Zhuang et al., 2020). However, there is little theoretical analysis for generalization of adaptive algorithms.
These observations and the research for GD motivate us to
study the implicit regularization for adaptive algorithms.
The key factor for the success of adaptive optimization algorithms is to design better conditioners of the gradient.
Adagrad adopts the simple average of the squared values of
the historical gradients in its conditioner, while RMSProp

