Efficient Online Learning for Dynamic k-Clustering

Dimitris Fotakis 1 Georgios Piliouras 2 Stratis Skoulakis 2

Abstract
We study dynamic clustering problems from the
perspective of online learning. We consider
an online learning problem, called Dynamic kClustering, in which k centers are maintained in
a metric space over time (centers may change positions) such as a dynamically changing set of r
clients is served in the best possible way. The connection cost at round t is given by the p-norm of
the vector consisting of the distance of each client
to its closest center at round t, for some p ≥ 1
or p = ∞. We present a Θ (min(k, r))-regret
polynomial-time online learning algorithm and
show that, under some well-established computational complexity conjectures, constant-regret
cannot be achieved in polynomial-time. In addition to the efficient solution of Dynamic kClustering, our work contributes to the long line
of research on combinatorial online learning.

1. Introduction
Clustering problems are widely studied in Combinatorial
Optimization literature due to their vast applications in Operational Research, Machine Learning, Data Science and
Engineering (Williamson & Shmoys, 2011; Lin & Vitter,
1992; Charikar et al., 1999; Arya et al., 2001; Charikar &
Guha, 1999; Jain & Vazirani, 2001; Kumar, 2012; Young,
2000; Li & Svensson, 2016; Charikar & Li, 2012; Kumar
et al., 2010; Alamdari & Shmoys, 2018). Typically a fixed
number of centers must be placed in a metric space such that
a set of clients is served the best possible way. The quality
of a clustering solution is captured through the p-norm of
the vector consisting of the distance of each client to its
closest center, for some p ≥ 1 or p = ∞. For example
k-median and k-means assume p = 1 and 2 respectively,
*

Equal contribution 1 Departement of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens,
Greece 2 Pillar of Engineering Systems and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Dimitris Fotakis <fotakis@cs.ntua.gr>, Georgios Piliouras <georgios@sutd.edu.sg>, Stratis Skoulakis <efstratios@sutd.edu.sg>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

while k-center assumes p = ∞ (Lin & Vitter, 1992; Kumar
et al., 2010; Alamdari & Shmoys, 2018).
Today’s access on vast data (that may be frequently updated
over time) has motivated the study of clustering problems
in case of time-evolving clients, which dynamically change
positions over time (de Keijzer & Wojtczak; Fotakis et al.,
2019; Eisenstat et al.; An et al., 2017). In time-evolving
clustering problems, centers may also change position over
time so as to better capture the clients’ trajectories. For
example, a city may want to reallocate the units performing rapid tests for Covid-19 so as to better serve neighborhoods with more cases, the distribution of which may
substantially change from day to day. Other interesting applications of dynamic clustering include viral marketing,
epidemiology, facility location (e.g. schools, hospitals), conference planning etc. (Stehlé et al., 2011; Eisenstat et al.;
Newman, 2003; Pastor-Satorras & Vespignani, 2001; Tantipathananandh et al., 2007).
Our work is motivated by the fact that in most settings of
interest, clients can move in fairly complicated and unpredictable ways, and thus, an a-priori knowledge on such
trajectories is heavily under question (most of the previous
work assumes perfect knowledge on clients’ positions over
time (Eisenstat et al.; An et al., 2017; de Keijzer & Wojtczak;
Fotakis et al., 2019)). To capture this lack of information
we cast clustering problems under the perspective of online learning (Hazan, 2016). We study an online learning
problem called Dynamic k-Clustering in which a learner
selects at each round t, the positions of k centers trying to
minimize the connection cost of some clients, the positions
of which are unknown to the learner prior to the selection
of the centers.
Online Learning Problem 1 (Dynamic k-Clustering).
Given a metric space d : V × V 7→ R≥0 . At each round t,

1. The learner selects a set Ft ⊆ V , with |Ft | = k, at
which centers are placed.

2. The adversary selects the positions of the clients, denoted as Rt (after the selection of the positions of the
centers by the learner).

