Hierarchical VAEs Know What They Don’t Know

Jakob D. Havtorn 1 2 Jes Frellsen 1 Søren Hauberg 1 Lars Maaløe 1 2

Abstract
Deep generative models have been demonstrated
as state-of-the-art density estimators. Yet, recent
work has found that they often assign a higher
likelihood to data from outside the training distribution. This seemingly paradoxical behavior has
caused concerns over the quality of the attained
density estimates. In the context of hierarchical
variational autoencoders, we provide evidence to
explain this behavior by out-of-distribution data
having in-distribution low-level features. We argue that this is both expected and desirable behavior. With this insight in hand, we develop a
fast, scalable and fully unsupervised likelihoodratio score for OOD detection that requires data
to be in-distribution across all feature-levels. We
benchmark the method on a vast set of data and
model combinations and achieve state-of-the-art
results on out-of-distribution detection.

1. Introduction
The reliability and safety of machine learning systems applied in the real-world is contingent on the ability to detect
when an input is different from the training distribution.
Supervised classifiers built as deep neural networks are
well-known to misclassify such out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs to known classes with high confidence (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2015). Several approaches
have been suggested to equip deep classifiers with OOD
detection capabilities (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Hendrycks et al., 2019; DeVries &
Taylor, 2018). But, such methods are inherently supervised
and require in-distribution labels or examples of OOD data
limiting their applicability and generality.

Figure 1. Reconstructions using a hierarchical VAE trained on
FashionMNIST. Reconstruction quality of OOD data is comparable to in-distribution data, resulting in high likelihoods and poor
OOD discrimination. By sampling the k bottom-most latent variables from the conditional prior distribution p(z≥l |z>l ) (latent
reconstructions) instead of the approximate posterior q(z>l |z<l ),
the model reconstructs from the training distribution resulting in
lower p(x|z) for OOD data.

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
2
Corti AI, Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Jakob D.
Havtorn <jdh@corti.ai>, Lars Maaløe <lm@corti.ai>.

out-of-distribution without requiring labels or examples of
OOD data. By directly modeling the training distribution,
such models are expected to assign low likelihoods to OOD
data as it originates from regions of little or no support under
the learned density (Bishop, 1994). Recent advances in deep
generative models (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014; Oord et al., 2016b; Salimans et al., 2017; Kingma
& Dhariwal, 2018) have enabled learning high quality generative models on complex data such as natural images,
sequences including audio (Oord et al., 2016a) and graphs
(Kipf & Welling, 2016). However, recent observations have
brought into question the quality of the learned density estimates by showing that they often assign higher likelihoods
to OOD data than to in-distribution data (Nalisnick et al.,
2019a; Choi et al., 2019). Many complex data distributions
can be explained to a large degree by low-level features,
e.g. edges in images. However, such features do not explain high-level semantics of the data and may inhibit OOD
detection (Ren et al., 2019; Nalisnick et al., 2019a)

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In this paper, we examine the failure cases of deep generative models on OOD detection tasks within the context of

Unsupervised generative models that estimate an explicit
likelihood should understand what it means to be in- and
1

