Large-Margin Contrastive Learning with Distance Polarization Regularizer

Shuo Chen 1 Gang Niu 1 Chen Gong 2 Jun Li 2 Jian Yang 2 Masashi Sugiyama 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning without human annotation is a longstanding and important problem. Recently, the unsupervised
learning approach has been greatly promoted by contrastive
learning (CL), which shows encouraging performance compared to fully supervised learning methods (Wu et al., 2018;
Saunshi et al., 2019). CL directly learns a generic feature
embedding for original data, and the learned embedding can
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan;
PCA-Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China; 3 Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Shuo Chen <shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp>, Jun Li
<junli@njust.edu.cn>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Enlargement

Polarization

Density

Density

Contrastive learning (CL) pretrains models in a
pairwise manner, where given a data point, other
data points are all regarded as dissimilar, including some that are semantically similar. The issue
has been addressed by properly weighting similar and dissimilar pairs as in positive-unlabeled
learning, so that the objective of CL is unbiased
and CL is consistent. However, in this paper, we
argue that this great solution is still not enough:
its weighted objective hides the issue where the
semantically similar pairs are still pushed away;
as CL is pretraining, this phenomenon is not our
desideratum and might affect downstream tasks.
To this end, we propose large-margin contrastive
learning (LMCL) with distance polarization regularizer, motivated by the distribution characteristic of pairwise distances in metric learning. In
LMCL, we can distinguish between intra-cluster
and inter-cluster pairs, and then only push away
inter-cluster pairs, which solves the above issue
explicitly. Theoretically, we prove a tighter error
bound for LMCL; empirically, the superiority of
LMCL is demonstrated across multiple domains,
i.e., image classification, sentence representation,
and reinforcement learning.

Intra/Inter-Cluster Distance

Intra

Inter
Ambiguous

Unregularized

Distance

Intra

Inter

Unambiguous

Distance

Distance Polarization Regularized

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of unregularized contrastive learning and contrastive learning regularized by distance polarization
(DP). The unregularized model enlarges distances between all pairs
of instances and potentially leading to some ambiguous intra/intercluster distances. We propose a DP regularized learning algorithm
to encourage pairwise distances to be extremely large or small, and
thus gaining the unambiguous distance determination with a large
margin between intra-cluster and inter-cluster.

be widely employed in many downstream recognition tasks
such as classification (Chen et al., 2020a) and clustering
(Zhong et al., 2020). Thereby, CL has become one of the
most important unsupervised learning approaches.
As human annotation is not available in an unsupervised
learning problem setting, CL algorithms usually consider
building the pseudo supervision in their learning objectives (Saunshi et al., 2019; Jing & Tian, 2020). In general,
most existing CL frameworks regard any two instances in
the training data as a negative pair (including those falsenegative pairs consisted of semantically similar instances),
and meanwhile construct the positive pair by combining
each instance with its perturbation (Wu et al., 2018; Song
& Ermon, 2020). Due to the continued success from positive pairs, many recent efforts have increasingly focused
on various data augmentation techniques to further enrich
training data (Oord et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2020a) and simultaneously preserve semantic contents (Logeswaran &
Lee, 2018; Tian et al., 2020b).
While positive-pair sampling has drawn much attention, relatively fewer works consider the influence of negative pair
in CL (Jing & Tian, 2020). Actually, as most existing CL

