Learning Curves for Analysis of Deep Networks

Derek Hoiem 1 Tanmay Gupta 2 Zhizhong Li 1 Michal M. Shlapentokh-Rothman 1

Abstract
Learning curves model a classifier’s test error as a
function of the number of training samples. Prior
works show that learning curves can be used to
select model parameters and extrapolate performance. We investigate how to use learning curves
to evaluate design choices, such as pretraining,
architecture, and data augmentation. We propose
a method to robustly estimate learning curves, abstract their parameters into error and data-reliance,
and evaluate the effectiveness of different parameterizations. Our experiments exemplify use of
learning curves for analysis and yield several interesting observations.

1. Introduction
The performance of a learning system depends strongly on
the number of training samples, but standard evaluations use
a fixed train/test split. While some works measure performance using subsets of training data, the lack of a systematic way to measure and report performance as a function
of training size is a barrier to progress in machine learning
research, particularly in areas like representation learning,
data augmentation, and low-shot learning that specifically
address the limited-data regime. What gets measured gets
optimized, so we need better measures of learning ability to
design better classifiers for the spectrum of data availability.
In this paper, we establish and demonstrate use of learning curves to improve evaluation of classifiers (see Fig. 1).
Learning curves, which model error as a function of training
set size, were introduced nearly thirty years ago by Cortes
et al. (1993)) to accelerate model selection of deep networks,
and recent works have demonstrated the predictability of
performance improvements with more data (Hestness et al.,
2017; Johnson & Nguyen, 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2020) or more network parameters (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2020). But such studies aim to ex1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 PRIOR @
Allen Institute for AI. Correspondence to: Derek Hoiem
<dhoiem@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

trapolate rather than evaluate and have typically required
large-scale experiments that are outside the computational
budgets of many research groups.
Experimentally, we find that the extended power law
etest (n) = α + ηnγ yields a well-fitting learning curve,
where etest is test error and n is the number of training samples (or “training size”), but that the parameters {α, η, γ}
are individually unstable under measurement perturbations.
To facilitate curve comparisons, we abstract the curve into
two key parameters, eN and βN , that have intuitive meanings and are more stable under measurement variance. eN
is the test error at n = N , and βN is a measure of datareliance, how much a classifier’s error will change if the
training size changes. Our experiments show that learning
curves provide insights that cannot be obtained by singlepoint comparisons of performance. Our aim is to promote
the use of learning curves as part of a standard learning
system evaluation.
Our key contributions:
• Investigate how to best model, estimate, characterize,
and display learning curves for use in classifier analysis
• Exemplify use of learning curves with analysis of impact of error and data-reliance due to network architecture, optimization, depth, width, fine-tuning, data
augmentation, and pretraining.
Table 1 shows validated and rejected popular beliefs that
single-point comparisons often overlook. In the following sections, we investigate how to model learning curves
(Sec. 2), how to estimate them (Sec. 3), and what they can
tell us about the impact of design decisions (Sec. 4), with
discussion of limitations and future work in Sec. 5.

2. Modeling Learning Curves
The learning curve measures test error etest as a function of
the number of training samples n for a given classification
model and learning method. Previous empirical observations suggest a functional form etest (n) = α + ηnγ , with
bias-variance trade-off and generalization theories typically
indicating γ = −0.5. We summarize what bias-variance
trade-off and generalization theories (Sec. 2.1) and empiri-

