Machine Unlearning for Random Forests

Jonathan Brophy 1 Daniel Lowd 1

Abstract
Responding to user data deletion requests, removing noisy examples, or deleting corrupted training
data are just a few reasons for wanting to delete
instances from a machine learning (ML) model.
However, efficiently removing this data from an
ML model is generally difficult. In this paper, we
introduce data removal-enabled (DaRE) forests, a
variant of random forests that enables the removal
of training data with minimal retraining. Model
updates for each DaRE tree in the forest are exact,
meaning that removing instances from a DaRE
model yields exactly the same model as retraining
from scratch on updated data.
DaRE trees use randomness and caching to make
data deletion efficient. The upper levels of
DaRE trees use random nodes, which choose
split attributes and thresholds uniformly at random. These nodes rarely require updates because
they only minimally depend on the data. At the
lower levels, splits are chosen to greedily optimize a split criterion such as Gini index or mutual
information. DaRE trees cache statistics at each
node and training data at each leaf, so that only the
necessary subtrees are updated as data is removed.
For numerical attributes, greedy nodes optimize
over a random subset of thresholds, so that they
can maintain statistics while approximating the
optimal threshold. By adjusting the number of
thresholds considered for greedy nodes, and the
number of random nodes, DaRE trees can trade
off between more accurate predictions and more
efficient updates.
In experiments on 13 real-world datasets and one
synthetic dataset, we find DaRE forests delete
data orders of magnitude faster than retraining
from scratch while sacrificing little to no predictive power.
1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon. Correspondence to: Jonathan Brophy
<jbrophy@cs.uoregon.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent legislation (EU, 2016; California, 2018; Canada,
2018) requiring companies to remove private user data upon
request has prompted new discussions on data privacy and
ownership (Shintre et al., 2019), and fulfilling this “right
to be forgotten” (Kwak et al., 2017; Garg et al., 2020) may
require updating any models trained on this data (Villaronga
et al., 2018). However, retraining a model from scratch on a
revised dataset becomes prohibitively expensive as dataset
sizes and model complexities increase (Shoeybi et al., 2019);
the result is wasted time and computational resources, exacerbated as the frequency of data removal requests increases.
Decision trees and random forests (Breiman et al., 1984;
Friedman, 2001) are popular and widely used machine learning models (Lundberg et al., 2018), mainly due to their
predictive prowess on many classification and regression
tasks (Kocev et al., 2013; Genuer et al., 2017; Wager &
Athey, 2018; Linero & Yang, 2018; Biau et al., 2019). Current work on deleting data from machine learning models has focused mainly on recommender systems (Cao &
Yang, 2015; Schelter, 2020), K-means (Ginart et al., 2019),
SVMs (Cauwenberghs & Poggio, 2001), logistic regression (Guo et al., 2020; Schelter, 2020), and deep neural
networks (Baumhauer et al., 2020; Golatkar et al., 2020b;
Wu et al., 2020); however, there is very limited work addressing the problem of efficient data deletion for tree-based
models (Schelter et al., 2021). Thus, we outline our contributions as follows:
1. We introduce DaRE (Data Removal-Enabled) Forests
(a.k.a DaRE RF), a variant of random forests that supports the efficient removal of training instances. DaRE
RF works with discrete tree structures, in contrast to
many related works on efficient data deletion that assume continuous parameters. The key components
of DaRE RF are to retrain subtrees only as needed,
consider only a subset of valid thresholds per attribute
at each decision node, and to strategically place completely random nodes near the top of each tree to avoid
costly retraining.
2. We provide algorithms for training and subsequently
removing data from a DaRE forest.
3. We evaluate DaRE RF’s ability to efficiently perform

