SAINT-ACC: Safety-Aware Intelligent Adaptive Cruise Control for
Autonomous Vehicles Using Deep Reinforcement Learning

Lokesh Das 1 Myounggyu Won 1

Abstract
We present a novel adaptive cruise control
(ACC) system namely SAINT-ACC: SafetyAware Intelligent ACC system (SAINT-ACC)
that is designed to achieve simultaneous optimization of traffic efficiency, driving safety, and driving comfort through dynamic adaptation of the
inter-vehicle gap based on deep reinforcement
learning (RL). A novel dual RL agent-based approach is developed to seek and adapt the optimal balance between traffic efficiency and driving
safety/comfort by effectively controlling the driving safety model parameters and inter-vehicle gap
based on macroscopic and microscopic traffic information collected from dynamically changing
and complex traffic environments. Results obtained through over 12,000 simulation runs with
varying traffic scenarios and penetration rates
demonstrate that SAINT-ACC significantly enhances traffic flow, driving safety and comfort
compared with a state-of-the-art approach.

1. Introduction
An adaptive cruise control (ACC) system enables vehicles
to automatically maintain the desired headway distance to
the preceding vehicle by using various kinds of sensors
such as radar, LiDAR, and cameras (Vahidi & Eskandarian,
2003). It is one of the critical components of autonomous
vehicles (Wang et al., 2020). Recent research demonstrates
that it can also be used to enhance traffic flow (Ntousakis
et al., 2015; Delis et al., 2016; Nikolos et al., 2015) by
adaptively adjusting the inter-vehicle gap in response to
dynamically changing traffic conditions (Bekiaris-Liberis &
Delis, 2019; Goñi-Ros et al., 2019; Das & Won, 2020).
Latest intelligent ACC systems, however, focus mostly on
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Memphis,
TN, United States. Correspondence to: Myounggyu Won
<mwon@memphis.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

enhancing traffic flow, overlooking the impact of adaptive
adjustment of inter-vehicle gap on driving safety and comfort (Bekiaris-Liberis & Delis, 2019; Goñi-Ros et al., 2019).
As such, developing an intelligent ACC system that optimizes not only traffic flow but also driving safety and comfort is an important research problem. Recently, a surrogate
safety measure (SSM) (Nadimi et al., 2020) such as the
time-to-collision (TTC) model (Gettman & Head, 2003) is
incorporated in the design of an intelligent ACC system to
account for driving safety and comfort in making a control
decision on the inter-vehicle gap (Zhu et al., 2020; Alizadeh
et al., 2019). However, we demonstrate that state-of-theart safety-aware ACC systems (Zhu et al., 2020; Alizadeh
et al., 2019) do not perform driving safety assessment effectively under dynamically changing and complex traffic
environments (Zhu et al., 2020) because the implications of
dynamic adaptation of the critical parameters of the driving
safety model on balancing traffic efficiency and safety are
not fully considered.
In this paper, we develop the Safety-Aware Intelligent ACC
system (SAINT-ACC) that performs driving safety assessment more effectively through dynamically updating the
safety model parameters in response to varying traffic conditions. A novel dual reinforcement learning (RL) agent
approach is designed aiming to maximize traffic efficiency,
driving safety, and driving comfort simultaneously. Specifically, a separate RL agent is designed to find and adapt
the optimal TTC threshold (Gettman & Head, 2003) based
on rich traffic information including both macroscopic and
microscopic traffic data obtained from the surrounding environment. This RL agent, by providing the optimal TTC
threshold as feedback, interacts with the main RL agent designed to derive an optimal inter-vehicle gap that maximizes
traffic flow, driving safety, and comfort at the same time.
The dual RL agents are trained under various highway scenarios including highways with on-ramps and off-ramps. A
simulation platform based on the combination of a traffic
simulator, SUMO (Krajzewicz et al., 2012), and a vehicular
network simulator, Veins (Sommer et al., 2019), is used to
perform extensive simulations over 12,000 runs with varying penetration rates and merging/exiting traffic density to
evaluate the performance. Results demonstrate the superior

