PAPRIKA: Private Online False Discovery Rate Control

Wanrong Zhang 1 Gautam Kamath * 2 Rachel Cummings * 3

Abstract
In hypothesis testing, a false discovery occurs
when a hypothesis is incorrectly rejected due to
noise in the sample. When adaptively testing multiple hypotheses, the probability of a false discovery increases as more tests are performed. Thus
the problem of False Discovery Rate (FDR) control is to find a procedure for testing multiple
hypotheses that accounts for this effect in determining the set of hypotheses to reject. The goal
is to minimize the number (or fraction) of false
discoveries, while maintaining a high true positive rate (i.e., correct discoveries). In this work,
we study False Discovery Rate (FDR) control in
multiple hypothesis testing under the constraint of
differential privacy for the sample. Unlike previous work in this direction, we focus on the online
setting, meaning that a decision about each hypothesis must be made immediately after the test
is performed, rather than waiting for the output
of all tests as in the offline setting. We provide
new private algorithms based on state-of-the-art
results in non-private online FDR control. Our
algorithms have strong provable guarantees for
privacy and statistical performance as measured
by FDR and power. We also provide experimental
results to demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms in a variety of data environments.

1. Introduction
In the modern era of big data, data analyses play an important role in decision-making in healthcare, information technology, and government agencies. The growing availability
*

Equal contribution as last author. 1 H. Milton Stewart School
of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 2 Cheriton School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 3 Department of
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Wanrong Zhang
<wanrongz@gatech.edu>, Gautam Kamath <g@csail.mit.edu>,
Rachel Cummings <rac2239@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of large-scale datasets and ease of data analysis, while beneficial to society, has created a severe crisis of reproducibility
in science. In 2011, Bayer HealthCare reviewed 67 in-house
projects and found that they could replicate fewer than 25
percent, and found that over two-thirds of the projects had
major inconsistencies (National Academies, 2019). One
major reason is that random noise in the data can often be
mistaken for interesting signals, which does not lead to valid
and reproducible results. This problem is particularly relevant when testing multiple hypotheses, when there is an
increased chance of false discoveries based on noise in the
data. For example, an analyst may conduct 250 hypothesis
tests and find that 11 are significant at the 5% level. This
may be exciting to the researcher who publishes a paper
based on these findings, but elementary statistics suggests
that (in expectation) 12.5 of those tests should be significant
at that level purely by chance, even if the null hypotheses
were all true. To avoid such problems, statisticians have
developed tools for controlling overall error rates when performing multiple hypothesis tests.
In hypothesis testing, the null hypothesis of no interesting
scientific discovery (e.g., a drug has no effect), is tested
against the alternative hypothesis of a particular scientific
theory being true (e.g., a drug has a particular effect). The
significance of each test is measured by a p-value, which is
the probability of the observed data occurring under the null
hypothesis, and a hypothesis is rejected if the corresponding p-value is below some (fixed) significance level. Each
rejection is called a discovery, and a rejected hypothesis is a
false discovery if the null hypothesis is actually true. When
testing multiple hypotheses, the probability of a false discovery increases as more tests are performed. The problem
of false discovery rate (FDR) control is to find a procedure
for testing multiple hypotheses that takes in the p-values
of each test, and outputs a set of hypotheses to reject. The
goal is to minimize the number of false discoveries, while
maintaining high true positive rate (i.e., true discoveries).
In many applications, the dataset may contain sensitive personal information, and the analysis must be conducted in a
privacy-preserving way. For example, in genome-wide association studies (GWAS), a large number of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) are tested for an association with a
disease simultaneously or adaptively. Prior work has shown
that the statistical analysis of these datasets can lead to

