Rethinking Rotated Object Detection with Gaussian Wasserstein Distance Loss

Xue Yang 1 2 3 Junchi Yan 1 2 Qi Ming 4 Wentao Wang 1 Xiaopeng Zhang 3 Qi Tian 3

Abstract
Boundary discontinuity and its inconsistency to
the final detection metric have been the bottleneck for rotating detection regression loss design.
In this paper, we propose a novel regression loss
based on Gaussian Wasserstein distance as a fundamental approach to solve the problem. Specifically, the rotated bounding box is converted to
a 2-D Gaussian distribution, which enables to
approximate the indifferentiable rotational IoU
induced loss by the Gaussian Wasserstein distance (GWD) which can be learned efficiently
by gradient back-propagation. GWD can still be
informative for learning even there is no overlapping between two rotating bounding boxes
which is often the case for small object detection. Thanks to its three unique properties, GWD
can also elegantly solve the boundary discontinuity and square-like problem regardless how the
bounding box is defined. Experiments on five
datasets using different detectors show the effectiveness of our approach, and codes are available
at https://github.com/yangxue0827/
RotationDetection.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary-oriented objects are ubiquitous for detection
across visual datasets, such as aerial images (Yang et al.,
2018a; Jiao et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018b; 2019), scene
text (Zhou et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2017;
Ma et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2018b), faces (Shi et al., 2018)
and 3D objects (Zheng et al., 2020a), retail scenes (Chen
et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020), etc. Compared with the large
literature on horizontal object detection (Girshick, 2015;
Ren et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2017a;b), re1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University 2 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Huawei Inc. 4 School
of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Junchi Yan <yangjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>, Xue Yang <yangxue2019-sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison of the detection results between Smooth L1
loss-based (left) and the proposed GWD-based (right) detector.

search in oriented object detection is relatively in its earlier
stage, with many open problems to solve.
The dominant line of works (Azimi et al., 2018; Ding et al.,
2019; Yang et al., 2019; 2021b) take a regression methodology to predict the rotation angle, which has achieved
state-of-the-art performance. However, compared with traditional horizontal detectors, the angle regression model
will bring new issues, as summarized as follows: i) the
inconsistency between metric and loss, ii) boundary discontinuity, and iii) square-like problem. In fact, these issues
remain open without a unified solution, and they can largely
hurt the final performance especially at the boundary position, as shown in the left of Fig. 1. In this paper, we
use a two-dimensional Gaussian distribution to model an
arbitrary-oriented bounding box for object detection, and
approximate the indifferentiable rotational Intersection over
Union (IoU) induced loss between two boxes by calculating
their Gaussian Wasserstein Distance (GWD) (Chafaı̈, 2010).
GWD elegantly aligns model learning with the final detection accuracy metric, which has been a bottleneck and not
achieved in existing rotation detectors. Our GWD based
detectors are immune from both boundary discontinuity and
square-like problem, and this immunity is independent with
how the bounding box protocol is defined, as shown on the
right of Fig. 1. The highlights of this paper are four-folds:
i) We summarize three flaws in state-of-the-art rotation detectors, i.e. inconsistency between metric and loss, boundary
discontinuity, and square-like problem, due to their regression based angle prediction nature.
ii) We propose to model the rotating bounding box distance
by Gaussian Wasserstein Distance (GWD) which leads to
an approximate and differentiable IoU induced loss. It resolves the loss inconsistency by aligning model learning

