Variational Empowerment as Representation Learning
for Goal-Based Reinforcement Learning

Jongwook Choi † 1 Archit Sharma † 2 Honglak Lee 1 3 Sergey Levine 4 5 Shixiang Shane Gu 4

Abstract
Learning to reach goal states and learning diverse
skills through mutual information (MI) maximization have been proposed as principled frameworks
for self-supervised reinforcement learning, allowing agents to acquire broadly applicable multitask policies with minimal reward engineering.
Starting from a simple observation that the standard goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) is encapsulated by the optimization objective of variational
empowerment, we discuss how GCRL and MIbased RL can be generalized into a single family
of methods, which we name variational GCRL
(VGCRL), interpreting variational MI maximization, or variational empowerment, as representation learning methods that acquire functionallyaware state representations for goal reaching. This
novel perspective allows us to: (1) derive simple
but unexplored variants of GCRL to study how
adding small representation capacity can already
expand its capabilities; (2) investigate how discriminator function capacity and smoothness determine the quality of discovered skills, or latent
goals, through modifying latent dimensionality
and applying spectral normalization; (3) adapt
techniques such as hindsight experience replay
(HER) from GCRL to MI-based RL; and lastly,
(4) propose a novel evaluation metric, named latent goal reaching (LGR), for comparing empowerment algorithms with different choices of latent
dimensionality and discriminator parameterization. Through principled mathematical derivations and careful experimental studies, our work
lays a novel foundation from which to evaluate,
analyze, and develop representation learning techniques in goal-based RL.
†

Work done while an intern at Google.
University of Michigan 2 Stanford University 3 LG AI Research
4
Google Research 5 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Jongwook Choi <jwook@umich.edu>, Shixiang Shane
Gu <shanegu@google.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a general framework
for discovering optimal behaviors for sequential decisionmaking. Combined with powerful function approximators
like neural networks, RL can be used to learn to play computer games from raw pixels (Mnih et al., 2013) and acquire
complex sensorimotor skills with real-world robots (Gu
et al., 2017a; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al.,
2018). Neural networks show best performance, generalization, and reusability when they are trained on large
and diverse datasets (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Devlin et al.,
2018). However, a critical limitation in RL is that human
experts often need to spend considerable efforts designing
and fine-tuning reward functions per task, making it hard
to scale and define a huge set of tasks in advance. If we
have agents that can interact with the world without rewards,
build up a body of knowledge autonomously, and utilize
this knowledge to accomplish new tasks efficiently, then
we can greatly scale up task and skill learning to achieve
similar level of generalization and performance for RL as
what neural networks have enabled for other domains.
Several works have tried to find a single generalizable taskagnostic reward function which can potentially be used
across several environments. The use of such intrinsic reward functions has been motivated as exploration heuristics
such as curiosity and novelty (Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer
& Kaplan, 2009; Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017),
as optimizing mutual information (MI) (Gregor et al., 2017;
Eysenbach et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020b;a) or as empowerment (Klyubin et al., 2005; Jung et al., 2011; Mohamed &
Rezende, 2015). Classically, goal-conditioned RL (GCRL)
has shown success in learning diverse and useful skills in
concurrence to MI-based methods. GCRL optimizes a stationary and interpretable reward for goal-reaching, but when
the goal space is high-dimensional, how does the agent
know which part of the space is relevant and which part can
be ignored? In such cases, prior GCRL works frequently
rely on manual definition (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) or
off-the-shelf representation learning (Nachum et al., 2018;
Nair et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018) optimized prior to or
separately from reinforcement learning. Meanwhile, MI or
empowerment-based RL offers a clear objective for representation learning through reinforcement learning, but the

