Global Optimality Beyond Two Layers: Training Deep ReLU Networks via
Convex Programs

Tolga Ergen 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
Understanding the fundamental mechanism behind the success of deep neural networks is one
of the key challenges in the modern machine
learning literature. Despite numerous attempts, a
solid theoretical analysis is yet to be developed.
In this paper, we develop a novel unified framework to reveal a hidden regularization mechanism through the lens of convex optimization.
We first show that the training of multiple threelayer ReLU sub-networks with weight decay regularization can be equivalently cast as a convex
optimization problem in a higher dimensional
space, where sparsity is enforced via a group `1 norm regularization. Consequently, ReLU networks can be interpreted as high dimensional feature selection methods. More importantly, we
then prove that the equivalent convex problem
can be globally optimized by a standard convex
optimization solver with a polynomial-time complexity with respect to the number of samples
and data dimension when the width of the network is fixed. Finally, we numerically validate
our theoretical results via experiments involving
both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been extensively studied in machine learning, natural language processing, computer vision, and many other fields. Even though deep neural networks have provided dramatic improvements over conventional learning algorithms (Goodfellow et al., 2016), fundamental mathematical mechanisms behind this success remain elusive. To this end, in this paper, we investigate the
implicit mechanisms behind deep neural networks by leveraging tools available in convex optimization theory.
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Tolga Ergen <ergen@stanford.edu>, Mert Pilanci <pilanci@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Output

Input

Figure 1: An architecture with three sub-networks, i.e.,
K = 3, where each is a three-layer ReLU network.

1.1. Related Work
The problem of learning the parameters of a deep neural
network is the subject of many studies due to its highly
non-convex and nonlinear nature. Despite their complex
structure, deep networks are usually trained by simple local search algorithms such as Gradient Descent (GD) to
achieve a globally optimal set of parameters (Brutzkus
& Globerson, 2017). However, it has been shown that
these algorithms might also converge a local minimum in
pathological cases (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017; Goodfellow et al., 2016; Ergen & Pilanci, 2019). In addition to
this, (Ge et al., 2017; Safran & Shamir, 2018) proved that
Stochastic GD (SGD) is likely to get stuck at a local minimum when the number of parameters is small. Furthermore, (Anandkumar & Ge, 2016) reported that complicated
saddle points do exist in the optimization landscape of deep
networks. Since such points might be hard to escape for
local search algorithms, training deep neural networks is
a computationally challenging optimization problem (DasGupta et al., 1995; Blum & Rivest, 1989; Bartlett & BenDavid, 1999).

