TFix: Learning to Fix Coding Errors with a Text-to-Text Transformer

Berkay Berabi 1 2 Jingxuan He 1 Veselin Raychev 1 2 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
The problem of ﬁxing errors in programs has attracted substantial interest over the years. The
key challenge for building an effective code ﬁxing tool is to capture a wide range of errors and
meanwhile maintain high accuracy. In this paper, we address this challenge and present a new
learning-based system, called TFix. TFix works
directly on program text and phrases the problem of code ﬁxing as a text-to-text task. In turn,
this enables it to leverage a powerful Transformer
based model pre-trained on natural language and
ﬁne-tuned to generate code ﬁxes (via a large, highquality dataset obtained from GitHub commits).
TFix is not speciﬁc to a particular programming
language or class of defects and, in fact, improved
its precision by simultaneously ﬁne-tuning on 52
different error types reported by a popular static
analyzer. Our evaluation on a massive dataset of
JavaScript programs shows that TFix is practically
effective: it is able to synthesize code that ﬁxes
the error in ∼67 percent of cases and signiﬁcantly
outperforms existing learning-based approaches.

1. Introduction
The high complexity and large size of modern code repositories have led to a substantial amount of coding errors, a
serious obstacle to programmer productivity. While powerful static analysis tools can detect errors, a signiﬁcant
amount of manual effort is still exerted on examining the
reports and trying to ﬁx these errors correctly. This situation indicates that a tool capable of automatically ﬁxing
real-world coding errors would be highly desirable.

such as variable misuses (Allamanis et al., 2018) and integer
type errors (Coker & Haﬁz, 2013), have varying root causes.
To correctly ﬁx these, it is necessary that the tool is able
to capture a range of different program behaviors. Indeed,
existing learning-based models either only ﬁx speciﬁc kinds
of errors (Vasic et al., 2019; Hellendoorn et al., 2020; Pradel
& Sen, 2018; Cornu et al., 2015) or become very inaccurate
(e.g., 25% accuracy) when extended to handling a more
diverse, but still limited, set of errors (Dinella et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2019; Lutellier et al., 2020).

This work: TFix To address this challenge, we present
a new learning-based tool, called TFix1 , that can accurately synthesize ﬁxes to a wide range of errors covered
by ESLint (esl, 2021), the most popular static analyzer for
JavaScript. TFix formulates the problem of ﬁxing coding
errors as a text-to-text prediction task. That is, given a coding error as text, TFix predicts a new text representing the
code that ﬁxes the error. Such a formulation beneﬁts TFix
in three ways: (a) it allows TFix to capture various error
types in the same text format, (b) frees TFix from the burden of creating a complicated code representation such as
graphs (Allamanis et al., 2018; Dinella et al., 2020), and
most importantly, (c) enables TFix to utilize a powerful
model called Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) (Raffel et al., 2020). T5 has been demonstrated to generalize
across various natural language problems in the text-to-text
format and is thus well-suited for our task.

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 Snyk, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Berkay
Berabi <berkay.berabi@gmail.com>, Jingxuan He <jingxuan.he@inf.ethz.ch>.

Leveraging new types of knowledge transfer TFix exploits
two kinds of knowledge transfer that are not commonly
adopted. First, our T5 model is pre-trained on natural language and then ﬁne-tuned on the programming task of code
ﬁxing. This enables knowledge transfer between natural
and programming languages (Feng et al., 2020). Further,
unlike prior works that train models for each individual
error type (Pradel & Sen, 2018; Bader et al., 2019), we
ﬁne-tune various error types together (Dinella et al., 2020;
Tarlow et al., 2020; Yasunaga & Liang, 2020), which enables knowledge transfer between error types and can be
seen as a form of multi-task learning (ﬁxing each error type
is an individual task). These two features are key factors for

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1
The code, trained model, and dataset can be found at
https://github.com/eth-sri/TFix.

An ideal tool should cover a wide range of errors to beneﬁt
most developers and come with high ﬁx accuracy. However,
this is difﬁcult to achieve as different types of coding errors,
1

