Generative Video Transformer: Can Objects be the Words?

Yi-Fu Wu 1 Jaesik Yoon 1 2 Sungjin Ahn 1 3

Abstract
Transformers have been successful for many natural language processing tasks. However, applying
transformers to the video domain for tasks such
as long-term video generation and scene understanding has remained elusive due to the high
computational complexity and the lack of natural
tokenization. In this paper, we propose the ObjectCentric Video Transformer (OCVT) which utilizes an object-centric approach for decomposing
scenes into tokens suitable for use in a generative
video transformer. By factoring the video into
objects, our fully unsupervised model is able to
learn complex spatio-temporal dynamics of multiple interacting objects in a scene and generate
future frames of the video. Our model is also
significantly more memory-efficient than pixelbased models and thus able to train on videos
of length up to 70 frames with a single 48GB
GPU. We compare our model with previous RNNbased approaches as well as other possible video
transformer baselines. We demonstrate OCVT
performs well when compared to baselines in generating future frames. OCVT also develops useful representations for video reasoning, achieving
start-of-the-art performance on the CATER task.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) have
shown that models trained with an autoregressive language
modeling objective using large transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) can learn to generate realistic text passages (Radford, 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Furthermore, the representations learned with these generative
pre-trained (GPT) models are effective at downstream tasks
such as question answering, machine translation, reading
comprehension, and summarization. While it is of primary
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 2 SAP
Labs 3 Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science.
Correspondence to: Yi-Fu Wu <yifu.wu@gmail.com>, Sungjin Ahn
<sjn.ahn@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

interest to develop an analogous generative pre-training procedure for videos, the computational overhead in dealing
with videos has made this a difficult endeavor.
The main challenges in developing video transformers are
(1) how to tokenize a video and (2) how to serialize the
tokens because unlike text the ordered symbolic structure is
not naturally given in videos. Several previous attempts for
images (Chen et al., 2020; Parmar et al., 2018) and videos
(Weissenborn et al., 2020) operate at the pixel level, flattening out an image into a sequence of pixels. However, since
the memory and computation of the self-attention layers
used in transformers are quadratic in the input sequence
length, in order to train these models efficiently, these works
either lower the resolution of the image or use local attention
instead of global attention across the entire image or video.
In this paper, we investigate a potentially different approach
to tackling this quadratic cost. We leverage the inductive
bias that our world is made of objects and working at an
object-level granularity can be beneficial for many downstream tasks, especially in scenes where the objects interact with each other. To this end, we investigate different
design choices for tokenizing and serializing a video and
propose the Object-Centric Video Transformer (OCVT).
In OCVT, we combine object-centric representations with
a transformer trained using an autoregressive object-level
next-frame prediction objective. Our model leverages a
class of object-centric latent representations (Eslami et al.,
2016; Crawford & Pineau, 2019b; Lin et al., 2020b;a) which
can learn structured representations without object-level labeling. The learned object representation includes explicit
location and size information about the objects in each video
frame. We use this to find a bipartite matching of objects between frames, allowing us to construct the object-wise loss
function. The use of an object-centric transformer allows
OCVT to learn spatial and long-term temporal interactions
between objects in a video.
We evaluate OCVT in a number of environments constructed to demonstrate the strengths and limitations of
the model. Given a number of initial ground-truth video
frames, OCVT is able to generate future predictions of a
video, even in scenarios where the dynamics of the objects
in the video depend on interactions made many frames in
the past. Lastly, the representations OCVT learns are also

