Conservative Objective Models for Effective Offline Model-Based Optimization

Brandon Trabucco 1 Aviral Kumar 1 Xinyang Geng 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to solve data-driven modelbased optimization (MBO) problems, where the
goal is to find a design input that maximizes an unknown objective function provided access to only
a static dataset of inputs and their corresponding
objective values. Such data-driven optimization
procedures are the only practical methods in many
real-world domains where active data collection
is expensive (e.g., when optimizing over proteins)
or dangerous (e.g., when optimizing over aircraft
designs, actively evaluating malformed aircraft
designs is unsafe). Typical methods for MBO
that optimize the input against a learned model
of the unknown score function are affected by
erroneous overestimation in the learned model
caused due to distributional shift, that drives the
optimizer to low-scoring or invalid inputs. To
overcome this, we propose conservative objective
models (COMs), a method that learns a model
of the objective function which lower bounds the
actual value of the ground-truth objective on outof-distribution inputs and uses it for optimization.
In practice, COMs outperform a number existing
methods on a wide range of MBO problems, including optimizing controller parameters, robot
morphologies, and superconducting materials.

1. Introduction
Black-box model-based optimization (MBO) problems
are ubiquitous in a wide range of domains, such as protein (Brookes et al., 2019) or molecule design (Gaulton
et al., 2012), designing controllers (Berkenkamp et al., 2016)
or robot morphologies (Liao et al., 2019), optimizing neural network designs (Zoph & Le, 2017) and aircraft design (Hoburg & Abbeel, 2012). Existing methods to solve
such model-based optimization problems typically learn a
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California Berkeley.. Correspondence to: Brandon Trabucco <btrabucco@berkeley.edu>, Aviral Kumar <aviralk@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

|| y - ylabel ||2

y

y

Loss
Learned
Model

x

x
Supervised
Regression

x

Designs

Adversarial Example
Generation

Figure 1. Overview of COMs. Our method trains a model of
the objective function by training a neural net with supervised
regression on the training data augmented two additional loss terms
to obtian conservative predictions. These additional terms aim to
maximize the predictions of the neural net model on the training
data, and minimize the predictions on adversarially generated
designs. This principle prevents the optimizer from producing bad
designs with erroneously high values at unseen and poor designs.

proxy function to represent the unknown objective landscape based on the data and optimize the design against this
learned objective function. In order to prevent errors in the
learned proxy function from affecting optimization, these
methods often critically rely on a tight interaction loop between optimization and active data collection (Snoek et al.,
2012). Active data collection can be expensive or even
dangerous: evaluating a real design might involve a complex real-world procedure such as synthesizing candidate
protein structures for protein optimization or building the
robot for robot design optimization. While these problems
can potentially be solved via computer simulation, a high
fidelity simulator often requires considerable effort from
experts across multiple domains to build, making it impractical for most problems. Therefore, a favorable alternative
approach for a broad range of MBO problems is to develop
data-driven methods that can obtain optimized designs by
training highly generalizable and expressive deep neural
network models on previously collected datasets of inputs
(x) and their corresponding objective values (y), without
access to the true function or any form of active data collection (Kumar & Levine, 2019). Moreover, in a number of
these practical domains, such as protein (Sarkisyan et al.,
2016) or molecule design (Gaulton et al., 2012), plenty of
prior data already exists and can be utilized for completely
offline model-based optimization.

