Discrete-Valued Latent Preference Matrix Estimation
with Graph Side Information

Changhun Jo 1 Kangwook Lee 2

Abstract
Incorporating graph side information into recommender systems has been widely used to better
predict ratings, but relatively few works have focused on theoretical guarantees. Ahn et al. (2018)
firstly characterized the optimal sample complexity in the presence of graph side information, but
the results are limited due to strict, unrealistic assumptions made on the unknown latent preference
matrix and the structure of user clusters. In this
work, we propose a new model in which 1) the
unknown latent preference matrix can have any
discrete values, and 2) users can be clustered into
multiple clusters, thereby relaxing the assumptions made in prior work. Under this new model,
we fully characterize the optimal sample complexity and develop a computationally-efficient
algorithm that matches the optimal sample complexity. Our algorithm is robust to model errors
and outperforms the existing algorithms in terms
of prediction performance on both synthetic and
real data.

1. Introduction
Recommender systems provide suggestions for items based
on users’ decisions such as ratings given to those items.
Collaborative filtering is a popular approach to designing
recommender systems (Herlocker et al., 1999; Sarwar et al.,
2001; Linden et al., 2003; Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Salakhutdinov & Mnih, 2007; 2008; Agarwal & Chen, 2010; Davenport et al., 2014). However, collaborative filtering suffers
from the well-known cold start problem since it relies only
on past interactions between users and items. With the exponential growth of social media, recommender systems
1
Department of Mathematics, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Changhun Jo
<cjo4@wisc.edu>, Kangwook Lee <kangwook.lee@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

have started to use a social graph to resolve the cold start
problem. For instance, Jamali & Ester (2010) provide an
algorithm that handles the cold start problem by exploiting
social graph information.
While a lot of works have improved the performance of
algorithms by incorporating graph side information into recommender systems (Jamali & Ester, 2009a;b; 2010; Cai
et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012; 2013b; Kalofolias et al., 2014), relatively few works have focused on
justifying theoretical guarantees of the performance (Chiang et al., 2015; Rao et al., 2015; Ahn et al., 2018). One
notable exception is the recent work of Ahn et al. (2018),
which finds the minimum number of observed ratings for
reliable recovery of the latent preference matrix with social graph information and partial observation of the rating
matrix. They also provide an efficient algorithm with low
computational complexity. However, the assumptions made
in this work are too strong to reflect the real-world data. In
specific, they assume that each user rates each item either
+1 (like) or −1 (dislike), and that the observations are noisy
so that they can be flipped with probability θ ∈ (0, 21 ). This
assumption can be interpreted as each user rates each item
+1 with probability 1 − θ or θ. Note that this parametric
model is very limited, so the discrepancy between the model
and the real world occurs; if a user likes item a, b and c
with probability 1/4, 1/3 and 3/4 respectively, then the model
cannot represent this case well (see Rmk. 3 for a detailed
description).
This motivates us to propose a general model that better represents real data. Specifically, we assume that user i likes
item j with probability Rij , which we call user i’s latent
preference level on item j, and Rij belongs to the discrete
set {p1 , . . . , pd } where d ≥ 1 and 0 < p1 < · · · < pd < 1.
As d can be any positive integer, our generalized model
can reflect various preference levels on different items. In
addition to that, we assume that the social graph information follows the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) (Holland
et al., 1983), and the social graph is correlated with the
latent preference matrix R in a specific way, which we will
detail in Sec. 3. Under this highly generalized model, we
fully characterize the optimal sample complexity required
for estimating the latent preference matrix R. To the best of

