Latent Space Energy-Based Model of Symbol-Vector Coupling for Text
Generation and Classification
Bo Pang 1 Ying Nian Wu 1

Abstract
We propose a latent space energy-based prior
model for text generation and classification. The
model stands on a generator network that generates the text sequence based on a continuous
latent vector. The energy term of the prior model
couples a continuous latent vector and a symbolic
one-hot vector, so that discrete category can be
inferred from the observed example based on the
continuous latent vector. Such a latent space coupling naturally enables incorporation of information bottleneck regularization to encourage the
continuous latent vector to extract information
from the observed example that is informative of
the underlying category. In our learning method,
the symbol-vector coupling, the generator network and the inference network are learned jointly.
Our model can be learned in an unsupervised setting where no category labels are provided. It can
also be learned in semi-supervised setting where
category labels are provided for a subset of training examples. Our experiments demonstrate that
the proposed model learns well-structured and
meaningful latent space, which (1) guides the generator to generate text with high quality, diversity,
and interpretability, and (2) effectively classifies
text.

1. Introduction
Generative models for text generation is of vital importance
in a wide range of real world applications such as dialog
system (Young et al., 2013) and machine translation (Brown
et al., 1993). Impressive progress has been achieved with
the development of neural generative models (Serban et al.,
2016; Zhao et al., 2017; 2018b; Zhang et al., 2016; Li et al.,
2017a; Gupta et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018a) . However,
1
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los
Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Pang
<bopang@ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

most of prior methods focus on the improvement of text
generation quality such as fluency and diversity. Besides
the quality, the interpretability or controllability of text generation process is also critical for real world applications.
Several recent papers recruit deep latent variable models
for interpretable text generation where the latent space is
learned to capture interpretable structures such as topics and
dialog actions which are then used to guide text generation
(Wang et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2018b).
Deep latent variable models map a latent vector to the observed example such as a piece of text. Earlier methods
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Bowman
et al., 2016) utilize a continuous latent space. Although it
is able to generate text of high quality, it is not suitable for
modeling interpretable discrete attributes such as topics and
dialog actions. A recent paper (Zhao et al., 2018b) proposes
to use a discrete latent space in order to capture dialog actions and has shown promising interpretability of dialog
utterance generation. A discrete latent space nevertheless
encodes limited information and thus might limit the expressiveness of the generative model. To address this issue, Shi
et al. (2020) proposes to use Gaussian mixture VAE (variational auto-encoder) which has a latent space with both
continuous and discrete latent variables. By including a dispersion term to avoid the modes of the Gaussian mixture to
collapse into a single mode, the model produces promising
results on interpretable generation of dialog utterances.
To improve the expressivity of the latent space and the generative model as a whole, Pang et al. (2020a) recently proposes
to learn an energy-based model (EBM) in the latent space,
where the EBM serves as a prior model for the latent vector.
Both the EBM prior and the generator network are learned
jointly by maximum likelihood or its approximate variants.
The latent space EBM has been applied to text modeling,
image modeling, and molecule generation, and significantly
improves over VAEs with Gaussian prior, mixture prior
and other flexible priors. Aneja et al. (2020) generalizes
this model to a multi-layer latent variable model with a
large-scale generator network and achieves state-of-the-art
generation performance on images.
Moving EBM from data space to latent space allows the
EBM to stand on an already expressive generator model,

