Offline Contextual Bandits with Overparameterized Models

David Brandfonbrener 1 William F. Whitney 1 Rajesh Ranganath 1 Joan Bruna 1

Abstract
Recent results in supervised learning suggest that
while overparameterized models have the capacity to overfit, they in fact generalize quite well.
We ask whether the same phenomenon occurs for
offline contextual bandits. Our results are mixed.
Value-based algorithms benefit from the same generalization behavior as overparameterized supervised learning, but policy-based algorithms do
not. We show that this discrepancy is due to
the action-stability of their objectives. An objective is action-stable if there exists a prediction
(action-value vector or action distribution) which
is optimal no matter which action is observed.
While value-based objectives are action-stable,
policy-based objectives are unstable. We formally
prove upper bounds on the regret of overparameterized value-based learning and lower bounds
on the regret for policy-based algorithms. In our
experiments with large neural networks, this gap
between action-stable value-based objectives and
unstable policy-based objectives leads to significant performance differences.

1. Introduction
The offline contextual bandit problem can be used to model
decision making from logged data in domains as diverse as
recommender systems (Li et al., 2010; Bottou et al., 2013),
healthcare (Prasad et al., 2017; Raghu et al., 2017), and
robotics (Pinto & Gupta, 2016). Prior work on the problem
has primarily focused on underparameterized models with
finite and small VC dimensions. This work has come from
the bandit literature (Strehl et al., 2010; Swaminathan &
Joachims, 2015a;b), the reinforcement learning literature
(Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Chen & Jiang, 2019), and the
causal inference literature (Bottou et al., 2013; Athey &
Wager, 2017; Kallus, 2018; Zhou et al., 2018).
1
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: David
Brandfonbrener <david.brandfonbrener@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

In contrast, the best performance in modern supervised
learning is often achieved by massively overparameterized
models that are capable of fitting random labels (Zhang
et al., 2016). Use of such large models renders vacuous the
bounds that require a small model class. But, the massive
capacity of popular neural network models is now often
viewed as a feature rather than a bug. Large models reduce
approximation error and allow for easier optimization (Du
et al., 2018) while still being able to generalize in regression
and classification problems (Belkin et al., 2018; 2019). In
this paper, we investigate whether the strong performance of
overparameterized models in supervised learning translates
to the offline contextual bandit setting. The main prior work
that considers this setup is (Joachims et al., 2018), which
we discuss in detail in Section 7.
To formalize the differences between the supervised learning
and contextual bandit settings, we introduce a novel regret
decomposition. This decomposition shares the approximation and estimation terms from classic work in supervised
learning (Vapnik, 1982; Bottou & Bousquet, 2008), but adds
a term for “bandit” error which captures the excess risk due
to only receiving partial feedback.
We use this framework to address the question: can we
use overparameterized models for offline contextual bandits? Or is the bandit error a fundamental problem when
we use large models? We find mixed results. Value-based
algorithms benefit from the same generalization behavior
as overparameterized supervised learning, but policy-based
algorithms do not. We show that this difference is explained
by a property of their objectives called action-stability. An
objective is action-stable if there exists a single prediction
which is simultaneously optimal for any observed action
(where a “prediction” is a vector of state-action values for a
value-based objective or an action distribution for a policybased objective). Action-stable objectives perform well
when combined with overparameterized models since the
random actions taken by the behavior policy do not change
the optimal prediction. However, interpolating an unstable
objective results in learning a different function for every
sample of actions, even though the true optimal policy remains unchanged.
On the theory side, we prove that overparameterized valuebased algorithms are action stable and have small bandit

