Understanding Failures in Out-of-Distribution Detection with
Deep Generative Models

Lily H. Zhang 1 Mark Goldstein 1 Rajesh Ranganath 1

Abstract
Deep generative models (DGMs) seem a natural fit for detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, but such models have been shown to assign
higher probabilities or densities to OOD images
than images from the training distribution. In
this work, we explain why this behavior should
be attributed to model misestimation. We first
prove that no method can guarantee performance
beyond random chance without assumptions on
which out-distributions are relevant. We then interrogate the typical set hypothesis, the claim that
relevant out-distributions can lie in high likelihood regions of the data distribution, and that
OOD detection should be defined based on the
data distribution’s typical set. We highlight the
consequences implied by assuming support overlap between in- and out-distributions, as well as
the arbitrariness of the typical set for OOD detection. Our results suggest that estimation error is a
more plausible explanation than the misalignment
between likelihood-based OOD detection and outdistributions of interest, and we illustrate how
even minimal estimation error can lead to OOD
detection failures, yielding implications for future work in deep generative modeling and OOD
detection.

1. Introduction
Predictive models have little guarantee in performance on
inputs that differ from the training distribution. Thus, detecting such out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs is an important
step towards safe and reliable machine learning (Amodei
et al., 2016). O OD detection has been formalized as the task
of identifying points with low likelihood1 under the training
1

New York University. Correspondence to: Lily H. Zhang
<lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
As is common in the literature, we will use “likelihood” to
refer to the probability or density of a sample under a distribution,

distribution, estimated via a model (Bishop, 1994).
Deep generative models (DGMs) estimate complex distributions from often high-dimensional inputs and produce
high-quality simulations (Salimans et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018). However, explicit likelihood DGMs (e.g. autoregressive models, normalizing flows)
have been shown to assign higher likelihood to unrelated
inputs than even those from the training distribution. For instance, a model trained on Fashion-MNIST, an image dataset
of clothing items, assigns higher likelihoods to MNIST images. The same is true for the training distribution (or
in-distribution) CIFAR -10, a dataset of animals and vehicles, and the OOD distribution (or out-distribution) SVHN,
a dataset of house numbers. For such dataset pairs, OOD
detection based on explicit likelihood DGMs performs worse
than random chance (Nalisnick et al., 2019a; Hendrycks
et al., 2019).
This observation has motivated many alternative methods
for OOD detection which employ the same DGMs but modify how they are used (Ren et al., 2019; Serrà et al., 2020;
Schirrmeister et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2018; Nalisnick et al.,
2019b; Wang et al., 2020; Morningstar et al., 2021). While
these methods have been successful in empirical benchmarks, we prove that all methods are powerless against
some set of out-distributions (Section 2.2). This result applies to any detection method, regardless of whether DGMs
are involved, and highlights the need to specify the outdistributions of interest for the task.
Some works have suggested that the failure of deep generative models to assign low likelihood to OOD points is not a
model failure; rather, out-distributions of interest can lie in
high likelihood regions of the data distribution. (To explain
why points with high likelihood are never observed among
samples from the data distribution, these works mention
that points assigned high density or probability under the
training distribution may lie within regions of small overall
probability.) A method that identifies low likelihood points
as OOD will fail to detect such out-distributions, so existing
works suggest instead to flag as OOD any point which falls
even though the statistical definition of the term refers to a function
of the parameters given fixed data.

