Differentially Private Sliced Wasserstein Distance

Alain Rakotomamonjy 1 2 Liva Ralaivola 1

Abstract
Developing machine learning methods that are
privacy preserving is today a central topic of
research, with huge practical impacts. Among
the numerous ways to address privacy-preserving
learning, we here take the perspective of computing the divergences between distributions under the Differential Privacy (DP) framework —
being able to compute divergences between distributions is pivotal for many machine learning
problems, such as learning generative models
or domain adaptation problems. Instead of resorting to the popular gradient-based sanitization
method for DP, we tackle the problem at its roots
by focusing on the Sliced Wasserstein Distance
and seamlessly making it differentially private.
Our main contribution is as follows: we analyze the property of adding a Gaussian perturbation to the intrinsic randomized mechanism of
the Sliced Wasserstein Distance, and we establish
the sensitivity of the resulting differentially private mechanism. One of our important findings
is that this DP mechanism transforms the Sliced
Wasserstein distance into another distance, that
we call the Smoothed Sliced Wasserstein Distance. This new differentially private distribution
distance can be plugged into generative models
and domain adaptation algorithms in a transparent way, and we empirically show that it yields
highly competitive performance compared with
gradient-based DP approaches from the literature, with almost no loss in accuracy for the domain adaptation problems that we consider.

tinous advances made in Machine Learning (ML). However, as ethical and regulatory concerns become prominent
in these areas, there is the need to devise privacy preserving
mechanisms allowing i) to prevent the access to individual
and critical data and ii) to still leave the door open to the
use of elaborate ML methods. Differential privacy (DP)
offers a sound privacy-preserving framework to tackle both
issues and effective DP mechanisms have been designed
for, e.g., logistic regression and Support Vector Machines
(Rubinstein et al., 2009; Chaudhuri et al., 2011).
Here, we address the problem of devising a differentially
private distribution distance with, in the hindsight, tasks
such as learning generative models and domain adaptation
—which both may rely on a relevant distribution distance
(Lee et al., 2019; Deshpande et al., 2018). In particular,
we propose and analyze a mechanism that transforms the
sliced Wasserstein distance (SWD) (Rabin et al., 2011) into
a differentially private distance while retaining the scalability advantages and metric properties of the base SWD. The
key ingredient to our contribution: to take advantage of the
combination of the embedded sampling process of SWD
and the so-called Gaussian mechanism.
Our contributions are as follows: i) we analyze the effect of
a Gaussian mechanism on the sliced Wasserstein distance
and we establish the DP-compliance of the resulting mechanism DP-SWD; ii) we show that DP-SWD boils down to
what we call Gaussian smoothed SWD, that inherits some
of the key properties of a distance, a novel result that has
value on its own; iii) extensive empirical analysis on domain adaptation and generative modeling tasks show that
the proposed DP-SWD is competitive, as we achieve DP
guarantees without almost no loss in accuracy in domain
adaptation, while being the first to present a DP generative
model on the 64 × 64 RGB CelebA dataset.

1. Introduction
Healthcare and computational advertising are examples of
domains that could find a tremendous benefit from the con1

Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 2 LITIS EA4108, Université de Rouen Normandie, Saint-Etienne du Rouvray, France.
Correspondence to: Alain Rakotomamonjy <alain.rakoto@insarouen.fr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Outline. Section 2 states the problem we are interested
in and provides background on differential privacy and the
sliced Wasserstein distance. In Section 3, we analyze the
DP guarantee of random direction projections and we characterize the resulting Gaussian Smoothed Sliced Wasserstein distance. Section 4 discusses how this distance can
be plugged into domain adaptation and generative model
algorithms. After discussing related works in Section 5,
Section 6 presents empirical results, showing our ability to

