Zero-Shot Text-to-Image Generation

Aditya Ramesh 1 Mikhail Pavlov 1 Gabriel Goh 1 Scott Gray 1
Chelsea Voss 1 Alec Radford 1 Mark Chen 1 Ilya Sutskever 1

Abstract
Text-to-image generation has traditionally focused on finding better modeling assumptions for
training on a fixed dataset. These assumptions
might involve complex architectures, auxiliary
losses, or side information such as object part labels or segmentation masks supplied during training. We describe a simple approach for this task
based on a transformer that autoregressively models the text and image tokens as a single stream of
data. With sufficient data and scale, our approach
is competitive with previous domain-specific models when evaluated in a zero-shot fashion.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning approaches to text to image synthesis started with the work of Mansimov et al. (2015),
who showed that the DRAW Gregor et al. (2015) generative
model, when extended to condition on image captions, could
also generate novel visual scenes. Reed et al. (2016b) later
demonstrated that using a generative adversarial network
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), rather than a recurrent variational
auto-encoder, improved image fidelity. Reed et al. (2016b)
showed that this system could not only generate objects with
recognizable properties, but also could zero-shot generalize
to held-out categories.
Over the next few years, progress continued using a combination of methods. These include improving the generative
model architecture with modifications like multi-scale generators (Zhang et al., 2017; 2018), integrating attention and
auxiliary losses (Xu et al., 2018), and leveraging additional
sources of conditioning information beyond just text (Reed
et al., 2016a; Li et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021).
Separately, Nguyen et al. (2017) propose an energy-based
framework for conditional image generation that obtained
a large improvement in sample quality relative to contem1

OpenAI, San Francisco, California, United States. Correspondence to: Aditya Ramesh <_@adityaramesh.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Online, PMLR 139, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the
author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison of original images (top) and reconstructions
from the discrete VAE (bottom). The encoder downsamples the
spatial resolution by a factor of 8. While details (e.g., the texture of
the cat’s fur, the writing on the storefront, and the thin lines in the
illustration) are sometimes lost or distorted, the main features of the
image are still typically recognizable. We use a large vocabulary
size of 8192 to mitigate the loss of information.

porary methods. Their approach can incorporate pretrained
discriminative models, and they show that it is capable of
performing text-to-image generation when applied to a captioning model pretrained on MS-COCO. More recently, Cho
et al. (2020) also propose a method that involves optimizing the input to a pretrained cross-modal masked language
model. While significant increases in visual fidelity have occurred as a result of the work since Mansimov et al. (2015),
samples can still suffer from severe artifacts such as object
distortion, illogical object placement, or unnatural blending
of foreground and background elements.
Recent advances fueled by large-scale generative models
suggest a possible route for further improvements. Specifically, when compute, model size, and data are scaled carefully, autoregressive transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
have achieved impressive results in several domains such as
text (Radford et al., 2019), images (Chen et al., 2020), and
audio (Dhariwal et al., 2020).
By comparison, text-to-image generation has typically been
evaluated on relatively small datasets such as MS-COCO
and CUB-200 (Welinder et al., 2010). Could dataset size and

