You Only Sample (Almost) Once: Linear Cost Self-Attention Via Bernoulli
Sampling

Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Yunyang Xiong 1 Sathya N. Ravi 2 Shailesh Acharya 3 Glenn Fung 3 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract
Transformer-based models are widely used in natural language processing (NLP). Central to the
transformer model is the self-attention mechanism, which captures the interactions of token
pairs in the input sequences and depends quadratically on the sequence length. Training such models on longer sequences is expensive. In this paper, we show that a Bernoulli sampling attention
mechanism based on Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH), decreases the quadratic complexity
of such models to linear. We bypass the quadratic
cost by considering self-attention as a sum of
individual tokens associated with Bernoulli random variables that can, in principle, be sampled
at once by a single hash (although in practice,
this number may be a small constant). This
leads to an efficient sampling scheme to estimate
self-attention which relies on specific modifications of LSH (to enable deployment on GPU architectures). We evaluate our algorithm on the
GLUE benchmark with standard 512 sequence
length where we see favorable performance relative to a standard pretrained Transformer. On
the Long Range Arena (LRA) benchmark, for
evaluating performance on long sequences, our
method achieves results consistent with softmax
self-attention but with sizable speed-ups and memory savings and often outperforms other efficient
self-attention methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/mlpen/YOSO.

1. Introduction
The Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) is incredibly
effective across natural language processing (NLP) applications including machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017),
1
University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA 2 University of Illinois, Chicago, USA 3 American Family Insurance, Madison, USA.
Correspondence to: Zhanpeng Zeng <zzeng38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

language inference (Devlin et al., 2019) and paraphrasing
(Raffel et al., 2020). Transformer-based models such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) are pretrained in an unsupervised manner and later finetuned on different downstream
tasks, often providing state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks. While such models have strong empirical
performance, their computational/memory requirements remain high. Consequently, in the NLP setting, many current
models have certain constraints on the sequence length, e.g.,
BERT and other transformer-based language models (Yang
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019) limit the sentence length to be at
most 512, although recent results have reported success with
longer sequences based on interesting efficiency-focused
strategies (Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020; Xiong
et al., 2021).
Multi-Head Self-Attention is central to Transformer based
models and provides a flexible global receptive field to
exchange information among input tokens. While selfattention provides various benefits, it is also a bottleneck
when training with long sequences. In particular, the output
of self-attention is a combination of all tokens where coefficients are determined by the similarities among tokens. This
is beneficial, but involves a sizable resource footprint. When
the sequence length is n, one incurs a O(n2 ) complexity
in both time and memory to compute pairwise similarities
among all input tokens. This quadratic cost restricts its use
in applications where capturing long term context dependencies is important, and has motivated many ongoing efforts
to mitigate the resource needs of such models.
Our work, also seeks to address the aforementioned issues,
and is inspired by ideas of importance sampling via hashingbased sampling strategies (Spring & Shrivastava, 2018;
Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017). We propose a Bernoulli
based sampling scheme to approximate self-attention, which
scales linearly with the input sequence length. We view
self-attention as a sum of individual tokens associated with
Bernoulli random variables whose success probability is
determined by the similarities among tokens. In principle,
we can sample all Bernoulli random variables at once with a
single hash. It turns out that the resultant strategy (You Only
Sample Almost Once, YOSO-Attention) is more amenable
to an efficient/backpropagation friendly implementation,

