What Makes for End-to-End Object Detection?

Peize Sun 1 Yi Jiang 2 Enze Xie 1 Wenqi Shao 3 Zehuan Yuan 2 Changhu Wang 2 Ping Luo 1

Abstract
Object detection has recently achieved a
breakthrough for removing the last one nondifferentiable component in the pipeline,
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS), and building up an end-to-end system. However, what
makes for its one-to-one prediction has not been
well understood. In this paper, we first point out
that one-to-one positive sample assignment is
the key factor, while, one-to-many assignment in
previous detectors causes redundant predictions
in inference. Second, we surprisingly find
that even training with one-to-one assignment,
previous detectors still produce redundant predictions. We identify that classification cost in
matching cost is the main ingredient: (1) previous detectors only consider location cost, (2) by
additionally introducing classification cost, previous detectors immediately produce one-to-one
prediction during inference. We introduce the
concept of score gap to explore the effect of
matching cost. Classification cost enlarges the
score gap by choosing positive samples as those
of highest score in the training iteration and
reducing noisy positive samples brought by
only location cost. Finally, we demonstrate the
advantages of end-to-end object detection on
crowded scenes.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in the computer vision area and enables numerous downstream applications. It aims at localizing a set of objects and recognizing their categories in an image. The development of
object detection pipeline (Girshick et al., 2014; Girshick,
2015; Ren et al., 2015; Cai & Vasconcelos, 2018; Redmon
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2017b; Tian et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong 2 AI Lab, ByteDance 3 Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to:
Peize Sun <peizesun@connect.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. End-to-end object detection. Non-end-to-end object
detectors require NMS to remove redundant predictions. As the
last one manually-designed component in the object detection
pipeline, non-differentiable NMS blocks setting up an end-to-end
object detection system.

2019; Zhou et al., 2019; Carion et al., 2020) is a route to
remove manually-designed components and towards endto-end system.
For decades, the sample in object detection is box candidates. In classical computer vision, the classifier is applied
on sliding windows enumerated on the image grid (Dalal
& Triggs, 2005; Felzenszwalb et al., 2010; Viola & Jones,
2001). Modern detectors pre-define thousands of anchor
boxes on the image grid and perform classification and regression on these candidates (Girshick et al., 2014; Ren
et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2017b; Redmon & Farhadi, 2017).
Despite box candidate methods dominate object detection
for years, the detection performance is largely sensitive to
sizes, aspect ratios, and the number of anchor boxes. To
eliminate the hand-crafted design and complex computation of box candidates, anchor-free detectors (Tian et al.,
2019; Zhou et al., 2019) are rising. These methods directly
treat grid points in the feature map as object candidates and
predict the offset from the grid point to the object box’s
boundaries and largely simplify the detection pipeline.
However, both box candidates and point candidates suffer
from one common problem, that is, redundant and nearduplicate predictions for each object are produced, thus
making non-maximum suppression(NMS) necessary postprocessing in inference. Towards building up an end-to-

