Understanding the Dynamics of Gradient Flow in
Overparameterized Linear Models

Salma Tarmoun * 1 2 Guilherme França * 1 3 Benjamin Haeffele 1 4 René Vidal 1 4

Abstract
We provide a detailed analysis of the dynamics of
the gradient flow in overparameterized two-layer
linear models. A particularly interesting feature
of this model is that its nonlinear dynamics can be
exactly solved as a consequence of a large number of conservation laws that constrain the system
to follow particular trajectories. More precisely,
the gradient flow preserves the difference of the
Gramian matrices of the input and output weights,
and its convergence to equilibrium depends on
both the magnitude of that difference (which is
fixed at initialization) and the spectrum of the data.
In addition, and generalizing prior work, we prove
our results without assuming small, balanced or
spectral initialization for the weights. Moreover,
we establish interesting mathematical connections
between matrix factorization problems and differential equations of the Riccati type.

1. Introduction
Understanding overparameterization in deep learning is
a puzzling question. Contrary to the common belief that
it may hurt generalization and optimization, recent work
suggests that overparameterization may actually bias the
optimization algorithm towards solutions that generalize
well—a phenomenon known as implicit regularization or
implicit bias—and may also accelerate convergence—a phenomenon known as implicit acceleration. Both phenomena
are consequences of the fact that different optimization algorithms correspond to different dynamical systems acting on
different models. Understanding these effects thus requires
*

Equal contribution 1 Mathematical Institute for Data Science,
Johns Hopkins University, 2 Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 3 Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley, 4 Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University. Correspondence to: Salma Tarmoun <starmou1@jhu.edu>, Guilherme
França <guifranca@gmail.com>, Benjamin Haeffele <bhaeffele@jhu.edu>, René Vidal <rvidal@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

a thorough analysis of the dynamics of optimization methods, such as gradient descent, which despite its simplicity
can lead to a complicated nonlinear dynamics.
Recent work on the implicit bias in the overparameterized
regime (Chizat & Bach, 2020; Gunasekar et al., 2018a;b;
Ji & Telgarsky, 2019b) shows that gradient descent on unregularized problems finds minimum norm solutions. For
instance, Ji & Telgarsky (2019a); Soudry et al. (2018) analyze linear networks trained for binary classification on
linearly separable data, and show that the predictor converges to a max-margin solution. Similar ideas have been
developed for matrix factorization, yielding solutions with
minimum nuclear norm (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2018) or low-rank (Arora et al., 2019a). The convergence
properties of gradient descent on wide neural networks was
also analyzed (Arora et al., 2019b; Du & Hu, 2019; Du
et al., 2018b), leading to a linear convergence when the
initialization is Gaussian or balanced. Recent results regarding the implicit acceleration of gradient descent on matrix
factorization and deep linear networks (Arora et al., 2018)
show that when the initialization is sufficiently small and
balanced (see Definition 2), overparameterization acts as a
preconditioning and can be interpreted as a combination of
momentum and an adaptive learning rate, suggesting that
acceleration for `p -regression is possible when p > 2.
A parallel line of research has been exploring the continuoustime limit of gradient descent, i.e., the gradient flow, which
has the advantage of being mathematically more tractable.
Furthermore, such a continuous-time analysis can provide
a stepping stone towards understanding the (discrete-time)
dynamics of gradient descent. For instance, Saxe et al.
(2014) analyzed the gradient flow dynamics for deep linear
models with least squares loss under the assumptions of
whitened data, small, balanced, and spectral initialization
(see Definition 3); they obtained a closed-form solution in
this setting. For two-layer linear networks, by means of such
solution, Gidel et al. (2019); Saxe et al. (2019) highlighted
the sequential learning of the hierarchical components as a
phenomenon that could improve generalization. Moreover,
Gidel et al. (2019) was able to extend some of these results
to gradient descent. However, both of these papers limited
the analysis to vanishing spectral initialization.

