Rethinking Neural vs. Matrix-Factorization Collaborative Filtering: the
Theoretical Perspectives

Da Xu 1 Chuanwei Ruan 2 Evren Korpeoglu 1 Sushant Kumar 1 Kannan Achan 1

Abstract
The recent work by Rendle et al. (2020), based
on empirical observations, argues that matrixfactorization collaborative filtering (MCF) compares favorably to neural collaborative filtering
(NCF), and conjectures the dot product’s superiority over the feed-forward neural network as
similarity function. In this paper, we address the
comparison rigorously by answering the following questions: 1. what is the limiting expressivity
of each model; 2. under the practical gradient
descent, to which solution does each optimization path converge; 3. how would the models
generalize under the inductive and transductive
learning setting. Our results highlight the similar expressivity for the overparameterized NCF
and MCF as kernelized predictors, and reveal the
relation between their optimization paths. We further show their different generalization behaviors,
where MCF and NCF experience specific tradeoff
and comparison in the transductive and inductive
collaborative filtering setting. Lastly, by showing
a novel generalization result, we reveal the critical
role of correcting exposure bias for model evaluation in the inductive setting. Our results explain
some of the previously observed conflicts, and
we provide synthetic and real-data experiments to
shed further insights to this topic.

1. Introduction
Neural collaborative filtering (NCF) and matrix factorization
collaborative filtering (MCF) are the two major approaches
for learning the user-item embeddings and combining them
into similarity scores. From the early stage of collaborative filtering (CF), the factorization methods are actively
1

Walmart Labs, Sunnyvale, California, USA. 2 Instacart, San
Francisco, California, USA. The work was done when the author was with Walmart Labs.. Correspondence to: Da Xu
<daxu5180@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

explored thanks to their interpretability and computation
advantage. (Koren et al., 2009; Koren, 2008; Rendle, 2010).
In recent years, the success of deep learning in various other
domains has motivated the adaptation of universal model architectures, such as the feedforward neural network (FFN),
to CF tasks. A prevalent practice is to use FFN to combine
the user and item embeddings, which is referred to as the
NCF (He et al., 2017). As a consequence, the comparison
between MCF and NCF was led by whether the similarity
measurement should be computed by the dot product, or
learnt by the FFN in a data-adaptive fashion. He et al. (2017)
claims that NCF is superior because it is capable of expressing MCF under a particular parameterization. Since then, a
significant proportion of new models use FFN as the default
similarity function, and they are often reported with more
competitive performances than MCF (Zhang et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, a recent paper argues based on empirical evidence that after training, FFN is unable to reconstruct the
dot-product computation, and NCF can be outperformed by
the MCF (Rendle et al., 2020).
It is not of surprise that the controversy arises since our
understandings of both methods, specially NCF, are still
somewhat limited from the theoretical standpoint. In particular, He et al. (2017) does not consider how training affects
the parameters’ dynamics, as well as how it alters the model
expressivity in comparison with the dot-product formulation.
Likewise, the conjectures in Rendle et al. (2020) regarding
the trained FFN are based on empirical observations so
the conclusions may not generalize to other settings. On
the other hand, while MCF has been studied intensively
under the matrix completion framework with many theoretical guarantees (Candès & Recht, 2009; Srebro et al.,
2004; Srebro & Shraibman, 2005; Candès & Recht, 2009),
it is nevertheless unclear how the inductive bias of using
gradient descent training can affect the performance.
In addition to the choice of model, which is the main focus
of the previous literature, we find that the testing performance is closely connected to how the tasks are designed,
including the learning setting (inductive or transductive)
as well as the relation between the empirical and exposure
distribution. Towards that end, we summarize several major
questions that prompt the ongoing debate:

