Reserve Price Optimization for First Price Auctions in Display Advertising

Zhe Feng 1 Sébastien Lahaie 2 Jon Schneider 2 Jinchao Ye 2

Abstract
The display advertising industry has recently transitioned from second- to first-price auctions as its
primary mechanism for ad allocation and pricing.
In light of this, publishers need to re-evaluate and
optimize their auction parameters, notably reserve
prices. In this paper, we propose a gradient-based
algorithm to adaptively update and optimize reserve prices based on estimates of bidders’ responsiveness to experimental shocks in reserves. Our
key innovation is to draw on the inherent structure
of the revenue objective in order to reduce the variance of gradient estimates and improve convergence rates in both theory and practice. We show
that revenue in a first-price auction can be usefully decomposed into a demand component and
a bidding component, and introduce techniques
to reduce the variance of each component. We
characterize the bias-variance trade-offs of these
techniques and validate the performance of our
proposed algorithm through experiments on synthetic data and real display ad auctions data from
a major ad exchange.

1. Introduction
A reserve price in an auction specifies a minimum acceptable
winning bid, below which the item remains with the seller.
The reserve price may correspond to some outside offer, or
the value of the item to the seller itself, and more generally
may be set to maximize expected revenue (Myerson, 1981).
In a data-rich environment like online advertising auctions
it becomes possible to learn a revenue-optimal reserve price
over time, and there is a substantial literature on optimizing
reserve prices for second-price auctions, which have been
commonly used to allocate ad space (Paes Leme et al., 2016;
Mohri & Medina, 2016; Munoz & Vassilvitskii, 2017).
In this work we examine the problem of reserve price op1
Harvard University, this work was done when the first author
was an intern in Google Inc, NYC. 2 Google Inc, NYC. Correspondence to: Zhe Feng <zhe_feng@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

timization in first-price (i.e., pay-your-bid) auctions, motivated by the fact that all the major ad exchanges have
recently transitioned to this auction format as their main
ad allocation mechanism (Chen, 2017; Bigler, 2019). Firstprice auctions have grown in favor because they are considered more transparent, in the sense that there is no uncertainty in the final price upon winning (Benes, 2017).1
Unless restrictive assumptions are met, there is in theory
no revenue ranking between first- and second-price auctions (Krishna, 2009), and there is no guarantee that reserve
prices optimized for second-price auctions will continue to
be effective in a first-price setting.
From a learning standpoint the shift from second- to firstprice auctions introduces several new challenges. In a
second-price auction, truthful bidding is a dominant strategy
no matter what the reserve. The bidders’ value distributions are therefore readily available, and bids stay static
(in principle) as the reserve is varied. In a first-price auction, in contrast, bidders have an incentive to shade their
values when placing their bids, and bid-shading strategies
can vary by bidder. The gain from setting a reserve price
now comes if (and only if) it induces higher bidding, so an
understanding of bidder responsiveness becomes crucial to
setting effective reserves.
Bid adjustments in response to a reserve price can occur at
different timescales. If a bidder observes that it wins too
few auctions because of the reserve price, it may increase
its bid in the long-term (in a matter of hours up to weeks).
Our focus here is on setting reserves prices by taking into
account immediate bidder responses to reserves. We assume
that each bidder has a fixed, unknown bidding function
b(r, v) that depends on its private value v and the observed
auction reserve r. This agrees with practice in display ad
auctions because the reserve r is normally sent out in the
‘bid request’ message to potential bidders (IAB, 2016). To
the extent that the bid function responds to r, first-price
reserves can show an immediate positive effect on revenue.
Our Results. We propose a gradient-based approach to
adaptively improve and optimize reserve prices, where we
1
The full reasons for the transition are complex, and include the
rise of “header bidding” (Weiss, 2019). A header bidding auction
is a first-price auction usually triggered by code in a webpage
header (hence the name).

