Learning Routines for Effective Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning

Edoardo Cetin 1 Oya Celiktutan 1

Abstract
The performance of reinforcement learning depends upon designing an appropriate action space,
where the effect of each action is measurable, yet,
granular enough to permit flexible behavior. So
far, this process involved non-trivial user choices
in terms of the available actions and their execution frequency. We propose a novel framework
for reinforcement learning that effectively lifts
such constraints. Within our framework, agents
learn effective behavior over a routine space: a
new, higher-level action space, where each routine represents a set of ‘equivalent’ sequences
of granular actions with arbitrary length. Our
routine space is learned end-to-end to facilitate
the accomplishment of underlying off-policy reinforcement learning objectives. We apply our
framework to two state-of-the-art off-policy algorithms and show that the resulting agents obtain
relevant performance improvements while requiring fewer interactions with the environment per
episode, improving computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
The applicability of machine learning has seen tremendous
advancements with the advent of deep, expressive models
(LeCun et al., 2015). These models enabled to tackle complex problems given large quantities of data through end-toend training, removing bottlenecks related to hand-designed
features. Such trend has seen success also in reinforcement
learning, where deep learning enabled the achievement of
significant milestones (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017)
and the specification of practical algorithms (Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018a).
However, within the reinforcement learning framework,
there are still many fixed components, related to the agent’s
interface with the environment, that are the result of expert1
Centre for Robotics Research, Department of Engineering,
King’s College London. Correspondence to: Edoardo Cetin
<edoardo.cetin@kcl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

engineering and are often quite influential on the performance (Mahmood et al., 2018). Algorithms that learn also
these additional components end-to-end would alleviate
some of the deployment burdens and likely improve final
performance given enough data. One of such components
is the agent’s action space. The performance of current reinforcement learning algorithms is dependent on reasoning
with an expressive set of actions that have a tangible effect
on the current state. Specifying this, generally includes setting an environment-specific fixed frequency with which the
agent alternates reasoning and executing behavior.
On the other hand, humans are capable of effectively performing actions to the lowest level of granularity while only
directly reasoning with higher-level abstractions of what
they intend to do. This can be attributed to their observable
ability of acquiring, through repetition of a particular task,
temporally-extended motor-skills that can be re-enacted
without conscious thought (Sweatt, 2009). Doing so allows
to abstract away the details regarding the composition of
each motor-skill, thus, minimizing the required reasoning
to solve the task. We will refer to these motor-skills, acquired with the objective of solving a particular task more
efficiently as routines.
From these observations, we design a new class of reinforcement learning algorithms that learn behavior together with
a new ‘action space’, which we name the routine space. In
this space, each learned routine represents higher-level concepts of what the agent intends to achieve with respect to the
task goal and can be mapped to a whole set of ‘equivalent’
variable-length sequences of action primitives. Within our
framework, this space is learned end-to-end to facilitate the
underlying objectives of any base reinforcement learning
algorithm.
Our experimental results demonstrate that utilizing our proposed routine framework improves the performance of two
different off-policy reinforcement learning algorithms tested
on the environments from the DeepMind Control Suite
(Tassa et al., 2018). Moreover, using our framework, agents
need to reason only after experiencing the outcome of each
routine rather than each action. Therefore, they are able
to query their policy much more infrequently by learning
to perform longer routines from states that do not require
a fine level of control. Practically, this enables for compu-

