On the Power of Localized Perceptron for Label-Optimal Learning of
Halfspaces with Adversarial Noise

Jie Shen 1

Abstract
We study online active learning of homogeneous
halfspaces in Rd with adversarial noise where
the overall probability of a noisy label is constrained to be at most ν. Our main contribution is
a Perceptron-like online active learning algorithm
that runs in polynomial time, and under the conditions that the marginal distribution is isotropic
log-concave and ν = Ω(), where  ∈ (0, 1) is
the target error rate, our algorithm PAC learns the
underlying halfspace with near-optimal
label com
plexity of Õ d·polylog( 1 ) and sample complex
ity of Õ d .1 Prior to this work, existing online
algorithms designed for tolerating the adversarial
noise are subject to either label complexity polynomial in 1 , or suboptimal noise tolerance, or
restrictive marginal distributions. With the additional prior knowledge that the underlying halfspace is s-sparse, we obtain attribute-efficient
label

complexity of Õ s · polylog(d, 1 ) and sample

complexity of Õ s · polylog(d) . As an immediate corollary, we show that under the agnostic
model where no assumption is made on the noise
rate ν, our active learner achieves an error rate
of O(OPT) +  with the same running time and
label and sample complexity, where OPT is the
best possible error rate achievable by any homogeneous halfspace.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications, there are massive amounts
of unlabeled data but labeling is expensive. This distinction has driven the study of active learning (Cohn et al.,
1994; Balcan et al., 2007; Dasgupta, 2011; Hanneke, 2014;
Awasthi et al., 2017), where labels are initially hidden and
1
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.
Correspondence to: Jie Shen <jie.shen@stevens.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
We use the notation Õ(f ) := O(f · log f ), Ω̃(f ) :=
Ω(f / log f ), and Θ̃(f ) that is between Ω̃(f ) and Õ(f ).

the learner must pay for each label it wishes to be revealed.
The goal is to design querying strategies to avoid less informative labeling requests, e.g. the labels that can be inferred
from previously seen samples. Parallel to active learning,
online learning concerns the scenario where the learner
observes a stream of samples and makes real-time model
updating in order to compete with the best model obtained
by seeing all the history data in a batch (Rosenblatt, 1958;
Littlestone & Warmuth, 1989; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1996;
Zinkevich, 2003; Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Hazan, 2019). Online learning algorithms have also been broadly investigated
in machine learning, and have found various successful applications owing to its potential of savings in memory cost,
low computational cost per sample, and its generalization
ability (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2004; Kakade & Tewari, 2008).
In this paper, we study the important problem of active learning of homogeneous halfspaces in the online setting, where
the learner observes a stream of unlabeled data and makes
spot decision of whether or not to query the labels. The goal
is to achieve the best of the two worlds: label efficiency
from active learning and computational efficiency from online learning. In this spectrum, there are a number of early
works that share the same merit with this paper. For example, Freund et al. (1997) proposed a query-by-committee
learning algorithm and Dasgupta et al. (2005) developed a
Perceptron-like algorithm, both of which are implemented
in an online fashion and enjoy a near-optimal label complexity bound of Õ(d log 1 ) where d is the dimension of the
instance2 and  ∈ (0, 1) is the target error rate. However,
there are two crucial assumptions made by these works that
seem too stringent: 1) the marginal distribution over the unlabeled data is uniform on the unit sphere in Rd ; and 2) there
exists a perfect halfspace that incurs zero error rate with respect to the underlying distribution. In this regard, a natural
question is: can we design an online active learner, that
provably works under a significantly more general family
of marginal distributions while achieving arbitrarily small
error rate without the realizability condition?
To be more concrete, we are interested in designing an online active learning algorithm that PAC learns some underlying halfspace (Valiant, 1984) when the instances are drawn
2

We will interchangeably use “instance” and “unlabeled data”.

