Discovering symbolic policies with deep reinforcement learning

Mikel Landajuela * 1 Brenden K. Petersen * 1 Sookyung Kim * 1 Claudio P. Santiago 1 Ruben Glatt 1
T. Nathan Mundhenk 1 Jacob F. Pettit 1 Daniel M. Faissol 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has proven
successful for many difficult control problems by
learning policies represented by neural networks.
However, the complexity of neural network-based
policies—involving thousands of composed nonlinear operators—can render them problematic to
understand, trust, and deploy. In contrast, simple
policies comprising short symbolic expressions
can facilitate human understanding, while also
being transparent and exhibiting predictable behavior. To this end, we propose deep symbolic
policy, a novel approach to directly search the
space of symbolic policies. We use an autoregressive recurrent neural network to generate control
policies represented by tractable mathematical
expressions, employing a risk-seeking policy gradient to maximize performance of the generated
policies. To scale to environments with multidimensional action spaces, we propose an “anchoring” algorithm that distills pre-trained neural
network-based policies into fully symbolic policies, one action dimension at a time. We also
introduce two novel methods to improve exploration in DRL-based combinatorial optimization,
building on ideas of entropy regularization and
distribution initialization. Despite their dramatically reduced complexity, we demonstrate that
discovered symbolic policies outperform seven
state-of-the-art DRL algorithms in terms of average rank and average normalized episodic reward
across eight benchmark environments.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown remarkable
success in the last few years in solving a wide-range of
*
Equal contribution 1 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California, USA. Correspondence to: Brenden K.
Petersen <bp@llnl.gov>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Algorithm overview. (Top) The Policy Generator
samples an example expression. (Middle) The current policy
is a construct of previously learned symbolic policies, the
current sample, and an anchor model. (Bottom) The Policy
Evaluator applies the policy to the environment, and the
reward is used to train the Policy Generator. The algorithm
learns actions sequentially until all n actions are symbolic
and the anchor model is discarded.

difficult control problems (Collins et al., 2005; Mnih et al.,
2015; 2016; Pettit et al., 2019; Glatt et al., 2020). DRL
owes much of its success to recent advances in training deep
neural networks (NNs), which are commonly employed as
function approximators for an RL policy (Rumelhart et al.,
1985; Hinton et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015). However,
NN-based policies exhibit complex functional forms, involving thousands of nested non-linear operators and affine
transformations. This complexity poses a significant barrier
to deployment of DRL policies in real-world settings due
to the difficulty to understand, verify, trust, and predict the
behavior of the RL agent. These challenges are particularly relevant for medical domains, in which “black-box”

