Making transport more robust and interpretable by moving data
through a small number of anchor points

Chi-Heng Lin 1 Mehdi Azabou 1 2 Eva L. Dyer 1 2 3

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) is a widely used technique for distribution alignment, with applications
throughout the machine learning, graphics, and
vision communities. Without any additional structural assumptions on transport, however, OT can
be fragile to outliers or noise, especially in high
dimensions. Here, we introduce Latent Optimal
Transport (LOT), a new approach for OT that simultaneously learns low-dimensional structure in
data while leveraging this structure to solve the
alignment task. The idea behind our approach
is to learn two sets of “anchors” that constrain
the flow of transport between a source and target distribution. In both theoretical and empirical
studies, we show that LOT regularizes the rank of
transport and makes it more robust to outliers and
the sampling density. We show that by allowing
the source and target to have different anchors,
and using LOT to align the latent spaces between
anchors, the resulting transport plan has better
structural interpretability and highlights connections between both the individual data points and
the local geometry of the datasets.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2008) is a widely used technique for distribution alignment that learns a transport plan
which moves mass from one distribution to match another.
With recent advances in tools for regularizing and speeding
up OT (Cuturi, 2013), this approach has found applications
in many diverse areas of machine learning, including domain adaptation (Courty et al.; Courty et al., 2017), genera1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 2 Machine Learning Program,
Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 3 Coulter Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Tech & Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Correspondence to: Chi-Heng Lin
<cl3385@gatech.edu>, Mehdi Azabou <mazabou@gatech.edu>,
Eva L. Dyer <evadyer@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tive modeling (Martin Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Tolstikhin
et al., 2017), document retrieval (Kusner et al., 2015), computer graphics (Solomon et al., 2014; 2015; Bonneel et al.,
2016), and computational neuroscience (Gramfort et al.,
2015; Lee et al., 2019).
While the ground metric in OT can be used to impose geometric structure into transport, without any additional assumptions, OT can be fragile to outliers or noise, especially
in high dimensions. To overcome this issue, additional structure, either in the data or in the transport plan, can be used
to improve alignment or make transport more robust. Examples of methods that incorporate additional structure into OT
include approaches that leverage hierarchical structure or
cluster consistency (Lee et al., 2019; Yurochkin et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2020), partial class information (Courty et al.,
2017; Courty et al.), submodular cost functions (AlvarezMelis et al., 2018), and low-rank constraints on the transport
plan (Forrow et al., 2019; Altschuler et al., 2019). Because
of the difficulty of incorporating structure into OT, many of
these methods need low-dimensional structure in data to be
specified in advance (e.g., estimated clusters or labels).
To simultaneously learn low-dimensional structure and use
it to constrain transport, Forrow et al. (2019) recently introduced a statistical approach for OT that builds a factorization
of the transport plan to regularize its rank. After factorization, transport from a source to target distribution can be
visualized as the flow of mass through a small number of
anchors (hubs), which serve as relay stations through which
transportation must pass (see Figure 1, a vs. b). Although
this idea of moving data through anchors is appealing, in
previous work, the anchors used to constrain transport are
shared by the source and target. As a result, when the source
and target contain different structures or experience domain
shift (Courty et al.), shared anchors may not provide an
adequate representation for both domains simultaneously.
In this work, we propose a new structured transport approach called Latent Optimal Transport (LOT). The main
idea behind LOT is to factorize the transport plan into three
components, where mass is moved: (i) from individual
source points to source anchors, (ii) from the source anchors
to target anchors, and (iii) from target anchors to individual target points (Figure 1c-d). The intermediate transport

