SUNRISE: A Simple Unified Framework
for Ensemble Learning in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Kimin Lee 1 Michael Laskin 1 Aravind Srinivas 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
Off-policy deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
been successful in a range of challenging domains.
However, standard off-policy RL algorithms can
suffer from several issues, such as instability in Qlearning and balancing exploration and exploitation. To mitigate these issues, we present SUNRISE, a simple unified ensemble method, which
is compatible with various off-policy RL algorithms. SUNRISE integrates two key ingredients: (a) ensemble-based weighted Bellman backups, which re-weight target Q-values based on
uncertainty estimates from a Q-ensemble, and
(b) an inference method that selects actions using the highest upper-confidence bounds for efficient exploration. By enforcing the diversity
between agents using Bootstrap with random initialization, we show that these different ideas
are largely orthogonal and can be fruitfully integrated, together further improving the performance of existing off-policy RL algorithms, such
as Soft Actor-Critic and Rainbow DQN, for both
continuous and discrete control tasks on both
low-dimensional and high-dimensional environments. Our training code is available at https:
//github.com/pokaxpoka/sunrise.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL), with high-capacity
function approximators, such as deep neural networks
(DNNs), has been used to solve a variety of sequential
decision-making problems, including board games (Silver
et al., 2017; 2018), video games (Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals
et al., 2019), and robotic manipulation (Kalashnikov et al.,
2018). It has been well established that the above successes are highly sample inefficient (Kaiser et al., 2020).
Recently, a lot of progress has been made in more sample1

University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Kimin
Lee <kiminlee@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

efficient model-free RL algorithms through improvements
in off-policy learning both in discrete and continuous domains (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Hessel
et al., 2018; Amos et al., 2020). However, there are still substantial challenges when training off-policy RL algorithms.
First, Q-learning often converges to sub-optimal solutions
due to error propagation in the Bellman backup, i.e., the
errors induced in the target value can lead to an increase in
overall error in the Q-function (Kumar et al., 2019; 2020).
Second, it is hard to balance exploration and exploitation,
which is necessary for efficient RL (Chen et al., 2017; Osband et al., 2016a) (see Section 2 for further details).
One way to address the above issues with off-policy RL algorithms is to use ensemble methods, which combine multiple
models of the value function and (or) policy (Chen et al.,
2017; Lan et al., 2020; Osband et al., 2016a; Wiering &
Van Hasselt, 2008). For example, double Q-learning (Hasselt, 2010; Van Hasselt et al., 2016) addressed the value
overestimation by maintaining two independent estimators
of the action values and later extended to continuous control tasks in TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018). Bootstrapped
DQN (Osband et al., 2016a) leveraged an ensemble of Qfunctions for more effective exploration, and Chen et al.
(2017) further improved it by adapting upper-confidence
bounds algorithms (Audibert et al., 2009; Auer et al., 2002)
based on uncertainty estimates from ensembles. However,
most prior works have studied the various axes of improvements from ensemble methods in isolation and have ignored
the error propagation aspect.
In this paper, we present SUNRISE, a simple unified ensemble method that is compatible with most modern off-policy
RL algorithms, such as Q-learning and actor-critic algorithms. Our main idea is to reweight sample transitions
based on uncertainty estimates from a Q-ensemble. Because prediction errors can be characterized by uncertainty
estimates from ensembles (i.e., variance of predictions) as
shown in Figure 1(b), we find that the proposed method
significantly improves the signal-to-noise in the Q-updates
and stabilizes the learning process. Additionally, for efficient exploration, We define an upper-confidence bound
(UCB) based on the mean and variance of Q-functions similar to Chen et al. (2017), and introduce an inference method,

