Understanding Instance-Level Label Noise:
Disparate Impacts and Treatments

Yang Liu 1

Abstract
This paper aims to provide understandings for the
effect of an over-parameterized model, e.g. a deep
neural network, memorizing instance-dependent
noisy labels. We first quantify the harms caused
by memorizing noisy instances, and show the
disparate impacts of noisy labels for sample instances with different representation frequencies.
We then analyze how several popular solutions for
learning with noisy labels mitigate this harm at
the instance level. Our analysis reveals that existing approaches lead to disparate treatments when
handling noisy instances. While higher-frequency
instances often enjoy a high probability of an
improvement by applying these solutions, lowerfrequency instances do not. Our analysis reveals
new understandings for when these approaches
work, and provides theoretical justifications for
previously reported empirical observations. This
observation requires us to rethink the distribution
of label noise across instances and calls for different treatments for instances in different regimes.

1. Introduction
A salient feature of an over-parameterized model, e.g. a
deep neural network, is its ability to memorize examples
(Zhang et al., 2016; Neyshabur et al., 2017), and the memorization has proven to benefit the generalization performance
(Arpit et al., 2017; Feldman, 2020; Feldman & Zhang, 2020).
Nonetheless, the potential existence of label noise, combined with the memorization effect, might lead to detrimental consequence (Song et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020a; Cheng
et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2019; Han et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020). In light of the reported empirical evidence of harms
caused by over-memorizing noisy labels, we set out to understand this effect theoretically. Built on a recent analytical
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Liu
<yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

framework (Feldman, 2020), we demonstrate the varying
effects of memorizing noisy labels associated with instances
that sit at the different spectra of the instance distribution.
Soon since the above negative effect was empirically shown,
learning with noisy labels has been recognized as a challenging and important task. The literature has observed growing
interests in proposing defenses, see Natarajan et al. (2013);
Liu & Tao (2016); Menon et al. (2015); Liu & Guo (2020);
Lukasik et al. (2020) and many more. The second contribution of this paper is to build an analytical framework to
gain new understandings of how the existing solutions fare
(Section 5). While most existing theoretical results focus on
the setting where label noise is homogeneous across training examples and focus on the distribution-level analysis,
ours invests on the instance-level and aims to quantify when
these existing approaches work and when they fail for different regimes of instances. Our result points out that while
noisy labels for highly frequent instances contribute more to
the drop of generalization power, they are also easier cases
to fix with. We further highlight the need for taking additional care of long-tail examples (Zhu et al., 2014), where
we prove existing solutions can have a substantial probability of failing. Our results call for immediate attention to a
hybrid treatment of noisy instances.
To facilitate the understanding of our results, we outline the
main contributions below with pointers:
• We extend an analytical framework to quantify the effects

of memorizing noisy labels (Theorem 4 - 6).
• We highlight the scenarios when existing popular robust

learning methods succeed or fail at the instance level
(Section 4.4 & 5). We provide the conditions under which
the existing approaches improve over memorizing the
noisy labels (Theorem 7 & 11 and their corollaries), and
when not (Theorem 8 & 12 and their corollaries).
• Our results in Section 5 help explain some empirical ob-

servations reported in the literature, including i) peer
loss (Liu & Guo, 2020) induces confident prediction
(Lemma 3), and ii) when peer loss and label smoothing (Lukasik et al., 2020) could perform better than loss
correction (Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017),
which uses explicit knowledge of the noise rates (Sec-

