Adapting to Misspecification in Contextual Bandits with Offline Regression
Oracles
Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy 1 Vitor Hadad 2 Susan Athey 2

Abstract
Computationally efficient contextual bandits are
often based on estimating a predictive model of
rewards given contexts and arms using past data.
However, when the reward model is not wellspecified, the bandit algorithm may incur unexpected regret, so recent work has focused on algorithms that are robust to misspecification. We
propose a simple family of contextual bandit algorithms that adapt to misspecification error by
reverting to a good safe policy when there is evidence that misspecification is causing a regret
increase. Our algorithm requires only an offline
regression oracle to ensure regret guarantees that
gracefully degrade in terms of a measure of the
average misspecification level. Compared to prior
work, we attain similar regret guarantees, but we
do no rely on a master algorithm, and do not
require more robust oracles like online or constrained regression oracles (e.g., (Foster et al.,
2020a); (Krishnamurthy et al., 2020)). This allows us to design algorithms for more general
function approximation classes.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandit algorithms are a fundamental tool in sequential decision making and have been used in a variety
of applications (see e.g., Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020,
Section 1.4 for a review).
The finite-armed (stochastic) contextual bandit setting that
this paper is concerned with can be described as follows.
Over a sequence of rounds, a bandit algorithm receives some
side information or “contexts”, which is drawn from a fixed
distribution. Upon receiving each context, the algorithm
selects an action, and then receives a probabilistic reward

whose distribution may depend on the context and action.
The objective of the algorithm is to interactively learn a mapping from contexts to actions so as to maximize the rewards
received during the experiment. In order to do so, it must
efficiently trade off the need for resolving uncertainty about
the value of each action (exploration), with the objective of
maximizing rewards (exploitation).
Many contextual bandit algorithms make use of an estimate of the conditional mean function of rewards given
contexts and arms, along with some measure of the uncertainty around this function. At a high level, if the model
predicts that an action has high expected reward with low
uncertainty, then the algorithm is more likely to select this
action. This intuition leads to heuristics that are statistically
optimal in some settings (e.g., Agrawal & Goyal, 2013; Li
et al., 2010). Such algorithms also tend to be computationally tractable relative to alternatives (Agarwal et al., 2014),
since all that is required is a predictive model and the ability
to produce appropriate confidence intervals.
However, the success of such algorithms depends heavily on
tenuous assumptions about the underlying data-generating
process, as their performance guarantees often rely on the
conditional mean function belonging to a particular class;
e.g., that it be linear under some transformation of the contexts. This is often called “realizability” in the literature, and
when violated can cause the algorithm to behave erratically.
In this paper, we suggest an algorithm that adapts to model
misspecification. To illustrate the problem, we consider
an example described in (Krishnamurthy et al., 2020) and
use it to get insights into the behavior of a realizabilitybased algorithm FALCON+ (Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2020) in a
setting where realizability does not hold. Consider a twoarm contextual bandit setting:
(
I{xt > 0.5}
E[rt xt = x, at = a] =
0.5

if a = 1
if a = 2

(1)

1

Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 2 Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Sanath Kumar
Krishnamurthy <sanathsk@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

where xt ∼ Uniform[0, 1] represents the contexts observed
at the beginning of the t-th round, at is the action taken, rt
is the reward, which is observed by the experimenter with
noise et ∼ N (0, 1). Although the conditional expectation
of rewards (1) is clearly non-linear, the model is simple

