Sawtooth Factorial Topic Embeddings Guided Gamma Belief Network

Zhibin Duan * 1 Dongsheng Wang * 1 Bo Chen 1 Chaojie Wang 1
Wenchao Chen 1 Yewen Li 1 Jie Ren 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
Hierarchical topic models such as the gamma belief network (GBN) have delivered promising results in mining multi-layer document representations and discovering interpretable topic taxonomies. However, they often assume in the prior
that the topics at each layer are independently
drawn from the Dirichlet distribution, ignoring the
dependencies between the topics both at the same
layer and across different layers. To relax this
assumption, we propose sawtooth factorial topic
embedding guided GBN, a deep generative model
of documents that captures the dependencies and
semantic similarities between the topics in the embedding space. Specifically, both the words and
topics are represented as embedding vectors of
the same dimension. The topic matrix at a layer
is factorized into the product of a factor loading
matrix and a topic embedding matrix, the transpose of which is set as the factor loading matrix of
the layer above. Repeating this particular type of
factorization, which shares components between
adjacent layers, leads to a structure referred to as
sawtooth factorization. An auto-encoding variational inference network is constructed to optimize the model parameter via stochastic gradient
descent. Experiments on big corpora show that
our models outperform other neural topic models on extracting deeper interpretable topics and
deriving better document representations.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) and Poisson factor analysis (PFA)
(Zhou et al., 2012), have the ability to discover the underly*
Equal contribution 1 National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China. 2 McCombs
School of Business The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Chen
<bchen@mail.xidian.edu.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ing semantic themes from a collection of documents, achieving great success in text analysis. In general, a topic model
represents each document as a mixture of latent topics, each
of which describes an interpretable semantic concept. While
being widely used, vanilla topic models assume that topics
are independent and there are no structures among them,
which limits those models’ ability to explore any hierarchical thematic structures. To remove its limitation, a series of
hierarchical extensions, including nonparametric Bayesian
hierarchical prior based topic models (Blei et al., 2010; Paisley et al., 2014), deep PFA (Gan et al., 2015; Henao et al.,
2015), gamma belief network (GBN) (Zhou et al., 2015;
Cong et al., 2017), and Dirichlet belief network (DirBN)
(Zhao et al., 2018a), have been proposed. Commonly, these
models learn directed acyclic graph (DAG)-structured hierarchical topics, which assumes that the topics in the upper
layers are more general/abstract than those in the lower layers. Consequently, revealing hierarchical relations between
topics provides the user an intuitive way to better understand
text data.
With the development of deep neural networks (DNN), there
is a growing interest in developing neural topic models
(NTMs). Specifically, most neural topic models are based
on variational auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014), which employ a variational
inference network (encoder) to approximate the posterior
distribution and are equipped with a decoder to reconstruct
the document’s Bag-of-Words (BOW) representation (Miao
et al., 2016; Srivastava & Sutton, 2017; Card et al., 2017).
However, most NTMs rely on Gaussian latent variables,
which often fail to well approximate the posterior distributions of sparse and nonnegative document latent representations. To address this limition, Zhang et al. (2018)
develop Weibull hybrid autoencoding inference (WHAI) for
deep LDA, which infers posterior samples via a hybrid of
stochastic-gradient MCMC and autoencoding variational
Bayes. As a hierarchical neural topic model, WHAI shows
attractive qualities in multi-layer document representation
learning and hierarchical explainable topic discovery. Compared with traditional Bayesian probabilistic topic models,
these NTMs usually enjoy better flexibility and scalability,
which are important for modeling large-scale data and performing downstream tasks (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al.,

