Three Operator Splitting with a Nonconvex Loss Function

Alp Yurtsever 1 Varun Mangalick 1 Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract

2007), in certain transport and assignment problems (Koopmans & Beckmann, 1957; Peyré et al., 2019), among countless others. The nonsmooth terms in (1) can be used as
regularizers, e.g., to promote joint behavior such as sparsity
and low-rank (Richard et al., 2012). Moreover, we can also
split a complex regularizer into simpler terms for computational advantages, e.g., in group lasso with overlaps (Jacob
et al., 2009), structured sparsity (El Halabi & Cevher, 2015),
or total variation (Barbero & Sra, 2018).

We consider the problem of minimizing the sum
of three functions, one of which is nonconvex
but differentiable, and the other two are convex
but possibly nondifferentiable. We investigate the
Three Operator Splitting method (TOS) of Davis
& Yin (2017) with an aim to extend its theoretical
guarantees for this nonconvex problem template.
In particular, we prove convergence of TOS with
nonasymptotic bounds on its nonstationarity and
infeasibility errors. In contrast with the existing
work on nonconvex TOS, our guarantees do not
require additional smoothness assumptions on the
terms comprising the objective; hence they cover
instances of particular interest where the nondifferentiable terms are indicator functions. We also
extend our results to a stochastic setting where
we have access only to an unbiased estimator of
the gradient. Finally, we illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method through numerical
experiments on quadratic assignment problems.

We obtain an important special case by choosing the nonsmooth terms g and h in (1) as indicator functions of closed
and convex sets G and H ⊆ Rn . In this case, (1) turns into
min

x∈Rn

We study nonconvex optimization problems of the form:
x∈R

φ(x) := f (x) + g(x) + h(x),

x ∈ G ∩ H.

(2)

We are particularly interested in the setting where G and
H are simple in the sense that we can project onto these
sets efficiently, but not so easily onto their intersection.
Some examples include learning with correlation matrices (Higham & Strabić, 2016), power assignment in wireless
networks (De Berg et al., 2010), graph transduction (Shivanna et al., 2015), graph matching (Zaslavskiy et al., 2008),
and quadratic assignment (Koopmans & Beckmann, 1957;
Loiola et al., 2007).

1. Introduction
minn

f (x) subject to

(1)

where f : Rn → R is continuously differentiable and potentially nonconvex, whereas g and h : Rn → R ∪ {+∞} are
proper lower-semicontinuous convex functions (potentially
nonsmooth). Further, we assume that the domain of g, that
is, dom(g) = {x ∈ Rn : g(x) < +∞}, is bounded.
Template (1) enjoys a rich number of applications in optimization, machine learning, and statistics. Nonconvex
losses arise naturally in several maximum likelihood estimation (McLachlan & Krishnan, 1996) and M-estimation problems (Ollila & Tyler, 2014; Maronna et al., 2019), in problems with a matrix factorization structure (Zass & Shashua,
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Alp Yurtsever
<alpy@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

An effective way to solve (1) for convex f with Lipschitz gradients is the Three Operator Splitting (TOS)
method (Davis & Yin, 2017), whose convergence has been
well-studied (see §1.1). But for nonconvex f , convergence
properties of TOS are less understood (again, see §1.1).
This gap motivates us to develop nonasymptotic convergence guarantees for TOS. Beyond theoretical progress, we
highlight the potential empirical value of TOS by evaluating it on a challenging nonconvex problem, the quadratic
assignment problem (QAP).
Contributions. We summarize our contributions towards
the convergence analysis of nonconvex TOS below.
. We first discuss how to quantify convergence of TOS to
first-order stationary points for both templates (1) and (2).
Specifically, we propose to measure approximate stationarity based on a variational inequality. Thereafter, we
prove that the associated non-stationarity error is smaller
than  (in expectation over a random iteration counter)
after T = O(1/3 ) iterations (and gradient evaluations).

