Graph R-CNN for Scene
Graph Generation
Jianwei Yang1(B) , Jiasen Lu1 , Stefan Lee1 , Dhruv Batra1,2 ,
and Devi Parikh1,2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
{jw2yang,jiasenlu,steflee,dbatra,parikh}@gatech.edu
2
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, USA

Abstract. We propose a novel scene graph generation model called
Graph R-CNN, that is both eﬀective and eﬃcient at detecting objects
and their relations in images. Our model contains a Relation Proposal
Network (RePN) that eﬃciently deals with the quadratic number of
potential relations between objects in an image. We also propose an
attentional Graph Convolutional Network (aGCN) that eﬀectively captures contextual information between objects and relations. Finally, we
introduce a new evaluation metric that is more holistic and realistic than
existing metrics. We report state-of-the-art performance on scene graph
generation as evaluated using both existing and our proposed metrics.
Keywords: Graph R-CNN · Scene graph generation
Relation proposal network · Attentional graph convolutional network

1

Introduction

Visual scene understanding has traditionally focused on identifying objects in
images – learning to predict their presence (i.e. image classiﬁcation [9,15,34])
and spatial extent (i.e. object detection [7,22,31] or segmentation [21]). These
object-centric techniques have matured signiﬁcantly in recent years, however,
representing scenes as collections of objects fails to capture relationships which
may be essential for scene understanding.
A recent work [12] has instead proposed representing visual scenes as graphs
containing objects, their attributes, and the relationships between them. These
scene graphs form an interpretable structured representation of the image that
can support higher-level visual intelligence tasks such as captioning [24,39],
visual question answering [1,11,35,37–39], and image-grounded dialog [3]. While
scene graph representations hold tremendous promise, extracting scene graphs
from images – eﬃciently and accurately – is challenging. The natural approach
of considering every pair of nodes (objects) as a potential edge (relationship) –
essentially reasoning over fully-connected graphs – is often eﬀective in modeling
J. Yang and J. Lu – Equal contribution
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 690–706, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_41

