SaaS: Speed as a Supervisor
for Semi-supervised Learning
Safa Cicek(B) , Alhussein Fawzi, and Stefano Soatto
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
{safacicek,fawzi,soatto}@ucla.edu

Abstract. We introduce the SaaS Algorithm for semi-supervised learning, which uses learning speed during stochastic gradient descent in a
deep neural network to measure the quality of an iterative estimate of
the posterior probability of unknown labels. Training speed in supervised
learning correlates strongly with the percentage of correct labels, so we
use it as an inference criterion for the unknown labels, without attempting to infer the model parameters at ﬁrst. Despite its simplicity, SaaS
achieves competitive results in semi-supervised learning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The key idea of our approach is to use speed of convergence as an inference criterion for the value of the unknown labels for semi-supervised learning (SSL).
Figure 1 explicitly shows the relation between label corruption and training
speed.
In SSL, one is given some labeled and some unlabeled data to train (infer the
parameters of) a classiﬁer, in hope of it performing better than if trained on the
labeled data alone [1]. This is an important problem in vision where annotations
are costly but unlabeled data are aplenty.
To measure learning speed, we use a small number of epochs as the unit
of time, and compute the decrease of the loss in that interval when following a standard optimization procedure (stochastic gradient descent or Langevin
dynamics). The main idea of our SSL algorithm is then to optimize the labels
of unlabeled data (or more precisely, the posterior distribution of the unlabeled
data) to maximize the loss decrease.
The resulting SaaS Algorithm is composed of an outer loop, which updates
the distribution of unknown labels, and an inner loop which simulates the optimization procedure over a small number of epochs.
The proposed algorithm is unusual, as the posterior distribution of the
unknown labels is initially inferred independently of the model parameters
(weights), rather than along with them as customary in SSL.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 10) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 152–166, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_10

