Lifting Layers: Analysis and Applications
Peter Ochs1 , Tim Meinhardt2 , Laura Leal-Taixe2 , and Michael Moeller3(B)
1

Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
ochs@math.uni-sb.de
2
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
{tim.meinhardt,leal.taixe}@tum.de
3
University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany
michael.moeller@uni-siegen.de

Abstract. The great advances of learning-based approaches in image
processing and computer vision are largely based on deeply nested
networks that compose linear transfer functions with suitable nonlinearities. Interestingly, the most frequently used non-linearities in imaging applications (variants of the rectiﬁed linear unit) are uncommon in
low dimensional approximation problems. In this paper we propose a
novel non-linear transfer function, called lifting, which is motivated from
a related technique in convex optimization. A lifting layer increases the
dimensionality of the input, naturally yields a linear spline when combined with a fully connected layer, and therefore closes the gap between
low and high dimensional approximation problems. Moreover, applying
the lifting operation to the loss layer of the network allows us to handle non-convex and ﬂat (zero-gradient) cost functions. We analyze the
proposed lifting theoretically, exemplify interesting properties in synthetic experiments and demonstrate its eﬀectiveness in deep learning
approaches to image classiﬁcation and denoising.
Keywords: Machine learning · Deep learning · Interpolation
Approximation theory · Convex relaxation · Lifting

1

Introduction

Deep Learning has seen a tremendous success within the last 10 years improving
the state-of-the-art in almost all computer vision and image processing tasks signiﬁcantly. While one of the main explanations for this success is the replacement
of handcrafted methods and features with data-driven approaches, the architectures of successful networks remain handcrafted and diﬃcult to interpret.
The use of some common building blocks, such as convolutions, in imaging
tasks is intuitive as they establish translational invariance. The composition of
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 4) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 53–68, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_4

