Pairwise Relational Networks for Face
Recognition
Bong-Nam Kang1(B) , Yonghyun Kim2 , and Daijin Kim1,2
1

Department of Creative IT Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
{bnkang,dkim}@postech.ac.kr
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
gkyh0805@postech.ac.kr

Abstract. Existing face recognition using deep neural networks is diﬃcult to know what kind of features are used to discriminate the identities
of face images clearly. To investigate the eﬀective features for face recognition, we propose a novel face recognition method, called a pairwise
relational network (PRN), that obtains local appearance patches around
landmark points on the feature map, and captures the pairwise relation between a pair of local appearance patches. The PRN is trained
to capture unique and discriminative pairwise relations among diﬀerent identities. Because the existence and meaning of pairwise relations
should be identity dependent, we add a face identity state feature, which
obtains from the long short-term memory (LSTM) units network with
the sequential local appearance patches on the feature maps, to the PRN.
To further improve accuracy of face recognition, we combined the global
appearance representation with the pairwise relational feature. Experimental results on the LFW show that the PRN using only pairwise
relations achieved 99.65% accuracy and the PRN using both pairwise
relations and face identity state feature achieved 99.76% accuracy. On
the YTF, both the PRN using only pairwise relations and the PRN
using pairwise relations and the face identity state feature achieved the
state-of-the-art (95.7% and 96.3%). The PRN also achieved comparable
results to the state-of-the-art for both face veriﬁcation and face identiﬁcation tasks on the IJB-A, and the state-of-the-art on the IJB-B.
Keywords: Pairwise relational network · Relations · Face recognition

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success on computer
vision community by improving the state-of-the-art in almost all of applications,
especially in classiﬁcation problems including object [12–14,20,22,29,33] scene
[43,44], and so on. The key to success of CNNs is the availability of large scale of
training data and the end-to-end learning framework. The most commonly used
CNNs perform feature learning and prediction of label information by mapping
the input raw data to deep embedded features which are commonly the output
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 646–663, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_39

