The Sound of Pixels
Hang Zhao1(B) , Chuang Gan1,2 , Andrew Rouditchenko1 , Carl Vondrick1,3 ,
Josh McDermott1 , and Antonio Torralba1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
{hangzhao,roudi,jhm,torralba}@mit.edu
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, USA
ganchuang1990@gmail.com
3
Columbia University, New York City, USA
cvondrick@gmail.com

Abstract. We introduce PixelPlayer, a system that, by leveraging large
amounts of unlabeled videos, learns to locate image regions which produce sounds and separate the input sounds into a set of components that
represents the sound from each pixel. Our approach capitalizes on the
natural synchronization of the visual and audio modalities to learn models that jointly parse sounds and images, without requiring additional
manual supervision. Experimental results on a newly collected MUSIC
dataset show that our proposed Mix-and-Separate framework outperforms several baselines on source separation. Qualitative results suggest
our model learns to ground sounds in vision, enabling applications such
as independently adjusting the volume of sound sources.
Keywords: Cross-modal learning · Sound separation and localization

1

Introduction

The world generates a rich source of visual and auditory signals. Our visual
and auditory systems are able to recognize objects in the world, segment image
regions covered by the objects, and isolate sounds produced by objects. While
auditory scene analysis [5] is widely studied in the ﬁelds of environmental sound
recognition [18,26] and source separation [4,6,9,41,42,52], the natural synchronization between vision and sound can provide a rich supervisory signal for
grounding sounds in vision [17,21,28]. Training systems to recognize objects
from vision or sound typically requires large amounts of supervision. In this
paper, however, we leverage joint audio-visual learning to discover objects that
produce sound in the world without manual supervision [1,30,36].
We show that by working with both auditory and visual information, we can
learn in an unsupervised way to recognize objects from their visual appearance
or the sound they make, to localize objects in images, and to separate the audio
component coming from each object. We introduce a new system called PixelPlayer. Given an input video, PixelPlayer jointly separates the accompanying
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 587–604, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_35

