Diverse and Coherent Paragraph
Generation from Images
Moitreya Chatterjee(B) and Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
metro.smiles@gmail.com, aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract. Paragraph generation from images, which has gained popularity recently, is an important task for video summarization, editing,
and support of the disabled. Traditional image captioning methods fall
short on this front, since they aren’t designed to generate long informative descriptions. Moreover, the vanilla approach of simply concatenating
multiple short sentences, possibly synthesized from a classical image captioning system, doesn’t embrace the intricacies of paragraphs: coherent
sentences, globally consistent structure, and diversity. To address those
challenges, we propose to augment paragraph generation techniques with
“coherence vectors,” “global topic vectors,” and modeling of the inherent
ambiguity of associating paragraphs with images, via a variational autoencoder formulation. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the developed
approach on two datasets, outperforming existing state-of-the-art techniques on both.
Keywords: Captioning · Review generation
Variational autoencoders

1

Introduction

Daily, we eﬀortlessly describe fun events to friends and family, showing them
pictures to underline the main plot. The narrative ensures that our audience
can follow along step by step and picture the missing pieces in their mind with
ease. Key to ﬁlling in the missing pieces is a consistency in our narrative which
generally follows the arrow of time.
While computer vision, natural language processing and artiﬁcial intelligence
techniques, more generally, have made great progress in describing visual content
via image or video captioning [5,11,18,29,38], the obtained result is often a single
sentence of around 20 words, describing the main observation. Even if brevity
caters to today’s short attention span, 20 words are hardly enough to describe
subtle interactions, let alone detailed plots of our experience. Those are much
more meaningfully depicted in a paragraph of reasonable length.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 45) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 747–763, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_45

