Multi-fiber Networks for Video
Recognition
Yunpeng Chen1(B) , Yannis Kalantidis2 , Jianshu Li1 , Shuicheng Yan1,3 ,
and Jiashi Feng1
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
{chenyunpeng,jianshu}@u.nus.edu,
{eleyans,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg
2
Facebook Research, Menlo Park, USA
yannisk@fb.com
3
Qihoo 360 AI Institute, Beijing, China

Abstract. In this paper, we aim to reduce the computational cost
of spatio-temporal deep neural networks, making them run as fast as
their 2D counterparts while preserving state-of-the-art accuracy on video
recognition benchmarks. To this end, we present the novel Multi-Fiber
architecture that slices a complex neural network into an ensemble of
lightweight networks or fibers that run through the network. To facilitate
information ﬂow between ﬁbers we further incorporate multiplexer modules and end up with an architecture that reduces the computational cost
of 3D networks by an order of magnitude, while increasing recognition
performance at the same time. Extensive experimental results show that
our multi-ﬁber architecture signiﬁcantly boosts the eﬃciency of existing
convolution networks for both image and video recognition tasks, achieving state-of-the-art performance on UCF-101, HMDB-51 and Kinetics
datasets. Our proposed model requires over 9× and 13× less computations than the I3D [1] and R(2+1)D [2] models, respectively, yet providing higher accuracy.
Keywords: Deep learning · Neural networks · Video · Classiﬁcation
Action recognition

1

Introduction

With the aid of deep convolutional neural networks, image understanding has
achieved remarkable success in the past few years. Notable examples include
residual networks [3] for image classiﬁcation, FastRCNN [4] for object detection,
and Deeplab [5] for semantic segmentation, to name a few. However, the progress
of deep neural networks for video analysis still lags their image counterparts,
mostly due to the extra computational cost and complexity of spatio-temporal
inputs.
The temporal dimension of videos contains valuable motion information that
needs to be incorporated for video recognition tasks. A popular and eﬀective
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 364–380, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_22

