Learning Compression from Limited
Unlabeled Data
Xiangyu He1,2

and Jian Cheng1,2,3(B)

1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{xiangyu.he,jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have dramatically
advanced the state-of-art in a number of domains. However, most models
are both computation and memory intensive, which arouse the interest
of network compression. While existing compression methods achieve
good performance, they suﬀer from three limitations: (1) the inevitable
retraining with enormous labeled data; (2) the massive GPU hours for
retraining; (3) the training tricks for model compression. Especially the
requirement of retraining on original datasets makes it diﬃcult to apply
in many real-world scenarios, where training data is not publicly available. In this paper, we reveal that re-normalization is the practical and
eﬀective way to alleviate the above limitations. Through quantization or
pruning, most methods may compress a large number of parameters but
ignore the core role in performance degradation, which is the Gaussian
conjugate prior induced by batch normalization. By employing the reestimated statistics in batch normalization, we signiﬁcantly improve the
accuracy of compressed CNNs. Extensive experiments on ImageNet show
it outperforms baselines by a large margin and is comparable to labelbased methods. Besides, the ﬁne-tuning process takes less than 5 min on
CPU, using 1000 unlabeled images.
Keywords: Deep neural networks · Label-free network compression

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved impressive performances
in many challenging problems [15,24], and even surpass human-level for certain
tasks such as ImageNet classiﬁcation [16]. As CNN-based recognition systems [3]
continue to grow, it is critical to improve inference eﬃciency while maintaining
accuracy [5].
Since network compression introduces eﬃcient approximations to CNNs and
compressed models require less memory and fewer operations, parameter quantization [8,18,30], pruning [11,13] and low-rank [33,38] representations have
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 778–795, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_46

