Deep High Dynamic Range Imaging
with Large Foreground Motions
Shangzhe Wu1,3(B) , Jiarui Xu1 , Yu-Wing Tai2 , and Chi-Keung Tang1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{swuai,jxuat}@connect.ust.hk, cktang@cs.ust.hk
2
Tencent Youtu, Shanghai, China
yuwingtai@tencent.com
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Abstract. This paper proposes the ﬁrst non-ﬂow-based deep framework for high dynamic range (HDR) imaging of dynamic scenes with
large-scale foreground motions. In state-of-the-art deep HDR imaging, input images are ﬁrst aligned using optical ﬂows before merging,
which are still error-prone due to occlusion and large motions. In stark
contrast to ﬂow-based methods, we formulate HDR imaging as an image
translation problem without optical flows. Moreover, our simple translation network can automatically hallucinate plausible HDR details in
the presence of total occlusion, saturation and under-exposure, which
are otherwise almost impossible to recover by conventional optimization
approaches. Our framework can also be extended for diﬀerent reference
images. We performed extensive qualitative and quantitative comparisons to show that our approach produces excellent results where color
artifacts and geometric distortions are signiﬁcantly reduced compared
to existing state-of-the-art methods, and is robust across various inputs,
including images without radiometric calibration.
Keywords: High dynamic range imaging
Computational photography

1

Introduction

Oﬀ-the-shelf digital cameras typically fail to capture the entire dynamic range of
a 3D scene. In order to produce high dynamic range (HDR) images, custom captures and special devices have been proposed [8,24,25]. Unfortunately, they are
usually too heavy and/or too expensive for capturing ﬂeeting moments to cherish, which are typically photographed using cellphone cameras. The other more
practical approach is to merge several low dynamic range (LDR) images captured
at diﬀerent exposures. If the LDR images are perfectly aligned, in other words
no camera motion or object motion is observed, the merging problem is considered almost solved [1,17]. However, foreground and background misalignments
This work was partially done when Shangzhe Wu was an intern at Tencent Youtu.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 120–135, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_8

