Joint Person Segmentation
and Identification in Synchronized
First- and Third-Person Videos
Mingze Xu(B) , Chenyou Fan, Yuchen Wang, Michael S. Ryoo,
and David J. Crandall
School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47408, USA
{mx6,fan6,wang617,mryoo,djcran}@indiana.edu

Abstract. In a world of pervasive cameras, public spaces are often captured from multiple perspectives by cameras of diﬀerent types, both ﬁxed
and mobile. An important problem is to organize these heterogeneous collections of videos by ﬁnding connections between them, such as identifying correspondences between the people appearing in the videos and the
people holding or wearing the cameras. In this paper, we wish to solve two
speciﬁc problems: (1) given two or more synchronized third-person videos
of a scene, produce a pixel-level segmentation of each visible person and
identify corresponding people across diﬀerent views (i.e., determine who
in camera A corresponds with whom in camera B), and (2) given one
or more synchronized third-person videos as well as a ﬁrst-person video
taken by a mobile or wearable camera, segment and identify the camera
wearer in the third-person videos. Unlike previous work which requires
ground truth bounding boxes to estimate the correspondences, we perform person segmentation and identiﬁcation jointly. We ﬁnd that solving
these two problems simultaneously is mutually beneﬁcial, because better
ﬁne-grained segmentation allows us to better perform matching across
views, and information from multiple views helps us perform more accurate segmentation. We evaluate our approach on two challenging datasets
of interacting people captured from multiple wearable cameras, and show
that our proposed method performs signiﬁcantly better than the stateof-the-art on both person segmentation and identiﬁcation.

Keyword: Synchronized ﬁrst- and third-person cameras

1

Introduction

There will be an estimated 45 billion cameras on Earth by 2022—more than
ﬁve times the number of people [25]! In a world with so many cameras, it will
be commonplace for a scene to be simultaneously recorded by multiple cameras
of diﬀerent types. For example, a busy city street may be recorded by not only
ﬁxed surveillance cameras, but also by mobile cameras on smartphones, laptops,
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 656–672, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_39

