A Modulation Module for Multi-task
Learning with Applications in Image
Retrieval
Xiangyun Zhao1 , Haoxiang Li2(B) , Xiaohui Shen3 , Xiaodan Liang4 ,
and Ying Wu1
1

EECS Department, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA
2
AIBee, Palo Alto, USA
hxli@aibee.com
3
Bytedance AI Lab, Beijing, China
4
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract. Multi-task learning has been widely adopted in many computer vision tasks to improve overall computation eﬃciency or boost the
performance of individual tasks, under the assumption that those tasks
are correlated and complementary to each other. However, the relationships between the tasks are complicated in practice, especially when the
number of involved tasks scales up. When two tasks are of weak relevance,
they may compete or even distract each other during joint training of
shared parameters, and as a consequence undermine the learning of all
the tasks. This will raise destructive interference which decreases learning
eﬃciency of shared parameters and lead to low quality loss local optimum
w.r.t. shared parameters. To address the this problem, we propose a general modulation module, which can be inserted into any convolutional
neural network architecture, to encourage the coupling and feature sharing of relevant tasks while disentangling the learning of irrelevant tasks
with minor parameters addition. Equipped with this module, gradient
directions from diﬀerent tasks can be enforced to be consistent for those
shared parameters, which beneﬁts multi-task joint training. The module
is end-to-end learnable without ad-hoc design for speciﬁc tasks, and can
naturally handle many tasks at the same time. We apply our approach
on two retrieval tasks, face retrieval on the CelebA dataset [12] and product retrieval on the UT-Zappos50K dataset [34, 35], and demonstrate its
advantage over other multi-task learning methods in both accuracy and
storage eﬃciency.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning aims to improve learning eﬃciency and boost the performance of individual tasks by jointly learning multiple tasks at the same time.
Part of the work is done when Xiangyun Zhao was an intern at Adobe Research
advised by Haoxiang Li and Xiaohui Shen.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 415–432, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_25

