Bi-box Regression for Pedestrian
Detection and Occlusion Estimation
Chunluan Zhou1,2(B)

and Junsong Yuan2

1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg
2
The State University of New York at Buﬀalo, Buﬀalo, USA
jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract. Occlusions present a great challenge for pedestrian detection
in practical applications. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
simultaneous pedestrian detection and occlusion estimation by regressing
two bounding boxes to localize the full body as well as the visible part of
a pedestrian respectively. For this purpose, we learn a deep convolutional
neural network (CNN) consisting of two branches, one for full body estimation and the other for visible part estimation. The two branches are
treated diﬀerently during training such that they are learned to produce
complementary outputs which can be further fused to improve detection
performance. The full body estimation branch is trained to regress full
body regions for positive pedestrian proposals, while the visible part estimation branch is trained to regress visible part regions for both positive
and negative pedestrian proposals. The visible part region of a negative pedestrian proposal is forced to shrink to its center. In addition,
we introduce a new criterion for selecting positive training examples,
which contributes largely to heavily occluded pedestrian detection. We
validate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed bi-box regression approach on
the Caltech and CityPersons datasets. Experimental results show that
our approach achieves promising performance for detecting both nonoccluded and occluded pedestrians, especially heavily occluded ones.
Keywords: Pedestrian detection · Occlusion handling · Deep CNN

1

Introduction

Pedestrian detection has a wide range of applications including autonomous driving, robotics and video surveillance. Many eﬀorts have been made to improve
its performance in recent years [3–6,8,17,33,34,37,39–41]. Although reasonably
good performance has been achieved on some benchmark datasets for detecting non-occluded or slightly occluded pedestrians, the performance for detecting
heavily occluded pedestrians is still far from being satisfactory. Take the Caltech dataset [9] for example. One of the top-performing approaches, SDS-RCNN
[4], achieves a miss rate of about 7.4% at 0.1 false positives per image (FPPI)
for non-occludexd or slightly occluded pedestrian detection, but its miss rate
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 138–154, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_9

