Eﬀective Use of Synthetic Data for Urban
Scene Semantic Segmentation
Fatemeh Sadat Saleh1,2(B) , Mohammad Sadegh Aliakbarian1,2,3 ,
Mathieu Salzmann4 , Lars Petersson2 , and Jose M. Alvarez5
1

ANU, Canberra, Australia
Data61-CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
{fatemehsadat.saleh,mohammadsadegh.aliakbarian,
lars.petersson}@data61.csiro.au
3
ACRV, Canberra, Australia
4
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch
5
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA
josea@nvidia.com
2

Abstract. Training a deep network to perform semantic segmentation
requires large amounts of labeled data. To alleviate the manual eﬀort
of annotating real images, researchers have investigated the use of synthetic data, which can be labeled automatically. Unfortunately, a network trained on synthetic data performs relatively poorly on real images.
While this can be addressed by domain adaptation, existing methods all
require having access to real images during training. In this paper, we
introduce a drastically diﬀerent way to handle synthetic images that
does not require seeing any real images at training time. Our approach
builds on the observation that foreground and background classes are
not aﬀected in the same manner by the domain shift, and thus should
be treated diﬀerently. In particular, the former should be handled in
a detection-based manner to better account for the fact that, while
their texture in synthetic images is not photo-realistic, their shape looks
natural. Our experiments evidence the eﬀectiveness of our approach on
Cityscapes and CamVid with models trained on synthetic data only.
Keywords: Synthetic data · Semantic segmentation
Object detection · Instance-level annotation

1

Introduction

As for many other computer vision tasks, deep networks have proven highly
eﬀective to perform semantic segmentation. Their main drawback, however, is
their requirement for vast amounts of labeled data. In particular, acquiring such
data for semantic segmentation is very expensive. For instance, pixel labeling of
This work was supported by the Australian Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 86–103, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_6

