Discriminative Region Proposal
Adversarial Networks for High-Quality
Image-to-Image Translation
Chao Wang , Haiyong Zheng(B) , Zhibin Yu , Ziqiang Zheng ,
Zhaorui Gu , and Bing Zheng
Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
chaowangplus@gmail.com,
{zhenghaiyong,yuzhibin,guzhaorui,bingzh}@ouc.edu.cn,
zhengziqiang@stu.ouc.edu.cn
http://vision.ouc.edu.cn

Abstract. Image-to-image translation has been made much progress
with embracing Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). However,
it’s still very challenging for translation tasks that require high quality, especially at high-resolution and photorealism. In this paper, we
present Discriminative Region Proposal Adversarial Networks (DRPAN)
for high-quality image-to-image translation. We decompose the procedure of image-to-image translation task into three iterated steps, ﬁrst is
to generate an image with global structure but some local artifacts (via
GAN), second is using our DRPnet to propose the most fake region from
the generated image, and third is to implement “image inpainting” on
the most fake region for more realistic result through a reviser, so that
the system (DRPAN) can be gradually optimized to synthesize images
with more attention on the most artifact local part. Experiments on a
variety of image-to-image translation tasks and datasets validate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-arts for producing high-quality translation results in terms of both human perceptual studies and automatic
quantitative measures.
Keywords: GAN · DRPAN · Image-to-image translation

1

Introduction

From the aspect of human visual perception, why we consider a synthesized
image as fake is often because it contains local artifacts. Although it looks like
real at the ﬁrst glance, we can still easily distinguish the fake from the real
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 47) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 796–812, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_47

