Tackling 3D ToF Artifacts Through
Learning and the FLAT Dataset
Qi Guo1,2 , Iuri Frosio1(B) , Orazio Gallo1 , Todd Zickler2 , and Jan Kautz1
1

NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA
ifrosio@nvidia.com
2
Harvard SEAS, Cambridge, USA

Abstract. Scene motion, multiple reﬂections, and sensor noise introduce artifacts in the depth reconstruction performed by time-of-ﬂight
cameras. We propose a two-stage, deep-learning approach to address all
of these sources of artifacts simultaneously. We also introduce FLAT, a
synthetic dataset of 2000 ToF measurements that capture all of these
nonidealities, and allows to simulate diﬀerent camera hardware. Using
the Kinect 2 camera as a baseline, we show improved reconstruction
errors over state-of-the-art methods, on both simulated and real data.
Keywords: Time-of-Flight · MPI artifacts · Motion artifacts

1

Introduction

Depth estimation is central to several computer vision applications. Among the
many existing strategies for extracting a scene’s 3D information, Time-of-Flight
(ToF) cameras are particularly popular due to their robustness and aﬀordability.
ToF cameras leverage the relation between an object’s distance from the sensor and the amount of time required for photons to travel to that object and
back. In particular, Amplitude-Modulated Continuous-Wave (AMCW) cameras
emit a periodic light signal and measure its phase delay upon return: the phase
delay oﬀers an estimate of the time of ﬂight and, in turn, of depth. Any implementation of this approach requires several careful considerations.
First and foremost, the phase delay wraps at distances that correspond to
multiples of the modulation period. A common approach is to combine information from diﬀerent modulation frequencies: longer modulation periods extend
the unambiguous range, while shorter periods allow resolving ﬁner details. Using
multiple frequencies, however, is not without consequences. The dynamic parts
of the scene may be displaced between sequential measurements at diﬀerent frequencies, causing depth estimation errors1 that are particularly strong along the
1

Some cameras use spatial multiplexing instead, and synchronize neighboring pixels
with speciﬁc emission frequencies, thus sacriﬁcing spatial resolution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 23) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.

c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 381–396, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_23

