Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
with Spatial Reasoning and Temporal
Stack Learning
Chenyang Si1,3 , Ya Jing1,3 , Wei Wang1,3(B) , Liang Wang1,2,3 ,
and Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Beijing, China
{chenyang.si,ya.jing}@cripac.ia.ac.cn,
{wangwei,wangliang,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), Beijing, China

Abstract. Skeleton-based action recognition has made great progress
recently, but many problems still remain unsolved. For example, the
representations of skeleton sequences captured by most of the previous methods lack spatial structure information and detailed temporal
dynamics features. In this paper, we propose a novel model with spatial reasoning and temporal stack learning (SR-TSL) for skeleton-based
action recognition, which consists of a spatial reasoning network (SRN)
and a temporal stack learning network (TSLN). The SRN can capture the
high-level spatial structural information within each frame by a residual
graph neural network, while the TSLN can model the detailed temporal
dynamics of skeleton sequences by a composition of multiple skip-clip
LSTMs. During training, we propose a clip-based incremental loss to
optimize the model. We perform extensive experiments on the SYSU
3D Human-Object Interaction dataset and NTU RGB+D dataset and
verify the eﬀectiveness of each network of our model. The comparison
results illustrate that our approach achieves much better results than
the state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Skeleton-based action recognition · Spatial reasoning
Temporal stack learning · Clip-based incremental loss

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is an important and challenging problem in computer
vision research. It plays an important role in many applications, such as intelligent video surveillance, sports analysis and video retrieval. Human action recognition can also help robots to have a better understanding of human behaviors,
thus robots can interact with people much better [1,21,30].
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 106–121, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_7

