Learning to Anonymize Faces for Privacy
Preserving Action Detection
Zhongzheng Ren1,2(B) , Yong Jae Lee1,2 , and Michael S. Ryoo1
1

EgoVid Inc., Daejeon, South Korea
mryoo@egovid.com
2
University of California, Davis, Davis, USA
{zzren,yongjaelee}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract. There is an increasing concern in computer vision devices
invading users’ privacy by recording unwanted videos. On the one hand,
we want the camera systems to recognize important events and assist
human daily lives by understanding its videos, but on the other hand
we want to ensure that they do not intrude people’s privacy. In this
paper, we propose a new principled approach for learning a video face
anonymizer. We use an adversarial training setting in which two competing systems ﬁght: (1) a video anonymizer that modiﬁes the original video to remove privacy-sensitive information while still trying to
maximize spatial action detection performance, and (2) a discriminator
that tries to extract privacy-sensitive information from the anonymized
videos. The end result is a video anonymizer that performs pixel-level
modiﬁcations to anonymize each person’s face, with minimal eﬀect on
action detection performance. We experimentally conﬁrm the beneﬁts
of our approach compared to conventional hand-crafted anonymization
methods including masking, blurring, and noise adding. Code, demo, and
more results can be found on our project page https://jason718.github.
io/project/privacy/main.html.

1

Introduction

Computer vision technology is enabling automatic understanding of large-scale
visual data and is becoming a crucial component of many societal applications
with ubiquitous cameras. For instance, cities are adopting networked camera
systems for policing and intelligent resource allocation, individuals are recording
their lives using wearable devices, and service robots at homes and public places
are becoming increasingly popular.
Simultaneously, there is an increasing concern in these systems invading
the privacy of their users; in particular, from unwanted video recording. On
the one hand, we want the camera systems to recognize important events and
assist human daily lives by understanding its videos, but on the other hand we
want to ensure that they do not intrude the people’s privacy. Most computer
vision algorithms require loading high resolution images/videos that can contain privacy-sensitive data to CPU/GPU memory to enable visual recognition.
They sometimes even require network access to high computing power servers,
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 639–655, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_38

