Good Line Cutting: Towards Accurate
Pose Tracking of Line-Assisted
VO/VSLAM
Yipu Zhao(B)

and Patricio A. Vela

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
yipu.zhao@gatech.edu

Abstract. This paper tackles a problem in line-assisted VO/VSLAM:
accurately solving the least squares pose optimization with unreliable 3D
line input. The solution we present is good line cutting, which extracts the
most-informative sub-segment from each 3D line for use within the pose
optimization formulation. By studying the impact of line cutting towards
the information gain of pose estimation in line-based least squares problem, we demonstrate the applicability of improving pose estimation accuracy with good line cutting. To that end, we describe an eﬃcient algorithm that approximately approaches the joint optimization problem of
good line cutting. The proposed algorithm is integrated into a stateof-the-art line-assisted VSLAM system. When evaluated in two target
scenarios of line-assisted VO/VSLAM, low-texture and motion blur, the
accuracy of pose tracking is improved, while the robustness is preserved.
Keywords: SLAM · Line feature · Least squares

1

Introduction

Visual Odometry (VO) and Visual SLAM (VSLAM) methods typically exploit
point features as they are the simplest to describe and manage. A sensible alternative or addition is to consider lines given that edges are also fairly abundant
in images; especially within man-made environments where sometimes the quantity of points may be lacking to the detriment of VO/VSLAM. The canonical
examples being corridors and hallways, whose low-texture degrades the performance of point features methods. Under these circumstances, lines become more
reliable constraints versus points.
Compared to points, additional beneﬁts of lines is that their detection is less
sensitive to the noise associated to video capturing, and that lines are trivially
stable under a wide range of viewing angles [1,2]. Additionally, lines are more
robust to motion blur [3]. Even with heavily blurred input image, one would
This work was supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. 1400256 and 1544857.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 527–543, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_32

