End-to-End View Synthesis for Light
Field Imaging with Pseudo 4DCNN
Yunlong Wang1,2 , Fei Liu2 , Zilei Wang1 , Guangqi Hou2 ,
Zhenan Sun2(B) , and Tieniu Tan1,2
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
zlwang@ustc.edu.cn
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing,
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yunlong.wang,fei.liu}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {gqhou,znsun,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract. Limited angular resolution has become the main bottleneck
of microlens-based plenoptic cameras towards practical vision applications. Existing view synthesis methods mainly break the task into two
steps, i.e. depth estimating and view warping, which are usually ineﬃcient and produce artifacts over depth ambiguities. In this paper, an endto-end deep learning framework is proposed to solve these problems by
exploring Pseudo 4DCNN. Speciﬁcally, 2D strided convolutions operated
on stacked EPIs and detail-restoration 3D CNNs connected with angular
conversion are assembled to build the Pseudo 4DCNN. The key advantage is to eﬃciently synthesize dense 4D light ﬁelds from a sparse set of
input views. The learning framework is well formulated as an entirely
trainable problem, and all the weights can be recursively updated with
standard backpropagation. The proposed framework is compared with
state-of-the-art approaches on both genuine and synthetic light ﬁeld
databases, which achieves signiﬁcant improvements of both image quality
(+2 dB higher ) and computational eﬃciency (over 10X faster ). Furthermore, the proposed framework shows good performances in real-world
applications such as biometrics and depth estimation.
Keywords: View synthesis · Light Field · End-to-end
Pseudo 4DCNN

1

Introduction

As a revolutionary imaging technology, Light Field (LF) imaging [1,11,14,23]
has attracted extensive attention from both academia and industry, especially
with the emergence of commercial plenoptic cameras [16] and recent dedication
in the ﬁeld of Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) [8]. With
additional optical components like the microlens array inserted between the main
lens and the image sensor, plenoptic cameras are capable of capturing both
intensity and direction information of rays from real-world scenes, which enables
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 340–355, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_21

