Question-Guided Hybrid Convolution for
Visual Question Answering
Peng Gao1 , Hongsheng Li1(B) , Shuang Li1 , Pan Lu1 , Yikang Li1 ,
Steven C. H. Hoi2 , and Xiaogang Wang1
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
{penggao,hsli,sli,plu,ykli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
School of Information Systems,
Singapore Management Univeristy, Singapore, Singapore
chhoi@smu.edu.sg

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a novel Question-Guided Hybrid
Convolution (QGHC) network for Visual Question Answering (VQA).
Most state-of-the-art VQA methods fuse the high-level textual and visual
features from the neural network and abandon the visual spatial information when learning multi-modal features. To address these problems,
question-guided kernels generated from the input question are designed
to convolute with visual features for capturing the textual and visual relationship in the early stage. The question-guided convolution can tightly
couple the textual and visual information but also introduce more parameters when learning kernels. We apply the group convolution, which consists of question-independent kernels and question-dependent kernels, to
reduce the parameter size and alleviate over-ﬁtting. The hybrid convolution can generate discriminative multi-modal features with fewer parameters. The proposed approach is also complementary to existing bilinear
pooling fusion and attention based VQA methods. By integrating with
them, our method could further boost the performance. Experiments on
VQA datasets validate the eﬀectiveness of QGHC.
Keywords: VQA · Dynamic parameter prediction
Group convolution

1

Introduction

Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
have shown great success in vision and language tasks [12,39,46]. Recently, CNN
and RNN are jointly trained for learning feature representations for multi-modal
tasks, including image captioning [3,4], text-to-image retrieval [5,34], and Visual
Question Answering (VQA) [6,26,40]. Among the vision-language tasks, VQA
is one of the most challenging problems. Instead of embedding images and their
textual descriptions into the same feature subspace as in the text-image matching
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 485–501, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_29

