Deep Generative Models
for Weakly-Supervised Multi-Label
Classification
Hong-Min Chu1 , Chih-Kuan Yeh2 , and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1(B)
1

College of EECS, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{r04922031,ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw
2
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
cjyeh@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract. In order to train learning models for multi-label classiﬁcation
(MLC), it is typically desirable to have a large amount of fully annotated
multi-label data. Since such annotation process is in general costly, we
focus on the learning task of weakly-supervised multi-label classiﬁcation
(WS-MLC). In this paper, we tackle WS-MLC by learning deep generative models for describing the collected data. In particular, we introduce
a sequential network architecture for constructing our generative model
with the ability to approximate observed data posterior distributions.
We show that how information of training data with missing labels or
unlabeled ones can be exploited, which allows us to learn multi-label
classiﬁers via scalable variational inferences. Empirical studies on various
scales of datasets demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed model,
which performs favorably against state-of-the-art MLC algorithms.
Keywords: Multi-label classiﬁcation · Generative models
Semi-supervised learning · Weakly-supervised learning

1

Introduction

Multi-label classiﬁcation (MLC) solves the problem of assigning multiple labels
to a single input instance, which has been seen in a variety of applications in
the ﬁelds of machine learning, computer vision, data mining, and bio-informatics
[2,9,28].
Like most classiﬁcation algorithms, one typically needs a large number of data
with ground truth labels, so that the associated MLC model can be learned
with satisfactory performance. However, for the task of MLC, collecting fully
annotated data would take extensive eﬀorts and costs. How to alleviate the above
limitation for designing eﬀective MLC models becomes a challenging yet practical
task. To be more speciﬁc, it would be desirable to train MLC models using
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 25) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 409–425, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_25

