Geometric Constrained Joint Lane
Segmentation and Lane
Boundary Detection
Jie Zhang, Yi Xu(B) , Bingbing Ni, and Zhenyu Duan
SJTU-UCLA Joint Center for Machine Perception and Inference,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{a135b920,xuyi,nibingbing,ol7650}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. Lane detection is playing an indispensable role in advanced
driver assistance systems. The existing approaches for lane detection can
be categorized as lane area segmentation and lane boundary detection.
Most of these methods abandon a great quantity of complementary information, such as geometric priors, when exploiting the lane area and the
lane boundaries alternatively. In this paper, we establish a multiple-task
learning framework to segment lane areas and detect lane boundaries
simultaneously. The main contributions of the proposed framework are
highlighted in two facets: (1) We put forward a multiple-task learning
framework with mutually interlinked sub-structures between lane segmentation and lane boundary detection to improve overall performance.
(2) A novel loss function is proposed with two geometric constraints
considered, as assumed that the lane boundary is predicted as the outer
contour of the lane area while the lane area is predicted as the area
integration result within the lane boundary lines. With an end-to-end
training process, these improvements extremely enhance the robustness
and accuracy of our approach on several metrics. The proposed framework is evaluated on KITTI dataset, CULane dataset and RVD dataset.
Compared with the state of the arts, our approach achieves the best performance on the metrics and a robust detection in varied traﬃc scenes.
Keywords: Lane segmentation · Semantic segmentation

1

Introduction

Trajectory planning [20] of autonomous driving is an challenging task in the
ﬁeld of computer vision. Lane area segmentation is a crucial issue in trajectory
planning which classiﬁes diﬀerent lanes and generates deﬁnite driving areas.
Texture-based approaches are proposed in the early works. Texture features
from diﬀerent color spaces are aggregated to enhance the robustness of lane
detection [3,22,24]. Generally, there are homogeneous regions in the lane area,
so it is diﬃcult to establish distinguishable feature descriptors for these regions.
Without adequate texture information to rely on, the supplement of lane
boundaries is critical to precise detection of lane area. Traditional approaches
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 502–518, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_30

