Recurrent Fusion Network for Image
Captioning
Wenhao Jiang1(B) , Lin Ma1 , Yu-Gang Jiang2 , Wei Liu1 , and Tong Zhang1
1

Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
cswhjiang@gmail.com, forest.linma@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu,
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org
2
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
ygj@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract. Recently, much advance has been made in image captioning,
and an encoder-decoder framework has been adopted by all the stateof-the-art models. Under this framework, an input image is encoded by
a convolutional neural network (CNN) and then translated into natural
language with a recurrent neural network (RNN). The existing models
counting on this framework employ only one kind of CNNs, e.g., ResNet
or Inception-X, which describes the image contents from only one speciﬁc
view point. Thus, the semantic meaning of the input image cannot be
comprehensively understood, which restricts improving the performance.
In this paper, to exploit the complementary information from multiple
encoders, we propose a novel recurrent fusion network (RFNet) for the
image captioning task. The fusion process in our model can exploit the
interactions among the outputs of the image encoders and generate new
compact and informative representations for the decoder. Experiments
on the MSCOCO dataset demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed
RFNet, which sets a new state-of-the-art for image captioning.
Keywords: Image captioning · Encoder-decoder framework
Recurrent fusion network (RFNet)

1

Introduction

Captioning [1–7], a task to describe images/videos with natural sentences automatically, has been an active research topic in computer vision and machine
learning. Generating natural descriptions of images is very useful in practice.
For example, it can improve the quality of image retrieval by discovering salient
contents and help visually impaired people understand image contents.
Even though a great success has been achieved in object recognition [8,9],
describing images with natural sentences is still a very challenging task. Image
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 31) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 510–526, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_31

