Grounding Visual Explanations
Lisa Anne Hendricks1(B) , Ronghang Hu1 , Trevor Darrell1 ,
and Zeynep Akata2
1
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{lisa anne,ronghang,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu
2
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
z.akata@uva.nl

Abstract. Existing visual explanation generating agents learn to ﬂuently justify a class prediction. However, they may mention visual
attributes which reﬂect a strong class prior, although the evidence may
not actually be in the image. This is particularly concerning as ultimately
such agents fail in building trust with human users. To overcome this limitation, we propose a phrase-critic model to reﬁne generated candidate
explanations augmented with ﬂipped phrases which we use as negative
examples while training. At inference time, our phrase-critic model takes
an image and a candidate explanation as input and outputs a score indicating how well the candidate explanation is grounded in the image.
Our explainable AI agent is capable of providing counter arguments for
an alternative prediction, i.e. counterfactuals, along with explanations
that justify the correct classiﬁcation decisions. Our model improves the
textual explanation quality of ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation decisions on the
CUB dataset by mentioning phrases that are grounded in the image.
Moreover, on the FOIL tasks, our agent detects when there is a mistake
in the sentence, grounds the incorrect phrase and corrects it signiﬁcantly
better than other models.
Keywords: Explainability · Counterfactuals · Grounding
Phrase correction

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks are good at localizing objects [6], predicting object
categories [7] and describing scenes with natural language [32]. However, the
reasoning behind the decision of neural networks are often hidden from the
user. Therefore, in order to interpret and monitor neural networks, providing
explanations of network decisions has gained interest [8,13,22].
Ideally, an agent that accurately explains a classiﬁer’s decision via natural
language, as depicted in Fig. 1, is expected to generate explanations such as “This
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 17) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 269–286, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_17

