Deep Video Quality Assessor:
From Spatio-Temporal Visual
Sensitivity to a Convolutional Neural
Aggregation Network
Woojae Kim1 , Jongyoo Kim2 , Sewoong Ahn1 , Jinwoo Kim1 ,
and Sanghoon Lee1(B)
1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{wooyoa,anse3832,jw09191,slee}@yonsei.ac.kr
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
jongk@microsoft.com

Abstract. Incorporating spatio-temporal human visual perception into
video quality assessment (VQA) remains a formidable issue. Previous statistical or computational models of spatio-temporal perception have limitations to be applied to the general VQA algorithms. In this paper, we
propose a novel full-reference (FR) VQA framework named Deep Video
Quality Assessor (DeepVQA) to quantify the spatio-temporal visual perception via a convolutional neural network (CNN) and a convolutional
neural aggregation network (CNAN). Our framework enables to ﬁgure
out the spatio-temporal sensitivity behavior through learning in accordance with the subjective score. In addition, to manipulate the temporal
variation of distortions, we propose a novel temporal pooling method
using an attention model. In the experiment, we show DeepVQA remarkably achieves the state-of-the-art prediction accuracy of more than 0.9
correlation, which is ∼5% higher than those of conventional methods on
the LIVE and CSIQ video databases.
Keywords: Video quality assessment · Visual sensitivity
Convolutional neural network · Attention mechanism · HVS
Temporal pooling

1

Introduction

With the explosive demand for video streaming services, it is vital to provide
videos with high quality under unpredictable network conditions. Accordingly,
video quality prediction plays an essential role in providing satisfactory streaming services to users. Since the ultimate receiver of video contents is a human,
it is essential to develop a model or methodology to pervade human perception
into the design of video quality assessment (VQA).
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 224–241, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_14

