Rolling Shutter Pose and Ego-Motion
Estimation Using Shape-from-Template
Yizhen Lao(B) , Omar Ait-Aider, and Adrien Bartoli
Institut Pascal, Université Clermont Auvergne/CNRS, Clermont-Ferrand, France
lyz91822@gmail.com, omar.ait-aider@uca.fr, adrien.bartoli@gmail.com

Abstract. We propose a new method for the absolute camera pose problem (PnP) which handles Rolling Shutter (RS) eﬀects. Unlike all existing
methods which perform 3D-2D registration after augmenting the Global
Shutter (GS) projection model with the velocity parameters under various kinematic models, we propose to use local diﬀerential constraints.
These are established by drawing an analogy with Shape-from-Template
(SfT). The main idea consists in considering that RS distortions due to
camera ego-motion during image acquisition can be interpreted as virtual
deformations of a template captured by a GS camera. Once the virtual
deformations have been recovered using SfT, the camera pose and egomotion are computed by registering the deformed scene on the original
template. This 3D-3D registration involves a 3D cost function based on
the Euclidean point distance, more physically meaningful than the reprojection error or the algebraic distance based cost functions used in
previous work. Results on both synthetic and real data show that the
proposed method outperforms existing RS pose estimation techniques in
terms of accuracy and stability of performance in various conﬁgurations.
Keywords: Rolling Shutter · Pose estimation · Shape-from-Template

1

Introduction

Many modern CMOS cameras are equipped with Rolling Shutter (RS) sensors
which are relatively low-cost and electronically advantageous compared to Global
Shutter (GS) ones. However, in RS acquisition mode, the pixel rows are exposed
sequentially from the top to the bottom of the image. Therefore, images captured
by moving RS cameras produce distortions (e.g. wobble, skew), which defeat
the classical GS geometric models in 3D computer vision. Thus, new methods
adapted to RS cameras are strongly desired. Recently, many methods have been
designed to ﬁt RS camera applications such as object pose calculation [1–3],
3D reconstruction from stereo rigs [3–5], bundle adjustment [6,7], relative pose
estimation [8], dense matching [4,9] and degeneracy understanding [10,11].
Camera pose estimation (PnP) is the problem of calculating the pose of a calibrated camera from n 3D-2D correspondences. Camera pose estimation is important and extensively used in Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM)
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 477–492, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_29

