ForestHash: Semantic Hashing with
Shallow Random Forests and Tiny
Convolutional Networks
Qiang Qiu1(B) , José Lezama2 , Alex Bronstein3 , and Guillermo Sapiro1
1

Duke University, Durham, USA
Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay
3
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
qiang.qiu@duke.edu
2

Abstract. In this paper, we introduce a random forest semantic hashing scheme that embeds tiny convolutional neural networks (CNN) into
shallow random forests. A binary hash code for a data point is obtained
by a set of decision trees, setting ‘1’ for the visited tree leaf, and ‘0’ for
the rest. We propose to ﬁrst randomly group arriving classes at each
tree split node into two groups, obtaining a signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed twoclass classiﬁcation problem that can be a handled with a light-weight
CNN weak learner. Code uniqueness is achieved via the random class
grouping, whilst code consistency is achieved using a low-rank loss in
the CNN weak learners that encourages intra-class compactness for the
two random class groups. Finally, we introduce an information-theoretic
approach for aggregating codes of individual trees into a single hash
code, producing a near-optimal unique hash for each class. The proposed
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art hashing methods for
image retrieval tasks on large-scale public datasets, and is comparable
to image classiﬁcation methods while utilizing a more compact, eﬃcient
and scalable representation. This work proposes a principled and robust
procedure to train and deploy in parallel an ensemble of light-weight
CNNs, instead of simply going deeper.

1

Introduction

In view of the recent huge interest in image classiﬁcation and object recognition
problems and the spectacular success of deep learning and random forests in
solving these tasks, modest eﬀorts are being invested into the related, and often
more diﬃcult, problems of image and multimodal content-based retrieval, and,
more generally, similarity assessment in very large-scale databases. These problems, arising as primitives in many computer vision tasks, are becoming increasingly important in the era of exponentially increasing information. Semantic
and similarity-preserving hashing methods have recently received considerable
attention for addressing such a need, in part due to their signiﬁcant memory
and computational advantage over other representations. These methods learn
to embed data points into a space of binary strings; thus producing compact
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 442–459, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_27

