Graph Adaptive Knowledge Transfer
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhengming Ding1,2(B) , Sheng Li3 , Ming Shao4 , and Yun Fu5
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University,
Boston, USA
zmding.iupui@gmail.com
2
Department of CIT, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia, Athens, USA
shengli.uga@gmail.com
4
Department of CIS, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Dartmouth, USA
mshao@umassd.edu
5
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University,
Boston, USA
yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract. Unsupervised domain adaptation has caught appealing
attentions as it facilitates the unlabeled target learning by borrowing
existing well-established source domain knowledge. Recent practice on
domain adaptation manages to extract eﬀective features by incorporating the pseudo labels for the target domain to better solve crossdomain distribution divergences. However, existing approaches separate
target label optimization and domain-invariant feature learning as different steps. To address that issue, we develop a novel Graph Adaptive
Knowledge Transfer (GAKT) model to jointly optimize target labels and
domain-free features in a uniﬁed framework. Speciﬁcally, semi-supervised
knowledge adaptation and label propagation on target data are coupled
to beneﬁt each other, and hence the marginal and conditional disparities
across diﬀerent domains will be better alleviated. Experimental evaluation on two cross-domain visual datasets demonstrates the eﬀectiveness
of our designed approach on facilitating the unlabeled target task learning, compared to the state-of-the-art domain adaptation approaches.
Keywords: Domain adaptation · Adaptive graph
Semi-supervised learning

1

Introduction

In the real-world applications, there often exists a challenge that we can get
access to the abundant target data but with limited or even no labels [1,2]. However, it would be extremely time-consuming and expensive to manually annotate
the data. Domain adaptation has shown appealing performance in handling such
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 36–52, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_3

