Unpaired Image Captioning
by Language Pivoting
Jiuxiang Gu1(B) , Shaﬁq Joty2 , Jianfei Cai2 , and Gang Wang3
1

ROSE Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
jgu004@ntu.edu.sg
2
SCSE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
{srjoty,asjfcai}@ntu.edu.sg
3
Alibaba AI Labs, Hangzhou, China
gangwang6@gmail.com

Abstract. Image captioning is a multimodal task involving computer
vision and natural language processing, where the goal is to learn a mapping from the image to its natural language description. In general, the
mapping function is learned from a training set of image-caption pairs.
However, for some language, large scale image-caption paired corpus
might not be available. We present an approach to this unpaired image
captioning problem by language pivoting. Our method can eﬀectively
capture the characteristics of an image captioner from the pivot language
(Chinese) and align it to the target language (English) using another
pivot-target (Chinese-English) sentence parallel corpus. We evaluate our
method on two image-to-English benchmark datasets: MSCOCO and
Flickr30K. Quantitative comparisons against several baseline approaches
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our method.
Keywords: Image captioning · Unpaired learning

1

Introduction

Recent several years have witnessed unprecedented advancements in automatic
image caption generation. This progress can be attributed (i) to the invention of
novel deep learning framework that learns to generate natural language descriptions of images in an end-to-end fashion, and (ii) to the availability of large
annotated corpora of images paired with captions such as MSCOCO [30] to train
these models. The dominant methods are based on an encoder-decoder framework, which uses a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to encode the image
into a feature vector, and then use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to generate the caption from the encoded vector [27,29,44]. More recently, approaches
of using attention mechanisms and reinforcement learning have dominated the
MSCOCO captioning leaderboard [1,18,39].
Despite the impressive results achieved by the deep learning framework, one
performance bottleneck is the availability of large paired datasets because neural image captioning models are generally annotation-hungry requiring a large
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 519–535, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_31

