Light Structure from Pin Motion: Simple
and Accurate Point Light Calibration
for Physics-Based Modeling
Hiroaki Santo(B) , Michael Waechter, Masaki Samejima, Yusuke Sugano,
and Yasuyuki Matsushita
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
{santo.hiroaki,waechter.michael,samejima,sugano,
yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract. We present a practical method for geometric point light
source calibration. Unlike in prior works that use Lambertian spheres,
mirror spheres, or mirror planes, our calibration target consists of a Lambertian plane and small shadow casters at unknown positions above the
plane. Due to their small size, the casters’ shadows can be localized more
precisely than highlights on mirrors. We show that, given shadow observations from a moving calibration target and a ﬁxed camera, the shadow
caster positions and the light position or direction can be simultaneously
recovered in a structure from motion framework. Our evaluation on simulated and real scenes shows that our method yields light estimates that
are stable and more accurate than existing techniques while having a
considerably simpler setup and requiring less manual labor.
This project’s source code can be downloaded from: https://github.
com/hiroaki-santo/light-structure-from-pin-motion.
Keywords: Light source calibration · Photometric stereo
Shape-from-shading · Appearance modeling · Physics-based modeling

1

Introduction

Estimating the position or direction of a light source accurately is essential for
many physics-based techniques such as shape from shading, photometric stereo,
or reﬂectance and material estimation. In these, inaccurate light positions immediately cause errors. Figure 1 shows the relation between light calibration error
and normal estimation error in a synthetic experiment with directional light, a
Lambertian sphere as target object, and a basic photometric stereo method [1,2].
We can see the importance of accurate light calibration: Working on algorithmic
improvements in photometric stereo that squeeze out the last few percent in
accuracy is futile if the improvements are overshadowed by the calibration inaccuracy. Despite the importance of accurate light calibration, it remains laborious
as researchers have not yet come up with accurate and easy to use techniques.
This paper proposes a method for calibrating both distant and near point
lights. We introduce a calibration target, shown in Fig. 2, that can be made
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11207, pp. 3–19, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_1

