Attention-GAN for Object
Transfiguration in Wild Images
Xinyuan Chen1,2,3(B) , Chang Xu3 , Xiaokang Yang1 , and Dacheng Tao3
1

MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{xychen91,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, SIT, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney,
Sydney, Australia
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
{c.xu,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract. This paper studies the object transﬁguration problem in wild
images. The generative network in classical GANs for object transﬁguration often undertakes a dual responsibility: to detect the objects of interests and to convert the object from source domain to another domain.
In contrast, we decompose the generative network into two separated
networks, each of which is only dedicated to one particular sub-task.
The attention network predicts spatial attention maps of images, and
the transformation network focuses on translating objects. Attention
maps produced by attention network are encouraged to be sparse, so that
major attention can be paid on objects of interests. No matter before or
after object transﬁguration, attention maps should remain constant. In
addition, learning attention network can receive more instructions, given
the available segmentation annotations of images. Experimental results
demonstrate the necessity of investigating attention in object transﬁguration, and that the proposed algorithm can learn accurate attention to
improve quality of generated images.
Keywords: Generative adversarial networks · Attention mechanism

1

Introduction

The task of image-to-image translation aims to translate images from a source
domain to another target domain, e.g., greyscale to color and image to semantic label. A lot of researches on image-to-image translation have been produced
in the supervised setting, where ground truths in the target domain are available. [1] learns a parametric translation function using CNNs by minimizing the
discrepancy between generated images and the corresponding target images. [2]
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 167–184, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_11

