Deep Fundamental Matrix Estimation
René Ranftl(B) and Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs, Munich, Germany
ranftlr@gmail.com

Abstract. We present an approach to robust estimation of fundamental
matrices from noisy data contaminated by outliers. The problem is cast
as a series of weighted homogeneous least-squares problems, where robust
weights are estimated using deep networks. The presented formulation
acts directly on putative correspondences and thus ﬁts into standard 3D
vision pipelines that perform feature extraction, matching, and model
ﬁtting. The approach can be trained end-to-end and yields computationally eﬃcient robust estimators. Our experiments indicate that the
presented approach is able to train robust estimators that outperform
classic approaches on real data by a signiﬁcant margin.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has shown promising results on computer vision problems such
as image categorization [20], image segmentation [24], and object detection [10].
Many problems that have been successfully tackled with deep learning share a
common trait: The mapping from input to output is diﬃcult to characterize
by explicit mathematical modeling. This is especially true for the aforementioned applications, where even simple questions like what actually constitutes
an object of a speciﬁc class cannot be answered in a simple way that lends itself
to mathematical modeling [11]. Consequently, approaches such as deep learning,
which are able to learn representations directly from large corpora of data are
necessarily superior in these tasks.
On the other hand, certain computer vision problems, such as fundamental
matrix estimation, can be deﬁned in a precise mathematical way, provided that
some assumptions are made about the data [12]. It is thus not surprising that
these subﬁelds have largely been spared by the recent surge in deep learning
research.
However, being able to deﬁne a problem in a precise mathematical way
doesn’t necessarily mean that it can be easily solved. We argue that robust
fundamental matrix estimation can be solved more accurately if the estimator
can be adapted to the data at hand. For example, in an automotive scenario
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 18) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 292–309, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_18

