Robust Image Stitching with Multiple
Registrations
Charles Herrmann1 , Chen Wang1,2 , Richard Strong Bowen1 , Emil Keyder2 ,
Michael Krainin3 , Ce Liu3 , and Ramin Zabih1,2(B)
1

Cornell Tech, New York, NY 10044, USA
{cih,chenwang,rsb,rdz}@cs.cornell.edu
2
Google Research, New York, NY 10011, USA
wangch@google.com, emilkeyder@google.com, raminz@google.com
3
Google Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
mkrainin@google.com, celiu@google.com

Abstract. Panorama creation is one of the most widely deployed techniques in computer vision. In addition to industry applications such as
Google Street View, it is also used by millions of consumers in smartphones and other cameras. Traditionally, the problem is decomposed into
three phases: registration, which picks a single transformation of each
source image to align it to the other inputs, seam ﬁnding, which selects
a source image for each pixel in the ﬁnal result, and blending, which
ﬁxes minor visual artifacts [1, 2]. Here, we observe that the use of a single registration often leads to errors, especially in scenes with signiﬁcant
depth variation or object motion. We propose instead the use of multiple registrations, permitting regions of the image at diﬀerent depths to
be captured with greater accuracy. MRF inference techniques naturally
extend to seam ﬁnding over multiple registrations, and we show here
that their energy functions can be readily modiﬁed with new terms that
discourage duplication and tearing, common problems that are exacerbated by the use of multiple registrations. Our techniques are closely
related to layer-based stereo [3, 4], and move image stitching closer to
explicit scene modeling. Experimental evidence demonstrates that our
techniques often generate signiﬁcantly better panoramas when there is
substantial motion or parallax.

1

Image Stitching and Parallax Errors

The problem of image stitching, or the creation of a panorama from a set of
overlapping images, is a well-studied topic with widespread applications [5–7].
Most modern digital cameras include a panorama creation mode, as do iPhones
and Android smartphones. Google Street View presents the user with panoramas
stitched together from images taken from moving vehicles, and the overhead
views shown in map applications from Google and Microsoft are likewise stitched
together from satellite images. Despite this ubiquity, stitching is far from solved.
In particular, stitching algorithms often produce parallax errors even in a static
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 53–69, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_4

