From Face Recognition to Models of
Identity: A Bayesian Approach to
Learning About Unknown Identities from
Unsupervised Data
Daniel Coelho de Castro1(B) and Sebastian Nowozin2
1

Imperial College London, London, UK
dc315@imperial.ac.uk
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
Sebastian.Nowozin@microsoft.com

Abstract. Current face recognition systems robustly recognize identities across a wide variety of imaging conditions. In these systems recognition is performed via classiﬁcation into known identities obtained from
supervised identity annotations. There are two problems with this current paradigm: (1) current systems are unable to beneﬁt from unlabelled
data which may be available in large quantities; and (2) current systems equate successful recognition with labelling a given input image.
Humans, on the other hand, regularly perform identiﬁcation of individuals completely unsupervised, recognising the identity of someone they
have seen before even without being able to name that individual. How
can we go beyond the current classiﬁcation paradigm towards a more
human understanding of identities? We propose an integrated Bayesian
model that coherently reasons about the observed images, identities, partial knowledge about names, and the situational context of each observation. While our model achieves good recognition performance against
known identities, it can also discover new identities from unsupervised
data and learns to associate identities with diﬀerent contexts depending on which identities tend to be observed together. In addition, the
proposed semi-supervised component is able to handle not only acquaintances, whose names are known, but also unlabelled familiar faces and
complete strangers in a uniﬁed framework.

1

Introduction

For the following discussion, we decompose the usual face identiﬁcation task into
two sub-problems: recognition and tagging. Here we understand recognition as
D. C. de Castro—Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 46) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 764–780, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_46

