Generative Domain-Migration Hashing
for Sketch-to-Image Retrieval
Jingyi Zhang1,2 , Fumin Shen1(B) , Li Liu2 , Fan Zhu2 , Mengyang Yu3 ,
Ling Shao2 , Heng Tao Shen1 , and Luc Van Gool3
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
fumin.shen@gmail.com
2
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract. Due to the succinct nature of free-hand sketch drawings,
sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) has abundant practical use cases in
consumer electronics. However, SBIR remains a long-standing unsolved
problem mainly because of the signiﬁcant discrepancy between the sketch
domain and the image domain. In this work, we propose a Generative
Domain-migration Hashing (GDH) approach, which for the ﬁrst time
generates hashing codes from synthetic natural images that are migrated
from sketches. The generative model learns a mapping that the distributions of sketches can be indistinguishable from the distribution of natural images using an adversarial loss, and simultaneously learns an inverse
mapping based on the cycle consistency loss in order to enhance the indistinguishability. With the robust mapping learned from the generative
model, GDH can migrate sketches to their indistinguishable image counterparts while preserving the domain-invariant information of sketches.
With an end-to-end multi-task learning framework, the generative model
and binarized hashing codes can be jointly optimized. Comprehensive
experiments of both category-level and ﬁne-grained SBIR on multiple
large-scale datasets demonstrate the consistently balanced superiority of
GDH in terms of eﬃciency, memory costs and eﬀectiveness (Models and
code at https://github.com/YCJGG/GDH).
Keywords: Domain-migration · Hash function · SBIR

1

Introduction

The prevalence of touchscreen in consumer electronics (range from portable
devices to large home appliance) facilitates human-machine interactions freehand drawings. The input of sketches is succinct, convenient and eﬃcient for
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 19) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 304–321, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_19

