Composition Loss for Counting, Density
Map Estimation and Localization
in Dense Crowds
Haroon Idrees1(B) , Muhmmad Tayyab5 , Kishan Athrey5 , Dong Zhang2 ,
Somaya Al-Maadeed3 , Nasir Rajpoot4 , and Mubarak Shah5
1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
hidrees@cs.cmu.edu
2
NVIDIA Inc., Santa Clara, USA
3
Computer Science Department, Faculty of Engineering,
Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
5
Center for Research in Computer Vision,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
Abstract. With multiple crowd gatherings of millions of people every
year in events ranging from pilgrimages to protests, concerts to
marathons, and festivals to funerals; visual crowd analysis is emerging
as a new frontier in computer vision. In particular, counting in highly
dense crowds is a challenging problem with far-reaching applicability in
crowd safety and management, as well as gauging political signiﬁcance
of protests and demonstrations. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that simultaneously solves the problems of counting, density map
estimation and localization of people in a given dense crowd image. Our
formulation is based on an important observation that the three problems
are inherently related to each other making the loss function for optimizing a deep CNN decomposable. Since localization requires high-quality
images and annotations, we introduce UCF-QNRF dataset that overcomes the shortcomings of previous datasets, and contains 1.25 million
humans manually marked with dot annotations. Finally, we present evaluation measures and comparison with recent deep CNNs, including those
developed speciﬁcally for crowd counting. Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art on the new dataset, which is the most challenging dataset with the largest number of crowd annotations in the most
diverse set of scenes.
Keywords: Crowd counting · Localization · Composition loss
Convolution Neural Networks

1

Introduction

Counting dense crowds is signiﬁcant both from socio-political and safety perspective. At one end of the spectrum, there are large ritual gatherings such as during
pilgrimages that typically have large crowds occurring in known and pre-deﬁned
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 544–559, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_33

