Cross-Modal Hamming Hashing
Yue Cao1,2 , Bin Liu1,2 , Mingsheng Long1,2(B) , and Jianmin Wang1,2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
caoyue10@gmail.com, liubinthss@gmail.com,
{mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software, Beijing National Research
Center for Information Science and Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract. Cross-modal hashing enables similarity retrieval across different content modalities, such as searching relevant images in response
to text queries. It provide with the advantages of computation eﬃciency
and retrieval quality for multimedia retrieval. Hamming space retrieval
enables eﬃcient constant-time search that returns data items within a
given Hamming radius to each query, by hash lookups instead of linear
scan. However, Hamming space retrieval is ineﬀective in existing crossmodal hashing methods, subject to their weak capability of concentrating
the relevant items to be within a small Hamming ball, while worse still,
the Hamming distances between hash codes from diﬀerent modalities are
inevitably large due to the large heterogeneity across diﬀerent modalities.
This work presents Cross-Modal Hamming Hashing (CMHH), a novel
deep cross-modal hashing approach that generates compact and highly
concentrated hash codes to enable eﬃcient and eﬀective Hamming space
retrieval. The main idea is to penalize signiﬁcantly on similar cross-modal
pairs with Hamming distance larger than the Hamming radius threshold,
by designing a pairwise focal loss based on the exponential distribution.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that CMHH can generate highly concentrated hash codes and achieve state-of-the-art cross-modal retrieval
performance for both hash lookups and linear scan scenarios on three
benchmark datasets, NUS-WIDE, MIRFlickr-25K, and IAPR TC-12.
Keywords: Deep hashing · Cross-modal hashing
Hamming space retrieval

1

Introduction

With the explosion of big data, large-scale and high-dimensional data has been
widespread in search engines and social networks. As relevant data items from
diﬀerent modalities may convey semantic correlations, it is signiﬁcant to support cross-modal retrieval, which returns semantically-relevant results from one
modality in response to a query of another modality. Recently, a popular and
advantageous solution to cross-modal retrieval is learning to hash [1], an approach to approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) search across diﬀerent modalc
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 207–223, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_13

