Product Quantization Network for Fast
Image Retrieval
Tan Yu1(B) , Junsong Yuan2 , Chen Fang3 , and Hailin Jin3
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
tyu008@e.ntu.edu.sg
2
State University of New York at Buﬀalo, Buﬀalo, USA
jsyuan@buffalo.edu
3
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
{cfang,hljin}@adobe.com

Abstract. Product quantization has been widely used in fast image
retrieval due to its eﬀectiveness of coding high-dimensional visual features. By extending the hard assignment to soft assignment, we make it
feasible to incorporate the product quantization as a layer of a convolutional neural network and propose our product quantization network.
Meanwhile, we come up with a novel asymmetric triplet loss, which eﬀectively boosts the retrieval accuracy of the proposed product quantization
network based on asymmetric similarity. Through the proposed product
quantization network, we can obtain a discriminative and compact image
representation in an end-to-end manner, which further enables a fast and
accurate image retrieval. Comprehensive experiments conducted on public benchmark datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of
the proposed product quantization network.

1

Introduction

Image retrieval has been a fundamental research topic in computer vision. Given
a query image, it aims to ﬁnd the relevant images from a database. Precision
and eﬃciency are two key aspects for a retrieval system. These two key aspects
also drives the image retrieval research to progress in two directions.
One direction is to design or learn a more eﬀective image representation
for a higher retrieval precision [2–5,11,18,28,30,31,40]. Good image representation maintains a large distance between irrelevant images in feature space and
keeps a close distance between relevant images. Traditional image retrieval systems generated image representation by aggregating hand-craft local features like
SIFT and the research focuses on designing a more eﬀective aggregation method
[18,30,31]. With the progress of deep learning, the convolutional neural network
provides an eﬀective image representation [2,3,28,38,41], which is trained by the
semantic information and is robust to low-level image transformations.
On the other hand, to achieve a satisfactory eﬃciency in image retrieval,
especially when dealing with a large-scale dataset, a compact image representation is necessary. Generically speaking, there are two types of schemes to gain
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 191–206, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_12

