Temporal Relational Reasoning in Videos
Bolei Zhou(B) , Alex Andonian, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
{bzhou,aandonia,oliva,torralba}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract. Temporal relational reasoning, the ability to link meaningful
transformations of objects or entities over time, is a fundamental property of intelligent species. In this paper, we introduce an eﬀective and
interpretable network module, the Temporal Relation Network (TRN),
designed to learn and reason about temporal dependencies between video
frames at multiple time scales. We evaluate TRN-equipped networks on
activity recognition tasks using three recent video datasets - SomethingSomething, Jester, and Charades - which fundamentally depend on temporal relational reasoning. Our results demonstrate that the proposed
TRN gives convolutional neural networks a remarkable capacity to discover temporal relations in videos. Through only sparsely sampled video
frames, TRN-equipped networks can accurately predict human-object
interactions in the Something-Something dataset and identify various
human gestures on the Jester dataset with very competitive performance. TRN-equipped networks also outperform two-stream networks
and 3D convolution networks in recognizing daily activities in the Charades dataset. Further analyses show that the models learn intuitive and
interpretable visual common sense knowledge in videos (Code and models are available at http://relation.csail.mit.edu/.).

1

Introduction

The ability to reason about the relations between entities over time is crucial for intelligent decision-making. Temporal relational reasoning allows intelligent species to analyze the current situation relative to the past and formulate
hypotheses on what may happen next. For example (Fig. 1), given two observations of an event, people can easily recognize the temporal relation between two
states of the visual world and deduce what has happened given only two video
frames1 .
Temporal relational reasoning is critical for activity recognition, forming the
building blocks for describing the steps of an event. A single activity can consist
of several temporal relations at both short-term and long-term timescales. For
example, the activity of sprinting contains the long-term relations of crouching
at the starting blocks, running on track, and ﬁnishing at end line, while it also
includes the short-term relations of periodic hands and feet movement.
1

Answer: (a) Poking a stack of cans so it collapses; (b) Stack something; (c) Tidying
up a closet; (d) Thumb up.

c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 831–846, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_49

