Learning with Biased
Complementary Labels
Xiyu Yu1(B) , Tongliang Liu1 , Mingming Gong2,3 , and Dacheng Tao1
1

UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT,
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
xiyu0300@uni.sydney.edu.ac, {tongliang.liu,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au
2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
mig73@pitt.edu

Abstract. In this paper, we study the classiﬁcation problem in which we
have access to easily obtainable surrogate for true labels, namely complementary labels, which specify classes that observations do not belong to.
Let Y and Ȳ be the true and complementary labels, respectively. We ﬁrst
model the annotation of complementary labels via transition probabilities P (Ȳ = i|Y = j), i = j ∈ {1, · · · , c}, where c is the number of classes.
Previous methods implicitly assume that P (Ȳ = i|Y = j), ∀i = j, are
identical, which is not true in practice because humans are biased toward
their own experience. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, if an annotator is
more familiar with monkeys than prairie dogs when providing complementary labels for meerkats, she is more likely to employ “monkey” as a
complementary label. We therefore reason that the transition probabilities will be diﬀerent. In this paper, we propose a framework that contributes three main innovations to learning with biased complementary
labels: (1) It estimates transition probabilities with no bias. (2) It provides a general method to modify traditional loss functions and extends
standard deep neural network classiﬁers to learn with biased complementary labels. (3) It theoretically ensures that the classiﬁer learned with
complementary labels converges to the optimal one learned with true
labels. Comprehensive experiments on several benchmark datasets validate the superiority of our method to current state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Multi-class classiﬁcation · Biased complementary labels
Transition matrix · Modiﬁed loss function

1

Introduction

Large-scale training datasets translate supervised learning from theories and
algorithms to practice, especially in deep supervised learning. One major
assumption that guarantees this successful translation is that data are accurately
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 5) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 69–85, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_5

