Fast and Accurate Intrinsic Symmetry
Detection
Rajendra Nagar(B)

and Shanmuganathan Raman

Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar,
Gandhinagar, India
{rajendra.nagar,shanmuga}@iitgn.ac.in

Abstract. In computer vision and graphics, various types of symmetries
are extensively studied since symmetry present in objects is a fundamental cue for understanding the shape and the structure of objects. In
this work, we detect the intrinsic reﬂective symmetry in triangle meshes
where we have to ﬁnd the intrinsically symmetric point for each point of
the shape. We establish correspondences between functions deﬁned on
the shapes by extending the functional map framework and then recover
the point-to-point correspondences. Previous approaches using the functional map for this task ﬁnd the functional correspondences matrix by
solving a non-linear optimization problem which makes them slow. In this
work, we propose a closed form solution for this matrix which makes our
approach faster. We ﬁnd the closed-form solution based on our following
results. If the given shape is intrinsically symmetric, then the shortest
length geodesic between two intrinsically symmetric points is also intrinsically symmetric. If an eigenfunction of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
for the given shape is an even (odd) function, then its restriction on the
shortest length geodesic between two intrinsically symmetric points is
also an even (odd) function. The sign of a low-frequency eigenfunction
is the same on the neighboring points. Our method is invariant to the
ordering of the eigenfunctions and has the least time complexity. We
achieve the best performance on the SCAPE dataset and comparable
performance with the state-of-the-art methods on the TOSCA dataset.
Keywords: Intrinsic symmetry · Functional map · Eigenfunction

1

Introduction

The importance of various types of symmetry is evident while solving problems such as shape segmentation, mesh repairing, shape matching, retrieving
the normal forms of 3D models [12,30,60], inverse procedural modeling [31],
shape recognition [14], shape understanding [34], shape completion [47,49], and
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 26) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 433–450, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_26

