Deblurring Natural Image Using
Super-Gaussian Fields
Yuhang Liu1 , Wenyong Dong1(B) , Dong Gong2 , Lei Zhang2 ,
and Qinfeng Shi2
1

Computer School, Wuhan University, Hubei, China
{liuyuhang,dwy}@whu.edu.cn
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
{dong.gong,lei.zhang,javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract. Blind image deblurring is a challenging problem due to its
ill-posed nature, of which the success is closely related to a proper image
prior. Although a large number of sparsity-based priors, such as the
sparse gradient prior, have been successfully applied for blind image
deblurring, they inherently suﬀer from several drawbacks, limiting their
applications. Existing sparsity-based priors are usually rooted in modeling the response of images to some speciﬁc ﬁlters (e.g., image gradients), which are insuﬃcient to capture the complicated image structures.
Moreover, the traditional sparse priors or regularizations model the ﬁlter response (e.g., image gradients) independently and thus fail to depict
the long-range correlation among them. To address the above issues,
we present a novel image prior for image deblurring based on a SuperGaussian ﬁeld model with adaptive structures. Instead of modeling the
response of the ﬁxed short-term ﬁlters, the proposed Super-Gaussian
ﬁelds capture the complicated structures in natural images by integrating potentials on all cliques (e.g., centring at each pixel) into a joint
probabilistic distribution. Considering that the ﬁxed ﬁlters in diﬀerent
scales are impractical for the coarse-to-ﬁne framework of image deblurring, we deﬁne each potential function as a super-Gaussian distribution.
Through this deﬁnition, the partition function, the curse for traditional
MRFs, can be theoretically ignored, and all model parameters of the proposed Super-Gaussian ﬁelds can be data-adaptively learned and inferred
from the blurred observation with a variational framework. Extensive
experiments on both blind deblurring and non-blind deblurring demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Image deblurring involves the estimation of a sharp image when given a blurred
observation. Generally, this problem can be formalized as follows:
y = k ⊗ x + n,

(1)

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 28) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 467–484, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_28

