Objects that Sound
Relja Arandjelović1(B) and Andrew Zisserman1,2
1

DeepMind, London, UK
relja@google.com
2
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Abstract. In this paper our objectives are, ﬁrst, networks that can
embed audio and visual inputs into a common space that is suitable
for cross-modal retrieval; and second, a network that can localize the
object that sounds in an image, given the audio signal. We achieve both
these objectives by training from unlabelled video using only audio-visual
correspondence (AVC) as the objective function. This is a form of crossmodal self-supervision from video.
To this end, we design new network architectures that can be trained
for cross-modal retrieval and localizing the sound source in an image,
by using the AVC task. We make the following contributions: (i) show
that audio and visual embeddings can be learnt that enable both withinmode (e.g. audio-to-audio) and between-mode retrieval; (ii) explore various architectures for the AVC task, including those for the visual stream
that ingest a single image, or multiple images, or a single image and
multi-frame optical ﬂow; (iii) show that the semantic object that sounds
within an image can be localized (using only the sound, no motion or ﬂow
information); and (iv) give a cautionary tale on how to avoid undesirable
shortcuts in the data preparation.

1

Introduction

There has been a recent surge of interest in cross-modal learning from images and
audio [1–4]. One reason for this surge is the availability of virtually unlimited
training material in the form of videos (e.g. from YouTube) that can provide
both an image stream and a (synchronized) audio stream, and this cross-modal
information can be used to train deep networks. Cross-modal learning itself has a
long history in computer vision, principally in the form of images and text [5–7].
Although audio and text share the fact that they are both sequential in nature,
the challenges of using audio to partner images are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to those
of using text. Text is much closer to a semantic annotation than audio. With
text, e.g. in the form of a provided caption of an image, the concepts (such as ‘a
dog’) are directly available and the problem is then to provide a correspondence
between the noun ‘dog’ and a spatial region in the image [5,8]. Whereas, for
audio, obtaining the semantics is less direct, and has more in common with
image classiﬁcation, in that the concept dog is not directly available from the
signal but requires something like a ConvNet to obtain it (think of classifying
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 451–466, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_27

