Eﬃcient Uncertainty Estimation
for Semantic Segmentation in Videos
Po-Yu Huang1(B) , Wan-Ting Hsu1(B) , Chun-Yueh Chiu1(B) ,
Ting-Fan Wu2(B) , and Min Sun1(B)
1

National Tsing Hua University, Taipei, Taiwan
andy11330@gmail.com, cindyemail0720@gmail.com,
chiupick86@gapp.nthu.edu.tw,sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
2
Umbo Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan
tingfan.wu@umbocv.com

Abstract. Uncertainty estimation in deep learning becomes more
important recently. A deep learning model can’t be applied in real applications if we don’t know whether the model is certain about the decision
or not. Some literature proposes the Bayesian neural network which can
estimate the uncertainty by Monte Carlo Dropout (MC dropout). However, MC dropout needs to forward the model N times which results in N
times slower. For real-time applications such as a self-driving car system,
which needs to obtain the prediction and the uncertainty as fast as possible, so that MC dropout becomes impractical. In this work, we propose
the region-based temporal aggregation (RTA) method which leverages
the temporal information in videos to simulate the sampling procedure.
Our RTA method with Tiramisu backbone is 10x faster than the MC
dropout with Tiramisu backbone (N = 5). Furthermore, the uncertainty
estimation obtained by our RTA method is comparable to MC dropout’s
uncertainty estimation on pixel-level and frame-level metrics.
Keywords: Uncertainty · Segmentation · Video · Eﬃcient

1

Introduction

Nowadays, deep learning has become a powerful tool in various applications.
The uncertainty estimation in deep learning has got more attention as well.
Some applications need not only the prediction of the model but also the conﬁdence of this prediction. For instance, in the biomedical ﬁeld, the conﬁdence of
cancer diagnosis is essential for doctors to make the decision. For self-driving car
system to avoid accidents, the model should know what situation haven’t seen
before and then return to human control. There are some methods of uncertainty estimation [2,11,20] for deep learning have been proposed, but most of
them need to sample several times, which is harmful to real-time applications.
Slow inference of uncertainty estimation is an important issue before applying
on real-time applications.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 536–552, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_32

