Diverse Image-to-Image Translation
via Disentangled Representations
Hsin-Ying Lee1(B) , Hung-Yu Tseng1 , Jia-Bin Huang2 , Maneesh Singh3 ,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4
1

University of California, Merced, USA
hlee246@ucmerced.edu
2
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
3
Verisk Analytics, Jersey City, USA
4
Google Cloud, Merced, USA

Abstract. Image-to-image translation aims to learn the mapping
between two visual domains. There are two main challenges for many
applications: (1) the lack of aligned training pairs and (2) multiple possible outputs from a single input image. In this work, we present an
approach based on disentangled representation for producing diverse outputs without paired training images. To achieve diversity, we propose to
embed images onto two spaces: a domain-invariant content space capturing shared information across domains and a domain-speciﬁc attribute
space. Using the disentangled features as inputs greatly reduces mode collapse. To handle unpaired training data, we introduce a novel cross-cycle
consistency loss. Qualitative results show that our model can generate
diverse and realistic images on a wide range of tasks. We validate the
eﬀectiveness of our approach through extensive evaluation.

1

Introduction

Image-to-Image (I2I) translation aims to learn the mapping between diﬀerent visual domains. Many vision and graphics problems can be formulated
as I2I translation problems, such as colorization [21,43] (grayscale → color),
super-resolution [20,23,24] (low-resolution → high-resolution), and photorealistic image synthesis [6,39] (label → image). Furthermore, I2I translation has
recently shown promising results in facilitating domain adaptation [3,15,30,33].
Learning the mapping between two visual domains is challenging for two
main reasons. First, aligned training image pairs are either diﬃcult to collect
(e.g., day scene ↔ night scene) or do not exist (e.g., artwork ↔ real photo).
Second, many such mappings are inherently multimodal — a single input may
correspond to multiple possible outputs. To handle multimodal translation, one
possible approach is to inject a random noise vector to the generator for modeling
the data distribution in the target domain. However, mode collapse may still
occur easily since the generator often ignores the additional noise vectors.
H.-Y. Lee and H.-Y. Tseng—Equal contribution.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 36–52, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_3

