Deep Recursive HDRI: Inverse Tone
Mapping Using Generative Adversarial
Networks
Siyeong Lee, Gwon Hwan An, and Suk-Ju Kang(B)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, South Korea
{siyeong,ghan,sjkang}@sogang.ac.kr

Abstract. High dynamic range images contain luminance information
of the physical world and provide more realistic experience than conventional low dynamic range images. Because most images have a low
dynamic range, recovering the lost dynamic range from a single low
dynamic range image is still prevalent. We propose a novel method
for restoring the lost dynamic range from a single low dynamic range
image through a deep neural network. The proposed method is the ﬁrst
framework to create high dynamic range images based on the estimated
multi-exposure stack using the conditional generative adversarial network structure. In this architecture, we train the network by setting
an objective function that is a combination of L1 loss and generative
adversarial network loss. In addition, this architecture has a simpliﬁed
structure than the existing networks. In the experimental results, the
proposed network generated a multi-exposure stack consisting of realistic images with varying exposure values while avoiding artifacts on public
benchmarks, compared with the existing methods. In addition, both the
multi-exposure stacks and high dynamic range images estimated by the
proposed method are signiﬁcantly similar to the ground truth than other
state-of-the-art algorithms.
Keywords: High dynamic range imaging · Inverse tone mapping
Image restoration · Computational photography
Generative adversarial network · Deep learning

1

Introduction

Most single low dynamic range (LDR) images cannot capture light information
for inﬁnite levels owing to physical sensor limitations of a camera. For the too
bright or dark area in the image, the boundary with surrounding objects does
not appear. However, a high dynamic range (HDR) image containing various
brightness information by acquiring and combining LDR images having diﬀerent
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 37) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 613–628, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_37

