Factorizable Net: An Eﬃcient
Subgraph-Based Framework for Scene
Graph Generation
Yikang Li1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Bolei Zhou3 , Jianping Shi4 , Chao Zhang5 ,
and Xiaogang Wang1(B)
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{ykli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group,
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
3
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
bzhou@csail.mit.edu
4
Sensetime Ltd., Beijing, China
shijianping@sensetime.com
5
Samsung Telecommunication Research Institute, Beijing, China
c0502.zhang@samsung.com
Abstract. Generating scene graph to describe the object interactions
inside an image gains increasing interests these years. However, most
of the previous methods use complicated structures with slow inference
speed or rely on the external data, which limits the usage of the model in
real-life scenarios. To improve the eﬃciency of scene graph generation,
we propose a subgraph-based connection graph to concisely represent
the scene graph during the inference. A bottom-up clustering method is
ﬁrst used to factorize the entire graph into subgraphs, where each subgraph contains several objects and a subset of their relationships. By
replacing the numerous relationship representations of the scene graph
with fewer subgraph and object features, the computation in the intermediate stage is signiﬁcantly reduced. In addition, spatial information is
maintained by the subgraph features, which is leveraged by our proposed
Spatial-weighted Message Passing (SMP) structure and Spatial-sensitive
Relation Inference (SRI) module to facilitate the relationship recognition. On the recent Visual Relationship Detection and Visual Genome
datasets, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art method in both
accuracy and speed. Code has been made publicly available (https://
github.com/yikang-li/FactorizableNet).
Keywords: Visual Relationship Detection · Scene graph generation
Scene understanding · Object interactions · Language and vision

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 21) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 346–363, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_21

