Person Search by Multi-Scale Matching
Xu Lan1(B) , Xiatian Zhu2 , and Shaogang Gong1
1

Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
{x.lan, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk
2
Vision Semantics Ltd., London, UK
eddy@visionsemantics.com

Abstract. We consider the problem of person search in unconstrained
scene images. Existing methods usually focus on improving the person
detection accuracy to mitigate negative eﬀects imposed by misalignment, mis-detections, and false alarms resulted from noisy people autodetection. In contrast to previous studies, we show that suﬃciently reliable person instance cropping is achievable by slightly improved stateof-the-art deep learning object detectors (e.g. Faster-RCNN), and the
under-studied multi-scale matching problem in person search is a more
severe barrier. In this work, we address this multi-scale person search
challenge by proposing a Cross-Level Semantic Alignment (CLSA) deep
learning approach capable of learning more discriminative identity feature representations in a uniﬁed end-to-end model. This is realised by
exploiting the in-network feature pyramid structure of a deep neural network enhanced by a novel cross pyramid-level semantic alignment loss
function. This favourably eliminates the need for constructing a computationally expensive image pyramid and a complex multi-branch network
architecture. Extensive experiments show the modelling advantages and
performance superiority of CLSA over the state-of-the-art person search
and multi-scale matching methods on two large person search benchmarking datasets: CUHK-SYSU and PRW.
Keywords: Person search · Person detection and re-identiﬁcation
Multi-scale matching · Feature pyramid · Image pyramid
Semantic alignment

1

Introduction

Person search aims to ﬁnd a probe person in a gallery of whole unconstrained
scene images [41]. It is an extended form of person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) [12]
by additionally considering the requirement of automatically detecting people in
the scene images besides matching the identity classes. Unlike the conventional
person re-id problem assuming the gallery images as either manually cropped or
carefully ﬁltered auto-detected bounding boxes [2,3,15,20,24,25,37,39,40,44],
person search deals with raw unreﬁned detections with many false cropping
and unknown degrees of misalignment. This yields a more challenging matching
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 553–569, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_33

