ECO: Eﬃcient Convolutional Network
for Online Video Understanding
Mohammadreza Zolfaghari(B) , Kamaljeet Singh, and Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
{zolfagha,singhk,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract. The state of the art in video understanding suﬀers from
two problems: (1) The major part of reasoning is performed locally
in the video, therefore, it misses important relationships within actions
that span several seconds. (2) While there are local methods with fast
per-frame processing, the processing of the whole video is not eﬃcient
and hampers fast video retrieval or online classiﬁcation of long-term
activities. In this paper, we introduce a network architecture (https://
github.com/mzolfaghari/ECO-eﬃcient-video-understanding) that takes
long-term content into account and enables fast per-video processing at
the same time. The architecture is based on merging long-term content
already in the network rather than in a post-hoc fusion. Together with
a sampling strategy, which exploits that neighboring frames are largely
redundant, this yields high-quality action classiﬁcation and video captioning at up to 230 videos per second, where each video can consist of
a few hundred frames. The approach achieves competitive performance
across all datasets while being 10× to 80× faster than state-of-the-art
methods.
Keywords: Online video understanding · Real-time
Action recognition · Video captioning

1

Introduction

Video understanding and, speciﬁcally, action classiﬁcation have beneﬁted a lot
from deep learning and the larger datasets that have been created in recent years.
The new datasets, such as Kinetics [20], ActivityNet [13], and SomethingSomething [10] have contributed more diversity and realism to the ﬁeld. Deep learning
provides powerful classiﬁers at interactive frame rates, enabling applications like
real-time action detection [30].
While action detection, which quickly decides on the present action within
a short time window, is fast enough to run in real-time, activity understanding,
which is concerned with longer-term activities that can span several seconds,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 43) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 713–730, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_43

