Multi-Scale Structure-Aware Network
for Human Pose Estimation
Lipeng Ke1(B) , Ming-Ching Chang2 , Honggang Qi1 , and Siwei Lyu2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
kelipeng15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hgqi@ucas.ac.cn
2
University at Albany, State University of New York, New York City, NY, USA
{mchang2,slyu}@albany.edu

Abstract. We develop a robust multi-scale structure-aware neural network for human pose estimation. This method improves the recent deep
conv-deconv hourglass models with four key improvements: (1) multiscale supervision to strengthen contextual feature learning in matching
body keypoints by combining feature heatmaps across scales, (2) multiscale regression network at the end to globally optimize the structural
matching of the multi-scale features, (3) structure-aware loss used in the
intermediate supervision and at the regression to improve the matching of keypoints and respective neighbors to infer a higher-order matching conﬁgurations, and (4) a keypoint masking training scheme that can
eﬀectively ﬁne-tune our network to robustly localize occluded keypoints
via adjacent matches. Our method can eﬀectively improve state-of-theart pose estimation methods that suﬀer from diﬃculties in scale varieties, occlusions, and complex multi-person scenarios. This multi-scale
supervision tightly integrates with the regression network to eﬀectively
(i) localize keypoints using the ensemble of multi-scale features, and
(ii) infer global pose conﬁguration by maximizing structural consistencies across multiple keypoints and scales. The keypoint masking training
enhances these advantages to focus learning on hard occlusion samples.
Our method achieves the leading position in the MPII challenge leaderboard among the state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Human pose estimation
Conv-deconv network · Multi-scale supervision

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation refers to the task of recognizing postures by localizing
body keypoints (head, shoulders, elbows, wrists, knees, ankles, etc.) from images.
We focus on the problem of single-person pose estimation from a single RGB
image with the input of a rough bounding box of a person, while the pose and the
activity of the person can be arbitrary. The task is challenging due to the large
variability of human body appearances, lighting conditions, complex background
and occlusions, body physique and posture structures of the activities performed
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 731–746, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_44

