CTAP: Complementary Temporal Action
Proposal Generation
Jiyang Gao(B) , Kan Chen, and Ram Nevatia
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
{jiyangga,kanchen,nevatia}@usc.edu

Abstract. Temporal action proposal generation is an important task,
akin to object proposals, temporal action proposals are intended to capture “clips” or temporal intervals in videos that are likely to contain
an action. Previous methods can be divided to two groups: sliding window ranking and actionness score grouping. Sliding windows uniformly
cover all segments in videos, but the temporal boundaries are imprecise; grouping based method may have more precise boundaries but it
may omit some proposals when the quality of actionness score is low.
Based on the complementary characteristics of these two methods, we
propose a novel Complementary Temporal Action Proposal (CTAP) generator. Speciﬁcally, we apply a Proposal-level Actionness Trustworthiness
Estimator (PATE) on the sliding windows proposals to generate the
probabilities indicating whether the actions can be correctly detected
by actionness scores, the windows with high scores are collected. The
collected sliding windows and actionness proposals are then processed
by a temporal convolutional neural network for proposal ranking and
boundary adjustment. CTAP outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
average recall (AR) by a large margin on THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet
1.3 datasets. We further apply CTAP as a proposal generation method
in an existing action detector, and show consistent signiﬁcant improvements.
Keywords: Temporal action proposal · Temporal action detection

1

Introduction

We focus on the task of generating accurate temporal action proposals in videos;
akin to object proposals for object detection [1], temporal action proposals are
intended to capture “clips” or temporal intervals in videos that are likely to
contain an action. There has been some previous work in this topic and it has
been shown that, as expected and in analogy with object proposals, quality of
temporal action proposals has a direct inﬂuence on the action detection performance [2,3]. High quality action proposals should reach high Average Recall
(AR) with as few number of retrieved proposals as possible.
J. Gao and K. Chen—Equal contribution. Code is in http://www.github.com/
jiyanggao/CTAP.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 70–85, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_5

