A Hybrid Model for Identity Obfuscation
by Face Replacement
Qianru Sun(B) , Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Mario Fritz,
Christian Theobalt, and Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{qsun,atewari,wxu,mfritz,theobalt,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract. As more and more personal photos are shared and tagged
in social media, avoiding privacy risks such as unintended recognition,
becomes increasingly challenging. We propose a new hybrid approach to
obfuscate identities in photos by head replacement. Our approach combines state of the art parametric face synthesis with latest advances in
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) for data-driven image synthesis. On the one hand, the parametric part of our method gives us control
over the facial parameters and allows for explicit manipulation of the
identity. On the other hand, the data-driven aspects allow for adding
ﬁne details and overall realism as well as seamless blending into the
scene context. In our experiments we show highly realistic output of our
system that improves over the previous state of the art in obfuscation
rate while preserving a higher similarity to the original image content.

1

Introduction

Visual data is shared publicly at unprecedented scales through social media.
At the same time, however, advanced image retrieval and face recognition algorithms, enabled by deep neural networks and large-scale training datasets, allow
to index and recognize privacy relevant information more reliably than ever. To
address this exploding privacy threat, methods for reliable identity obfuscation
are crucial. Ideally, such a method should not only eﬀectively hide the identity
information but also preserve the realism of the visual data, i.e., make obfuscated
people look realistic.
Existing techniques for identity obfuscation have evolved from simply covering the face with often unpleasant occluders, such as black boxes or mosaics,
to more advanced methods that produce natural images [1–3]. These methods
either perturb the imagery in an imperceptible way to confuse speciﬁc recognition algorithms [2,3], or substantially modify the appearance of the people in
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 34) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 570–586, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_34

