TextSnake: A Flexible Representation
for Detecting Text of Arbitrary Shapes
Shangbang Long1,2 , Jiaqiang Ruan1,2 , Wenjie Zhang1,2 , Xin He2 ,
Wenhao Wu2 , and Cong Yao2(B)
1
Peking University, Beijing, China
{longlongsb,jiaqiang.ruan,zhang wen jie}@pku.edu.cn
2
Megvii (Face++) Technology Inc., Beijing, China
{hexin,wwh}@megvii.com, yaocong2010@gmail.com

Abstract. Driven by deep neural networks and large scale datasets,
scene text detection methods have progressed substantially over the past
years, continuously refreshing the performance records on various standard benchmarks. However, limited by the representations (axis-aligned
rectangles, rotated rectangles or quadrangles) adopted to describe text,
existing methods may fall short when dealing with much more free-form
text instances, such as curved text, which are actually very common in
real-world scenarios. To tackle this problem, we propose a more ﬂexible
representation for scene text, termed as TextSnake, which is able to eﬀectively represent text instances in horizontal, oriented and curved forms.
In TextSnake, a text instance is described as a sequence of ordered, overlapping disks centered at symmetric axes, each of which is associated with
potentially variable radius and orientation. Such geometry attributes are
estimated via a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) model. In experiments, the text detector based on TextSnake achieves state-of-the-art or
comparable performance on Total-Text and SCUT-CTW1500, the two
newly published benchmarks with special emphasis on curved text in natural images, as well as the widely-used datasets ICDAR 2015 and MSRATD500. Speciﬁcally, TextSnake outperforms the baseline on Total-Text
by more than 40% in F-measure.
Keywords: Scene text detection · Deep neural network · Curved text

1

Introduction

In recent years, the community has witnessed a surge of research interest and
eﬀort regarding the extraction of textual information from natural scenes, a.k.a.
scene text detection and recognition [48]. The driving factors stem from both
application prospect and research value. On the one hand, scene text detection and recognition have been playing ever-increasingly important roles in a
wide range of practical systems, such as scene understanding, product search,
and autonomous driving. On the other hand, the unique traits of scene text,
for instance, signiﬁcant variations in color, scale, orientation, aspect ratio and
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 19–35, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_2

