Egocentric Activity Prediction via Event
Modulated Attention
Yang Shen, Bingbing Ni(B) , Zefan Li, and Ning Zhuang
SJTU-UCLA Joint Center for Machine Perception and Inference,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{cohakuel,bingbingni,leezf,ningzhuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. Predicting future activities from an egocentric viewpoint is
of particular interest in assisted living. However, state-of-the-art egocentric activity understanding techniques are mostly NOT capable of
predictive tasks, as their synchronous processing architecture performs
poorly in either modeling event dependency or pruning temporal redundant features. This work explicitly addresses these issues by proposing
an asynchronous gaze-event driven attentive activity prediction network.
This network is built on a gaze-event extraction module inspired by the
fact that gaze moving in/out of a certain object most probably indicates the occurrence/ending of a certain activity. The extracted gaze
events are input to: (1) an asynchronous module which reasons about
the temporal dependency between events and (2) a synchronous module
which softly attends to informative temporal durations for more compact and discriminative feature extraction. Both modules are seamlessly
integrated for collaborative prediction. Extensive experimental results on
egocentric activity prediction as well as recognition well demonstrate the
eﬀectiveness of the proposed method.
Keywords: Egocentric video · Prediction · Event · Gaze · Attention
Asynchronous

1

Introduction

Egocentric (ﬁrst-person viewpoint) activity analysis [8,28,32] is of particular
interest for assisted living. Previous methods [9,19,22] mainly focus on activity recognition (i.e., to classify those already occurred activities into diﬀerent
classes); however, for a realistic application, being able to predict an activity
before its occurrence is more important, especially in the smart home scenario.
For a certain task, the occurrence of activities is usually in order, so modeling the
relationship between continuous activities can help to predict the future activity.
However, the task of egocentric activity prediction is challenging for most of the
existing egocentric methods mainly due to their synchronous processing architecture’s limitation in both modeling event dependency and pruning temporal
redundant features. On the one hand, the dependency between activities are
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 202–217, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_13

