Inner Space Preserving Generative Pose
Machine
Shuangjun Liu and Sarah Ostadabbas(B)
Augmented Cognition Lab, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{shuliu,ostadabbas}@ece.neu.edu
http://www.northeastern.edu/ostadabbas/

Abstract. Image-based generative methods, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) have already been able to generate realistic
images with much context control, specially when they are conditioned.
However, most successful frameworks share a common procedure which
performs an image-to-image translation with pose of ﬁgures in the image
untouched. When the objective is reposing a ﬁgure in an image while preserving the rest of the image, the state-of-the-art mainly assumes a single rigid body with simple background and limited pose shift, which can
hardly be extended to the images under normal settings. In this paper,
we introduce an image “inner space” preserving model that assigns an
interpretable low-dimensional pose descriptor (LDPD) to an articulated
ﬁgure in the image. Figure reposing is then generated by passing the
LDPD and the original image through multi-stage augmented hourglass
networks in a conditional GAN structure, called inner space preserving
generative pose machine (ISP-GPM). We evaluated ISP-GPM on reposing human ﬁgures, which are highly articulated with versatile variations.
Test of a state-of-the-art pose estimator on our reposed dataset gave an
accuracy over 80% on PCK0.5 metric. The results also elucidated that
our ISP-GPM is able to preserve the background with high accuracy
while reasonably recovering the area blocked by the ﬁgure to be reposed.
Keywords: conditional Generative adversarial networks (cGANS)
Inner space preserving · Generative pose models · Articulated bodies

1

Introduction

Photographs are important because they seem to capture so much: in the right
photograph we can almost feel the sunlight, smell the ocean breeze, and see the
ﬂuttering of the birds. And yet, none of this information is actually present in a
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5 44) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 740–759, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_44

