Self-Calibrating Isometric Non-Rigid
Structure-from-Motion
Shaifali Parashar1(B) , Adrien Bartoli1 , and Daniel Pizarro1,2
1

Institut Pascal - CNRS/Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France
shaifali.parashar@gmail.com
2
GEINTRA, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Spain
http://igt.ip.uca.fr/~ab/

Abstract. We present self-calibrating isometric non-rigid structurefrom-motion (SCIso-NRSfM), the ﬁrst method to reconstruct a non-rigid
object from at least three monocular images with constant but unknown
focal length. The majority of NRSfM methods using the perspective camera simply assume that the calibration is known. SCIso-NRSfM leverages
the recent powerful diﬀerential approaches to NRSfM, based on formulating local polynomial constraints, where local means correspondencewise. In NRSfM, the local shape may be solved from these constraints.
In SCIso-NRSfM, the diﬃculty is to also solve for the focal length as
a global variable. We propose to eliminate the shape using resultants,
obtaining univariate polynomials for the focal length only, whose sum of
squares can then be globally minimized. SCIso-NRSfM thus solves for
the focal length by integrating the constraints for all correspondences
and the whole image set. Once this is done, the local shape is easily
recovered. Our experiments show that its performance is very close to
the state-of-the-art methods that use a calibrated camera.
Keywords: NRSfM · Self-calibration · Uncalibrated camera
Diﬀerential geometry · Metric tensor · Christoﬀel symbols · Resultants

1

Introduction

Estimating the intrinsic camera parameters from images is known as camera
self-calibration. In Structure-from-Motion (SfM), which is a mature technique
for the 3D reconstruction of rigid objects from monocular images, the intrinsic parameters are required to achieve Euclidean 3D reconstruction [12]. SfM
may use calibrated images directly [23,29] or uncalibrated images with selfcalibration [22,26]. SfM was extended to handle non-rigid (deformable) objects
in the last two decades with Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM). While
most recent SfM methods use the perspective camera, many early NRSfM methods [3,7,9,28,30,34] use a metric aﬃne camera, namely the orthographic or
weak-perspective camera. They handle uncalibrated images because these metric aﬃne cameras only have a scale factor as intrinsic parameter, which couples
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 259–274, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_16

