Adversarial Open-World Person
Re-Identification
Xiang Li1 , Ancong Wu1 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3(B)
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{lixiang47,wuancong}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org
2
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE,
Guangzhou, China

Abstract. In a typical real-world application of re-id, a watch-list
(gallery set) of a handful of target people (e.g. suspects) to track around
a large volume of non-target people are demanded across camera views,
and this is called the open-world person re-id. Diﬀerent from conventional
(closed-world) person re-id, a large portion of probe samples are not from
target people in the open-world setting. And, it always happens that a
non-target person would look similar to a target one and therefore would
seriously challenge a re-id system. In this work, we introduce a deep openworld group-based person re-id model based on adversarial learning to
alleviate the attack problem caused by similar non-target people. The
main idea is learning to attack feature extractor on the target people by
using GAN to generate very target-like images (imposters), and in the
meantime the model will make the feature extractor learn to tolerate
the attack by discriminative learning so as to realize group-based veriﬁcation. The framework we proposed is called the adversarial open-world
person re-identiﬁcation, and this is realized by our Adversarial PersonNet
(APN) that jointly learns a generator, a person discriminator, a target
discriminator and a feature extractor, where the feature extractor and
target discriminator share the same weights so as to makes the feature
extractor learn to tolerate the attack by imposters for better group-based
veriﬁcation. While open-world person re-id is challenging, we show for
the ﬁrst time that the adversarial-based approach helps stabilize person
re-id system under imposter attack more eﬀectively.

1

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id), which is to match a pedestrian across disjoint
camera views in diverse scenes, is practical and useful for many ﬁelds, such as
public security applications and has gained increasing interests in recent years
[3,4,6,10,11,21,33,35,36,39,41,44]. Rather than re-identifying every person in
a multiple camera network, a typical real-world application is to re-identify or
track only a handful of target people on a watch list (gallery set), which is called
the open-world person re-id problem [4,41,45]. While target people will reappear
in the camera network at diﬀerent views, a large volume of non-target people,
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 287–303, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_18

