Zero-Shot Object Detection
Ankan Bansal1(B) , Karan Sikka2 , Gaurav Sharma3 , Rama Chellappa1 ,
and Ajay Divakaran2
1

University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
{ankan,rama}@umiacs.umd.edu
2
SRI International, Princeton, NJ, USA
{karan.sikka,ajay.divakaran}@sri.com
3
NEC Labs America, Cupertino, CA, USA
grv@nec-labs.com

Abstract. We introduce and tackle the problem of zero-shot object
detection (ZSD), which aims to detect object classes which are not
observed during training. We work with a challenging set of object
classes, not restricting ourselves to similar and/or ﬁne-grained categories
as in prior works on zero-shot classiﬁcation. We present a principled approach by ﬁrst adapting visual-semantic embeddings for ZSD. We then
discuss the problems associated with selecting a background class and
motivate two background-aware approaches for learning robust detectors. One of these models uses a ﬁxed background class and the other
is based on iterative latent assignments. We also outline the challenge
associated with using a limited number of training classes and propose
a solution based on dense sampling of the semantic label space using
auxiliary data with a large number of categories. We propose novel splits
of two standard detection datasets – MSCOCO and VisualGenome, and
present extensive empirical results in both the traditional and generalized
zero-shot settings to highlight the beneﬁts of the proposed methods. We
provide useful insights into the algorithm and conclude by posing some
open questions to encourage further research.

1

Introduction

Humans can eﬀortlessly make a mental model of an object using only textual
description, while machine recognition systems, until not very long ago, needed
to be shown visual examples of every category of interest. Recently, some work
has been done on zero-shot classiﬁcation using textual descriptions [53], leveraging progress made on both visual representations [51] and semantic text embeddings [21,34,39]. In zero-shot classiﬁcation, at training time visual examples are
provided for some visual classes but during testing the model is expected to
recognize instances of classes which were not seen, with the constraint that the
new classes are semantically related to the training classes.
A. Bansal—Most of the work was done when AB was an intern at SRI International.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 397–414, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_24

