Local Orthogonal-Group Testing
Ahmet Iscen(B) and Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of EE, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
ahmet.iscen@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract. This work addresses approximate nearest neighbor search
applied in the domain of large-scale image retrieval. Within the group
testing framework we propose an eﬃcient oﬀ-line construction of
the search structures. The linear-time complexity orthogonal grouping
increases the probability that at most one element from each group is
matching to a given query. Non-maxima suppression with each group
eﬃciently reduces the number of false positive results at no extra cost.
Unlike in other well-performing approaches, all processing is local, fast,
and suitable to process data in batches and in parallel. We experimentally show that the proposed method achieves search accuracy of
the exhaustive search with signiﬁcant reduction in the search complexity. The method can be naturally combined with existing embedding
methods.
Keywords: Approximate nearest neighbours · Group testing
Image retrieval

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in approximate nearest neighbor search, specifically in large-scale image search. First, since the seminal paper of Sivic and
Zisserman [1], the image similarity was based on the bag-of-words approach [2–
6]. Eﬃcient image retrieval was performed via inverted ﬁle structure [7]. Later,
high dimensional non-sparse descriptors were introduced by VLAD [8] and Fisher
vectors [9,10]. Nowadays, image search is dominated by CNN descriptors [11–
15], which also use high dimensional non-sparse vectors to represent images.
Image similarity is typically measured by cosine similarity of the descriptors, or
equivalently by an Euclidean distance of 2 normalized vectors. Eﬃcient search
in this case is performed by (approximate) nearest neighbor search.
A number of methods exist for eﬃcient search in high dimensional data, using
a variety of approaches such as partitioning and embedding. In partitioning, the
descriptor space is subdivided and only a small fraction of the data is actually
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 28) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 460–476, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_28

