ShapeStacks: Learning Vision-Based
Physical Intuition for Generalised Object
Stacking
Oliver Groth(B) , Fabian B. Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Andrea Vedaldi
Department of Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
{ogroth,fabian,ingmar,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract. Physical intuition is pivotal for intelligent agents to perform
complex tasks. In this paper we investigate the passive acquisition of
an intuitive understanding of physical principles as well as the active
utilisation of this intuition in the context of generalised object stacking.
To this end, we provide ShapeStacks (Source code & data are available
at http://shapestacks.robots.ox.ac.uk): a simulation-based dataset featuring 20,000 stack conﬁgurations composed of a variety of elementary
geometric primitives richly annotated regarding semantics and structural
stability. We train visual classiﬁers for binary stability prediction on the
ShapeStacks data and scrutinise their learned physical intuition. Due to
the richness of the training data our approach also generalises favourably
to real-world scenarios achieving state-of-the-art stability prediction on a
publicly available benchmark of block towers. We then leverage the physical intuition learned by our model to actively construct stable stacks and
observe the emergence of an intuitive notion of stackability - an inherent
object aﬀordance - induced by the active stacking task. Our approach
performs well exceeding the stack height observed during training and
even manages to counterbalance initially unstable structures.
Keywords: Intuitive physics · Stability prediction · Object stacking

1

Introduction

Research in cognitive science [8,14] highlights how the ability of humans to
manipulate the environment depends strongly on our ability to intuitively understand its physics from visual observations. Intuitive physics may be just as important for autonomous agents to eﬀectively and eﬃciently perform complex tasks
such as object stacking or (dis-)assembly - and even the creation and use of tools.
Central to these deliberations is an understanding of the physical properties of
objects in the context of how they are meant to be used. Such object aﬀordances
are typically pre-deﬁned given knowledge of the task at hand [11,12]. In contrast,
we posit that relevant aﬀordances do not need to be speciﬁed a priori but can
be learned in a task-driven manner.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 724–739, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_43

