Materials for Masses: SVBRDF
Acquisition with a Single
Mobile Phone Image
Zhengqin Li1(B) , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , and Manmohan Chandraker1
1

University of California, San Diego, USA
zhl378@eng.ucsd.edu
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA

Abstract. We propose a material acquisition approach to recover the
spatially-varying BRDF and normal map of a near-planar surface from
a single image captured by a handheld mobile phone camera. Our
method images the surface under arbitrary environment lighting with
the ﬂash turned on, thereby avoiding shadows while simultaneously capturing high-frequency specular highlights. We train a CNN to regress an
SVBRDF and surface normals from this image. Our network is trained
using a large-scale SVBRDF dataset and designed to incorporate physical insights for material estimation, including an in-network rendering
layer to model appearance and a material classiﬁer to provide additional
supervision during training. We reﬁne the results from the network using
a dense CRF module whose terms are designed speciﬁcally for our task.
The framework is trained end-to-end and produces high quality results
for a variety of materials. We provide extensive ablation studies to evaluate our network on both synthetic and real data, while demonstrating
signiﬁcant improvements in comparisons with prior works.

1

Introduction

The wide variety of images around us are the outcome of interactions between
lighting, shapes and materials. In recent years, the advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has led to signiﬁcant advances in recovering shape using
just a single image [9,12]. In contrast, material estimation has not seen as much
progress, which might be attributed to multiple causes. First, material properties can be more complex. Even discounting more complex global illumination
eﬀects, materials are represented by a spatially-varying bidirectional reﬂectance
distribution function (SVBRDF), which is an unknown high-dimensional function that depends on exitant and incident lighting directions [25]. Second, while
large-scale synthetic and real datasets have been collected for shape estimation
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9 5) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11207, pp. 74–90, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_5

