Eﬃcient 6-DoF Tracking of Handheld
Objects from an Egocentric Viewpoint
Rohit Pandey(B) , Pavel Pidlypenskyi, Shuoran Yang,
and Christine Kaeser-Chen
Google Inc., Mountain View, USA
rohitpandey@google.com, podlipensky@google.com, shuorany@google.com,
christinech@google.com

Abstract. Virtual and augmented reality technologies have seen significant growth in the past few years. A key component of such systems is
the ability to track the pose of head mounted displays and controllers in
3D space. We tackle the problem of eﬃcient 6-DoF tracking of a handheld controller from egocentric camera perspectives. We collected the
HMD Controller dataset which consist of over 540,000 stereo image pairs
labelled with the full 6-DoF pose of the handheld controller. Our proposed SSD-AF-Stereo3D model achieves a mean average error of 33.5 mm
in 3D keypoint prediction and is used in conjunction with an IMU sensor
on the controller to enable 6-DoF tracking. We also present results on
approaches for model based full 6-DoF tracking. All our models operate
under the strict constraints of real time mobile CPU inference.
Keywords: Virtual reality · 6DoF dataset · Handheld object tracking
MobileNet · SSD · Pose estimation

1

Introduction

In the past few years, virtual reality (VR) systems have seen an increased
demand. These devices are typically in the form of a head mounted display
(HMD) for rendering the virtual scene, and single or dual handheld controllers
for interaction. The HMD and controllers need to be tracked in position and orientation to create an immersive experience. The tracking can either be 3 degrees
of freedom (DoF) including only orientation (roll, pitch and yaw) or 6-DoF which
includes position in 3D space as well.
More realistic experiences can be created with 6-DoF tracking but it often
requires additional hardware. VR headsets like the HTC Vive use external IR
cameras and markers for tracking, restricting the system to be only operational
in limited space. Newer mobile 6-DoF headsets can achieve similar results with
inside out tracking. Such headsets have one or more outward facing cameras
attached to the headset. By applying localization algorithms such as SLAM on
R. Pandey and P. Pidlypenskyi—Equal contribution.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 426–441, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_26

