Audio-Visual Event Localization
in Unconstrained Videos
Yapeng Tian(B) , Jing Shi , Bochen Li , Zhiyao Duan ,
and Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester, Rochester, USA
yapengtian@rochester.edu

Abstract. In this paper, we introduce a novel problem of audio-visual
event localization in unconstrained videos. We deﬁne an audio-visual
event as an event that is both visible and audible in a video segment. We collect an Audio-Visual Event (AVE) dataset to systemically
investigate three temporal localization tasks: supervised and weaklysupervised audio-visual event localization, and cross-modality localization. We develop an audio-guided visual attention mechanism to explore
audio-visual correlations, propose a dual multimodal residual network
(DMRN) to fuse information over the two modalities, and introduce
an audio-visual distance learning network to handle the cross-modality
localization. Our experiments support the following ﬁndings: joint modeling of auditory and visual modalities outperforms independent modeling,
the learned attention can capture semantics of sounding objects, temporal alignment is important for audio-visual fusion, the proposed DMRN is
eﬀective in fusing audio-visual features, and strong correlations between
the two modalities enable cross-modality localization.
Keywords: Audio-visual event · Temporal localization · Attention
Fusion

1

Introduction

Studies in neurobiology suggest that the perceptual beneﬁts of integrating visual
and auditory information are extensive [9]. For computational models, they
reﬂect in lip reading [5,12], where correlations between speech and lip movements
provide a strong cue for linguistic understanding; in music performance [32],
where vibrato articulations and hand motions enable the association between
sound tracks and the performers; and in sound synthesis [41], where physical
interactions with diﬀerent types of material give rise to plausible sound patterns.
Albeit these advances, these models are limited in their constrained domains.
Indeed, our community has begun to explore marrying computer vision with
audition in-the-wild for learning a good representation [2,6,42]. For example, a
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8 16) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 252–268, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_16

