Stereo Vision-Based Semantic 3D Object
and Ego-Motion Tracking for
Autonomous Driving
Peiliang Li(B) , Tong Qin , and Shaojie Shen
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
{pliap,tong.qin,eeshaojie}@ust.hk

Abstract. We propose a stereo vision-based approach for tracking the
camera ego-motion and 3D semantic objects in dynamic autonomous
driving scenarios. Instead of directly regressing the 3D bounding box
using end-to-end approaches, we propose to use the easy-to-labeled 2D
detection and discrete viewpoint classiﬁcation together with a lightweight semantic inference method to obtain rough 3D object measurements. Based on the object-aware-aided camera pose tracking which is
robust in dynamic environments, in combination with our novel dynamic
object bundle adjustment (BA) approach to fuse temporal sparse feature
correspondences and the semantic 3D measurement model, we obtain 3D
object pose, velocity and anchored dynamic point cloud estimation with
instance accuracy and temporal consistency. The performance of our proposed method is demonstrated in diverse scenarios. Both the ego-motion
estimation and object localization are compared with the state-of-of-theart solutions.
Keywords: Semantic SLAM · 3D object localization
Visual Odometry

1

Introduction

Localizing dynamic objects and estimating the camera ego-motion in 3D space
are crucial tasks for autonomous driving. Currently, these objectives are separately explored by end-to-end 3D object detection methods [1,2] and traditional
visual SLAM approaches [3–5]. However, it is hard to directly employ these
approaches for autonomous driving scenarios. For 3D object detection, there are
two main problems: 1. end-to-end 3D regression approaches need lots of training data and require heavy workload to precisely label all the object boxes in
3D space and 2. the instance 3D detection produces frame-independent results,
which are not consistent enough for continuous perception in autonomous driving. To overcome this, we propose a light-weight semantic 3D box inference
method depending only on 2D object detection and discrete viewpoint classiﬁcation (Sect. 4). Comparing with directly 3D regression, the 2D detection and
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 664–679, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_40

