Deep Cross-Modal Projection Learning
for Image-Text Matching
Ying Zhang

and Huchuan Lu(B)

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
zydl0907@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract. The key point of image-text matching is how to accurately
measure the similarity between visual and textual inputs. Despite the
great progress of associating the deep cross-modal embeddings with the
bi-directional ranking loss, developing the strategies for mining useful
triplets and selecting appropriate margins remains a challenge in real
applications. In this paper, we propose a cross-modal projection matching (CMPM) loss and a cross-modal projection classiﬁcation (CMPC)
loss for learning discriminative image-text embeddings. The CMPM loss
minimizes the KL divergence between the projection compatibility distributions and the normalized matching distributions deﬁned with all the
positive and negative samples in a mini-batch. The CMPC loss attempts
to categorize the vector projection of representations from one modality
onto another with the improved norm-softmax loss, for further enhancing the feature compactness of each class. Extensive analysis and experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
approach.
Keywords: Image-text matching · Cross-modal projection
Joint embedding learning · Deep learning

1

Introduction

Exploring the relationship between image and natural language has recently
attracted great interest among researchers, due to its great importance in various applications, such as bi-directional image and text retrieval [22,44], natural language object retrieval [10], image captioning [35,43], and visual question answering (VQA) [1,18]. A critical task for these applications is to measure the similarity between visual data and textual descriptions. Existing deep
learning approaches either attempts to learn joint embeddings [21,39,40,44] for
image and text in a shared latent space, or build a similarity learning network [11,15,16,22,40] to compute the matching score for image-text pairs. The
joint embedding learning based methods have shown great potential in learning
discriminative cross-modal representations and computation eﬃciency at the test
stage.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 707–723, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_42

