Where Are the Blobs: Counting by
Localization with Point Supervision
Issam H. Laradji1,2(B) , Negar Rostamzadeh1 , Pedro O. Pinheiro1 ,
David Vazquez1 , and Mark Schmidt1,2
1

Element AI, Montreal, Canada
{negar,pedro,dvazquez}@elementai.com
2
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada
{issamou,schmidtm}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract. Object counting is an important task in computer vision
due to its growing demand in applications such as surveillance, trafﬁc monitoring, and counting everyday objects. State-of-the-art methods
use regression-based optimization where they explicitly learn to count
the objects of interest. These often perform better than detection-based
methods that need to learn the more diﬃcult task of predicting the location, size, and shape of each object. However, we propose a detectionbased method that does not need to estimate the size and shape of the
objects and that outperforms regression-based methods. Our contributions are three-fold: (1) we propose a novel loss function that encourages the network to output a single blob per object instance using
point-level annotations only; (2) we design two methods for splitting
large predicted blobs between object instances; and (3) we show that
our method achieves new state-of-the-art results on several challenging datasets including the Pascal VOC and the Penguins dataset. Our
method even outperforms those that use stronger supervision such as
depth features, multi-point annotations, and bounding-box labels.

1

Introduction

Object counting is an important task in computer vision with many applications
in surveillance systems [3,4], traﬃc monitoring [5,6], ecological surveys [1], and
cell counting [7,8]. In traﬃc monitoring, counting methods can be used to track
the number of moving cars, pedestrians, and parked cars. They can also be used
to monitor the count of diﬀerent species such as penguins, which is important for
animal conservation. Furthermore, it has been used for counting objects present
in everyday scenes in challenging datasets where the objects of interest come
from a large number of classes such as the Pascal VOC dataset [2].
Many challenges are associated with object counting. Models need to learn
the variability of the objects in terms of shape, size, pose, and appearance.
Moreover, objects may appear at diﬀerent angles and resolutions, and may be
partially occluded (see Fig. 1). Also, the background, weather conditions, and
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11206, pp. 560–576, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01216-8_34

