Adaptive Aﬃnity Fields for Semantic
Segmentation
Tsung-Wei Ke(B) , Jyh-Jing Hwang(B) , Ziwei Liu(B) ,
and Stella X. Yu(B)
UC Berkeley/ICSI, Berkeley, USA
{twke,jyh,zwliu,stellayu}@berkeley.edu

Abstract. Semantic segmentation has made much progress with
increasingly powerful pixel-wise classiﬁers and incorporating structural
priors via Conditional Random Fields (CRF) or Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN). We propose a simpler alternative that learns to verify
the spatial structure of segmentation during training only. Unlike existing
approaches that enforce semantic labels on individual pixels and match
labels between neighbouring pixels, we propose the concept of Adaptive Aﬃnity Fields (AAF) to capture and match the semantic relations
between neighbouring pixels in the label space. We use adversarial learning to select the optimal aﬃnity ﬁeld size for each semantic category. It
is formulated as a minimax problem, optimizing our segmentation neural network in a best worst-case learning scenario. AAF is versatile for
representing structures as a collection of pixel-centric relations, easier to
train than GAN and more eﬃcient than CRF without run-time inference. Our extensive evaluations on PASCAL VOC 2012, Cityscapes, and
GTA5 datasets demonstrate its above-par segmentation performance and
robust generalization across domains.
Keywords: Semantic segmentation · Aﬃnity ﬁeld
Adversarial learning

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation of an image refers to the challenging task of assigning
each pixel a categorical label, e.g., motorcycle or person. Segmentation performance is often measured in a pixel-wise fashion, in terms of mean Intersection
over Union (mIoU) across categories between the ground-truth (Fig. 1b) and the
predicted label map (Fig. 1c).
Much progress has been made on segmentation with convolutional neural
nets (CNN), mostly due to increasingly powerful pixel-wise classiﬁers, e.g.,VGG16 [21,32] and ResNet [14,33], with the convolutional ﬁlters optimized by minimizing the average pixel-wise classiﬁcation error over the image.
T.-W Ke and J.-J Hwang—Equal contributors. Jyh-Jing is a visiting student from
the University of Pennsylvania.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11205, pp. 605–621, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_36

