Programmable Triangulation Light
Curtains
Jian Wang(B) , Joseph Bartels, William Whittaker,
Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{jianwan2,josephba,saswin}@andrew.cmu.edu, red@cmu.edu,
srinivas@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract. A vehicle on a road or a robot in the ﬁeld does not need
a full-featured 3D depth sensor to detect potential collisions or monitor its blind spot. Instead, it needs to only monitor if any object comes
within its near proximity which is an easier task than full depth scanning. We introduce a novel device that monitors the presence of objects
on a virtual shell near the device, which we refer to as a light curtain.
Light curtains oﬀer a light-weight, resource-eﬃcient and programmable
approach to proximity awareness for obstacle avoidance and navigation.
They also have additional beneﬁts in terms of improving visibility in fog
as well as ﬂexibility in handling light fall-oﬀ. Our prototype for generating light curtains works by rapidly rotating a line sensor and a line
laser, in synchrony. The device is capable of generating light curtains of
various shapes with a range of 20–30 m in sunlight (40 m under cloudy
skies and 50 m indoors) and adapts dynamically to the demands of the
task. We analyze properties of light curtains and various approaches to
optimize their thickness as well as power requirements. We showcase the
potential of light curtains using a range of real-world scenarios.
Keywords: Computational imaging · Proximity sensors

1

Introduction

3D sensors play an important role in the deployment of many autonomous systems including ﬁeld robots and self-driving cars. However, there are many tasks
for which a full-ﬂedged 3D scanner is often unnecessary. For example, consider
a robot that is maneuvering a dynamic terrain; here, while full 3D perception
is important for long-term path planning, it is less useful for time-critical tasks
like obstacle detection and avoidance. Similarly, in autonomous driving, collision
avoidance—a task that must be continually performed—does not require full 3D
perception of the scene. For such tasks, a proximity sensor with much reduced
energy and computational footprint is suﬃcient.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9 2) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
V. Ferrari et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2018, LNCS 11207, pp. 20–35, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_2

