The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MTAAL: Multi-Task Adversarial Active Learning for Medical Named Entity
Recognition and Normalization
Baohang Zhou,1,3 Xiangrui Cai, 2,3 Ying Zhang, 1,3∗ Wenya Guo, 1,3 Xiaojie Yuan 1,3
1

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
2
College of Cyber Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
3
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Network and Data Security Technology, Tianjin 300350, China
{zhoubaohang, guowenya}@dbis.nankai.edu.cn, {yingzhang, caixr, yuanxj}@nankai.edu.cn
Disease

（A）

Abstract
Automated medical named entity recognition and normalization are fundamental for constructing knowledge graphs and
building QA systems. When it comes to medical text, the annotation demands a foundation of expertise and professionalism. Existing methods utilize active learning to reduce costs
in corpus annotation, as well as the multi-task learning strategy to model the correlations between different tasks. However, existing models do not take task-specific features for
different tasks and diversity of query samples into account.
To address these limitations, this paper proposes a multi-task
adversarial active learning model for medical named entity
recognition and normalization. In our model, the adversarial
learning keeps the effectiveness of multi-task learning module and active learning module. The task discriminator eliminates the influence of irregular task-specific features. And
the diversity discriminator exploits the heterogeneity between
samples to meet the diversity constraint. The empirical results
on two medical benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model against the existing methods.

NER
NEN
（B）

Chemical

evidence of myocardial injury in hospitalized cocaine abusers
O

O

null

null

NER

B-Disease I-Disease O
D009202

null

NER

NEN

O

B-Chemical O

null

D003042

NEN

Adversarial
Active Learning

Conventional
Active Learning

𝑥𝑥2

𝑥𝑥3

Sample Space

𝑥𝑥4

null

Unlabeled sample
Labeled sample
NER specific feature
NEN specific feature
Shared feature
Feature space
Query sample

Figure 1: (A) shows a medical text sample. The labels from
the NER task are strongly correlated to that of the NEN task.
(B) shows two active learning schemes for the two tasks,
i.e., NEN and NER. Different feature spaces influence the
procedure of query samples in multi-task active learning.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) and named entity normalization (NEN) are the fundamental tasks for constructing
the medical knowledge graph (Wu et al. 2019) and building
QA systems (Lamurias and Couto 2019). The former tries to
find the boundaries of mentions from the medical text, and
the latter maps mentions extracted from the medical text to
standard identifiers, such as MeSH and OMIM (Zhao et al.
2019).
As shown in Figure 1(A), the locations of the NER labels correspond to those of NEN. When predicting the label of NER or NEN, the location information of one task
favors the other one. To make better use of the relevance
between label locations in two tasks, a multi-task learning
model (Zhao et al. 2019) is proposed for the medical NER
and NEN. However, it is based on supervised learning which
requires a large number of labeled corpus. It is expensive to
achieve, especially in the medical domain.
To reduce labeling costs, active learning is widely used
and trained in a semi-supervised manner. It exploits task

models to estimate the uncertainty of unlabeled samples to
query more valuable ones (Zhu and Ma 2012). The effectiveness of active learning is influenced by the performance
of task models. Considering the relevance of different tasks,
some researchers have proposed multi-task active learning
for linguistic annotations (Reichart et al. 2008; Ikhwantri
et al. 2018). The model in (Ikhwantri et al. 2018) exploits
the encoder-decoder framework with soft-shared parameters. The encoder is trained to learn the shared features beneficial to all tasks. The decoder extracts task-specific features
for predicting sequence labels.
However, the existing multi-task active learning models
do not take the influence of task-specific features and the
diversity constraint into account. Firstly, the performance
of encoder-decoder framework is influenced by the taskspecific features (Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2017). The models
utilize task-specific features to estimate uncertainty degree
for selecting the most uncertain unlabeled samples for labeling. As shown in Figure 1(B), the task-specific features mix
up in conventional active learning models which influences
the performance of NER and NEN task models. Without effectively fitting on labeled data, the conventional model se-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14586

