The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Regularizing Attention Networks for Anomaly Detection in Visual Question
Answering
Doyup Lee1 , Yeongjae Cheon2 , Wook-Shin Han1 *
POSTECH1 , South Korea
Kakao Brain2 , South Korea
{doyup.lee, wshan}@postech.ac.kr1 , yeongjae.cheon@kakaobrain.com2

Abstract

users, if a VQA model fails to detect anomalous situations
and returns wrong answer, then the incorrect answers on abnormal situations will lead to fatal accidents. However, evaluating robustness of VQA models is only limited to irrelevant questions in previous studies (Mahendru et al. 2017;
Ray et al. 2016).
Many studies focus on how DNN classifiers can detect
anomalies, such as the unrecognizable (Nguyen, Yosinski,
and Clune 2015), the irrelevant (Ray et al. 2016), or the outof-distribution (OOD) inputs (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017).
They commonly calibrate a predictive confidence by maximum softmax probability (MSP) in the output predictions
(Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018)
and detect OOD inputs. In addition, (Hendrycks, Mazeika,
and Dietterich 2019; Hein, Andriushchenko, and Bitterwolf
2019) use post-training to make the predictions have a uniform distribution on anomalies, and show that the robustness
of DNNs is significantly improved.
However, previous studies have focused only on anomaly
detection in unimodal tasks such as image or text classification, rather than on tasks with multimodal inputs, such as
VQA. Furthermore, extending anomaly detection to VQA
has not been discussed, although it is not trivial and must be
carefully conducted because of the bimodality of VQA inputs. In this study, we categorize various anomalies in VQA
into five types according to two criteria: 1) whether the images and/or questions are from OOD or not and 2) whether
the pairs of in-distribution (ID) images and questions are answerable by VQA models. From a distributional perspective,
our categorization is a disjoint and complete partition of all
possible anomalies in VQA and includes worst-case scenarios, the most frequent scenarios, and the current limitation
of VQA models.
Then, we propose a simple attention-based method to calibrate predictive confidences and detect various anomalies
in VQA. We find that MSP, which is the most common
in unimodal tasks, can only detect samples with undefined
answers, whose answers are not among the answer candidates due to the current limitation of VQA models. However, MSP cannot detect the worst-case and the most frequent scenarios, which are OOD images/questions and irrelevant pairs of images and questions respectively. Thus, we
use cross-modal attention of VQA models, which associate
most related visual objects and question tokens in an input

For stability and reliability of real-world applications, the
robustness of DNNs in unimodal tasks has been evaluated.
However, few studies consider abnormal situations that a visual question answering (VQA) model might encounter at
test time after deployment in the real-world. In this study, we
evaluate the robustness of state-of-the-art VQA models to five
different anomalies, including worst-case scenarios, the most
frequent scenarios, and the current limitation of VQA models. Different from the results in unimodal tasks, the maximum confidence of answers in VQA models cannot detect
anomalous inputs, and post-training of the outputs, such as
outlier exposure, is ineffective for VQA models. Thus, we
propose an attention-based method, which uses confidence
of reasoning between input images and questions and shows
much more promising results than the previous methods in
unimodal tasks. In addition, we show that a maximum entropy regularization of attention networks can significantly
improve the attention-based anomaly detection of the VQA
models. Thanks to the simplicity, attention-based anomaly
detection and the regularization are model-agnostic methods,
which can be used for various cross-modal attentions in the
state-of-the-art VQA models. The results imply that crossmodal attention in VQA is important to improve not only
VQA accuracy, but also the robustness to various anomalies.

Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is a challenging task that
requires a comprehensive understanding of vision, language,
and commonsense knowledge (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al.
2017). Despite the difficulty, the accuracy of VQA has constantly improved by deep neural networks (DNNs) showing
great potential for real-world applications (Anderson et al.
2018; Kim, Jun, and Zhang 2018; Yu et al. 2017, 2018,
2019). For example, a VQA system can assist the blind, allowing them to use smartphone to take pictures and pose
natural language questions about their images (Gurari et al.
2018).
Orthogonal to answer accuracy, the capability to recognize abnormal situations is essential for stability and reliability, because there is little control of the test input after deployment of the model in practice. In the example of blind
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1845

