The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

UWSpeech: Speech to Speech Translation for Unwritten Languages
Chen Zhang1 , Xu Tan2 , Yi Ren1 , Tao Qin2 , Kejun Zhang1 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1

Zhejiang University, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
zc99@zju.edu.cn, xuta@microsoft.com, rayeren@zju.edu.cn,
taoqin@microsoft.com, zhangkejun@zju.edu.cn, tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract

like in Jia et al. (2019). Continuous speech (which usually
contains content, context, speaking style, etc.) is much more
flexible to represent semantic meanings than discrete symbols (text) (van den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017; Vigliocco
et al. 2004), which makes the translation into speech harder
than translation into text. Therefore, the key to ease the
speech translation for unwritten languages is to reduce the
flexible continuous space of speech into a more restricted
discrete space.
A variety of previous works (Muthukumar and Black
2014; Chen et al. 2015; Wilkinson, Zhao, and Black 2016;
Kamper, Livescu, and Goldwater 2017; Dunbar et al. 2017;
Eloff et al. 2019; Tjandra et al. 2019; Duong et al. 2016;
Salesky, Sperber, and Black 2019) have investigated the
conversion between speech and their corresponding phonetic categories (discrete tokens) in an unsupervised manner, which mimics the way that human infants learn acoustic models in their mother tongue during their early years of
life (Versteegh et al. 2016) (some of them only focus on a
much easier task such as speech-to-text translation (Duong
et al. 2016; Salesky, Sperber, and Black 2019)). Among
these works, vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQVAE) (van den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017; Dunbar et al. 2019;
Tjandra et al. 2019; Chorowski et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019;
Tjandra, Sakti, and Nakamura 2019; Baevski, Schneider,
and Auli 2019) has been widely adopted and shown advantages over other methods. However, VQ-VAE is still purely
unsupervised and cannot ensure the quality of the learned
discrete representations. Therefore, although VQ-VAE performs very well on relatively easier tasks like speech synthesis (Dunbar et al. 2019), it cannot achieve good accuracy
on more complicated speech to speech translation where semantic representations of speech are important and more
accurate phonetic representations are required. Few works
tackle on speech to speech translation for unwritten languages (Tjandra, Sakti, and Nakamura 2019) since it is extremely challenging.
In this paper, we develop UWSpeech (UW is short for UnWritten), a translation system for unwritten languages with
three key components: 1) a converter that transforms unwritten target speech into discrete tokens, 2) a translator that
translates source-language speech into target-language discrete tokens, and 3) an inverter that converts the translated
discrete tokens back to unwritten target speech. As can be

Existing speech to speech translation systems heavily rely on
the text of target language: they usually translate source language either to target text and then synthesize target speech
from text, or directly to target speech with target text for auxiliary training. However, those methods cannot be applied
to unwritten target languages, which have no written text
or phoneme available. In this paper, we develop a translation system for unwritten languages, named as UWSpeech,
which converts target unwritten speech into discrete tokens
with a converter, and then translates source-language speech
into target discrete tokens with a translator, and finally synthesizes target speech from target discrete tokens with an
inverter. We propose a method called XL-VAE, which enhances vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE)
with cross-lingual (XL) speech recognition, to train the converter and inverter of UWSpeech jointly. Experiments on
Fisher Spanish-English conversation translation dataset show
that UWSpeech outperforms direct translation and VQ-VAE
baseline by about 16 and 10 BLEU points respectively, which
demonstrate the advantages and potentials of UWSpeech.

1

Introduction

Speech to speech translation (Lavie et al. 1997; Nakamura
et al. 2006; Wahlster 2013; Jia et al. 2019) is important to
help the understanding of cross-lingual spoken conversations and lectures, and has been used in scenarios such as
international travel or conference. Existing speech to speech
translation systems either rely on target text as a pivot (they
first translate source speech into target text and then synthesize target speech given the translated text (Lavie et al.
1997; Nakamura et al. 2006; Wahlster 2013)), or directly
translate source speech into target speech (Jia et al. 2019).
In these translation systems, the text corresponding to the
target speech is leveraged as either pivots or auxiliary training data (Jia et al. 2019); otherwise, the translation would
not be possible or the translation accuracy would drop dramatically (Jia et al. 2019).
However, there are thousands of unwritten languages in
the world (?Scharenborg et al. 2020; Godard et al. 2017),
which are purely spoken and have no written text. It is challenging to build speech translation systems for these unwritten languages without text as pivots or auxiliary training data
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14319

