The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AdvantageNAS: Efficient Neural Architecture Search with Credit Assignment
Rei Sato, Jun Sakuma, Youhei Akimoto
University of Tsukuba
RIKEN AIP
{reisato@bbo., jun@, akimoto@}cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract

(weights) in a single training process or a few training processes. It maintains a redundant deep learning model comprising numerous layers and connections, called the parent
network, which can represent all possible architectures in
the search space as its sub-network. All the parameters required by candidate architectures are possessed by the parent network and shared among different architectures. The
goodness of an architecture is evaluated using the shared parameters, which drastically reduces the computational time
for the architecture search compared to conventional approaches that require the parameters to be trained from
scratch for each candidate architecture evaluation.
From the viewpoint of GPU memory consumption, oneshot NAS can be categorized into dense propagation NAS
(DP-NAS) and sparse propagation NAS (SP-NAS). DPNAS requires the entire parent network to be loaded in the
GPU memory to perform forward and/or backward propagation, whereas SP-NAS requires only a sub-network to
be loaded. DP-NAS is more popular owing to the success
of DARTS and its successors (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang
2019; Xie et al. 2019; Yao et al. 2020). However, because
of its high memory consumption, its search space is limited.
SP-NAS overcomes this limitation and provides more flexible search spaces on a standard GPU with limited memory.
Hence, we focus on SP-NAS in this study.
To further reduce the computational cost of one-shot SPNAS, we propose a novel one-shot SP-NAS, namely AdvantageNAS. Although various factors affect the performance of
NAS (performance estimation, search space, etc.) and stateof-the-art (SOTA) performance may require a search for the
best combination of these factors, this study focuses on the
search strategy. We emphasize that the objective of this study
is not to obtain the SOTA architecture but to investigate the
efficiency of the search strategy.
AdvantageNAS is a gradient-based SP-NAS.1 This cate-

Neural architecture search (NAS) is an approach for automatically designing a neural network architecture without human
effort or expert knowledge. However, the high computational
cost of NAS limits its use in commercial applications. Two
recent NAS paradigms, namely one-shot and sparse propagation, which reduce the time and space complexities, respectively, provide clues for solving this problem. In this
paper, we propose a novel search strategy for one-shot and
sparse propagation NAS, namely AdvantageNAS, which further reduces the time complexity of NAS by reducing the
number of search iterations. AdvantageNAS is a gradientbased approach that improves the search efficiency by introducing credit assignment in gradient estimation for architecture updates. Experiments on the NAS-Bench-201 and PTB
dataset show that AdvantageNAS discovers an architecture
with higher performance under a limited time budget compared to existing sparse propagation NAS. To further reveal
the reliabilities of AdvantageNAS, we investigate it theoretically and find that it monotonically improves the expected
loss and thus converges.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance improvements in various domains. Finding a
suitable DNN architecture is critical for applying a DNN to a
new task and achieving higher performance. However, as the
architecture is defined by a combination of tens to hundreds
of hyperparameters (filter sizes of convolutional layers, existence of connections between some layers, etc.), improving such a combination requires considerable human effort
and expert knowledge. Neural architecture search (NAS)
has been studied as a promising approach for automatically
identifying sophisticated DNN architectures and overcoming the problems in applying DNNs to previously unseen
tasks.
However, the high computational cost (time and space
complexity) of NAS is a bottleneck in its applications, especially commercial applications that do not involve multiple
high-spec GPUs. Hence, reducing the computational cost of
NAS is an important research direction.
One-shot NAS reduces the time complexity of NAS by simultaneously optimizing the architecture and the parameters

1

The advantages of gradient-based approaches are as follows.
Approaches using evolutionary algorithms (e.g., (Real et al. 2017))
or progressive search methods (e.g., (Liu et al. 2018)) must define
a mutation or expansion strategy depending on the search space.
Such manual preparations depending on the search space are not required in gradient-based methods. Another advantage of gradientbased methods is that they can be easily implemented in most modern deep learning frameworks, as they support automatic differentiation of deep neural networks.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9489

