The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

STL-SGD: Speeding Up Local SGD with Stagewise Communication Period
Shuheng Shen1, 3∗ , Yifei Cheng2∗ , Jingchang Liu5 , Linli Xu1, 4†
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Ant Financial Services Group
4
IFLYTEK Co., Ltd.
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{vaip, chengyif}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jliude@cse.ust.hk, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2017; Kairouz et al. 2019; Lyu, Yu, and Yang 2020),
where the local data in each mobile client is independent and
private, resulting in high variance of the data distributions.
As representatives of distributed stochastic optimization
methods, traditional Synchronous SGD (SyncSGD) (Dekel
et al. 2012; Ghadimi and Lan 2013) and Asynchronous
SGD (AsyncSGD) (Agarwal and Duchi 2011; Lian et al.
2015) achieve linear speedup theoretically with respect to
the number of clients. Nevertheless, for both SyncSGD
and AsyncSGD, communication needs to be conducted at
each iteration and O(d) parameters are communicated each
time, incurring significant communication cost which restricts the performance in terms of time speedup. To address this dilemma, distributed algorithms with low communication cost, either by decreasing the communication frequency (Wang and Joshi 2018b; Stich 2019; Yu, Yang, and
Zhu 2019; Shen et al. 2019) or by reducing the communication bits in each round (Alistarh et al. 2017; Stich, Cordonnier, and Jaggi 2018; Tang et al. 2019), become widely
applied for large scale training.
Among them, Local SGD (Stich 2019) (also called FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017)), which conducts communication every k iterations, enjoys excellent theoretical and practical performance (Lin et al. 2018; Stich 2019). In the IID
case and the Non-IID case, the communication complexity
3
1
of Local SGD is respectively proved to be O(N 2 T 2 ) (Wang
3
3
and Joshi 2018b; Stich 2019) and O(N 4 T 4 ) (Yu, Yang,
and Zhu 2019; Shen et al. 2019), while the linear speedup
is maintained. When the objective satisfies the PolyakŁojasiewicz condition (Karimi, Nutini, and Schmidt 2016),
(Haddadpour et al. 2019a) provides a tighter theoretical
analysis which shows that the communication complexity
1
1
of Local SGD is O(N 3 T 3 ). In terms of the communication
period k, most previous studies of Local SGD choose to fix it
through the iterations. In contrast, (Wang and Joshi 2018a)
suggests using an adaptively decreasing k when the learning rate is fixed, and (Haddadpour et al. 2019a) proposes an
adaptively increasing k as the iterations go on. Nevertheless,
none of them achieve a communication complexity lower
1
1
than O(N 3 T 3 ). For strongly convex objectives, if a fixed
learning rate is adopted, Local SGD with fixed communication period is proved to achieve O(N log (N T )) (Stich and

Distributed parallel stochastic gradient descent algorithms are
workhorses for large scale machine learning tasks. Among
them, local stochastic gradient descent (Local SGD) has attracted significant attention due to its low communication
complexity. Previous studies prove that the communication
complexity of Local SGD with a fixed or an adaptive commu3
1
3
3
nication period is in the order of O(N 2 T 2 ) and O(N 4 T 4 )
when the data distributions on clients are identical (IID) or
otherwise (Non-IID), where N is the number of clients and
T is the number of iterations. In this paper, to accelerate the
convergence by reducing the communication complexity, we
propose STagewise Local SGD (STL-SGD), which increases
the communication period gradually along with decreasing
learning rate. We prove that STL-SGD can keep the same
convergence rate and linear speedup as mini-batch SGD. In
addition, as the benefit of increasing the communication period, when the objective is strongly convex or satisfies the
Polyak-Łojasiewicz condition, the communication complex1
1
ity of STL-SGD is O(N log T ) and O(N 2 T 2 ) for the IID
case and the Non-IID case respectively, achieving significant
improvements over Local SGD. Experiments on both convex
and non-convex problems demonstrate the superior performance of STL-SGD.

Introduction
We consider the task of distributed stochastic optimization,
which employs N clients to solve the following empirical
risk minimization problem:
N

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x),
N i=1

(1)

P
where fi (x) := |D1i | ξ∈Di f (x, ξ) is the local objective
of client i. Di ’s denote the data distributions among clients,
which can be possibly different. Specifically, the scenario
where Di ’s are identical corresponds to a central problem of
traditional distributed optimization. When they are not identical, (1) captures the federated learning setting (McMahan
∗

Equal contribution.
The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9576

