The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhanced Regularizers for Attributional Robustness
Anindya Sarkar, Anirban Sarkar, Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
anindya.sarkar@cse.iith.ac.in, cs16resch11006@iith.ac.in, vineethnb@ith.ac.in

Abstract

such attacks proposed in (Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou 2019), is
very important to increase faithfulness of such models to end
users. Fig 1 visually explains the vulnerability of adversarial
robust models against attribution-based attacks and how attributional training (à la adversarial training) addresses this
to a certain extent. Such findings imply the need to explore
effective strategies to improve attributional robustness.
The limited efforts until now for attributional training rely
on minimizing change in attribution due to human imperceptible change in input (Chen et al. 2019) or maximizing
similarity between input and attribution map (Kumari et al.
2019). We instead propose a new methodology for attributional robustness that is based on empirical observations.
Our studies revealed that attributional robustness gets negatively affected when: (i) an input pixel has a high attribution for a negative class (non-ground truth class) during
training; (ii) an attribution map corresponding to the positive or true class is uniformly distributed across the given
image, instead of being localized on a few pixels; or and
(iii) change of attribution, due to an human imperceptible
change in input image (without changing predicted class label), is higher for a pixel with low attribution than for a pixel
with high attribution (since this leads to significant changes
in attribution). Based on these observations, we propose a
new training procedure for attributional robustness that addresses each of these concerns and outperforms existing attributional training methods. Our methodology is inspired
by the rigidity (and non-amorphous nature) of objects in images and instigates the fact that number of true class pixels are often small compared to total number of pixels in an
image, resulting in a non-uniform (or skewed) pixel distribution of the true class attribution across spatial locations
in the image. Complementarily, for the most confusing negative class, ensuring the attribution or saliency map is not
localized helps indirectly improve the localization of the attribution of the true class.
The key contributions of our work can be summarized
as follows: (i) We propose a class attribution-based contrastive regularizer for attributional training which forces
the true class attribution to assume a skewed shape distribution, replicating the fact that few input pixels attribute
highly compared to other pixels for a true class prediction.
We also drive pixels of the attribution map corresponding to
the negative class to behave uniformly (equivalent to not lo-

Deep neural networks are the default choice of learning models for computer vision tasks. Extensive work has been carried out in recent years on explaining deep models for vision
tasks such as classification. However, recent work has shown
that it is possible for these models to produce substantially
different attribution maps even when two very similar images are given to the network, raising serious questions about
trustworthiness. To address this issue, we propose a robust
attribution training strategy to improve attributional robustness of deep neural networks. Our method carefully analyzes
the requirements for attributional robustness and introduces
two new regularizers that preserve a model’s attribution map
during attacks. Our method surpasses state-of-the-art attributional robustness methods by a margin of approximately 3%
to 9% in terms of attribution robustness measures on several
datasets including MNIST, FMNIST, Flower and GTSRB.

Introduction
In order to deploy machine learning models in safety-critical
applications like healthcare and autonomous driving, it is desirable that such models should reliably explain their predictions. As neural network architectures become increasingly
complex, explanations of the model’s prediction or behavior are even more important for developing trust and transparency to end users. For example, if a model predicts a
given pathology image to be benign, then a doctor might
be interested to investigate further to know what features or
pixels in the image led the model to this classification.
Though there exist numerous efforts in the literature on
constructing adversarially robust models (Qin et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019; Madry et al. 2018;
Chan et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2019a), surprisingly very little
work has been done in addressing issues in robustness of the
explanations generated by a model. One aspect of genuineness of a model can be in producing very similar interpretations for two very similar human-indistinguishable images
where model predictions are the same. (Ghorbani, Abid, and
Zou 2019) demonstrated the possibilities to craft changes in
an image which are imperceptible to a human, but can induce huge change in attribution maps without affecting the
model’s prediction. Hence building robust models, against
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2532

