The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Fast Exact Algorithm for the Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problem
Saman Ahmadi,1,2 Guido Tack,1 Daniel Harabor,1 Philip Kilby2
1

Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Monash University, Australia
2
CSIRO Data61, Australia
{saman.ahmadi, guido.tack, daniel.harabor}@monash.edu, philip.kilby@data61.csiro.au

Abstract

pruning strategies. The Pulse algorithm has been shown to
outperform the Lagrangian Relaxation algorithm of Santos,
Coutinho-Rodrigues, and Current (2007) and the Label Setting algorithm of Zhu and Wilhelm (2012) on small-size instances. Given the pruning strategies introduced by Lozano
and Medaglia (2013), Sedeño-Noda and Alonso-Rodrı́guez
(2015) presented an exact path ranking approach based on
the K-Shortest Paths (K-SP) algorithm to solve the RCSPP
in large networks. Their results show that K-SP outperforms
Pulse on several instances.
Thomas, Calogiuri, and Hewitt (2019) adapted bidirectional A* search to the RCSPP (RC-BDA*). Their algorithm
integrated the pruning strategies of Lozano and Medaglia
(2013) and was compared with Pulse and K-SP on the same
instances of Sedeño-Noda and Alonso-Rodrı́guez (2015).
The results show a runtime improvement over some difficult instances, but the algorithm is not competitive with
Pulse and K-SP on many simple instances. Another recent
work in the RCSPP context is the bidirectional version of the
Pulse algorithm (Cabrera et al. 2020). Bidirectional Pulse
(Bi-Pulse) is practically a combination of the DFS and the
breadth-first search (BFS) strategy which recursively explores the graph in both directions. The experimental results
of their study show that the parallel implementation of the
Bi-Pulse algorithm delivers better performance compared
to the normal Pulse algorithm and RC-BDA* on relatively
small-size instances, but still fails to find optimal solutions
for several large-size instances even with a large time limit.

Resource constrained path finding is a well studied topic
in AI, with real-world applications in different areas such
as transportation and robotics. This paper introduces several
heuristics in the resource constrained path finding context
that significantly improve the algorithmic performance of the
initialisation phase and the core search. We implement our
heuristics on top of a bidirectional A* algorithm and evaluate them on a set of large instances. The experimental results
show that, for the first time in the context of constrained path
finding, our fast and enhanced algorithm can solve all of the
benchmark instances to optimality, and compared to the state
of the art algorithms, it can improve existing runtimes by up
to four orders of magnitude on large-size network graphs.

Introduction
The Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problem (RCSPP)
is a well-known NP-hard problem (Handler and Zang 1980).
It has important real-world applications in diverse areas such
as robotics, transportation and game development. The solution to a RCSPP is a minimum-cost path that consumes a
limited amount of resources. Typical examples are finding
a shortest distance path between two locations which can
be traversed within a fixed time limit, or the quickest path
between two locations within a certain energy budget. Formally, given a directed graph G with nodes V and arcs A,
the task is to find a minimum-cost
path p from source ∈ V
P
to target ∈ V such that (i,j)∈p rij ≤ R where rij is the
resource usage of the arc between node i and node j and R
is the given upper bound on the total resource consumption.
A summary of works on traditional approaches to the
RCSPP and its elementary counterpart (when cycles also
need to be handled) such as path ranking (Santos, CoutinhoRodrigues, and Current 2007) and dynamic programming
(Righini and Salani 2008) was presented by Pugliese and
Guerriero (2013). Extensions to these approaches can also
be found in the recent literature. Lozano and Medaglia
(2013) implemented a dynamic programming solution
which explores the graph using a depth-first search (DFS)
scheme. In their Pulse algorithm, the search is redirected if
the current partial path looks unpromising by using three

Contribution: In this paper, we present an enhanced bidirectional A* algorithm for the RCSPP and introduce several
heuristics for the initialisation phase and the main search
of the algorithm that can together significantly improve its
algorithmic performance. We design our Enhanced Biased
Bidirectional A* (RC-EBBA*) algorithm on top of the basic
bidirectional A* search from the literature and evaluate it under a set of 440 benchmark instances. The experiments show
that RC-EBBA* outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms,
which have already shown good performance on large-scale
instances by one to four orders of magnitude.

Background
Bidirectional A* search was first presented by Pohl (1971).
It runs two individual A* searches (Hart, Nilsson, and

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12217

