The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EQG-RACE: Examination-Type Question Generation
Xin Jia, Wenjie Zhou, Xu Sun, Yunfang Wu∗
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
{jemmryx, wjzhou013, xusun, wuyf}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Question Generation (QG) is an essential component of the
automatic intelligent tutoring systems, which aims to generate
high-quality questions for facilitating the reading practice and
assessments. However, existing QG technologies encounter
several key issues concerning the biased and unnatural language sources of datasets which are mainly obtained from
the Web (e.g. SQuAD). In this paper, we propose an innovative Examination-type Question Generation approach (EQGRACE) to generate exam-like questions based on a dataset
extracted from RACE. Two main strategies are employed in
EQG-RACE for dealing with discrete answer information and
reasoning among long contexts. A Rough Answer and Key
Sentence Tagging scheme is utilized to enhance the representations of input. An Answer-guided Graph Convolutional Network (AG-GCN) is designed to capture structure information
in revealing the inter-sentences and intra-sentence relations.
Experimental results show a state-of-the-art performance of
EQG-RACE, which is apparently superior to the baselines. In
addition, our work has established a new QG prototype with a
reshaped dataset and QG method, which provides an important
benchmark for related research in future work. We will make
our data and code publicly available for further research.

Introduction
Automatic Question Generation (QG) aims at generating
grammatical questions for a given text, which is receiving
an increasing research interest in the NLP community. Besides enhancing question answering (QA) systems (Tang et al.
2017; Duan et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019; Zhang and Bansal
2019) and human-machine dialog generation (Wang et al.
2018a), an important purpose of QG is to generate questions
of educational materials for reading practice and assessment.
To facilitate the instructing process, QG has been investigated for many years (Kunichika et al. 2001; Mitkov 2003;
Heilman and Smith 2010).
Existing methods for QG mainly adopt web-extracted
QA datasets, such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), MSMARCO (Nguyen et al. 2016), NewsQA (Trischler et al.
2016) and CoQA (Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2018), which
are not ideal for generating questions in real context. These
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13143

datasets are either domain-specific or mono-styled (such as
news stories for NewsQA and Wikipedia articles for SQuAD
and MS-MARCO). Answers in such datasets are often short
texts extracted from the context passages and questions are
automatically extracted from the Web or generated by crowdworkers. Another dataset, LearningQ (Chen et al. 2018) is
an answer-unaware QG dataset, where questions are subjective learner-generated posts extracted from E-learning videos.
Different from these datasets, RACE (Lai et al. 2017) is collected from English exams for Chinese students, which is a
high-quality examination dataset on reading comprehension
in real context. To evaluate learners’ cognitive levels in reading, RACE contains articles of diversified genres (such as
stories, ads, news, etc.) and questions of various levels. To
generate exam-like questions in RACE, models need more
advanced abilities of summarization and reasoning.
Most QG systems usually perform sequence-to-sequence
generation (Du, Shao, and Cardie 2017; Zhou et al. 2017; Sun
et al. 2018; Zhang and Bansal 2019) with attention mechanism. To generate answer-focused questions, features including answer position, POS and NER are used for encoding the
contexts (Zhou et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018). Some works
also explore Copy or Pointer mechanism (Hosking and Riedel
2019; See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Zhao et al. 2018b) to
overcome the OOV problem.
In this paper, we propose Examination-type Question
Generation on RACE (EQG-RACE). We clean the RACE
dataset and maintain Specific-style questions to construct
an examination-type QG dataset. According to our preliminary experiments, current QG models that perform well
on SQuAD show much inferior performance on EQGRACE, indicating the domain-transfer problem of generating
examination-type questions.
As a real-world examination data designed by educational
experts, there are two main factors that make EQG-RACE
more challenging. First, answers are often complete sentences
(or long phrases) rather than short text spans contained in
the input sequences, making the previous answer tagging
method invalid. Second, the context passages are longer and
the questions are created through deep reasoning in multiple sentences, making the sequential encoding method like
LSTM dysfunction. To address the first issue, we employ a
distant-supervised method to find key answer words and key
sentences, and then incorporate them into word representa-

