The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Graph Capsule Network
Jinyu Yang1∗ , Peilin Zhao2 , Yu Rong2 , Chaochao Yan1 , Chunyuan Li1 , Hehuan Ma1 ,
Junzhou Huang1
1

University of Texas at Arlington
2
Tencent AI Lab
jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) draw their strength from explicitly modeling the topological information of structured
data. However, existing GNNs suffer from limited capability in capturing the hierarchical graph representation which
plays an important role in graph classification. In this paper,
we innovatively propose hierarchical graph capsule network
(HGCN) that can jointly learn node embeddings and extract
graph hierarchies. Specifically, disentangled graph capsules
are established by identifying heterogeneous factors underlying each node, such that their instantiation parameters represent different properties of the same entity. To learn the hierarchical representation, HGCN characterizes the part-whole
relationship between lower-level capsules (part) and higherlevel capsules (whole) by explicitly considering the structure
information among the parts. Experimental studies demonstrate the effectiveness of HGCN and the contribution of each
component. Code: https://github.com/uta-smile/HGCN

Introduction
GNNs (Scarselli et al. 2008), especially graph convolutional
networks (Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun
2015) have demonstrated remarkable performance in modeling structured data in a wide variety of fields, such as social networks (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Li et al. 2019) and graph-based representations of molecules (Gilmer et al. 2017; Rong et al. 2020a).
The common practice is to recursively update node embeddings by aggregating (or message passing) information from
topological neighbors such that the GNNs can capture the local structure of nodes. Subsequently, the learned embeddings
can be used in downstream analyses, e.g., node classification
(Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Huang et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018b; Rong et al. 2020b), link
prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018), and graph classification
(Duvenaud et al. 2015; Dai, Dai, and Song 2016; Gilmer et al.
2017). However, those GNNs fail to capture the hierarchical
representations of graphs (Ying et al. 2018b), which is essential for many scenarios. For instance, in order to predict the
properties of a given molecule, it would be highly desirable
∗
This work is done when Jinyu Yang works as an intern at
Tencent AI Lab
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10603

to infer the sub-parts which are important for the molecular
properties hierarchically.
To this end, various graph pooling methods are recently
proposed, aiming to learn the coarse-grained graph structure
by either reserving the most informative nodes (Gao and Ji
2019; Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019) or aggregating nodes belonging to the same cluster (Ying et al. 2018b; Yuan and Ji
2020; Khasahmadi et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Bianchi,
Grattarola, and Alippi 2020). In particular, the latter attracts
considerable attention mainly attributed to its remarkable performance. Such kind of methods learn a cluster assignment
matrix to map each node to a set of clusters that may correspond to strongly connected communities within a social
network or functional groups within a molecule. However,
their limitations lie in that (i) simply grouping node features
fails to effectively model the part-whole relationship that is
crucial in characterizing the hierarchical structure, and (ii)
they ignore the entanglement of the latent factors behind
node embeddings, resulting in limited capacity in preserving
detailed node/graph properties and modeling graph hierarchy.
For example, it is of particular importance to consider the
interaction of heterogeneous factors (e.g., work, hobby) underlying each node, in order to identify the communities in a
social network.
Capsule neural networks (CapsNets) have proved its effectiveness in modeling hierarchical relationships on image data
by exploiting the fact that while viewpoint changes have complicated effects on pixel intensities, they have linear effects at
the part/object level (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017; Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018; Kosiorek et al. 2019). In contrast to convolutional neural networks, CapsNets use activity
vectors or pose matrices to represent the entities. Moreover,
the viewpoint-invariant relationship between the part and the
whole is characterized by trainable transformation matrices,
which is under the assumption that the human visual system relies on parse tree-like structure to recognize objects.
Such representations make CapsNets especially appealing in
reasoning the part-whole hierarchy and robust to adversarial
attacks (Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018; Qin et al. 2020).
However, how to effectively take advantage of CapsNets to
benefit graph classification remains largely unexplored.
In this work, we present the hierarchical graph capsule
network (HGCN) that is able to jointly learn node embeddings and extract the hierarchical structure of the input graph.

