The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Price of Connectivity in Fair Division
Xiaohui Bei,1 Ayumi Igarashi,2 Xinhang Lu,1 Warut Suksompong3
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Principles of Informatics Research Division, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract

share—said to satisfy maximin share fairness—does not always exist for additive utilities when there are at least three
agents, but a constant multiplicative approximation can be
obtained (Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2018).
Perhaps the best-known fair division protocol is the cutand-choose protocol, which can be used to allocate a divisible good between two agents. In this protocol, the first agent
divides the good into two equal parts (this is possible because the good is divisible), and the second agent chooses
the part that she prefers. The cut-and-choose protocol has
a direct analogue in the indivisible goods setting: since an
equal partition may no longer exist, the first agent now divides the goods into two parts that are as equal as possible
in her view. The resulting allocation is guaranteed to satisfy
maximin share fairness. However, this guarantee relies crucially on the assumption that any allocation of the goods to
the two agents can be chosen—in reality, there are often constraints on the allocations that we desire. A common type of
constraints is captured by a model of Bouveret et al. (2017),
where the goods are vertices of a connected undirected graph
and each agent must be allocated a connected subgraph. For
instance, the goods could represent offices in a university
building that we wish to divide between research groups, and
it is desirable for each group to receive a connected set of offices in order to facilitate communication within the group.
In this paper we therefore ask the following question:
To what extent do maximin share fairness guarantees
hold when connectivity constraints are imposed, and
how does the answer depend on the underlying graph?
Put differently, what is the price in terms of fairness
that we have to pay if we desire connectivity?

We study the allocation of indivisible goods that form an
undirected graph and quantify the loss of fairness when we
impose a constraint that each agent must receive a connected
subgraph. Our focus is on the well-studied fairness notion of
maximin share fairness. We introduce the price of connectivity to capture the largest gap between the graph-specific
and the unconstrained maximin share, and derive bounds on
this quantity which are tight for large classes of graphs in
the case of two agents and for paths and stars in the general
case. For instance, with two agents we show that for biconnected graphs it is possible to obtain at least 3/4 of the maximin share with connected allocations, while for the remaining graphs the guarantee is at most 1/2. Our work demonstrates several applications of graph-theoretic tools and concepts to fair division problems.

1

Introduction

We consider a classical resource allocation setting where a
set of goods are to be allocated among interested agents.
Our goal is to find an allocation that is fair to all agents.
This problem has been addressed in a large body of literature on fair division (Brams and Taylor 1996a; Moulin
2003), which has found applications ranging from divorce
settlement (Brams and Taylor 1996b) to credit assignment
(de Clippel, Moulin, and Tideman 2008). One of the most
prominent fairness notions in the literature is proportionality. An allocation is said to be proportional if every agent
receives value at least 1/n of her value for the entire set of
goods, where n denotes the number of agents.
Our focus in this paper is on the setting where we allocate
indivisible goods. This pertains to the allocation of houses,
cars, artworks, electronics, and many other common items.
When goods are indivisible, a proportional allocation does
not always exist—consider two agents trying to divide a single valuable good. As a result, relaxations of proportionality
have been studied. A relaxation that has received considerable attention in recent years is maximin share fairness—the
maximin share (MMS) of an agent is the largest value that the
agent can guarantee for herself if she is allowed to divide the
goods into n parts and always receives the worst part (Budish 2011). An allocation that gives every agent her maximin

1.1

Our Contributions

In this paper, we study maximin share fairness for agents
with additive utilities. We define the price of connectivity
(PoC) of a graph to be the largest gap between the maximin share defined over all possible partitions and the graph
maximin share (G-MMS), which is defined over all partitions
that respect the connectivity constraints of the graph. For any
graph and any number of agents, it follows from the definitions that if the PoC is α and one can give each agent β times
her G-MMS, then it is also possible to guarantee all agents a
β/α fraction of their MMS. Moreover, in cases where giving
every agent their full G-MMS is possible (i.e., β = 1), we

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5151

