The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Augmenting Policy Learning with
Routines Discovered from a Single Demonstration
Zelin Zhao ∗ 1 , Chuang Gan 2 , Jiajun Wu 3 , Xiaoxiao Guo 2 , Joshua Tenenbaum 4
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
Stanford University
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
Humans can abstract prior knowledge from very little data and
use it to boost skill learning. In this paper, we propose routineaugmented policy learning (RAPL), which discovers routines
composed of primitive actions from a single demonstration
and uses discovered routines to augment policy learning. To
discover routines from the demonstration, we first abstract
routine candidates by identifying grammar over the demonstrated action trajectory. Then, the best routines measured by
length and frequency are selected to form a routine library. We
propose to learn policy simultaneously at primitive-level and
routine-level with discovered routines, leveraging the temporal
structure of routines. Our approach enables imitating expert
behavior at multiple temporal scales for imitation learning and
promotes reinforcement learning exploration. Extensive experiments on Atari games demonstrate that RAPL improves the
state-of-the-art imitation learning method SQIL and reinforcement learning method A2C. Further, we show that discovered
routines can generalize to unseen levels and difficulties on the
CoinRun benchmark.

Introduction
Extensive evidence from cognitive psychology and neuroscience suggests that humans are remarkably capable of abstracting knowledge from very few observations to boost
practice in new scenarios. For instance, behavioral experiments on the Atari games (Tsividis et al. 2017) have demonstrated that human game players could learn from a video
of one episode and earn more than double scores than those
who do not watch the video. On the contrary, previous Learning from Demonstrations (LfD) approaches either require a
large amount of pre-collected data (Esmaili, Sammut, and
Shirazi 1995), an active oracle (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell
2010), or a family of similar tasks (Kipf et al. 2019). In this
paper, we focus on the following question: how can a single
demonstration promote policy learning?
Two challenges exist when learning from a single demonstration. First, the agent would often drift away from the
few seen expert observations and not return to demonstrated
states. Second, high-dimension value function approximators
such as deep neural networks (Mnih et al. 2015) may over-fit
∗

Work was done when Zelin was a visiting student at MIT.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11024

the few demonstrated state-action pairs and cannot overcome
unseen environment dynamics. We propose to abstract routines from the demonstration via a non-parametric algorithm
and use the routines to help policy learning to address these
problems. This idea can alleviate the out-of-distribution problem because routines force the agent to follow segments of
the demonstration. Besides, the process of decomposing the
demonstration is non-parametric, making the learned policy
generalizable to unseen states.
The overview of the proposed approach is shown in Figure 1. A library of routines that represent useful skills is
abstracted from the demonstration. The routines can be used
in two settings. First, the agent could imitate expert behaviors at multiple temporal scales without access to the reward
signal. Second, in reinforcement learning, the abstracted routines can promote deeper exploration and long-range value
learning. However, previous option learning approaches must
rely on reward signals (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2016; Stolle
and Precup 2002; Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999).
We propose a two-phase model for routine discovery. During the first phase, we adopt a non-parametric algorithm,
Sequitur (Nevill-Manning and Witten 1997), to discover the
structure of the demonstration. Each element in the structure
is treated as one routine proposal. In the second phase, we
select the best proposals by the frequency and lengths of routine candidates to form a routine library. Too similar routine
candidates are pruned to keep the parsimony of the routine
library. This model can effectively discover routines without
a time-consuming training procedure.
The discovered routines are then used as higher-level actions to boost exploration and policy learning. A naı̈ve approach is to run an off-the-shelf policy learning algorithm
based on the augmented action space composed by routines
and action primitives (Durugkar et al. 2016; Chang et al.
2019). The problem of such an approach is that it ignores
the inner structure of routines, so experiences from routine
execution are exclusively used to update values at the routine
level, which would slow down value learning at the primitive
level. Such conflict turns to be a bigger issue as the number
of routines grows. To address this problem, since the routines
are temporally decomposable, we reuse routine execution
experiences to update the value function at the primitive level.
Our approach harmonizes the relationship between routines
and primitives and has stronger performance when utilizing

