The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Lenient Regret for Multi-Armed Bandits
Nadav Merlis1 and Shie Mannor1,2
1

Technion – Institute of Technology, Israel
2
Nvidia Research, Israel
merlis@campus.technion.ac.il, shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract

with high certainty, or they will suffer linear regret. This leads
to two undesired outcomes: (i) the regret fails to characterize
the difficulty of such problems, and (ii) regret-minimizing
algorithms tend to over-explore suboptimal arms.
Regret fails as a complexity measure: It is well known
that for any reasonable algorithm, the regret dramatically
increases as the suboptimality gaps shrink, i.e., the reward
of some suboptimal arms is very close to the reward of an
optimal one (Lai and Robbins 1985). Specifically in our
example, if most arms are almost-optimal, then the regret
can be arbitrarily large. In contrast, finding a near-optimal
solution in this problem is relatively simple. Thus, the regret
falsely classifies this easy problem as a hard one.
Regret-minimizing algorithms over-explore: As previously stated, any regret-minimizing agent must identify an
optimal arm with high certainty or suffer a linear regret. To do
so, the agent must thoroughly explore all suboptimal arms. In
contrast, if playing near-optimal arms is adequate, identifying
one such arm can be done much more efficiently. Importantly,
this issue becomes much more severe in large problems or
when the interaction with the problem is brief.
The origin of both problems is the comparison of the
agent’s reward to the optimal reward. Nonetheless, not all
bandit algorithms rely on such comparisons. Notably, when
trying to identify good arms (‘best-arm identification’), many
algorithms only attempt to output -optimal arms, for some
predetermined error level  > 0 (Even-Dar, Mannor, and
Mansour 2002). However, this criterion only assesses the
quality of the output arms and is unfit when we want the algorithm to choose near-optimal arms throughout the interaction.
In this work, we suggest bringing the leniency of the best-arm identification into regret criteria. Inspired by the
-optimality relaxation in best-arm identification, we define
the notion of lenient regret, that only penalizes arms with
gaps larger than . Intuitively, ignoring small gaps alleviates
both previously-mentioned problems: first, arms with gaps
smaller than  do not incur lenient regret, and if all other arms
have extremely larger gaps, then the lenient regret is expected
to be small. Second, removing the penalty from near-optimal
arms allows algorithms to spend less time on exploration of
bad arms. Then, we expect that algorithms will spend more
time playing near-optimal arms.
From a practical perspective, optimizing a more lenient
criterion is especially relevant when near-optimal solutions

We consider the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem, where
an agent sequentially chooses actions and observes rewards for
the actions it took. While the majority of algorithms try to minimize the regret, i.e., the cumulative difference between the
reward of the best action and the agent’s action, this criterion
might lead to undesirable results. For example, in large problems, or when the interaction with the environment is brief,
finding an optimal arm is infeasible, and regret-minimizing
algorithms tend to over-explore. To overcome this issue, algorithms for such settings should instead focus on playing
near-optimal arms. To this end, we suggest a new, more lenient, regret criterion that ignores suboptimality gaps smaller
than some . We then present a variant of the Thompson Sampling (TS) algorithm, called -TS, and prove its asymptotic
optimality in terms of the lenient regret. Importantly, we show
that when the mean of the optimal arm is high enough, the
lenient regret of -TS is bounded by a constant. Finally, we
show that -TS can be applied to improve the performance
when the agent knows a lower bound of the suboptimality
gaps.

Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems are sequential
decision-making problems where an agent repeatedly
chooses an action (‘arm’), out of K possible actions, and
observes a reward for the selected action (Robbins 1952). In
this setting, the agent usually aims to maximize the expected
cumulative return throughout the interaction with the problem. Equivalently, it tries to minimize its regret, which is the
expected difference between the best achievable total reward
and the agent’s actual returns.
Although regret is the most prevalent performance criterion, many problems that should intuitively be ‘easy’ suffer from both large regret and undesired behavior of regretminimizing algorithms. Consider, for example, a problem
where most arms are near-optimal and the few remaining
ones have extremely lower rewards. For most practical applications, it suffices to play any of the near-optimal arms,
and identifying such arms should be fairly easy. However,
regret-minimizing algorithms only compare themselves to
the optimal arm. Thus, they must identify an optimal arm
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8950

