The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Optical Flow Estimation from a Single Motion-blurred Image
Dawit Mureja Argaw, Junsik Kim, Francois Rameau, Jae Won Cho, In So Kweon
KAIST Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., Daejeon, Korea
dawitmureja@kaist.ac.kr, {mibastro, rameau.fr}@gmail.com, {chojw, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Meishvili, and Favaro 2018; Purohit, Shah, and Rajagopalan
2019), and 3D scene reconstruction (Qiu et al. 2019).
Our work focuses on recovering the apparent motion of
camera and objects during the exposure time from a single motion-blurred input i.e. optical flow estimation. Earlier works (Rekleitis 1995; Schoueri, Scaccia, and Rekleitis
2009) deployed a uniform motion-blur assumption, which
is often violated in practice. To address this issue, followup works (Portz, Zhang, and Jiang 2012; Li et al. 2014; Tu,
Poppe, and Veltkamp 2015; Li et al. 2014) extended the traditional warping-based methods to a sequence of blurred inputs by imposing further constraints such as non-uniform
blur matching and blur gradient constancy. Compared to earlier works, we estimate dense optical flow only from a single motion-blurred image in an end-to-end manner using a
novel deep learning framework. Moreover, our method does
not impose any restrictive assumption on the motion-blur,
hence, it is robust for various blur types.
Another line of work closely related to our work is
motion-flow estimation from a blurred image for deblurring applications (Dai and Wu 2008; Hyun Kim and Mu Lee
2014; Gong et al. 2017). However, these works assume restrictive assumptions for motion estimation, e.g. , linear motion assumption (Dai and Wu 2008; Hyun Kim and Mu Lee
2014) and constrained flow magnitude and direction (Gong
et al. 2017). All related works so far imposed a constraint
on the motion-kernel, and hence experimented with synthetically simulated blurs under the imposed constraint. In comparison, we train and analyze our network with blurs generated from real high speed videos with no particular motion
assumption.
Our proposed framework is composed of three network
components: feature encoder, feature decoder, and flow estimator. The feature encoder extracts features from the given
motion-blurred input at different spatial scales in a top-down
fashion. A feature decoder then decodes the extracted features in a bottom-up manner by learning motion from blur.
The feature decoder is composed of spatial transformer networks (STNs) (Jaderberg et al. 2015) and feature refining
blocks to learn globally and locally-varying motions from
the encoded features, respectively. The flow estimator inputs
the decoded features at different levels and estimates optical
flow in a coarse-to-fine manner.
We conduct experiments on synthetic and real image

In most of computer vision applications, motion blur is regarded as an undesirable artifact. However, it has been shown
that motion blur in an image may have practical interests in
fundamental computer vision problems. In this work, we propose a novel framework to estimate optical flow from a single motion-blurred image in an end-to-end manner. We design our network with transformer networks to learn globally and locally varying motions from encoded features of a
motion-blurred input, and decode left and right frame features
without explicit frame supervision. A flow estimator network
is then used to estimate optical flow from the decoded features in a coarse-to-fine manner. We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our model through a large set of experiments
on synthetic and real motion-blur datasets. We also provide
in-depth analysis of our model in connection with related approaches to highlight the effectiveness and favorability of our
approach. Furthermore, we showcase the applicability of the
flow estimated by our method on deblurring and moving object segmentation tasks.

Introduction
Acquiring an image with a camera requires the photosensitive sensor of the camera to be exposed to light for a
certain duration in order to collect enough photons. Therefore, if a rapid motion of the camera is performed during
this time interval – or if a dynamic object is present in the
scene, the resulting image will be motion-blurred and will
appear smeared along the direction of the relative motion.
Motion blur is often considered to be a degrading artifact in
many computer vision applications , such as, 3D reconstruction (Seok Lee and Mu Lee 2013) and visual SLAM (Lee,
Kwon, and Lee 2011). Therefore, existing deblurring approaches have been proposed to restore a clean image from
a blurred image (Zheng, Xu, and Jia 2013; Hyun Kim and
Mu Lee 2014; Wieschollek et al. 2016; Gong et al. 2017).
On the other hand, instead of being considered as an unwanted noise that is to be removed, it has been shown that
motion-blur in an image may have some practical interest
in core computer vision problems, such as optical flow estimation (Rekleitis 1995; Schoueri, Scaccia, and Rekleitis
2009; Dai and Wu 2008), video sequence restoration (Jin,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

891

