The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combining Machine Learning and Human Experts to Predict Match Outcomes in
Football: A Baseline Model
Ryan Beal, Stuart E. Middleton, Timothy J. Norman, Sarvapali D. Ramchurn
School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
{ryan.beal,sem03,t.j.norman,sdr1}@soton.ac.uk
Abstract

ating human and environmental elements to forecast an outcome. For example, one approach of looking at more than
just statistics in sports have been through sentiment analysis on social media platforms. Schumaker, Jarmoszko and
Labedz (2016) use this approach to predict English Premier
League (EPL) results and achieve an accuracy of 50% and
(Sinha et al. 2013) show use of similar analysis being performed for American Football results in the National Football League (NFL) predicting the winner 63.8% of the time.
However, these approaches focus on opinion aggregation
rather than trying to extract the potential indicators of performance for individual human teams from human experts.
Against this background, we set new baselines for results when predicting real-world sporting events involving
humans based on the combination of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and statistical machine learning techniques.
In more detail, we focus specifically on football games in
the EPL using match previews from the media alongside statistical machine learning (ML) techniques. The prediction
of football match outcomes is a challenging computational
problem due to the range of parameters that can influence
match results. To date, probabilistic methods devised since
the seminal work of Maher (1982) have generated fairly limited results and appear to have reached a glass ceiling in
terms of accuracy. By using media previews we can improve
on the accuracy of current approaches for match outcome
prediction. By so doing, we show that by incorporating human factors into our model, rather than just basic performance statistics, we can improve accuracy (e.g., mood, rivalries and other external factors). Thus, the contributions
of this paper are as follows:

In this paper, we present a new application-focused benchmark dataset and results from a set of baseline Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning models for prediction of match outcomes for games of football (soccer). By doing so we give a baseline for the prediction accuracy that can
be achieved exploiting both statistical match data and contextual articles from human sports journalists. Our dataset is
focuses on a representative time-period over 6 seasons of the
English Premier League, and includes newspaper match previews from The Guardian. The models presented in this paper
achieve an accuracy of 63.18% showing a 6.9% boost on the
traditional statistical methods.

1

Introduction

Real-world events such as sports games or elections involve
competing teams, each with capabilities and tactics, aiming
to win (e.g., seats during an election, or scoring more goals
in a football match). The performance of such teams is typically not only dependent on the teams’ abilities but also
on the environment within which they operate. For example, a political party may have the best orators and policies
but their opponents may be better at getting votes in key areas. Similarly, a top football team may be playing the worst
team in a league but the fact that the latter may be facing
relegation (to a lower league) may provide them with extra
motivation to win the game. Given this, in many cases, the
performance of such teams may not be easily predictable.
Traditional AI and machine learning techniques to predict
the outcome of real-world events tend to focus on the use of
statistical machine learning using historical data about the
individual teams (Silver 2012; Campbell and Shiller 1988;
Dixon and Coles 1997; Matthews, Ramchurn, and Chalkiadakis 2012). However, as per the examples above, historical performance may not be useful when team performance
may be dependent on dynamic factors such as human performance (morale, injuries, strategies) or environmental variables (weather, competition context, public mood). In turn,
humans can be better judges than algorithms when faced
with previously unseen situations. Journalists, online communities, and experienced analysts may be better at evalu-

1. New dataset for testing NLP/ML algorithms for sports
match outcome prediction for football (soccer). Our
dataset includes a previously unexplored feature set in
terms of football match outcome predictions, including
human knowledge that is overlooked in traditional statistics. The dataset includes match data and previews for
1770 games football games over 6 seasons.
2. Set of baseline models using a novel mixture of OpenIE,
text vectorisation and supervised ML methods for predicting the outcome of games of football using human opinions from domain-experts in the media.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. Set of benchmark results for our baseline algorithms pre15447

