The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Amata: An Annealing Mechanism for Adversarial Training Acceleration
Nanyang Ye,1 Qianxiao Li ,2, 5 Xiao-Yun Zhou, 3 Zhanxing Zhu * 4
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
The Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn, qianxiao@nus.edu.sg, xiaoyun.zhou27@gmail.com, zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn.
Abstract

bust optimization problem (Ben-Tal and Nemirovski 1998),
where a min-max optimization problem is solved (Madry
et al. 2017; Kolter and Wong 2017). For example, given a
C-class dataset S = {(x0i , yi )}ni=1 with x0i ∈ Rd as a normal or clean example in the d-dimensional input space and
yi ∈ RC as its associated one-hot label, the objective of
adversarial training is to solve the following min-max optimization problem:

Despite the empirical success in various domains, it has been
revealed that deep neural networks are vulnerable to maliciously perturbed input data that much degrade their performance. This is known as adversarial attacks. To counter adversarial attacks, adversarial training formulated as a form
of robust optimization has been demonstrated to be effective. However, conducting adversarial training brings much
computational overhead compared with standard training. In
order to reduce the computational cost, we propose an annealing mechanism, Amata, to reduce the overhead associated
with adversarial training. The proposed Amata is provably
convergent, well-motivated from the lens of optimal control
theory and can be combined with existing acceleration methods to further enhance performance. It is demonstrated that on
standard datasets, Amata can achieve similar or better robustness with around 1/3 to 1/2 the computational time compared
with traditional methods. In addition, Amata can be incorporated into other adversarial training acceleration algorithms
(e.g. YOPO, Free, Fast, and ATTA), which leads to further
reduction in computational time on large-scale problems.

1 
max (hθ (xi ), yi )
N i=1 xi −x0i ≤
N

min
θ

(1)

where hθ : Rd → RC is the deep neural network (DNN)
function,  is the loss function and  controls the maximum
perturbation magnitude. The inner maximization problem is
to ﬁnd an adversarial example xi , within the -ball around
a given normal example x0i that maximizes the surrogate
loss  for classiﬁcation error. The outer minimization problem is to ﬁnd model parameters that minimizes the loss  on
the adversarial examples {xi }ni=1 that are generated from
the inner maximization. Compared with a rich body of nonconvex optimization algorithms for neural networks (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016; Kingma and Ba 2014;
Pan and Jiang 2015), designing efﬁcient algorithm to solve
the min-max problem to achieve robustness is relatively less
studied.
The inner maximization problem is typically solved by
projected gradient descent (PGD). PGD perturbs a normal
example x0 by iteratively updating it in approximately the
steepest ascent direction for a total of K times. Each ascent
step is modulated by a small step size and a projection step
back onto the -ball of x0 to prevent the updated value from
falling outside the -ball of x0 (Madry et al. 2017):


xk−1 + α · sign(∇x (hθ (xk−1 ), y)
(2)
xk =

where α is the step size, (·) is the orthogonal projection
function onto {x : x0 −x  ≤ }, and xk is the adversarial
example at k-th step 1 .
A major issue limiting the practical applicability of adversarial training is the huge computational burden associated

Introduction
Deep neural networks were found to be vulnerable to malicious perturbations on the original input data. While the
perturbations remain almost imperceptible to humans, they
can lead to wrong predictions over the perturbed examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Akhtar and Mian 2018). These maliciously crafted
examples are known as adversarial examples, which have
caused serious concerns over the reliability and security of
deep learning systems, particularly when deployed in lifecritical scenarios, such as autonomous driving systems and
medical domains.
Several defense mechanisms have been proposed, such
as input reconstruction (Meng and Chen 2017; Song et al.
2018), input encoding (Buckman et al. 2018), and adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Tramèr
et al. 2017; He et al. 2017; Madry et al. 2017). Among
these methods, adversarial training is one of the most effective defense methods so far. It can be posed as a ro* Corresponding author. The full appendix is available on Arxiv.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Note that our methodology can also be applied to single step
methods, such as Fast. We take PGD as the ﬁrst example for clarity.

10691

