The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parameterized Logical Theories
Fangzhen Lin
Department of Computer Science & HKUST-Xiaoi Joint Lab
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
flin@cs.ust.hk

Abstract

called by others. In fact, our motivation for this work came
from a recent work by Lin (2016) that translates a procedural program to a first-order theory. While trying to extend Lin’s approach to more complex programs, including
those involving functions with side effects, we encountered
the need for embedding a logical theory inside another one,
for the reason that if a function P in a program is formalized
as a logical theory, then when another function Q calls P ,
there must be a way for the theory of Q to access the theory of P . We will outline how our notion of parameterized
theories can be used to address this issue.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we define the syntax of parameterized theories, and
illustrate it with examples. We then propose a formal semantics that translates a set of parameterized theories to a set of
first-order theories in the situation calculus, by viewing theory calls as actions. This is the main technical contribution
of the paper. We next describe some possible applications,
discuss related work, and then conclude the paper.

A theory in first-order logic is a set of sentences. A parameterized theory is a first-order theory with some of its predicates and functions identified as parameters, together with
some import statements that call other parameterized theories. A KB is then a collection of these interconnected parameterized theories, similar to how a computer program is
constructed as a set of functions in a modern programming
language. In this paper, we provide a translational semantics
for these parameterized theories in first-order logic using the
situation calculus. We also discuss their potential uses in areas such as multi-context reasoning and logical formalization
of computer programs.

Introduction
In AI, first-order logic and its variants have been widely used
in KR. Central to this use is the construction of a KB, which
is normally a logical theory, i.e. a set of sentences, for the domain of interest. When the domain of interest is complex and
diverse, it is often desirable to organize its KB in some modular ways. A simple approach is to organize it as a hierarchy
of smaller ones (e.g. (Hendrix 1975; Carnegie Group 1985;
Lenat 1995; Lifschitz and Ren 2006)). The hierarchy can
be in terms of refinement, abstraction, or some input/output
relationship. Another approach is to treat the KB as a collection of contexts that are connected by some meta-axioms
or rules to connect these contexts (e.g. (McCarthy 1993;
Giunchiglia 1993; Giunchiglia and Serafini 1994; McCarthy
and Buvac̆ 1997; Brézillon 1999; Ghidini and Giunchiglia
2001)).
In this paper, we propose a notion of parameterized theories and consider a KB to be a collection of such theories.
Informally, a parameterized theory is like a first-order theory but with some of the predicate and function symbols in
it identified as parameters, and these parameters can be replaced when called from another theory. Like contexts, there
are no built-in hierarchies in our framework. Unlike contexts, there are no separate meta-axioms or rules. As we will
see, to connect some parameterized theories, one can define
a new one that “calls” these theories.
In a sense, parameterized theories are like functions in
computer programming languages: they can call and be

Parameterized Theories
We consider parameterized theories in first-order logic. Each
parameterized theory can have its own language which is
a set of function (including constant) and predicate symbols. We use lambda notation to denote anonymous functions and relations. A lambda expression is one of the form
λx1 ...λxk .E, where E is either a term or a formula that has
x1 , .., xk as the free variables. If E is a term, then it defines a
k-ary function. If it is a formula then it defines a k-ary predicate. For example, if f is a binary function and g a unary
function, then λx.f (x, g(x)) is an anonymous unary function defined by the following equation:
∀y.(λx.f (x, g(x)))(y) = f (y, g(y)).
Similarly, if P is a binary predicate, then λx.∃yP (x, y) is
an anonymous unary predicate such that (λx.∃yP (x, y))(z)
is true iff ∃yP (z, y) is true.
As we mentioned, a parameterized theory is essentially a
first-order theory with some of the functions and predicates
in it designated as parameters that can be replaced when it is
called or imported into another theory.
Definition 1. Given a language L, a parameterized theory C(p1 , ..., pn ) consists of a unique name C, a tuple

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6402

