The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepPseudo: Pseudo Value Based Deep Learning Models for Competing Risk
Analysis
Md Mahmudur Rahman1 , Koji Matsuo2 , Shinya Matsuzaki3 , Sanjay Purushotham1
1

Department of Information Systems, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
2
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
3
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
mrahman6@umbc.edu, Koji.Matsuo@med.usc.edu, zacky s@gyne.med.osaka-u.ac.jp, psanjay@umbc.edu
Abstract

Gray 1999; Mogensen and Gerds 2013) since a patient can
experience more than one type of a certain event. According to the multi-morbidity trend in the USA during 2013-14,
the overall prevalence of more than 2 morbidities was 59.6%
(King, Xiang, and Pilkerton 2018). Among the older adults
over 65 years, that prevalence was around 92%. Therefore,
multi-morbidity is a crucial problem, which should be seriously taken into consideration for patient diagnosis. Ignoring multi-morbidity or competing risks while predicting the
marginal risk of an event may lead to overestimation and inaccurate risk predictions. CRA can make a more accurate
prediction of the risks, and thus, help clinicians to provide
better treatment to the patients. Moreover, CRA can also
help to allocate health resources more efficiently. Thus, CRA
is an important problem in the medical domain, and it has received substantial attention in statistics (Aalen and Johansen
1978; Fine and Gray 1999; Parner and Andersen 2010), and
machine learning literature (Ishwaran et al. 2014; Alaa and
van der Schaar 2017; Bellot and Schaar 2018; Bellot and
van der Schaar 2018; Lee et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2019; Lee,
Yoon, and Van Der Schaar 2019). The statistical CRA approaches are popular, interpretable, and can be easily implemented; however, they are limited by the underlying parametric, linearity, and/or proportional hazards assumptions.
On the other hand, many machine learning approaches overcome these limitations by capturing nonlinear relationships
between covariates and the risk of an event, and thus, have
achieved better results. Among all these models, DeepHit
(Lee et al. 2018) model - a deep learning approach that
makes no underlying assumption on the stochastic process has shown the state-of-the-art performance for CRA. However, it relies on a specialized objective function to handle
censoring and uses a large model (i.e., a large number of
parameters) to achieve good predictive performance. Thus,
there is a need to develop new approaches for CRA which
can address these drawbacks.
In this paper, we formulate CRA as a cause-specific regression analysis problem and propose DeepPseudo models,
which use simple and effective deep feed-forward neural
networks, to estimate cumulative incidence function (CIF)
(Kalbfleisch and Prentice 2011) using pseudo values, derived from the Aalen-Johansen estimate of the CIF (Klein
and Andersen 2005). DeepPseudo models model the nonlinear time-varying covariate effect on CIF and handle the

Competing Risk Analysis (CRA) aims at the correct estimation of the marginal probability of occurrence of an event in
the presence of competing events. Many of the statistical approaches developed for CRA are limited by strong assumptions about the underlying stochastic processes. To overcome
these issues and to handle censoring, machine learning approaches for CRA have designed specialized cost functions.
However, these approaches are not generalizable and are
computationally expensive. This paper formulates CRA as a
cause-specific regression problem and proposes DeepPseudo
models, which use simple and effective feed-forward deep
neural networks, to predict the cumulative incidence function (CIF) using Aalen-Johansen estimator-based pseudo values. DeepPseudo models capture the time-varying covariate
effect on CIF while handling the censored observations. We
show how DeepPseudo models can address covariate dependent censoring by using modified pseudo values. Experiments
on real and synthetic datasets demonstrate that our proposed
models obtain promising and statistically significant results
compared to the state-of-the-art CRA approaches. Furthermore, we show that explainable methods such as Layer-wise
Relevance Propagation can be used to interpret the predictions of our DeepPseudo models.

Introduction
Competing Risk Analysis (CRA) is a special type of survival analysis - time-to-event analysis - that aims to correctly estimate the marginal probability of occurrence of an
event in the presence of competing events (Putter, Fiocco,
and Geskus 2007). In standard survival analysis, it is assumed that a subject can experience only one event of interest during the follow-up period. However, in real life, a
subject can experience an event from multiple causes. The
occurrence of a certain event precludes the individual from
experiencing other events. For example, a patient may experience death (event) at a time t from one of the following causes; cardiovascular disease, breast cancer, or kidney
damage. Individuals who die of cardiovascular disease are
no longer at risk of dying of breast cancer or kidney damage.
These causes of failure are referred to as competing events,
and the probability of these events are referred to as competing risks. CRA is common in medical settings (Fine and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

479

