The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Robust Visual Information Extraction in Real World:
New Dataset and Novel Solution
Jiapeng Wang1 , Chongyu Liu1 , Lianwen Jin1,3, * , Guozhi Tang1 , Jiaxin Zhang1 , Shuaitao Zhang1 ,
Qianying Wang2 , Yaqiang Wu2,4 , Mingxiang Cai2
1

South China University of Technology
2
Lenovo Research
3
SCUT-Zhuhai Institute of Modern Industrial Innovation
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{eejpwang, eechongyu.liu}@mail.scut.edu.cn, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn, {eetanggz, eejxzhang, eestzhang}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
{wangqya, wuyqe, caimx}@lenovo.com
Abstract

Most existing works for VIE mainly comprise two independent stages, namely text spotting and information extraction. The former aims to locate and recognize the texts,
while the latter extracts specific entities based on previous
results. Recent studies (Liu et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020; Xu
et al. 2020) revealed that in addition to semantic features,
the visual and spatial characteristics of documents also provided abundant clues. Although achieved encouraging results, these approaches still suffered from the following limitations: (1) Although their text spotting models had learned
effective representations for detection and recognition, their
information extraction modules discarded and then retrieved
them again from the OCR results. This resulted in redundant computation, and the discarded features might be more
effective than the newly learned ones. (2) The training processes of independent parts were irrelevant, leading to the
lack of clues obtained by the information extraction module,
while the text spotting module cannot be optimized adaptively according to the fundamental objective. Continuous
stages were usually combined to accomplish a common task,
while they did not collaborate with each other. To address
the limitations mentioned above, in this paper, we propose
a robust visual information extraction system towards realworld scenarios called VIES, which is an unified end-to-end
trainable framework for simultaneous text detection, recognition and information extraction. VIES introduces vision
coordination mechanism (VCM) and semantics coordination mechanism (SCM) to gather rich visual and semantic features from text detection and recognition branches
respectively for subsequent information extraction branch
and conversely, provides higher-level semantic clues to contribute to the optimization of text spotting. Concurrently, a
novel adaptive feature fusion module (AFFM) is designed to
integrate the features from different sources (vision, semantics and location) and levels (segment-level and token-level)
in information extraction branch to generate more effective
representations.
With the development of learning-based algorithms, a
comprehensive benchmark conducted for a specific task is
a prerequisite to motivate more advanced works. In VIE,

Visual information extraction (VIE) has attracted considerable attention recently owing to its various advanced applications such as document understanding, automatic marking and intelligent education. Most existing works decoupled
this problem into several independent sub-tasks of text spotting (text detection and recognition) and information extraction, which completely ignored the high correlation among
them during optimization. In this paper, we propose a robust visual information extraction system (VIES) towards
real-world scenarios, which is an unified end-to-end trainable
framework for simultaneous text detection, recognition and
information extraction by taking a single document image
as input and outputting the structured information. Specifically, the information extraction branch collects abundant
visual and semantic representations from text spotting for
multimodal feature fusion and conversely, provides higherlevel semantic clues to contribute to the optimization of text
spotting. Moreover, regarding the shortage of public benchmarks, we construct a fully-annotated dataset called EPHOIE
(https://github.com/HCIILAB/EPHOIE), which is the first
Chinese benchmark for both text spotting and visual information extraction. EPHOIE consists of 1,494 images of examination paper head with complex layouts and background, including a total of 15,771 Chinese handwritten or printed text
instances. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, our
VIES shows significant superior performance on the EPHOIE
dataset and achieves a 9.01% F-score gain on the widely used
SROIE dataset under the end-to-end scenario.

Introduction
Recently, visual information extraction (VIE) has attracted
considerable research interest owing to its various advanced
applications, such as document understanding (Wong,
Casey, and Wahl 1982), automatic marking (Tremblay and
Labonté 2003), and intelligent education (Kahraman, Sagiroglu, and Colak 2010).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2738

