The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Counterfactual Explanations for Oblique Decision Trees:
Exact, Efficient Algorithms
Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán, Suryabhan Singh Hada
Dept. Computer Science & Engineering, University of California, Merced
{mcarreira-perpinan, shada}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract

humans. That said, related problems have been studied in
data mining or knowledge discovery from databases (Yang
et al. 2006; Bella et al. 2011; Martens and Provost 2014; Cui
et al. 2015), in particular in applications such as customer
relationship management (CRM).
In this paper we focus on a specific version of the second problem that, following Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2018), we will call a counterfactual explanation, which
refers to the fact that an event did not actually happen. For
example, “You were denied a loan because your annual income was $30,000. If your income had been $45,000, you
would have been offered a loan.” The second statement, or
counterfactual, offers an alternative event that would result
in the desired outcome (loan approval). Formally, a counterfactual explanation seeks the minimal change to a given
feature vector that will change a classifier’s decision in a
prescribed way, and we will make this more precise as an
optimization problem later. Compared to the problem of explaining the functionality of an automated system, counterfactual explanations are easier in that they do not require interpretability, as long as the explanations help a subject act
rather than understand.
Formally, the problem of finding a counterfactual explanation is the same as that of finding an adversarial example (Szegedy et al. 2014; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015). The difference is in the underlying motivation. In a counterfactual explanation, one typically seeks a
change of the source feature vector that is as small as possible (because changing features is seen as costly) and changes
the classifier outcome (to a prescribed and more desirable
one). In an adversarial example, one typically seeks a change
of the source feature vector that is as small as possible (so
that it is hard to detect) and changes the classifier outcome
(to trick it into predicting the wrong outcome). Our focus
will be in the solution of such optimization problems, although we will use as running example the case of counterfactual explanations.
Recent work has explored various ways of defining counterfactual explanation problems and solving them for different classifiers, in particular neural nets. Here we consider
classification trees1 , which are of particular interest com-

We consider counterfactual explanations, the problem of minimally adjusting features in a source input instance so that it
is classified as a target class under a given classifier. This has
become a topic of recent interest as a way to query a trained
model and suggest possible actions to overturn its decision.
Mathematically, the problem is formally equivalent to that of
finding adversarial examples, which also has attracted significant attention recently. Most work on either counterfactual
explanations or adversarial examples has focused on differentiable classifiers, such as neural nets. We focus on classification trees, both axis-aligned and oblique (having hyperplane splits). Although here the counterfactual optimization problem is nonconvex and nondifferentiable, we show
that an exact solution can be computed very efficiently, even
with high-dimensional feature vectors and with both continuous and categorical features, and demonstrate it in different
datasets and settings. The results are particularly relevant for
finance, medicine or legal applications, where interpretability
and counterfactual explanations are particularly important.

1

Introduction

Practical deployment of deep learning and machine learning models has become widespread in the last decade, and
there is enormous societal interest in AI as a technology that
can provide intelligent, automated processing of tasks that
up to now were hard for machines. At the same time, some
concerns about AI systems (ethical, safety and others) have
arisen as well. One is the problem of interpretability, i.e.,
explaining the functionality of an automated system. This is
an old problem, which has been studied (possibly under different names, such as explainability or transparency) since
decades ago in statistics and machine learning (e.g. Breiman
et al. (1984); Freitas (2014); Guidotti et al. (2018); Lipton
(2018)). A second problem is explaining why the system
made a decision, and how to contest it or—of particular interest here—how to change it. This problem is more recent
and has become more pressing and widely known with the
advent of legislation, such as the European Union’s General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Goodman and Flaxman 2017; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018), which
requires AI systems to explain in some way its decisions to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6903

We consider hard decision trees, where an instance goes either

