The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Gradient Methods for Constrained Convex Optimization and
Variational Inequalities
Alina Ene,1 Huy L. Nguyen, 2 Adrian Vladu 3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Boston University
Khoury College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University
3
CNRS & IRIF, Université de Paris
aene@bu.edu, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu, vladu@irif.fr
Abstract

adaptive methods appeared, including A DAM (Kingma and
Ba 2014), A MS G RAD (Reddi, Kale, and Kumar 2018), and
S HAMPOO (Gupta, Koren, and Singer 2018), which attained
optimal rates for generic online learning tasks.
A significant series of recent works on adaptive methods
addresses the regime of smooth convex functions. Notably,
Levy (2017), Cutkosky (2019), Kavis et al. (2019), and Bach
and Levy (2019) consider the case of minimizing smooth
convex functions without having prior knowledge of the
smoothness parameter. While a standard convergence rate
of 1/T is fairly easily attainable in the case of unconstrained
optimization, achieving the optimal 1/T 2 rate becomes significantly more challenging. Even worse, for constrained
minimization objectives, where the gradient is nonzero at the
optimum, it is generally unclear how an adaptive method can
pick the correct step sizes even when aiming for the weaker
non-accelerated rate of 1/T . These difficulties occur when
one merely attempts to find the correct learning rate; taking
advantage of non-uniform per-coordinate learning rates, as
in the case of the original A DAG RAD method has remained
largely open. In (Kavis et al. 2019), finding such a method
with an accelerated 1/T 2 convergence is posed as an open
problem, since it would allow the development of robust algorithms that are applicable to non-convex problems such as
training deep neural networks.
In this paper, we address this problem and present adaptive algorithms which achieve nearly-optimal convergence
with per-coordinate learning rates, even in constrained domains. Our algorithms are universal in the sense that they
achieve nearly-optimal convergence rate even when the objective function is non-smooth (Nesterov 2015). Furthermore, they automatically extend to the case of stochastic optimization, achieving up to logarithmic factors optimal dependence in the standard deviation of the stochastic
gradient norm. We complement them with a simpler nonaccelerated algorithm which enjoys the same features: it
achieves the standard convergence rate on both smooth and
non-smooth functions, and does not require prior knowledge
of the smoothness parameters, or the variance of the stochastic gradients.

We provide new adaptive first-order methods for constrained
convex optimization. Our main algorithms A DA ACSA and
A DA AGD+ are accelerated methods, which are universal in
the sense that they achieve nearly-optimal convergence rates
for both smooth and non-smooth functions, even when they
only have access to stochastic gradients. In addition, they do
not require any prior knowledge on how the objective function is parametrized, since they automatically adjust their percoordinate learning rate. These can be seen as truly accelerated A DAG RAD methods for constrained optimization.
We complement them with a simpler algorithm A DAG RAD +
which enjoys the same features, and achieves the standard
non-accelerated convergence rate. We also present a set of
new results involving adaptive methods for unconstrained optimization and monotone operators.

Introduction
Gradient methods are a fundamental building block of modern machine learning. Their scalability and small memory
footprint makes them exceptionally well suited to the massive volumes of data used for present-day learning tasks.
While such optimization methods perform very well in
practice, one of their major limitations consists of their inability to converge faster by taking advantage of specific
features of the input data. For example, the training data
used for classification tasks may exhibit a few very informative features, while all the others have only marginal relevance. Having access to this information a priori would enable practitioners to appropriately tune first-order optimization methods, thus allowing them to train much faster. Lacking this knowledge, one may attempt to reach a similar performance by very carefully tuning hyper-parameters, which
are all specific to the learning model and input data.
This limitation has motivated the development of adaptive
methods, which in absence of prior knowledge concerning
the importance of various features in the data, adapt their
learning rates based on the information they acquired in previous iterations. The most notable example is A DAG RAD
(Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011), which adaptively modifies the learning rate corresponding to each coordinate in
the vector of weights. Following its success, a host of new

Previous Work: Work on adaptive methods has been extensive, and resulted in a broad range of algorithms (Duchi,
Hazan, and Singer 2011; Kingma and Ba 2014; Reddi, Kale,
and Kumar 2018; Tieleman and Hinton 2012; Dozat 2016;

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7314

