The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Alternative Baselines for Low-Shot 3D Medical Image Segmentation—An Atlas
Perspective
Shuxin Wang,1,2 Shilei Cao,2 Dong Wei,2 Cong Xie,1,2 Kai Ma,2 Liansheng Wang,1,3
Deyu Meng,4 Yefeng Zheng2
1

Department of Computer Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Digestive Diseases, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{sxwang, xiecong}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {eliasslcao, donwei, kylekma, yefengzheng}@tencent.com, lswang@xmu.edu.cn,
dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Although evolved from the natural image domain, lowshot segmentation in medical imaging develops distinct
characteristics. First, in the natural image domain, the segmentor is trained on base classes, and the performance is
evaluated on novel classes. However, in medical imaging,
both the training and evaluation focus on the “base” classes
due to the relatively fixed human tissue types (Wang et al.
2020; Xu and Niethammer 2019; Zhao et al. 2019), i.e.,
the low-shot learning is more like semi-supervised learning.
Second, human organs/tissue are anatomically similar across
individuals, hence geometric and topological priors can be
exploited to help segmentation with limited data. Such differences in concepts and levels of domain knowledge lead
to essential differences in algorithm design. Low-shot segmentation in natural images emphasizes on representation
learning, which is more likely to learn a class-agnostic object “concept” with a large pool of labeled data of base
classes, where the features learned on base classes should
transfer well to novel classes; whereas low-shot segmentation in medical images makes effort to better utilize the
anatomical similarity between subjects, which is served as
surrogate supervision to remedy the scarcity of labeled data.
Recently, low-shot segmentation methods in medical images (Wang et al. 2020; Xu and Niethammer 2019; Zhao
et al. 2019) resorted to the practice of classical atlas-based
segmentation (Jia, Yap, and Shen 2012; Lorenzo-Valdés
et al. 2002), and proposed to implement this classical concept under the deep learning (DL) framework, which shifts
from implicit representation learning in the feature space
to explicit dense correspondence learning. The main idea
of these works can be summarized as follows: (1) utilizing
few labeled images (the atlases), the algorithms exploit the
anatomical priors to establish structural correspondences between the atlases and unlabeled images; and (2) these correspondences are then utilized to propagate the segmentation
labels from the atlases to the unlabeled images. Given the encouraging results obtained, the idea of extending atlas-based
segmentation for low-shot learning is compelling.
In this paper, we first adopt a simple yet effective baseline, which leverages the cutting edge technologies (Sun
et al. 2018) in correspondence learning to boost the per-

Low-shot (one/few-shot) segmentation has attracted increasing attention as it works well with limited annotation. Stateof-the-art low-shot segmentation methods on natural images
usually focus on implicit representation learning for each
novel class, such as learning prototypes, deriving guidance
features via masked average pooling, and segmenting using
cosine similarity in feature space. We argue that low-shot segmentation on medical images should step further to explicitly
learn dense correspondences between images to utilize the
anatomical similarity. The core ideas are inspired by the classical practice of multi-atlas segmentation, where the indispensable parts of atlas-based segmentation, i.e., registration,
label propagation, and label fusion are unified into a single
framework in our work. Specifically, we propose two alternative baselines, i.e., the Siamese-Baseline and IndividualDifference-Aware Baseline, where the former is targeted at
anatomically stable structures (such as brain tissues), and the
latter possesses a strong generalization ability to organs suffering large morphological variations (such as abdominal organs). In summary, this work sets up a benchmark for lowshot 3D medical image segmentation and sheds light on further understanding of atlas-based few-shot segmentation.

Introduction
The recent success of deep neural networks in medical image analysis relies on large amounts of labeled training data.
However, it is labor-intensive and time-consuming to manually produce 3D annotations for supervised training. To
reduce the demand for manual annotations, low-shot segmentation is proposed to solve this problem. Recently, a
large body of literature (Nguyen and Todorovic 2019; Shaban et al. 2017; Siam, Oreshkin, and Jagersand 2019; Wang
et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2018) has been devoted to the development of low-shot segmentation algorithms in the natural image domain, and inspired the development of low-shot
algorithms in the medical imaging domain.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
S. Wang, S. Cao and D. Wei contributed equally. S. Wang and
C. Xie contributed to this work during internships at Tencent. Corresponding authors: L. Wang and Y. Zheng.

634

