The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

United for Change: Deliberative Coalition Formation to Change the Status Quo
Edith Elkind1 , Davide Grossi2 , Ehud Shapiro3 , Nimrod Talmon4
1

2

University of Oxford
University of Groningen and University of Amsterdam
3
Weizmann Institute of Science
4
Ben-Gurion University

Abstract

as the status quo. We assume that the number of alternatives is large (possibly infinite), so that the agents cannot be
expected to rank the alternatives or even list all alternatives
they prefer to the status quo. Rather, during the deliberative process, some agents formulate new proposals, and then
each agent can decide whether she prefers a given proposal p
to the status quo, i.e., whether p is closer to her location
than the status quo alternative; if so, she may join a coalition of users supporting p. Importantly, such coalitions are
dynamic: a user may move to another coalition if she thinks
that its proposal is more likely to attract a large number of
supporters; or, two coalitions may merge, possibly leaving
some members behind. We assume that agents are driven by
a desire to get behind a winning proposal; thus, they may
prefer a larger coalition with a less appealing proposal to a
smaller coalition with a more appealing proposal, as long as
the former proposal is more attractive to them than the status
quo. The deliberation succeeds if it identifies a most popular
alternative to the status quo.
This process is democratic in that each participant who
is capable of formulating a new proposal is welcome to do
so; furthermore, participants who do not have the time or
sophistication to work out a proposal can still take part in
the deliberation by choosing which coalition to join. Also,
participants could be assisted by AI-enabled tools, to help
them search for a suitable compromise proposal.
To flesh out the broad outline of the deliberative coalition formation process described above, we specify rules
that govern the dynamics of coalition formation. We explore
several such rules ranging from single-agent moves to more
complex transitions where two coalitions merge behind a
new proposal, possibly leaving some dissenting members
behind. Our aim is to understand whether the agents can succeed at identifying credible alternatives to the status quo if
they conduct deliberation in a certain way.
We concentrate on how the properties of the underlying
abstract space of proposals and the coalition formation operators available to the agents affect the guaranteed success
of the deliberative coalition formation process. We show
that, as the complexity of the proposal space increases, more
complex forms of coalition formation are required in order to guarantee success. Intuitively, this seems to suggest
that complex deliberative spaces require more sophisticated
coalition formation abilities on the side of the agents.

We study a setting in which a community wishes to identify
a strongly supported proposal from a large space of alternatives, in order to change the status quo. We describe a deliberation process in which agents dynamically form coalitions
around proposals that they prefer over the status quo. We formulate conditions on the space of proposals and on the ways
in which coalitions are formed that guarantee deliberation to
succeed, that is, to terminate by identifying a proposal with
the largest possible support. Our results provide theoretical
foundations for the analysis of deliberative processes in systems for democratic deliberation support, such as, e.g., LiquidFeedback or Polis.

1

Introduction

Democratic decision-making requires equality in voting on
alternatives, and social choice theory provides us with a
plethora of useful tools for preference aggregation (Zwicker
2016). However, another important dimension, which has received considerably less attention in the literature, is equality in deciding on which alternatives to vote upon. In practice, agents engaging in group decisions do not just vote on
an externally determined set of choices: rather, they make
proposals, deliberate over them, and join coalitions to push
their proposals through. Understanding these processes is
critical for interactive democracy applications (Brill 2018),
which provide support for online voting and deliberation
to self-governing communities of users that need to make
democratic decisions; relevant examples are the LiquidFeedback1 (Behrens et al. 2014) and the Polis2 platforms.
In this paper, we aim to provide a plausible model of deliberative processes in self-governed online systems. We abstract away from the communication mechanisms by means
of which deliberation may be concretely implemented, and
focus instead on the coalitional effects of deliberation, that
is, on how coalitions in support of various proposals may
be formed or broken in the face of new suggestions. In our
model, agents and alternatives are located in a metric space,
and there is one distinguished alternative, which we refer to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://liquidfeedback.org
2
https://pol.is/home

5339

