The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sample Selection for Universal Domain Adaptation
Omri Lifshitz, Lior Wolf
Tel-Aviv University
omri.lifshtz@gmail.com, liorwolf@gmail.com

Abstract

leads to “negative transfer”, which occurs when incorrectly
applying the knowledge from the source domain to the target
domain, thus lowering the classification accuracy. We, therefore, propose to identify the samples in the target domain for
which the labels are likely to be in the set of shared classes.
The third loss we apply is the confidence regularization
loss, which encourages target samples that are likely to be
from classes that appear only in the target domain (“private
classes”) to be classified with lower confidence. This regularization term is especially important in the UniDA case, in
which there is no prior assumption on the label set relation
between the source and target domains and thus there is a
high risk of negative transfer. Similarly to the pseudo-labeling
scheme above, sample selection is needed, since lowering the
confidence of samples from the shared set of classes would
lead to a decrease in performance.
In our work, the samples from the target domain that are
likely to be from the shared classes are identified based on
two signals. The first is the certainty of the classifier, assuming that the classifier is more likely to be confused when
encountering samples from unseen classes. The second is the
similarity between samples from source and target domains,
assuming that there is a higher similarity between samples
from the shared classes. We, therefore, suggest a scoring
scheme that combines the outputs of both the label classifier
and the domain classifier.
Our experiments show that our scoring scheme based on
the aforementioned signals together with the three loss terms
improves the state of the art accuracy in the UniDA scenario.
Our main contributions are: (i) a direct method for UniDA,
which employs selective pseudo-labels as the main loss, (ii)
encouraging score separation using the confidence regularization, (iii) a new sample scoring scheme that outperforms
the weights employed in the literature, and (iv) state of the
art results across datasets and benchmarks.

This paper studies the problem of unsupervised domain adaption in the universal scenario, in which only some of the classes
are shared between the source and target domains. We present
a scoring scheme that is effective in identifying the samples
of the shared classes. The score is used to select samples in
the target domain for which to apply specific losses during
training; pseudo-labels for high scoring samples and confidence regularization for low scoring samples. Taken together,
our method is shown to outperform, by a sizeable margin, the
current state of the art on the literature benchmarks.

Introduction
In real world situations, the necessity of applying domain
adaptation is the rule and not the exception, since “no man
ever steps in the same river twice”. This is true not only
for the input samples, whose distribution is likely to change
both because of the shifting setting and due to the practical
considerations of collecting training samples, but also with
regards to the output labels. In many cases, the classes seen
and labeled during training differ from those encountered
during the deployment phase.
Unsupervised domain adaptation seeks to learn a classifier
in a source domain in which supervised training samples exist,
such that it would be effective in a target domain for which
only unsupervised samples exist. Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) adds the challenge that some of the classes in
the source domain do not appear in the target domain and
vice versa. Therefore, the classifier, when applied to the target
domain, has to classify only according to the relevant classes,
and also identify the samples that belong to the classes that
are unique to the target domain.
Our method is based on three losses. The first loss is the
conventional domain confusion loss, which encourages the
representation of the samples to be domain agnostic. The
second is the pseudo-labeling loss, which is a very common
loss in semi-supervised learning and, in particular, in unsupervised domain adaptation. However, the application of
pseudo-labels in the UniDA setting requires additional care,
since labeling every sample is almost guaranteed to lead to adverse results. In other words, assigning wrong pseudo-labels

Related Work
The problem of unsupervised domain adaptation can be divided into four different categories, based on the relation
between the label sets of the source and target domains:
closed-set, open-set, partial and universal.
Closed-set domain adaptation is a scenario where the source
and target domains share the same label set. The main challenge in this scenario is to overcome the domain gap that

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8592

