The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Representing the Unification of
Text Featurization using a Context-Free Grammar
Doruk Kilitçioğlu and Serdar Kadıoğlu
Artificial Intelligence Center of Excellence
Fidelity Investments, Boston, USA
{firstname.lastname@fmr.com}

Abstract

(Le and Mikolov 2014), or even more sophisticated language
models such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), or one of its
many of the variants, e.g., RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019), DistilBERT (Sanh et al. 2019), ALBERT (Lan et al. 2019) etc.
When faced with this challenge, data scientists have to experiment with many techniques and select the best performing one while also considering other factors such as the inference time, simplicity, maintainability, availability of specific hardware, deployment constraints, and reproducibility.
The task becomes even more involved when we consider not
only the different featurization methods but their combination thereof. For instance, we could represent each article
using a concatenation of two or more methods, or their transformation using dimensionality reduction or decomposition
techniques such as non-negative matrix factorization (Lee
and Seung 2001) and singular value decomposition (Golub
and Reinsch 1971).

We propose a novel context-free grammar to represent text
embeddings in conjunction with their various transformations. We show how this grammar can serve as a unification
layer on top of different featurization techniques, and their
hybridization thereof. The approach is embodied in an opensource library, called T EXT W ISER, with a high-level user
interface to serve researchers and practitioners. The goal of
T EXT W ISER is to enable rapid experimentation with various
featurization methods and to serve as a building block within
AI applications consuming unstructured data. We highlight
several key benefits that are desirable especially in industrial settings where rapid experimentation, reusability, reproducibility, and time to market are of great interest. Finally,
we showcase a deployed service powered by T EXT W ISER as
a proof-of-concept enterprise application.

Introduction
Unstructured text is a common source of input data for
many modern machine learning applications from finance to
healthcare and e-commerce. Given the vast amounts of unstructured data, applications turn to various text featurization
techniques from Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, there exists no silver bullet, and it typically remains
unknown which featurization technique, or which combinations, would provide the best performance for the downstream application at hand. Depending on the specific task,
which might range from ranking to classification and similarity matching to personalization among many others, practitioners turn to experimentation in the pursuit of finding the
best approach.

Recent developments in the open-source NLP community provided practitioners with a rich set of tools and libraries to combat this challenge. Popular examples include
NLTK (Loper and Bird 2002), GENSIM (Řehůřek and Sojka 2010), and more recently S PACY (Honnibal and Montani
2017), A LLEN NLP (Gardner et al. 2018), F LAIR (Akbik,
Blythe, and Vollgraf 2018) and H UGGING FACE T RANS FORMERS (Wolf et al. 2019). Thankfully, most of these libraries also offer pre-trained models to speed up application
development. Still, the availability of various techniques in
standalone, isolated libraries does not provide an immediate
solution for our scenario to find the best content similarity
approach. The task becomes working with many different
tools and building a custom layer on top to find the best approach. When the scenario changes in a new use case, we
have to re-do this work from scratch. Even worse, this is an
effort that every practitioner has to repeat for each use case.
Notice also that there is no guarantee of reproducibility between two different implementations and experimentations.
Moreover, as one of the fastest moving research areas, with
new NLP methods and tools being introduced on a rapid basis, data scientists and non-experts need to get familiar with
new technology and extend their experimentation setup with
another tool. This is exactly the problem we want to solve in
this paper to improve applied AI innovation and deployment
of AI systems.

Consider, for example, a scenario in which we would like
to find the pairwise similarities between the contents of a set
of articles. A reasonable and commonly applied approach
would be to select a distance measure and then compute
distances among articles based on their text features. This
leaves us with some algorithmic choices. On the one hand,
we can start with relatively simple counting and frequencybased approach such as Term Frequency-Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF)(Jones 1972). On the other hand, we can
employ drastically different techniques based on word embeddings such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), Doc2Vec
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15439

