The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Continuous-Time Attention for Sequential Learning
Jen-Tzung Chien, Yi-Hsiang Chen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National Chaio Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{jtchien, ethernet420.eed08g}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

a patient by using several biomedical signals acquired by
different sensors or diagnosis facilities where the sampling
resolutions in different signals are varied (Lipton, Kale, and
Wetzel 2016; Che et al. 2018; El Naqa et al. 2018; Chuang
et al. 2020). Some other practical applications in presence of
irregular-sampled data (Elman 1990) include financial marketing (Bauer, Schölkopf, and Peters 2016), weather forecasting (Shi et al. 2015) and traffic engineering (Wang et al.
2017), to name a few. A key issue in these applications is
the missing data problem which is possibly caused due to
the facility cost or affected by machine anomaly. A naive
way to deal with this issue is to adopt the time difference
of sequence samples as a new feature input for RNN training. Alternatively, an attractive approach is to construct a
continuous-time machine based on neural differential equation (NDE) (Chen et al. 2018) where the continuous-time
hidden state space is constructed for learning representation similarly over the sequence data with unlimited length.
The discrete-time state transitions in RNN are generalized
to the continuous-time state dynamics by combining NDE
with RNN (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019). NDE is
then built as a strong model with rich sequence information
for prediction. NDE is seen as an RNN model for extremely
long sequence. NDE can tackle the weakness of RNN which
is deteriorated when the length of input sequence increases
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). Nevertheless, the performance of sequential learning is bounded because the relevance or the importance of individual samples to target task
is neglected. This paper presents a continuous-time attention
scheme to strengthen the learning of irregular sampled data.

Attention mechanism is crucial for sequential learning where
a wide range of applications have been successfully developed. This mechanism is basically trained to spotlight on the
region of interest in hidden states of sequence data. Most of
the attention methods compute the attention score through relating between a query and a sequence where the discretetime state trajectory is represented. Such a discrete-time attention could not directly attend the continuous-time trajectory which is represented via neural differential equation
(NDE) combined with recurrent neural network. This paper
presents a new continuous-time attention method for sequential learning which is tightly integrated with NDE to construct
an attentive continuous-time state machine. The continuoustime attention is performed at all times over the hidden states
for different kinds of irregular time signals. The missing information in sequence data due to sampling loss, especially
in presence of long sequence, can be seamlessly compensated
and attended in learning representation. The experiments on
irregular sequence samples from human activities, dialogue
sentences and medical features show the merits of the proposed continuous-time attention for activity recognition, sentiment classification and mortality prediction, respectively.

Introduction
Learning representation of sequence data in spatial or temporal domain is crucial (Chien 2019; Tseng et al. 2017).
The popular examples of sequence data include natural sentences, video streams and medical signals. Most of them are
seen as time-series data although the sequences of spatial
samples in images are also recognized as the sequence data.
An essential solution to sequential learning is based on the
recurrent neural network (RNN) where the hidden states of
previous samples are continuously updated by a recurrent
machine, and seamlessly applied for prediction of next sample. One critical issue in sequential learning is to characterize the dynamics of sampling resolution in sequence data.
Generally, RNNs are feasible to learning representation for
regularly-sampled time-series data, while they are an awkward fit to irregularly-sampled time series. However, irregular time-series data are very common in real world. For
example, in medical areas, we usually predict the health of

In general, attention mechanism can be powerful to capture the relevance information between a query and a document or sequence which has been successfully developed
for a wide range of applications based on standard RNN
(Chien and Lin 2018; Chien and Wang 2019; Chien and Lin
2020). The document is formed as a matrix where each row
is a feature vector extracted from sequence data at different
time points. Then, the attention score is computed by using
a query vector and a document matrix. This paper presents a
novel continuous-time attention method for sequential learning where the attention is performed in continuous-time state
space based on NDE. Accordingly, the document is represented by a continuous function rather than a matrix. This
function represents the features at any desired time moments

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7116

