The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Classification Under Human Assistance
Abir De1 * , Nastaran Okati2* , Ali Zarezade2 , Manuel Gomez Rodriguez2
2

1
IIT Bombay
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems

Abstract

some instances, where they make far more errors than average (Raghu et al. 2019). Motivated by this observation,
there has been a paucity of work on developing machine
learning models that are optimized to operate under different automation levels (De et al. 2020a; Bordt and von
Luxburg 2020; Mozannar and Sontag 2020; Raghu et al.
2019; Wilder, Horvitz, and Kamar 2020)—models that are
optimized to take decisions for a given fraction of the instances and leave the remaining ones to humans. However,
most of this work has developed heuristic algorithms that do
not enjoy theoretical guarantees. One of the only exceptions
is the work by De et al. (2020a), which has reduced the
problem of ridge regression under different automation levels to the maximization of an α-submodular function (Gatmiry and Gomez-Rodriguez 2019). In our work, rather than
(ridge) regression, we focus on classification under human
assistance and show that, for support vector machines, the
problem can be solved using algorithms with theoretical
guarantees.
More specifically, we first show that, for convex margin-based classifiers, the problem of classification under human assistance is NP-hard. This is due to its combinatorial nature—for each potential meta-decision about which
instances the classifier will decide upon, there is an optimal set of parameters for the classifier, however, the metadecision is also something we seek to optimize. Then, for
support vector machines, we derive an alternative representation of the objective function as a difference of two functions f = g − c, where g is monotone, non-negative, and
γ-weakly submodular (Bian et al. 2017; Das and Kempe
2018) and c is non-negative and modular. Moreover, we further show that, in our problem, the submodularity ratio γ,
which characterizes how close is the function g to being
submodular, can be lower bounded. These properties allow
a recently introduced deterministic greedy algorithm (Algorithm 1) as well as a more efficient randomized variant of
the algorithm (Harshaw et al. 2019) to enjoy nontrivial approximation guarantees.
Finally, we experiment with synthetic and real-world data
from several applications in medical diagnosis. Our experiments on synthetic data reveal that, by outsourcing samples
to humans during training, the resulting support vector machine is able to reduce the number of training samples inside
or on the wrong side of the margin, among those samples it

Most supervised learning models are trained for full automation. However, their predictions are sometimes worse than
those by human experts on some specific instances. Motivated
by this empirical observation, our goal is to design classifiers
that are optimized to operate under different automation levels. More specifically, we focus on convex margin-based classifiers and first show that the problem is NP-hard. Then, we
further show that, for support vector machines, the corresponding objective function can be expressed as the difference of
two functions f = g − c, where g is monotone, non-negative
and γ-weakly submodular, and c is non-negative and modular. This representation allows us to utilize a recently introduced deterministic greedy algorithm, as well as a more efficient randomized variant of the algorithm, which enjoy approximation guarantees at solving the problem. Experiments
on synthetic and real-world data from several applications
in medical diagnosis illustrate our theoretical findings and
demonstrate that, under human assistance, supervised learning models trained to operate under different automation levels can outperform those trained for full automation as well
as humans operating alone.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning models have matched, or
even surpassed, the average performance of human experts
at tasks for which intelligence is required (Graves, AbdelRahman, and Hinton 2013; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Silver et al. 2016; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014). As a consequence, there is a widespread discussion
on the possibility of letting machine learning models take
high-stake decisions—the promise is that the timeliness and
quality of the decisions would greatly improve. For example, in medical diagnosis, patients would not need to wait for
months to be diagnosed by a specialist. In content moderation, online publishers could moderate toxic comments before they trigger incivility in their platforms. In software development, developers would easily find bugs in large software projects and would not need to spend long hours in
code reviews.
Unfortunately, the decisions taken by machine learning
models are still worse than those by human experts on
* Equal contributions.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5905

