The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing Scientific Papers Summarization with Citation Graph
Chenxin An, Ming Zhong, Yiran Chen, Danqing Wang, Xipeng Qiu* , Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{cxan20, mzhong18, yrchen19, dqwang18, xpqiu, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous work for text summarization in scientific domain
mainly focused on the content of the input document, but seldom considering its citation network. However, scientific papers are full of uncommon domain-specific terms, making it
almost impossible for the model to understand its true meaning without the help of the relevant research community. In
this paper, we redefine the task of scientific papers summarization by utilizing their citation graph and propose a citation graph-based summarization model (C G S UM) which can
incorporate the information of both the source paper and its
references. In addition, we construct a novel scientific papers summarization dataset Semantic Scholar Network (SSN)
which contains 141K research papers in different domains
and 661K citation relationships. The entire dataset constitutes
a large connected citation graph. Extensive experiments show
that our model can achieve competitive performance when
compared with the pretrained models even with a simple architecture. The results also indicates the citation graph is crucial to better understand the content of papers and generate
high-quality summaries.

Introduction

Figure 1: A small research community on the subject of
Weak Galerkin Finite Element Method. Green text indicates
the domain-specific terms shared in these papers, orange text
denotes different ways of writing the same sentences, blue
text represents the definition of Weak Galerkin Finite Element Method (does not appear in the source paper).

Text summarization is to automatically compress a document into a shorter version preserving a concise description
of the content. Most of the previous work focused on News
domain (Nallapati et al. 2016; Rush, Chopra, and Weston
2015; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2016; Zhong et al. 2019),
and achieved promising result using the neural encoderdecoder architecture. Although text summarization systems
have not been explored too much in other domains, such as
scientific papers, they still have broad application prospects.
Generating a good abstract for a scientific paper is a very
challenging task, even for a beginner researcher, since the
scientific papers are usually longer and full of complex concepts and domain-specific items in specific fields. Cohan
et al. (2018) and Xiao and Carenini (2019) leveraged the paper structure information to generate the abstracts for scientific papers. However, their methods dedicate to solving the
problem of long document modeling and do not utilize the
information of references. As a matter of fact, researchers

usually write an abstract of a paper by referring some examples. Especially a large number of papers on the same topic
are often similar in content. Reasonable use of the information of reference papers may help us solve the scientific papers summarization task. To generate better summary for a
scientific paper, Yasunaga et al. (2019) integrated the formation of the source paper and the papers which cite the source
papers. However, the citing papers appeared after the source
paper, so we tend to think that this task does not help a research to draft an abstract when the paper has not been cited
yet.
In this paper, we highlight the importance of the citation
graph and believe that it can assist in generating high-quality
summaries. Figure 1 shows an example of a small research

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12498

