The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Faster Stackelberg Planning via Symbolic Search and Information Sharing
Álvaro Torralba,1 Patrick Speicher,2 Robert Künnemann,2 Marcel Steinmetz,3 Jörg Hoffmann 3
1
Aalborg University, Denmark
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
3
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
alto@cs.aau.dk, {patrick.speicher,robert.kuennemann}@cispa.saarland, {steinmetz,hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de
2

Abstract

the different subtasks. We achieve this (1) by recognizing
that most follower subtasks can be solved with bounded
cost suboptimal planning techniques, which are often more
efficient than optimal planning algorithms; and (2) by using a symbolic representation to share information across
searches. Instead of considering the subtasks in isolation,
SLS symbolically represents all possible follower subtasks
that the leader can reach with a given cost. Not only does
this avoid the explicit enumeration of all possible states in
the leader state space, which can potentially provide an exponential advantage in terms of memory and time, but it also
allows for sharing information, e.g., by reusing upper bound
functions for cost-bounded planning algorithms.
Besides this algorithmic contribution, we also introduce
an extension of Stackelberg planning, using soft goals and
net-benefit planning at the follower level. They generalize
the follower’s goal and naturally occur both in the securityrelated and robustness-related scenarios. In the former, we
can now model attackers that wish to inflict maximal damage (e.g., sum of users associated to compromised domains).
In the latter, we can now model agents that maximize the
achievable benefits subject to the damage inflicted by the adversarial event. Solving such more general Stackelberg planning tasks is, in principle, straightforward: we can use the
well-known compilation from net-benefit to classical planning (Keyder and Geffner 2009).
Our empirical evaluation shows that SLS outperforms
previous approaches for Stackelberg planning. The improvement is consistent, and is particularly pronounced in tasks
with large leader action spaces and in net-benefit Stackelberg planning where follower subtasks are inherently harder
to solve. We thus significantly extend the scope of Stackelberg planning tools.

Stackelberg planning is a recent framework where a leader
and a follower each choose a plan in the same planning task,
the leader’s objective being to maximize plan cost for the
follower. This formulation naturally captures security-related
(leader=defender, follower=attacker) as well as robustnessrelated (leader=adversarial event, follower=agent) scenarios.
Solving Stackelberg planning tasks requires solving many related planning tasks at the follower level (in the worst case,
one for every possible leader plan). Here we introduce new
methods to tackle this source of complexity, through sharing
information across follower tasks. Our evaluation shows that
these methods can significantly reduce both the time needed
to solve follower tasks and the number of follower tasks that
need to be solved in the first place.

Introduction
Stackelberg planning (Speicher et al. 2018a) is a recent
framework inspired by Stackelberg security games (Tambe
2011; Shieh et al. 2014). It models a single exchange of adversarial plan choice between two agents, leader and follower, acting in the same planning task. The leader’s objective is to maximize the follower’s plan cost. Solutions
form a Pareto front containing pairs of leader/follower plans.
This captures security-related scenarios like network security, where the leader must make it as hard as possible for an
attacker to harm the system. It can also capture robustnessrelated scenarios, by assessing the impact of an adversarial
event (constructed by the leader) on the cost of the follower’s
plan (the agent acting in the domain at hand). Stackelberg
planning has been used in large-scale studies to evaluate the
efficacy of new protocol proposals for the email infrastructure (Speicher et al. 2018b) and for the web (Tizio 2018)
where performance and flexibility are key features.
Previous work by Speicher et al. (2018a) introduced a
search algorithm in the space of leader actions, where each
node corresponds to solving a follower task. Thus, one may
need to solve exponentially many follower subtasks, each of
which is a cost-optimal classical planning task.
We introduce Symbolic Leader Search (SLS), a new algorithm for solving Stackelberg planning tasks. SLS aims to
effectively reuse as much information as possible between

Background
Classical Planning
A SAS+ classical planning task is a tuple (V, A, I, G) where
V is a set of variables of finite domain (Bäckström and Nebel
1995). A state is a value assignment to all variables in V,
and a partial state p is an assignment to a subset of variables Vp ⊆ V. Given a (partial) state s, and a set of variables
V ⊆ Vs , s|V denotes the projection of s onto V . Given two
pairs of partial states s, t with disjoint variables, we define

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11998

