The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FairRec: Fairness-aware News Recommendation with
Decomposed Adversarial Learning
Chuhan Wu1 , Fangzhao Wu2 , Xiting Wang2 , Yongfeng Huang1 , Xing Xie2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering & BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing 100080, China
{wuchuhan15, wufangzhao}@gmail.com, {xitwan, xing.xie}@microsoft.com, yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recommend

News recommendation is important for online news services.
Existing news recommendation models are usually learned
from users’ news click behaviors. Usually the behaviors of
users with the same sensitive attributes (e.g., genders) have
similar patterns and news recommendation models can easily
capture these patterns. It may lead to some biases related to
sensitive user attributes in the recommendation results, e.g.,
always recommending sports news to male users, which is
unfair since users may not receive diverse news information.
In this paper, we propose a fairness-aware news recommendation approach with decomposed adversarial learning and
orthogonality regularization, which can alleviate unfairness
in news recommendation brought by the biases of sensitive
user attributes. In our approach, we propose to decompose
the user interest model into two components. One component aims to learn a bias-aware user embedding that captures
the bias information on sensitive user attributes, and the other
aims to learn a bias-free user embedding that only encodes
attribute-independent user interest information for fairnessaware news recommendation. In addition, we propose to apply an attribute prediction task to the bias-aware user embedding to enhance its ability on bias modeling, and we apply adversarial learning to the bias-free user embedding to remove
the bias information from it. Moreover, we propose an orthogonality regularization method to encourage the bias-free user
embeddings to be orthogonal to the bias-aware one to better
distinguish the bias-free user embedding from the bias-aware
one. For fairness-aware news ranking, we only use the biasfree user embedding. Extensive experiments on benchmark
dataset show that our approach can effectively improve fairness in news recommendation with minor performance loss.

*(Fashion, NBA)

Recommend
The three best
storylines of the
NBA season

Your guide to this
year's biggest
shoe trends

Recommend

*(Fashion)

×
×

*(NBA)

Recommend

*(Fashion, NBA)

Figure 1: An example of gender bias in news recommendation. *Keywords under users represent their interest.

tention networks to learn user representations from the representations of clicked news by using the embedding of user
ID as attention query. Usually, users with the same sensitive
attributes (e.g., genders) may have similar patterns in their
news click behaviors. Taking user genders as an example, in
Fig. 1 the female users may prefer fashion news while male
users may prefer sports news. However, user interest models can easily capture the these patterns and lead to some
biases (e.g., gender bias) in the news recommendation results. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, since fashion news
may be clicked by more female users while NBA news may
be preferred more by male users, the model tends to only
recommend fashion news to female users and NBA news to
male users. In this scenario, the recommendation results are
heavily influenced by the biases brought by sensitive user
attributes, and the users interested in both fashion and NBA
cannot receive diverse news information, which is unfair and
may be harmful for user experience.
In this paper, we propose a fairness-aware news
recommendation (FairRec) approach with decomposed adversarial learning and orthogonality regularization, which
can effectively alleviate the unfairness in news recommendation brought by the biases related to sensitive user attributes like genders. We propose to decompose the user interest model into two components, where the first one aims
to learn a bias-aware user embedding that captures biases
related to sensitive user attributes from user behaviors, and
the second one aims to learn a bias-free user embedding
that mainly encodes attribute-independent user interest information for making fairness-aware news recommendation.
In addition, we apply a sensitive user attribute prediction
task to the bias-aware user embedding to push it to convey

Introduction
Personalized news recommendation techniques are critical
for news websites to help users find their interested news
and improve their reading experience (Wu et al. 2019d).
Many existing methods for news recommendation rely on
the news click behaviors of users to learn user interest models (Okura et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019b). For example, Okura
et al. (2017) proposed to learn user representations from the
representations of clicked news articles with a GRU network. Wu et al. (2019b) proposed to use personalized atCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4462

