The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Discovering New Intents with Deep Aligned Clustering
Hanlei Zhang,1, 2 Hua Xu,1, 2∗ Ting-En Lin1, 2 , Rui Lyu1, 3
1

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications University, Beijing 100876, China
zhang-hl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn, ting-en.lte@alibaba-inc.com, lvrui2017@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Discovering new intents is a crucial task in dialogue systems. Most existing methods are limited in transferring the
prior knowledge from known intents to new intents. They also
have difficulties in providing high-quality supervised signals
to learn clustering-friendly features for grouping unlabeled
intents. In this work, we propose an effective method, Deep
Aligned Clustering, to discover new intents with the aid of the
limited known intent data. Firstly, we leverage a few labeled
known intent samples as prior knowledge to pre-train the
model. Then, we perform k-means to produce cluster assignments as pseudo-labels. Moreover, we propose an alignment
strategy to tackle the label inconsistency problem during clustering assignments. Finally, we learn the intent representations under the supervision of the aligned pseudo-labels. With
an unknown number of new intents, we predict the number of
intent categories by eliminating low-confidence intent-wise
clusters. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets
show that our method is more robust and achieves substantial improvements over the state-of-the-art methods. The
codes are released at https://github.com/thuiar/DeepAlignedClustering.

Training

Test

Known Intent1

Labeled

Intent1

Known Intent2

Labeled

Intent2

…

Labeled

…

Known IntentN

Labeled

IntentN

New Intent1

IntentN+1

New Intent2

IntentN+2

…

…

New IntentM

IntentN+M

Figure 1: An example for our task. We use limited known
intent labeled data as a guide to discover new intents.

sus predictions of multiple clustering techniques to discover similar semantic intent-wise clusters. Haponchyk et al.
(2018) cluster questions into user intent categories under the
supervision of structured outputs. Shi et al. (2018) extract
intent features with an autoencoder and automatically label
the intents with a hierarchical clustering method.
However, all of the above methods fail to leverage the
prior knowledge of known intents. These methods assume
that the unlabeled samples are only composed of undiscovered new intents. A more common case is that some labeled
data of known intents are accessible and the unlabeled data
are mixed with both known and new intents. As illustrated
in Figure 1, we may have a few labeled samples (e.g., with a
labeled proportion of 10%) of known intents in advance. The
remaining known and new intent samples are all unlabeled.
Our goal is to find known intents and discover new intents
with the prior knowledge of limited labeled data. Our previous work CDAC+ (Lin, Xu, and Zhang 2020) directly tackles this problem. Nevertheless, it uses pairwise similarities
as weak supervised signals, which are ambiguous to distinguish a mixture of unlabeled known and new intents. Thus,
the performance drops with more new intents.
To summarize, there are two main difficulties in our task.
On the one hand, it is challenging to effectively transfer the
prior knowledge from known intents to new intents with limited labeled data. On the other hand, it is hard to construct

Introduction
Discovering novel user intents is important to improve the
service quality in dialogue systems. By analyzing the discovered new intents, we may find underlying user interests,
which could provide business opportunities and guide the
improvement direction (Lin and Xu 2019).
Intent discovery has attracted much attention in recent
years (Perkins and Yang 2019; Min et al. 2020; Vedula et al.
2020). Many researchers regard it as an unsupervised clustering problem, and they manage to incorporate some weak
supervised signals to guide the clustering process. For example, Hakkani-Tür et al. (2013) propose a hierarchical semantic clustering model and collect web page clicked information as implicit supervision for intent discovery. HakkaniTür et al. (2015) utilize a semantic parsing graph as extra knowledge to mine novel intents during clustering. Padmasundari and Bangalore (2018) benefit from the consen∗

Hua Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14365

