The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Clustering of High-dimensional Data with a Feature Weighted Mean
Shift Algorithm
Saptarshi Chakraborty1∗ , Debolina Paul2∗ , Swagatam Das3†
1

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
2
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
3
Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
saptarshic@berkeley.edu, debolinap8@gmail.com, swagatam.das@isical.ac.in

Abstract

Hamerly and Elkan 2004; Fischer 2011; Kulis and Jordan
2012; Chakraborty and Das 2018; Gupta, Datta, and Das
2018; Paul and Das 2020).
Moreover, algorithms for solving k-means type nonconvex clustering problems are prone to get stuck at local
minima (Xu and Lange 2019). Recent attempts to mitigate
this issue approach the problem via annealing with a class of
functions approximating the k-means type objective (Xu and
Lange 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2020) or by taking a convex
relaxation of the problem (Chi and Lange 2015; Pelckmans
et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2018). There are also density-based
algorithms like DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996; Jiang 2017) or
other mode seeking approaches like quick shift (Vedaldi and
Soatto 2008; Jiang 2017) which attempts to speed up mean
shift. However, these methods either require k as an input
or their performance degrade in a high-dimensional setting,
where the signal-to-noise-ratio is quite low.
To find the number of clusters automatically and to learn
various properties of the feature space, researchers have resorted to the mean shift (MS) paradigm (Cheng 1995; Su
and Shang 2017). Mean shift has previously been used for
mode seeking, object tracking, and automated clustering in
the feature space.

Mean shift is a simple interactive procedure that gradually
shifts data points towards the mode which denotes the highest density of data points in the region. Mean shift algorithms
have been effectively used for data denoising, mode seeking,
and finding the number of clusters in a dataset in an automated fashion. However, the merits of mean shift quickly
fade away as the data dimensions increase and only a handful of features contain useful information about the cluster
structure of the data. We propose a simple yet elegant featureweighted variant of mean shift to efficiently learn the feature
importance and thus, extending the merits of mean shift to
high-dimensional data. The resulting algorithm not only outperforms the conventional mean shift clustering procedure
but also preserves its computational simplicity. In addition,
the proposed method comes with rigorous theoretical convergence guarantees and a convergence rate of at least a cubic
order. The efficacy of our proposal is thoroughly assessed
through experimental comparison against baseline and stateof-the-art clustering methods on synthetic as well as realworld datasets.

Introduction
Clustering, a cornerstone of unsupervised learning, refers to
the task of partitioning a dataset into more than one exhaustive and mutually exclusive groups, based on some measure
of similarity (Xu and Tian 2015). Some popular paradigms
in clustering include center-based approaches such as kmeans and its variants (Jain 2010), hierarchical clustering
(Carlsson and Mémoli 2010), spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002; Hess et al. 2019), density-based methods (Ester et al. 1996), convex clustering (Chi and Lange
2015), kernel clustering (Dhillon, Guan, and Kulis 2004),
model-based frequentist approaches (McNicholas 2016) and
Bayesian methods (Archambeau and Verleysen 2007; Kulis
and Jordan 2012).
Most of the aforementioned algorithms inherently use
the number of clusters (k) as an input. However, for realworld data, k may not be known beforehand. Determining
k from the dataset itself has long been an open problem
and has attracted a lot of attention from the relevant research community (Tibshirani, Walther, and Hastie 2001;

Suppose X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rp be n data points to
(0)
(0)
be clustered. The mean shift initiates n points y 1 , . . . , y n
and updates y i according to the following update rule:
Pn
(t)
j=1 K(ky i − xj k/h)xj
(t+1)
yi
= Pn
,
(1)
(t)
j=1 K(ky i − xj k/h)
until convergence. Here K(·) is a kernel function (e.g. the
Gaussian kernel, K(x) = exp{−x2 }) and h is the bandwidth parameter. This version of the mean shift is often used
to detect the mode(s) of the estimated density. Often, instead
of updating based on the original data points xi ’s, one uses
(t)
y i ’s, the points obtained in the t-th step as follows:
Pn
(t)
(t)
(t)
j=1 K(ky i − y j k/h)y j
(t+1)
yi
= Pn
.
(2)
(t)
(t)
j=1 K(ky i − y j k/h)

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

†

6930

∗
Co-first authors contributed equally
Corresponding author

