The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Deterministic Neural Network Approach to Playing Gin Rummy
Viet Dung Nguyen, Dung Doan, Todd W. Neller
Gettysburg College
{nguyvi01, doandu01, tneller}@gettysburg.edu

Abstract

We begin by describing prior work related to the computation of Gin Rummy strategy. We then introduce our deterministic approach for constructing or Gin Rummy Player.
Next, we define heuristic and neural network models that engineer features that are helpful for learning play decisions:
card goodness/badness, opponent hand estimation, and the
goodness/badness of a decision to knock. We share our intuitions for these models, our experimental means of collecting training data, training non-heuristic features, and the
results of such experiments. Comparing the performance of
players that use different combinations of our engineered
models, we observe their relative strengths, and conclude
which models offer the greatest statistically significant improvements in Gin Rummy play.

This paper describes a deterministic approach to building a
fixed-strategy gin rummy player. In the paper, we develop and
evaluate both heuristic and neural network models for informing draw, discard, and knock decisions in the game. In this
empirical study, we test performance of the models through
competitive game play, show which best inform strategy, and
demonstrate statistical significance of the improvement over
a simple strategy. Through this empirical study, we indicate
features that we expect to be helpful in future improvements
to Gin Rummy play.

Introduction
1

Gin Rummy is an imperfect information card game in
which one collects cards in sets or runs called melds, minimizing deadwood points of unmelded cards so as to knock,
i.e. end the hand, and have the least deadwood points. We
use North American 25-point gin and undercut bonuses, and
declare the winner as the first player to score 100 points or
more over successive hands.
In this paper, we develop an AI Gin Rummy player that
learns play strategy in simulated play with a simple Gin
Rummy player class SimpleGinRummyPlayer supplies
as reference implementation for a Gin Rummy research
competition (Neller 2020). The Simple player implements
a simple strategy:

Related Work
DeepStack
DeepStack (Moravčı́k et al. 2017) was one of two successful approaches to optimal Heads-Up, No-Limit (HUNL)
Texas Hold’em Poker which, like Gin Rummy, is an imperfect information card game. DeepStack utilize concepts of
counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Neller and Lanctot 2013), Monte Carlo Tree Search, and deep neural network learning in order to continually recompute a belief
state regarding the opponent’s two hole cards, which requires significant computational resources. The number of
non-abstract information sets in Gin Rummy is prohibitively
large given the 10-card hand in comparison to the 2-card
hand of Texas Hold’em Poker.

• It ignores opponent actions and cards that are no longer in
play
• It draws a face-up card only if it becomes part of a meld.
Otherwise, it draws face-down
• It discards a highest-deadwood unmelded card, breaking
ties randomly and without regard to breaking up potential
meld patterns (e.g. pairs)

TD-Rummy
The work by Kotnik and Kalita (Kotnik and Kalita 2003) is
one of very few works that treat Gin Rummy specifically.
In particular, their use of artificial neural networks (ANNs)
influenced our decision to apply ANNs to our approach. In
their work, they applied two different architectures of ANNs
to Temporal Difference and Evolution Learning models. In
their approach learning is continual and online, whereas we
desire to pretrain models offline with batch learning so as to
have fast real-time play decisions.

• It knocks as soon as possible
We restrict the scope of our work to approaches
that are efficiently computable in real-time without highperformance hardware for the purpose of fast, good, accessible Gin Rummy play.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.pagat.com/rummy/ginrummy.html

15622

