The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BSN++: Complementary Boundary Regressor with Scale-Balanced Relation
Modeling for Temporal Action Proposal Generation
Haisheng Su1 * , Weihao Gan1 , Wei Wu1 , Yu Qiao2, 3 , Junjie Yan1
1

SenseTime Research
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{suhaisheng, ganweihao, wuwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Generating human action proposals in untrimmed videos is
an important yet challenging task with wide applications.
Current methods often suffer from the noisy boundary locations and the inferior quality of confidence scores used
for proposal retrieving. In this paper, we present BSN++, a
new framework which exploits complementary boundary regressor and relation modeling for temporal proposal generation. First, we propose a novel boundary regressor based
on the complementary characteristics of both starting and
ending boundary classifiers. Specifically, we utilize the Ushaped architecture with nested skip connections to capture
rich contexts and introduce bi-directional boundary matching mechanism to improve boundary precision. Second, to
account for the proposal-proposal relations ignored in previous methods, we devise a proposal relation block to which includes two self-attention modules from the aspects of position
and channel. Furthermore, we find that there inevitably exists
data imbalanced problems in the positive/negative proposals
and temporal durations, which harm the model performance
on tail distributions. To relieve this issue, we introduce the
scale-balanced re-sampling strategy. Extensive experiments
are conducted on two popular benchmarks: ActivityNet-1.3
and THUMOS14, which demonstrate that BSN++ achieves
the state-of-the-art performance. Not surprisingly, the proposed BSN++ ranked 1st place in the CVPR19 - ActivityNet
challenge leaderboard on temporal action localization task.

Figure 1: (a) Given an untrimmed video containing several
action instances of small scale, (b) IoU-balanced sampling
is widely used to train the proposal confidence regressor,
which still suffers from inferior quality owing to the imbalanced distribution of the temporal durations, resulting in the
long-tailed proposal dataset. (c) BSN++ aims at generating
high-quality proposal boundaries as well as reliable confidence scores with complementary boundary regressor and
scale-balanced proposal relation block.

Introduction
Temporal action detection task has received much attention
from many researchers in recent years, which requires not
only categorizing the real-world untrimmed videos but also
locating the temporal boundaries of action instances. Akin to
object proposals for object detection in images, temporal action proposal indicates the temporal intervals containing the
actions and plays an important role in temporal action detection. It has been commonly recognized that high-quality proposals usually have two crucial properties: (1) the generated
proposals should cover the action instances temporally with
both high recall and temporal overlapping; (2) the quality of
proposals should be evaluated accurately, thus providing a
overall confidence for later retrieving step.

To cater for these two conditions and achieve high quality proposals, there are two main categories in the existing proposal generation methods (Buch et al. 2017b; Gao
et al. 2017; Lin, Zhao, and Shou 2017; Shou, Wang, and
Chang 2016). The first type adopts the top-down fashion,
where proposals are generated based on sliding windows
(Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016) or uniform-distributed anchors (Lin, Zhao, and Shou 2017), then a binary classifier
is employed to evaluate confidence for the proposals. However, the proposals generated in this way are doomed to have
imprecise boundaries though with regression. Under this circumstance, the other type of methods (Lin et al. 2018; Xiong
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019) attract many researchers recently

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2602

