The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph and Temporal Convolutional Networks for 3D Multi-person
Pose Estimation in Monocular Videos
Yu Cheng,1 Bo Wang,2 Bo Yang,2 Robby T. Tan1,3
1

National University of Singapore,
Tencent Game AI Research Center,
3
Yale-NUS College
e0321276@u.nus.edu, {bohawkwang,brandonyang}@tencent.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg
2

Frame 140

Abstract

Frame 150

Frame 180

Input frames
& detected
bounding
boxes

Despite the recent progress, 3D multi-person pose estimation
from monocular videos is still challenging due to the commonly encountered problem of missing information caused
by occlusion, partially out-of-frame target persons, and inaccurate person detection. To tackle this problem, we propose
a novel framework integrating graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) and temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) to robustly estimate camera-centric multi-person 3D poses that
does not require camera parameters. In particular, we introduce a human-joint GCN, which unlike the existing GCN,
is based on a directed graph that employs the 2D pose estimator’s confidence scores to improve the pose estimation
results. We also introduce a human-bone GCN, which models the bone connections and provides more information beyond human joints. The two GCNs work together to estimate the spatial frame-wise 3D poses, and can make use of
both visible joint and bone information in the target frame
to estimate the occluded or missing human-part information.
To further refine the 3D pose estimation, we use our temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) to enforce the temporal
and human-dynamics constraints. We use a joint-TCN to estimate person-centric 3D poses across frames, and propose a
velocity-TCN to estimate the speed of 3D joints to ensure the
consistency of the 3D pose estimation in consecutive frames.
Finally, to estimate the 3D human poses for multiple persons, we propose a root-TCN that estimates camera-centric
3D poses without requiring camera parameters. Quantitative
and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed method. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/3dpose/GnTCN.

Person-centric
result

Existing
camera-centric
result
(Moon et al.)

Our result

Figure 1: Incorrect 3D multi-person pose estimation caused
by person-centric pose estimation or occlusions. The personcentric estimation loses the location of each person in the
scene (2nd row) and existing method suffers from missing
information due to occlusion (3rd row).

many applications that require high pose estimation precision (Pavllo et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2020); while bottom-up
approaches are better in efficiency (Cao et al. 2017, 2019).
In this paper, we aim to further improve 3D pose estimation
accuracy, and thus push forward the frontier of the top-down
approaches.
Most top-down methods focus on single person and define a 3D pose in a person-centric coordinate system (e.g.,
pelvis-based origin), which cannot be extended to multiple
persons. Since for multiple persons, all the estimated skeletons need to reside in a single common 3D space in correct locations. The major problem here is that by applying
the person-centric coordinate system, we lose the location
of each person in the scene, and thus we do not know where
to put them, as shown in Fig. 1, second row. Another major

Introduction
Significant progress has been made in 3D human pose estimation in recent years, e.g. (Sun et al. 2019a; Pavllo et al.
2019; Cheng et al. 2019, 2020). In general, existing methods
can be classified as either top-down or bottom-up. Top-down
approaches use human detection to obtain the bounding box
of each person, and then perform pose estimation for every
person. Bottom-up approaches are human-detection free and
can estimate the poses of all persons simultaneously. Topdown approaches generally demonstrate more superior performance in pose estimation accuracy, and are suitable for
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1157

