The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Why and What to Teach: AI Curriculum for Elementary School
Seonghun Kim1 , Yeonju Jang1 , Woojin Kim1 , Seongyune Choi1 , Heeseok Jung1 , Soohwan Kim2 ,
Hyeoncheol. Kim1*
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Republic of Korea
2
Chongshin University, Republic of Korea
{ryankim0409, spring0425, woojinkim1021, poco2889 , csyun213, harrykim}@korea.ac.kr, skim@chongshin.ac.kr

Abstract

AI Literacy

With the rapid technological change of society with Artificial
Intelligence, elementary schools’ goal should be to prepare
the next generations according to competencies. We propose
an AI curriculum to cultivate students’ AI literacy to answer
the question of ‘why and what to teach’ on AI. The proposed
AI curriculum focuses on achieving AI literacy based on three
competencies: AI Knowledge, AI Skill, and AI Attitude. We
anticipate that the proposed curriculum will equip students
with core competencies for the future with AI.

Knowledge
•
•
•
•
•

Definition & Types of AI
Problem Solving & Search
Reasoning
Data & Machine Learning
Applications

Lecture Slides

Skill
•
•

Using AI Tools
Computational Thinking &
Programming

Teacher’s Guide

Attitude
•
•

Social Impact
Collaborate with AI

Student’s Workbook

Introduction
As the integration of AI into society accelerates digital transformation, the ways of problem-solving shifts from the automation of human action to the automation of human cognition. AI technology is anticipated to develop into a generalpurpose technology like electricity and networking technology in a shortcoming future. To reflect the future of AI integrated human labor systems, the objective of education
should be reconfigured to portray the changing dynamics of
our society (Parliament 2018). Accordingly, an elementary
school curriculum should also be devised to prepare and inspire the next generation in a world flooded with AI.
The discussion of to whom AI should be taught reoriented
from university students to elementary school students. Current AI education is mainly carried out at universities with
a well-established curriculum. The aim of AI education in
universities is to be academic and industry experts on the
career development of students. However, AI education in
elementary education should center on fostering the AI literacy of students. A blind application of higher education AI
curriculum is inadequate to meet the educational purpose of
elementary schools.
The AI curriculum of elementary school education should
consider the competencies specific to elementary school
students. The objective of elementary education is to provide students with an opportunity to strengthen core competencies to function as a member of a society successfully.
The competency of elementary school should direct toward
fostering students’ ability to understand the AI integrated
world.

Figure 1: The complete outline of the proposed AI curriculum for elementary school.
As an answer to the question of ‘why and what to teach’
students on AI, we propose an AI curriculum tailored to elementary school students to develop AI literacy. The proposed AI curriculum is built upon the three competencies:
AI Knowledge, AI Skill, and AI Attitude. The goal of the
curriculum is to cultivate AI-literate elementary school students with mastery of the three competencies. Figure 1 illustrates the complete outline of the proposed curriculum.
We further implemented a module of our curriculum to 60
elementary school students from five different schools and
examined the content’s adequacy, effectiveness, and value.

Existing Guidelines for K-12 AI Education
AI literacy is a set of competencies that enable an individual to function in AI integrated society proficiently. An individual with AI literacy would be able to critically evaluate AI, communicate and collaborate with AI and fluently
use AI as a tool (Long and Magerko 2020). However, academic discussions on definitions and components of AI literacy is in continuation. We share a parallel perspective and
the works that define AI literacy and its competencies for our
curriculum. Among the competencies to achieve AI literacy
in the work of Long and Magerko (2020), ‘Recognizing AI’,
‘Ethics’, and ‘Programming Ability’ are the core competencies that align with our curriculum development objective.
The AI for K-12 working group established guidelines

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15569

