The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Adequacy of Untuned Warmup for Adaptive Optimization
Jerry Ma, 1 2 Denis Yarats 3 4
1

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce
3
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
4
Facebook AI Research
research@jerryma.net, denisyarats@cs.nyu.edu
2

Abstract

ability to effectively train neural networks with parameter
counts from 100 million to several billion.
In these large-scale settings, Adam’s global learning rate is
usually annealed with a “warmup schedule” which promotes
early-stage training stability by regulating the size of the parameter updates. The prevalent warmup schedule is a simple
linear warmup, in which the global learning rate starts at zero
and increases by a constant at each iteration until reaching its
intended value. 1 The parameters of these warmup schedules
are typically tuned for each problem setting and model.
Liu et al. (2020) performed an analysis of Adam with
warmup, concluding that Adam requires a warmup schedule to mitigate the large or divergent variance of the perparameter scale term. They then propose the rectified Adam
(“RAdam”) algorithm, which automatically corrects for
this high variance. Liu et al. highlight the robustness of
RAdam, noting in particular that RAdam reduces or eliminates the need for tuning warmup schedules when using
Adam. RAdam has been applied to domains including generative modeling (Yamamoto, Song, and Kim 2020), natural
language processing (Nguyen and Salazar 2019), and video
retrieval (Liu et al. 2019a).

Adaptive optimization algorithms such as Adam are widely
used in deep learning. The stability of such algorithms is often improved with a warmup schedule for the learning rate.
Motivated by the difficulty of choosing and tuning warmup
schedules, recent work proposes automatic variance rectification of Adam’s adaptive learning rate, claiming that this
rectified approach (“RAdam”) surpasses the vanilla Adam algorithm and reduces the need for expensive tuning of Adam
with warmup. In this work, we refute this analysis and provide an alternative explanation for the necessity of warmup
based on the magnitude of the update term, which is of greater
relevance to training stability. We then provide some “rule-ofthumb” warmup schedules, and we demonstrate that simple
untuned warmup of Adam performs more-or-less identically
to RAdam in typical practical settings. We conclude by suggesting that practitioners stick to linear warmup with Adam,
with a sensible default being linear warmup over 2/(1 − β2 )
training iterations.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient-based optimization serves as the
workhorse training approach for many classes of parametric models, including neural networks. Stochastic gradient
descent and its various first-order cousins (Polyak 1964;
Nesterov 1983) have enabled numerous advances in deep
learning across domains (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016; Gehring et al. 2017). More recently,
adaptive optimization algorithms have become prevalent in
training the largest deep learning models. These adaptive
methods, which include Adagrad (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer
2010), RMSProp (Hinton, Srivastava, and Swersky 2012),
and Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014), scale the step size for each
individual parameter based on various gradient moments.
Many practitioners have adopted the Adam algorithm for
general-purpose use; notably, the preponderance of recent
state-of-the-art results in natural language processing (Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019b; Brown et al.
2020) have employed Adam, demonstrating the algorithm’s

Contributions
Our contributions in this work are as follows:
Reexamining RAdam and the variance-based motivation for warmup We dive into the inner operation of
RAdam and find that it is precisely Adam with a fixed
warmup schedule, with the only deviation being to perform
four iterations of heavy-ball momentum (Polyak 1964) at the
outset. We then argue that the variance-based motivation for
warmup is impaired as it overlooks the correlation between
the first and second moment estimators, which is crucial for
understanding the actual parameter updates applied by Adam.
Analyzing Adam’s early-stage update magnitudes
Shifting focus from gradients to parameter updates, we then
perform a simulation-based analysis on the magnitudes of
Adam’s parameter updates. We find that even at a simulated
local minimum of the objective, Adam exhibits considerable
non-regularity in its early-stage parameter updates, shedding

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Appendix available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.04209.

1
Linear warmup has also been deployed for first-order optimization – see, for example, Goyal et al. (2017).

8828

