The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Debiasing Evaluations That Are Biased by Evaluations
Jingyan Wang1 , Ivan Stelmakh1 , Yuting Wei2 and Nihar B. Shah1
1

School of Computer Science
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{jingyanw, stiv}@cs.cmu.edu, ytwei@cmu.edu, nihars@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

toboni, and Stark 2016), and student ratings serve as a poor
predictor on the follow-on course achievement of the students (Carrell and West 2008; Braga, Paccagnella, and Pellizzari 2014):
“...teachers who are associated with better subsequent
performance receive worst evaluations from their students.” (Braga, Paccagnella, and Pellizzari 2014)
The outcome we consider in teaching evaluation is the
grades that the students receive in the course under evaluation1 and the goal is to correct for the bias in student evaluations induced by the grades given by the instructor.
An analogous issue arises in conference peer review,
where conference organizers survey authors to rate their received reviews in order to understand the quality of the review process. It is well understood that authors are more
likely to give higher ratings to a positive review than a
to negative review (Weber et al. 2002; Papagiannaki 2007;
Khosla, Hoiem, and Belongie 2013):
“Satisfaction had a strong, positive association with acceptance of the manuscript for publication... Quality of
the review of the manuscript was not associated with author satisfaction.” (Weber et al. 2002)
Due to this problem, an author feedback experiment (Papagiannaki 2007) conducted at the PAM 2007 conference concluded that:
“...some of the TPC members from academia paralleled
the collected feedback to faculty evaluations within universities... while author feedback may be useful in pinpointing extreme cases, such as exceptional or problematic reviewers, it is not quite clear how such feedback
could become an integral part of the process behind the
organization of a conference.”
With this motivation, for the application of peer review, the
outcome we consider is the review rating or paper decision
received by the author, and the goal is to correct for the bias
induced by it in the feedback provided by the author.
Although the existence of such bias is widely acknowledged, student and author ratings are still widely

It is common to evaluate a set of items by soliciting people
to rate them. For example, universities ask students to rate
the teaching quality of their instructors, and conference organizers ask authors of submissions to evaluate the quality
of the reviews. However, in these applications, students often give a higher rating to a course if they receive higher
grades in a course, and authors often give a higher rating to
the reviews if their papers are accepted to the conference. In
this work, we call these external factors the “outcome” experienced by people, and consider the problem of mitigating
these outcome-induced biases in the given ratings when some
information about the outcome is available. We formulate the
information about the outcome as a known partial ordering
on the bias. We propose a debiasing method by solving a regularized optimization problem under this ordering constraint,
and also provide a carefully designed cross-validation method
that adaptively chooses the appropriate amount of regularization. We provide theoretical guarantees on the performance
of our algorithm, as well as experimental evaluations.

1

Introduction

It is common to aggregate information and evaluate items by
collecting ratings on these items from people. In this work,
we focus on the bias introduced by people’s observable outcome or experience from the entity under evaluation, and
we call it the “outcome-induced bias”. We now describe this
notion of bias with the help of two common applications –
teaching evaluation and peer review.
Many universities use student ratings for teaching evaluation. However, numerous studies have shown that student
ratings are affected by the grading policy of the instructor (Greenwald and Gillmore 1997; Johnson 2003; Boring,
Ottoboni, and Stark 2016). For instance, as noted in Johnson
(2003, Chapter 4):
“...the effects of grades on teacher-course evaluations
are both substantively and statistically important, and
suggest that instructors can often double their odds of receiving high evaluations from students simply by awarding A’s rather than B’s or C’s.”
As a consequence, the association between student ratings
and teaching effectiveness can become negative (Boring, Ot-

1
We use the term “grades” broadly to include letter grades, numerical scores, and rankings. We do not distinguish the difference
between evaluation of a course and evaluation of the instructor
teaching the course.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10120

