The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Scale Games: Representing and Solving Games on Networks
with Group Structure
Kun Jin1 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik2 , Mingyan Liu1
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Washington University in St. Louis
kunj@umich.edu, yvorobeychik@wustl.edu, mingyan@umich.edu
2

Abstract
Network games provide a natural machinery to compactly
represent strategic interactions among agents whose payoffs
exhibit sparsity in their dependence on the actions of others. Besides encoding interaction sparsity, however, real networks often exhibit a multi-scale structure, in which agents
can be grouped into communities, those communities further grouped, and so on, and where interactions among such
groups may also exhibit sparsity. We present a general model
of multi-scale network games that encodes such multi-level
structure. We then develop several algorithmic approaches
that leverage this multi-scale structure, and derive sufficient
conditions for convergence of these to a Nash equilibrium.
Our numerical experiments demonstrate that the proposed approaches enable orders of magnitude improvements in scalability when computing Nash equilibria in such games. For example, we can solve previously intractable instances involving up to 1 million agents in under 15 minutes.

Figure 1: An illustration of a multi-scale (3-level) network.

level agents who ultimately accrue the consequences of
these interactions (for example, corporate profits would ultimately benefit individual shareholders). Moreover, while
there are clear interdependencies among organizations, individual utilities are determined by a combination of individual actions of some agents, together with aggregate decisions by the groups (e.g., business units, organizations). For
example, an employee’s bonus is determined in part by their
performance in relation to their co-workers, and in part by
how well their employer (organization) performs against its
competitors in the marketplace.
We propose a novel multi-scale game model that generalizes network games to capture such hierarchical organization of individuals into groups. Figure 1 offers a stylized
example in which three groups (e.g., organizations) are comprised of 2-3 subgroups each (e.g., business units), which
are in turn comprised of 2-5 individual agents. Specifically,
our model includes an explicit hierarchical network structure that organizes agents into groups across a series of levels. Further, each group is associated with an action which
deterministically aggregates the decisions by its constituent
agents. The game is grounded at the lowest level, where the
agents are associated with scalar actions and utility functions that have modular structure in the strategies taken at
each level of the game. For example, in Figure 1, the utility
(3)
function of an individual member aj of level-3 group a3 is
a function of the strategies of (i) aj ’s immediate neighbors
(represented by links between pairs of filled-in circles), (ii)

Introduction
Strategic interactions among interconnected agents are commonly modeled using the network, or graphical, game formalism (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001; Jackson and
Zenou 2015). In such games, the utility of an agent depends on his own actions as well as those by its network
neighbors. Many variations of games on networks have
been considered, with applications including the provision
of public goods (Allouch 2015; Buckley and Croson 2006;
Khalili, Zhang, and Liu 2019; Yu et al. 2020), security (Hota
and Sundaram 2018; La 2016; Vorobeychik and Letchford
2015), and financial markets (Acemoglu et al. 2012).
While network games are a powerful modeling framework, they fail to capture a common feature of human organization: groups and communities. Indeed, investigation
of communities, or close-knit groups, in social networks is
a major research thread in network science. Moreover, such
groups often have a hierarchical structure (Clauset, Moor,
and Newman 2008; Girvan and Newman 2002). For example, strategic interactions among organizations in a marketplace often boil down to interactions among their constituent business units, which are, in turn, comprised of individual decision makers. In the end, it is those lowestCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5497

