The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Check Contract Inconsistencies
Shuo Zhang1 , Junzhou Zhao1∗ , Pinghui Wang1∗ , Nuo Xu1 ,
Yang Yang1 , Yiting Liu1 , Yi Huang2 , Junlan Feng2
1

MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China
2
JIUTIAN Team, China Mobile Research
{zs412082986, l530111398}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {junzhouzhao, yang.yang95868}@gmail.com
phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, nxu@sei.xjtu.edu.cn, {huangyi, fengjunlan}@chinamobile.com
Abstract

SALES CONTRACT

Contract consistency is important in ensuring the legal validity of the contract. In many scenarios, a contract is written by
filling the blanks in a precompiled form. Due to carelessness,
two blanks that should be filled with the same (or different)
content may be incorrectly filled with different (or same) content. This will result in the issue of contract inconsistencies,
which may severely impair the legal validity of the contract.
Traditional methods to address this issue mainly rely on manual contract review, which is labor-intensive and costly. In this
work, we formulate a novel Contract Inconsistency Checking
(CIC) problem, and design an end-to-end framework, called
Pair-wise Blank Resolution (PBR), to solve the CIC problem with high accuracy. Our PBR model contains a novel
BlankCoder to address the challenge of modeling meaningless blanks. BlankCoder adopts a two-stage attention
mechanism that adequately associates a meaningless blank
with its relevant descriptions while avoiding the incorporation of irrelevant context words. Experiments conducted on
real-world datasets show the promising performance of our
method with a balanced accuracy of 94.05% and an F1 score
of 90.90% in the CIC problem.

A is made effecive
This Contract for the Sale of Name
______
on Date
_____ .
…

Seller hereby agrees to sell Name
______B at a total price of
RMB Number
________A ( excluding 5%VAT ) on the Closing Date.
…
A only including
The total contract price is RMB Number
________

all taxes.

Same reference, Different content
Different reference, Same content

Figure 1: Examples of contract inconsistencies. The two
blanks with red background refer to the same item for sale
but incorrectly filled with different content. The two blanks
with yellow background refer to two different prices (one
with tax and the other without tax) but incorrectly filled with
the same price.
In this work, we study the Contract Inconsistency Checking (CIC) problem, and propose an end-to-end model to
solve the CIC problem with high accuracy. As far as we
know, the CIC problem has not yet been studied in the AI
community and no effective solution exists.
We consider contract inconsistencies caused by incorrectly filling blanks in a precompiled form. For example, in
Figure 1, the two blanks with red background actually refer
to the same item for sale, but incorrectly filled with different
content. The two blanks with yellow background actually
refer to two different prices (i.e., one with tax and the other
without tax), but incorrectly filled with the same price. Our
goal is to find methods that can automatically detect such
contract inconsistencies with high accuracy.
A straightforward method to solve the CIC problem is to
build a set of rules for each contract, and these rules regularize the allowed content for each blank. Rule-based methods have been used for other contract-related tasks such as
checking obligation violations in contracts (Governatori and
Milosevic 2005), verifying electronic contracts (Abdelsadiq,
Molina-Jimenez, and Shrivastava 2011), and contract formalization (Joanni and Ratiu 2018). However, the rules have
to be built manually by experts, and they do not scale well
to diverse types of contracts.
Coreference resolution (CR) methods (Sukthanker et al.

Introduction
A contract is a legally binding agreement that recognizes and
governs the rights and duties of the parties to the agreement.
Correctly composing contracts is crucial to ensure its legal
validity. In many real-world scenarios, a standard contract
is prepared by filling blanks in a precompiled form. Due to
carelessness, two blanks that should be filled with the same
(or different) content may be incorrectly filled with different (or same) content. This will result in contract inconsistencies, which may severely impair the legal validity of the
contract.
Contract review is widely used by companies to check
contract inconsistencies. However, contract review is laborintensive and costly. Big companies have to hire tens of
thousands of lawyers to conduct contract review, and it is
estimated that Fortune Global 2000 and Fortune 1000 companies spend about $35 billion annually to review and negotiate contracts (Strom 2019). Therefore, it is desired to
design methods to automate the contract review process.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14446

