The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Robustness to Model Inversion Attacks via Mutual Information
Regularization
Tianhao Wang1∗ , Yuheng Zhang2∗ , Ruoxi Jia3
1

Harvard University, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 3 Virginia Tech
tianhaowang@fas.harvard.edu, yuhengz2@illinois.edu, ruoxijia@vt.edu

Abstract
This paper studies defense mechanisms against model inversion (MI) attacks – a type of privacy attacks aimed at inferring
information about the training data distribution given the access to a target machine learning model. Existing defense
mechanisms rely on model-specific heuristics or noise injection. While being able to mitigate attacks, existing methods
significantly hinder model performance. There remains a question of how to design a defense mechanism that is applicable to
a variety of models and achieves better utility-privacy tradeoff.
In this paper, we propose the Mutual Information Regularization based Defense (MID) against MI attacks. The key idea
is to limit the information about the model input contained
in the prediction, thereby limiting the ability of an adversary
to infer the private training attributes from the model prediction. Our defense principle is model-agnostic and we present
tractable approximations to the regularizer for linear regression, decision trees, and neural networks, which have been
successfully attacked by prior work if not attached with any
defenses. We present a formal study of MI attacks by devising
a rigorous game-based definition and quantifying the associated information leakage. Our theoretical analysis sheds light
on the inefficacy of DP in defending against MI attacks, which
has been empirically observed in several prior works. Our
experiments demonstrate that MID leads to state-of-the-art
performance for a variety of MI attacks, target models and
datasets.

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) techniques have revolutionized many
fields, such as computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics. However, the application of ML to domains involving sensitive and proprietary datasets is currently
hindered by potential privacy threats. Recent studies have
demonstrated various privacy attacks, which can expose the
information about private training data through the access
to a target model. The access could either be whitebox or
blackbox. In the whitebox setting, the adversary has complete
knowledge of the target model, whereas in the blackbox setting, the adversary is just allowed to make prediction queries
against the model. Both settings can find concrete examples
in today’s ML-as-a-service platforms, such as Tensorflow
∗

Equal Contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11666

Hub which offers a library of models that users can download and Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services which produce
predictions for user-input data.
This paper focuses on MI attacks, a type of privacy attacks
aimed at reconstructing the input associated with any given
model output. MI attacks have been used to recover images
of any person from a face recognition model given just their
name (Zhang et al. 2019) and infer the genetic markers of
individuals based on the medicine dosage prediction and
some demographic information (Fredrikson et al. 2014).
Existing defense mechanisms against MI attacks can be categorized into two threads. One thread studies model-specific
heuristics to mitigate attacks. For example, for decision trees,
Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart (2015) studied the relationship between a sensitive feature’s depth in the tree and the
model’s susceptibility to MI attacks and provided guidance
for placing the sensitive feature in the tree. Although simple
and efficient to implement, these heuristics cannot be easily
generalized to a broader class of models and often only provide very limited protection against attacks. Another thread
studies generic defense strategies that can be applied to any
models. An example of such strategies is to train differentially private ML models. However, prior work (Fredrikson
et al. 2014) has empirically shown that DP can mitigate the
MI attack only when the injected noise is large enough and
as a side effect, the model suffers significant performance
degradation. There still remains a question of how to design
a defense mechanism that is applicable to a variety of models
and achieves better utility-privacy tradeoff.
In this paper, we present a defense mechanism against MI
attacks, called MID, which can achieve the state-of-the art
performance for a variety of target models, datasets, and attack algorithms in both blackbox and whitebox settings. Since
MI adversaries exploit the correlation between the model input and output for successful attacks, our idea for the defense
is to limit the redundant information about the model input
contained in the prediction. Algorithmically, we introduce a
regularizer into the training loss, which penalizes the mutual
information between the model input and the prediction. We
present tractable approximations of the regularizer for all the
models that have been successfully attacked before, which
include linear regression, decision trees and neural networks.
In addition, we provide a formal study of MI attacks and
defenses. Particularly, existing theoretical framework for MI

