The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Capturing Delayed Feedback in Conversion Rate Prediction
via Elapsed-Time Sampling
Jia-Qi Yang1 * , Xiang Li2† , Shuguang Han2 , Tao Zhuang2
De-Chuan Zhan1† , Xiaoyi Zeng2 , Bin Tong2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{yangjq,zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {leo.lx,shuguang.sh,zhuangtao.zt,yuanhan,tongbin.tb}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

industry (Lee et al. 2012; Chapelle, Manavoglu, and Rosales
2014; Ma et al. 2018).
In order to capture the dynamic change of user needs,
commercial systems often update learned models with upto-date data within a short time, i.e., in an online training
manner (Jugovac, Jannach, and Karimi 2018; Guo et al.
2019; Ktena et al. 2019). This further complicates the CVR
prediction since conversions usually do not happen immediately after user clicks. The Delayed Feedback issue introduces a dilemma for streaming CVR prediction — on the
one hand, we need to wait for a sufficient long time so that
the observation information can approximately reflect the
true conversion; on the other hand, we also tend to update
the learned models without much delay for model-freshness.
Chapelle (2014) was among the early studies to address
the delayed feedback problem. The proposed Delayed Feedback Model (DFM) optimizes CVR as a joint probability
over the predicted CVR and the delayed time distribution.
This joint probability is estimated in the observed time interval, which may be biased from the true conversion distribution. The biased CVR is probably more inaccurate due to
the delayed feedback problem in online learning settings.
To achieve unbiased CVR estimation in delayed feedback
problem, recent studies have explored the way of optimizing the expectation of true conversion distribution via importance sampling (Bishop 2007). Ktena et al. (2019) proposed
the Fake Negative Weighted (FNW) approach, in which each
arriving instance is firstly labeled as negative, and then corrected upon its conversion at a later time. Each fake negative instance may have a side-effect for the learned model
until it is amended. This side-effect is amplified if the data
distribution frequently changes. For example, in the beginning of a promotion event, user clicks may increase dramatically while most conversions come after a certain time.
Such overwhelming fake negatives may harm the predictive
model. Instead of blindly labeling each incoming example as
a negative instance, Yasui et al. (2020) proposed a Feedback
Shift Importance Weighting (FSIW) algorithm, in which the
model waits for the real conversion in a certain time interval. However, FSIW does not allow the data correction even
a conversion event took place afterward. We argue that positive examples are important for delayed feedback prediction as the positive examples are always more scarce than
the negative examples. Moreover, FSIW may lack model-

Conversion rate (CVR) prediction is one of the most critical
tasks for digital display advertising. Commercial systems often require to update models in an online learning manner to
catch up with the evolving data distribution. However, conversions usually do not happen immediately after user clicks.
This may result in inaccurate labeling, which is called delayed feedback problem. In previous studies, delayed feedback problem is handled either by waiting positive label for a
long period of time, or by consuming the negative sample on
its arrival and then insert a positive duplicate when conversion happens later. Indeed, there is a trade-off between waiting for more accurate labels and utilizing fresh data, which
is not considered in existing works. To strike a balance in
this trade-off, we propose Elapsed-Time Sampling Delayed
Feedback Model (ES-DFM), which models the relationship
between the observed conversion distribution and the true
conversion distribution. Then we optimize the expectation of
true conversion distribution via importance sampling under
the elapsed-time sampling distribution. We further estimate
the importance weight for each instance, which is used as the
weight of loss function in CVR prediction. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of ES-DFM, we conduct extensive experiments on a public data and a private industrial dataset. Experimental results confirm that our method consistently outperforms the previous state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
Digital display advertising has become the main business
model for many online services, in which advertisers pay
for placing ads on those platforms. Among the available
payment options, paying per conversion (CPA) is usually
the dominated mechanism as conversions can directly bring
profits. In the CPA model, advertisers pay only if users performed certain predefined conversion actions with the advertisement. To effectively display ads, machine learning models have been widely adopted to forecast the conversion rate
(CVR), which is widely investigated in both academia and
* Jia-Qi Yang performed this work as an intern at Alibaba.
†

De-Chuan Zhan and Xiang Li are the corresponding authors. This work was supported by NSFC (61773198, 6163000043,
61921006, 61751306).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4582

