The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Variance Penalized On-Policy and Off-Policy Actor-Critic
Arushi Jain,1, 2 Gandharv Patil, 1, 2 Ayush Jain, 1, 2
Khimya Khetarpal,1, 2 Doina Precup 1, 2, 3
1

McGill University, Montreal
2
Mila, Montreal
3
Google DeepMind, Montreal
{arushi.jain, gandharv.patil, ayush.jain, khimya.khetarpal}@mail.mcgill.ca, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca
Abstract

1994), or incorporation of the variance as a penalty in the
objective function (Filar, Kallenberg, and Lee 1989; White
1994). Here, we use a variance-penalized method to solve
the optimization problem by adding a penalty term to the
objective.
There are two ways to compute the variance in the return
Var(G). The indirect approach estimates Var(G) using the
Bellman equation for both the first moment (i.e. value function) and the second moment as Var(G) = E[G2 ] − E[G]2
(Sobel 1982). The direct approach forms a Bellman equation for the variance itself, as Var(G) = E[(G − E[G])2 ]
(Sherstan et al. 2018), skipping the calculation of the second moment. Sherstan et al. (2018) empirically established
that in the policy evaluation setting, the direct variance estimation approach is better behaved compared to the indirect approach, in several scenarios: (a) when the value estimates are noisy, (b) when eligibility traces are used in the
value estimation, and (c) when the variance in return is estimated from off-policy samples. Due to the above benefits
and the simplicity of the direct approach, we build upon the
approach proposed by Sherstan et al. (2018) only for policy
evaluation setting, and, develop actor-critic algorithms for
both on- and off-policy settings (control).
Contributions: (1) We modify the standard policy gradient objective to include a direct variance estimator for learning policies that maximize the variance-penalized return. (2)
We develop a multi-timescale actor-critic algorithm, by deriving the gradient of the variance estimator in both the onpolicy and the off-policy case. (3) We prove convergence to
locally optimal policies in the on-policy tabular setting. (4)
We compare our proposed variance-penalized actor-critic
(VPAC) algorithm with two baselines: actor-critic (AC)
(Sutton et al. 2000; Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000), and an existing indirect variance penalized approach called varianceadjusted actor-critic (VAAC) (Tamar and Mannor 2013). We
evaluate our on- and off-policy VPAC algorithms in both
discrete and continuous domains. The empirical findings
demonstrate that VPAC compares favorably to both baselines in terms of the mean return, but generates trajectories
with significantly lower variance in the return.

Reinforcement learning algorithms are typically geared towards optimizing the expected return of an agent. However,
in many practical applications, low variance in the return is
desired to ensure the reliability of an algorithm. In this paper,
we propose on-policy and off-policy actor-critic algorithms
that optimize a performance criterion involving both mean
and variance in the return. Previous work uses the second moment of return to estimate the variance indirectly. Instead, we
use a much simpler recently proposed direct variance estimator which updates the estimates incrementally using temporal
difference methods. Using the variance-penalized criterion,
we guarantee the convergence of our algorithm to locally
optimal policies for finite state action Markov decision processes. We demonstrate the utility of our algorithm in tabular
and continuous MuJoCo domains. Our approach not only performs on par with actor-critic and prior variance-penalization
baselines in terms of expected return, but also generates trajectories which have lower variance in the return.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents learn to solve a task
by optimizing the expected accumulated discounted rewards
(return) in a conventional setting. However, in risk-sensitive
applications like industrial automation, finance, medicine, or
robotics, the standard objective of RL may not suffice, because it does not account for the variability induced by the
return distribution. In this paper, we propose a technique that
promotes learning of policies with less variability.
Variability in sequential decision-making problems can
arise from two sources – the inherent stochasticity in the
environment (transition and reward), and imperfect knowledge about the model. The former source of variability is
addressed by the risk-sensitive Markov decision processes
(MDPs) (Howard and Matheson 1972; Heger 1994; Borkar
2001, 2002), whereas the latter is covered by robust MDPs
(Iyengar 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui 2005). In this work, we
address the former source of variability in an RL setup via
mean-variance optimization. One could account for meanvariance tradeoffs via maximization of the mean subject
to variance constraints (solved using constrained MDPs
(Altman 1999)), maximization of the Sharpe ratio (Sharpe

Preliminaries
Notation We consider an infinite-horizon discrete MDP
hS, A, R, P, γi with finite state space S and finite action

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7899

