The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Invariant Teacher and Equivariant Student for
Unsupervised 3D Human Pose Estimation
Chenxin Xu, Siheng Chen∗ , Maosen Li, Ya Zhang*
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xcxwakaka, sihengc, maosen_li, ya_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

2D
Input

Abstract
We propose a novel method based on teacher-student learning
framework for 3D human pose estimation without any 3D
annotation or side information. To solve this unsupervisedlearning problem, the teacher network adopts pose-dictionarybased modeling for regularization to estimate a physically
plausible 3D pose. To handle the decomposition ambiguity
in the teacher network, we propose a cycle-consistent architecture promoting a 3D rotation-invariant property to train
the teacher network. To further improve the estimation accuracy, the student network adopts a novel graph convolution
network for flexibility to directly estimate the 3D coordinates.
Another cycle-consistent architecture promoting 3D rotationequivariant property is adopted to exploit geometry consistency, together with knowledge distillation from the teacher
network to improve the pose estimation performance. We
conduct extensive experiments on Human3.6M and MPI-INF3DHP. Our method reduces the 3D joint prediction error by
11.4% compared to state-of-the-art unsupervised methods and
also outperforms many weakly-supervised methods that use
side information on Human3.6M. Code will be available at
https://github.com/sjtuxcx/ITES.

1

3D
estimation

2D
Input

Estimator
View A

Estimator
Canonical View

View A

Estimator

View B

(a)

3D
estimation

View A

Estimator

Canonical View

View B

(b)

View B

Figure 1: (a) 3D rotation-invariant property. Different input
views result in the same view-invariant 3D estimation. (b)
3D rotation-equivariant property. The 3D estimation has the
same view as the input views.

methods through straightforward reprojection might be underconstrained, resulting in overfitting. Extra regularization or
priors of a human body is required to eliminate solutions that
are not physically plausible. However, too much regularization tends to limit the flexibility of the model and leads to
underfitting. An appropriate trade-off between regularization
and flexibility is usually hard to reach, which leads to the
regularization-flexibility dilemma.
To resolve the above dilemma, we propose a teacherstudent framework to balance the regularization and flexibility, which achieves a coarse-to-fine estimation. The proposed
pose dictionary-based teacher network emphasizes the regularization, ensuring the feasibility of the pose estimation. The
proposed graph-convolution-based student network emphasizes the flexibility, further refining the estimation. To enable
unsupervised estimation, both teacher and student networks
are trained based on respective cycle-consistent architectures.
Following (Novotny et al. 2019), the teacher network
adopts a pose-dictionary-based modeling, where the 3D pose
is decomposed into the camera viewpoint and a linear combination of pose atoms in a pose dictionary. However, this
pose modeling suffers from decomposition ambiguity (Dai,
Li, and He 2014), with an infinite number of valid camerapose pairs. To resolve decomposition ambiguity, we propose a novel cycle-consistent architecture promoting the 3D
rotation-invariant property to train the teacher network. The
3D rotation-invariant property means that 2D poses from different views of a same 3D skeleton should lead to the same

Introduction

3D human pose estimation from 2D landmarks receives substantial attention due to its broad applications (Li et al. 2019,
2020a). Many fully-supervised or weakly-supervised estimating algorithms have been proposed, which require either
adequate 3D ground-truth annotations or side information
such as unpaired 3D poses (Tung et al. 2017) and multi-view
images (Kocabas, Karagoz, and Akbas 2019) as supervision.
However, obtaining such 3D annotation or side information
is time-consuming and prohibitive, which is not feasible for
many applicable scenarios. In this paper, we consider the
unsupervised-learning setting, which estimates a 3D pose
from a given 2D pose without any additional information in
either the training or the inference phase.
Estimating a 3D pose solely from a given 2D pose is an
ill-posed problem because there exists an infinite number of
3D skeletons corresponding to the same 2D pose with the perspective projection ambiguity. Some simple self-supervision
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3013

