The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

High-Resolution Deep Image Matting
Haichao Yu1 , Ning Xu2 , Zilong Huang1 , Yuqian Zhou1 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

UIUC, 2 Adobe Research, 3 University of Oregon
{haichao3, yuqian2, hshi10}@illinois.edu, nxu@adobe.com, zilong.huang2020@gmail.com

Abstract
Image matting is a key technique for image and video editing
and composition. Conventionally, deep learning approaches
take the whole input image and an associated trimap to infer
the alpha matte using convolutional neural networks. Such
approaches set state-of-the-arts in image matting; however,
they may fail in real-world matting applications due to hardware limitations, since real-world input images for matting
are mostly of very high resolution. In this paper, we propose HDMatt, a first deep learning based image matting approach for high-resolution inputs. More concretely, HDMatt
runs matting in a patch-based crop-and-stitch manner for
high-resolution inputs with a novel module design to address
the contextual dependency and consistency issues between
different patches. Compared with vanilla patch-based inference which computes each patch independently, we explicitly
model the cross-patch contextual dependency with a newlyproposed Cross-Patch Contextual module (CPC) guided by
the given trimap. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method and its necessity for highresolution inputs. Our HDMatt approach also sets new stateof-the-art performance on Adobe Image Matting and AlphaMatting benchmarks and produce impressive visual results on more real-world high-resolution images.

(a) HR Image

(b) Trimap

(c) Ground Truth

(d) ContextNet-DS

(e) ContextNet-C

(f) HDMatt (Ours)

Figure 1: Down-sampling (DS) and cropping (C) strategies
applied to ContextNet (Hou and Liu 2019) on an HR image. DS results in blurry details, and trivial cropping causes
cross-patch inconsistency. Our HDMatt resolves the above
drawbacks. Best viewed when zoomed in with colors.

Introduction

However, these methods may fail when dealing with highresolution (HR) inputs. Image matting is frequently applied
to HR images of size such as 5000 × 5000 or even higher
in real-world applications. Due to hardware limitations like
GPU memory, HR images cannot be directly handled by
previous deep learning methods. Two common strategies of
adapting those methods are down-sampling the inputs (He,
Sun, and Tang 2010) or trivial patch-based inference. The
former strategy results in losing most fine details, and the
latter causes patch-wise inconsistency. Besides, HR images
may have larger or even fully unknown regions within a
patch. This further requires the models to understand contextual information from long-range patches for successful
matting. A comparison run with ContextNet (Hou and Liu
2019) and our proposed method is shown in Fig. 1 to demonstrate these drawbacks.
In this paper, we propose HDMatt, a novel patch-based
deep learning approach for high-resolution image matting.
Specifically, we crop an input image into patches, and propose a Cross-Patch Contextual module (CPC) to explicitly

Image matting is a key technique in image and video editing and composition. Given an input image and a trimap indicating the background, forground and unknown regions,
image matting is applied to estimate the alpha matte inside
the unknown region to clearly separate the foreground from
the background. Recently, many deep-learning-based methods (Xu et al. 2017; Lu et al. 2019; Hou and Liu 2019;
Cai et al. 2019) have achieved significant improvements
over traditional methods (Wang and Cohen 2007; Gastal and
Oliveira 2010; Sun et al. 2004; Levin, Lischinski, and Weiss
2007; Grady et al. 2005). These deep learning methods (Xu
et al. 2017; Lu et al. 2019; Hou and Liu 2019) mostly take
the whole images and the associated whole trimaps as the
inputs, and employ deep neural networks such as VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) and Xception (Chollet 2017)
as their network backbones.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3217

