The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Topic-Oriented Spoken Dialogue Summarization for Customer Service
with Saliency-Aware Topic Modeling
Yicheng Zou,1 Lujun Zhao,2 Yangyang Kang,2 Jun Lin,2 Minlong Peng,1 Zhuoren Jiang,3
Changlong Sun,3,2 Qi Zhang,1 Xuanjing Huang,1 Xiaozhong Liu4
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
4
Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, United States
{yczou18, mlpeng16, qz, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn, {lujun.zlj, yangyang.kangyy, linjun.lj}@alibaba-inc.com,
jiangzhuoren@zju.edu.cn, changlong.scl@taobao.com, liu237@indiana.edu
A: Hello, this is xxx hotline. May I help you?
C: I've got an order saying that it has been delivered but I haven't
received yet. When I checked it, it shows that the deal is done.
C: But err... I haven't received anything.
A: I got it. Then, could you please provide your username or the
binding phone number of the application?
......
A: Did you place the order today?
C: Err... No, it was yesterday but he told me he would deliver it
today. Hum, I checked the message in the morning but I haven't
received anything.
A: Humm, ok. I see. I am gonna contact the deliveryman. Is that
okay? I will check it for you and call you back later.
C: Ok, ok. That's good.
Summary: The user called us because the order shows that it has
been delivered but he did not receive it at all. I replied that I
would check it by contacting the deliveryman.

Abstract
In a customer service system, dialogue summarization can
boost service efficiency by automatically creating summaries
for long spoken dialogues in which customers and agents try
to address issues about specific topics. In this work, we focus on topic-oriented dialogue summarization, which generates highly abstractive summaries that preserve the main
ideas from dialogues. In spoken dialogues, abundant dialogue
noise and common semantics could obscure the underlying
informative content, making the general topic modeling approaches difficult to apply. In addition, for customer service,
role-specific information matters and is an indispensable part
of a summary. To effectively perform topic modeling on dialogues and capture multi-role information, in this work we
propose a novel topic-augmented two-stage dialogue summarizer (TDS) jointly with a saliency-aware neural topic model
(SATM) for topic-oriented summarization of customer service dialogues. Comprehensive studies on a real-world Chinese customer service dataset demonstrated the superiority of
our method against several strong baselines.

Figure 1: A customer service dialogue and its reference summary. C denotes the customer and A denotes the agent. The
summary contains the customer’s problem and the agent’s
solution, which are highlighted in red and blue, respectively.

dialogue speakers commonly have strong and clear motivations and aim to address issues about specific topics (Wang
et al. 2020). To better understand customers’ and agents’
intentions, in this work we focus on the topic-oriented dialogue summarization, which aims to extract semantically
consistent topics and generate highly abstractive summaries
to maintain the main ideas from dialogues.
Recently, dozens of topic-aware models have been introduced to assist with document summarization tasks (Wang
et al. 2018; Narayan et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2020). However, rather than well-formed sentences found in conventional documents, spoken dialogues are often composed of
utterances. Salient information is diluted across these utterances and is accompanied by common semantics. Additionally, noise abounds in the form of unrelated chit-chats and
transcription errors (Tixier et al. 2017). Such common or
noisy words, e.g., please, thanks, and humm, usually have a
high frequency and co-occur with other informative words.
As a result, the general topic-based approach can hardly distinguish the mixture of useful and useless content statistically, leading to inaccurate estimations of topic distribution

Introduction
In an active customer service system, massive dialogues
conveying important information between customers and
agents are generated in real time. With this background, how
to efficiently consume dialogue information becomes a nontrivial issue. Dialogue summarization is a task that aims to
condense dialogues while retaining the salient information
(Rambow et al. 2004; Pan et al. 2018; Shang et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2019a), which can boost service efficiency by automatically creating concise summaries to avoid time-consuming
dialogue reading and comprehension.
Most existing works for dialogue summarization have
mainly focused on long and intricate spoken dialogues, like
meetings and court debates, which are usually summarized
by stringing all dialogue points to maintain an integral conversation flow (Gillick et al. 2009; Shang et al. 2018; Duan
et al. 2019b). Nevertheless, in the customer service scenario,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14665

