The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Budget Feasible Mechanisms Over Graphs
Xiang Liu1,∗ , Weiwei Wu1,∗ , Minming Li2,3 , Wanyuan Wang1,†
1

Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R. China
City University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, P.R. China
3
City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, P.R. China
{xiangliu,weiweiwu}@seu.edu.cn, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, wywang@seu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2014; Anari, Goel, and Nikzad 2018). All these works assume that sellers are reachable to the buyer and ready to join
the auction campaign. However, in reality, many potential
sellers will be unaware of the auction information if none of
their acquaintances propagates information to them.
In order to propagate auction information to more potential sellers, the buyer can adopt the traditional advertising
mechanisms. However, the high agency fee charged by the
third party platform might degrade the net revenue of the
buyer (Mehta 2000). Against this background, this paper
studies the social diffusion mechanisms over a graph. The
connections modeled in the graph might represent positive
individual interactions, which have been widely adopted for
information diffusion (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003),
information acquisition (Cebrian et al. 2012), and information search (Watts, Dodds, and Newman 2002). With the local positive interactions, social diffusion mechanisms can
bring a volume of potential sellers without any extra cost.
Taking the buyer’s budget constraint into account, the following natural question arises: Can we design a budgetfeasible mechanism which guarantees desirable economic
properties and stimulates involved sellers to propagate auction information to her neighbors over graphs, while guaranteeing a bounded total payment from the buyer?
For example, considering the questionnaire, a classic research instrument for the organizer to gather information
from respondents especially in the social networks (Sarason et al. 1983), a critical requirement is to get sufficient
respondents. However, it is inefficient and costly for the organizer to notify all respondents by herself. A promising
way is to incentivize participated respondents to invite potential people, e.g., their followers and friends. There may
be costs associated with finishing questionnaires, e.g., participants’ time and privacy. It is common to give participants
monetary rewards to motivate the population. Moreover, the
organizer usually has a budget and cannot afford unlimited
monetary rewards. Therefore, such scenario calls for viable
budget feasible diffusion mechanisms.
In the budget-feasible mechanism design literature, although there exists a general rule characterizing the truthful bidding behavior in single-parameter domains (Myerson
1981), there is no general rule on how to incentivize sellers
to bid truthfully while at the same time to propagate auction information to their neighbors. On the other hand, the

This paper studies the budget-feasible mechanism design
over graphs, where a buyer wishes to procure items from
sellers, and all participants (the buyer and sellers) can only
directly interact with their neighbors during the auction campaign. The problem for the buyer is to use the limited budget
to incentivize sellers to propagate auction information to their
neighbors, thereby more sellers will be informed of the auction and more item value will be procured. An impossibility
result shows that the large-market assumption is necessary.
We propose efficient budget-feasible diffusion mechanisms
for large markets that simultaneously guarantee individual rationality, budget-feasibility, strong budget-balance, incentivecompatibility to report private costs and diffuse auction information. Moreover, the proposed mechanisms achieve logarithmic approximation that the total procured value is within a
logarithmic factor of the optimal solution. Compared to most
related budget-feasible mechanisms, which do not take the
individual interactions among sellers into account, our mechanisms can incentivize sellers to further propagate auction information to other potential sellers. Meanwhile, existing related diffusion mechanisms only focus on seller-centric auctions and fail to satisfy the budget-feasibility of the buyer.

Introduction
Auction theory, as a common paradigm for multi-agent resource allocation (Krishna 2009), has enabled a wide range
of applications, e.g., wireless spectrum auctions (Huang,
Berry, and Honig 2006) and mobile crowdsourcing markets
(Feng et al. 2014). Much effort over past decades focused
on designing mechanisms to regulate trading behaviors in
markets, e.g., seller-centric auction when a seller sells items
to buyers, or buyer-centric/reverse auction when a buyer
procures items from sellers. Among the extraordinary progresses, the budget-feasible mechanism design in reverse
auctions was initially studied in (Singer 2010), where payments used to regulate behaviors should satisfy the budget
constraint. Many following works invest efforts to design
budget-feasible mechanisms (Chen, Gravin, and Lu 2011;
Dobzinski, Papadimitriou, and Singer 2011; Bei et al. 2012;
Singer 2012; Singer and Mittal 2013; Zhao, Li, and Ma
∗

These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5549

