The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

What the Role is vs. What Plays the Role:
Semi-Supervised Event Argument Extraction via Dual Question Answering
Yang Zhou1, 2 , Yubo Chen1, 2 , Jun Zhao1, 2 Yin Wu3 , Jiexin Xu3 , Jinlong Li3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100049, China
3
AI Lab, China Merchant Bank, ShenZhen, 518057, China
{yang.zhou2020, yubo.chen, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{xyionwu, jiexinx, lucida}@cmbchina.com
Abstract

Attacker
Time

Event argument extraction is an essential task in event extraction, and become particularly challenging in the case of
low-resource scenarios. We solve the issues in existing studies under low-resource situations from two sides. From the
perspective of the model, the existing methods always suffer from the concern of insufficient parameter sharing and
do not consider the semantics of roles, which is not conducive to dealing with sparse data. And from the perspective
of the data, most existing methods focus on data generation
and data augmentation. However, these methods rely heavily
on external resources, which is more laborious to create than
obtain unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose DualQA, a
novel framework, which models the event argument extraction task as question answering to alleviate the problem of
data sparseness and leverage the duality of event argument
recognition which is to ask “What plays the role”, as well
as event role recognition which is to ask “What the role is”,
to mutually improve each other. Experimental results on two
datasets prove the effectiveness of our approach, especially in
extremely low-resource situations.

Instrument

Target

Place

Event Schema :
Attack
Trigger: destroyed
Type: Attack

Event Detection
He
Iraqi troops

NER

tanks

Event Argument Recognition
He claimed Iraqi troops had
destroyed five tanks
What plays the role Attacker in the
Question:
event Attack ?

Sentence:

Answer:

Attacker :
Iraqi troops

Iraqi troops

Event Role Recognition
Sentence:
Question:
Answer:

He claimed Iraqi troops had
destroyed five tanks
What is the role of Iraqi troops in the
event Attack ?
Attacker

Attacker :
Iraqi troops

Figure 1: Examples of Event Argument Recognition(EAR)
and Event Role Recognition(ERR). EAR depends on the
pre-defined event schema ”Attack”. ERR depends on the
Named Entity Recognition(NER) of the sentence. Both of
them acted on the premise of event information providing
by ED.

So far, many methods have been done under the supervised learning paradigm (Chen et al. 2015; Nguyen, Cho,
and Grishman 2016; Liu, Luo, and Huang 2018), and they
ordinarily demand quantities of manually annotated data,
which is very expensive, and scarce in real situations. According to our statistics, about 60% event types in ACE 2005
English corpus (Doddington et al. 2004) have less than 100
labeled samples and only 1.11% events in ACE 2005 have
all roles that the type should contain. Thus, how to address
the bottleneck of low-resources EAE has become a challenge. We try to overcome this challenge from both model
and data perspectives.
From the perspective of the model, existing EAE methods
usually adopt sequence-labeling paradigm or classification
paradigm. (Chen et al. 2015; Nguyen, Cho, and Grishman
2016; Liu, Luo, and Huang 2018) However, they have two
major limitations. (1) Insufficient parameter sharing: Previous studies always model different roles separately (i.e.,
different tags or classifiers for various roles), and different
roles are trained independently. Such a separated paradigm
is natural to restrict the optimization of some roles with lim-

Introduction
Extracting events (EE) from natural language text has received growing interest these years (Hirschberg and Manning 2015; Liu, Chen, and Liu 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Tong
et al. 2020), which is usually modeled as two-stage task,
including event detection (ED) and event argument extraction (EAE). As event detection has gained great popularity
and reached a fairly high performance (Wang et al. 2019),
event argument extraction becomes the key of event extraction. Based on the trigger and event type detected by ED, the
goal of EAE is to extract the arguments related to the event
and predict their roles according to the event schema, which
defines what kind of roles should be contained in specific
event type. For example, giving an Attack event triggered by
“destroyed” as well as its event mention “He claimed Iraqi
troops had destroyed five tanks”, EAE needs to recognize
“Iraqi troops”(Role= Attacker), and “five tanks”(Role= Target).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14638

