The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Finite-State Controllers for Uncertain POMDPs
Murat Cubuktepe1 , Nils Jansen2 , Sebastian Junges3 ,
Ahmadreza Marandi4 , Marnix Suilen2 , Ufuk Topcu1
1

Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, University of Texas at Austin, USA
2
Department of Software Science, Radboud University, The Netherlands
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA
4
Department of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
{mcubuktepe, utopcu}@utexas.edu, n.jansen@science.ru.nl, sjunges@berkeley.edu, a.marandi@tue.nl, marnix.suilen@ru.nl
Abstract

transition and observation model in uPOMDPs and take the
form of, for example, probability intervals or likelihood functions (Givan, Leach, and Dean 2000; Nilim and Ghaoui 2005).
Such uncertainty is commonly called epistemic, which is induced by a lack of precise knowledge as opposed to aleatoric
uncertainty, which is due to stochasticity.
Motivating example. Consider a robust spacecraft motion
planning system which serves as decision support for a human operator. This system delivers advice on switching to a
different orbit or avoiding close encounters with other objects
in space. Existing POMDP models assume that a fixed probability captures the responsiveness of the human (Kochenderfer 2015). However, a single probability may not faithfully
capture the responsiveness of multiple operators. Instead of
using a single probability, we use bounds on the actual value
of this probability and obtain a uPOMDP model.
A policy for the decision support system necessarily considers all potential probability distributions and may need
to predict the current location of the spacecraft based on its
past trajectory. Therefore, it requires robustness against the
uncertainty, and memory to store past (observation) data.
Problem formulation. The general problem we address is:

Uncertain partially observable Markov decision processes
(uPOMDPs) allow the probabilistic transition and observation functions of standard POMDPs to belong to a so-called
uncertainty set. Such uncertainty, referred to as epistemic uncertainty, captures uncountable sets of probability distributions
caused by, for instance, a lack of data available. We develop an
algorithm to compute finite-memory policies for uPOMDPs
that robustly satisfy specifications against any admissible distribution. In general, computing such policies is theoretically
and practically intractable. We provide an efficient solution
to this problem in four steps. (1) We state the underlying
problem as a nonconvex optimization problem with infinitely
many constraints. (2) A dedicated dualization scheme yields
a dual problem that is still nonconvex but has finitely many
constraints. (3) We linearize this dual problem and (4) solve
the resulting finite linear program to obtain locally optimal
solutions to the original problem. The resulting problem formulation is exponentially smaller than those resulting from
existing methods. We demonstrate the applicability of our algorithm using large instances of an aircraft collision-avoidance
scenario and a novel spacecraft motion planning case study.

Introduction
In sequential decision making, one has to account for various
sources of uncertainty. Examples for such sources are lossy
long-range communication channels with a spacecraft orbiting the earth, or the expected responses of a human operator
in a decision support system (Kochenderfer 2015). Moreover,
sensor limitations may lead to imperfect information of the
current state of the system. The standard models to reason
about decision-making under uncertainty and imperfect information are partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998).
The likelihood of uncertain events, like a message loss
in communication channels or of specific responses by human operators, is often only estimated from data. Yet, such
likelihoods enter a POMDP model as concrete probabilities.
POMDPs, in fact, require precise transition and observation probabilities. Uncertain POMDPs (uPOMDPs) remove
this assumption by incorporating uncertainty sets of probabilities (Burns and Brock 2007). These sets are part of the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11792

For a uPOMDP, compute a policy that is robust against
all possible probabilities from the uncertainty set.
Even without uncertainties, the problem is undecidable (Madani, Hanks, and Condon 1999). Most research has
focused on either belief-based approaches or on computing
finite state controllers (FSCs) (Meuleau et al. 1999; Amato,
Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2010). Our approach extends the
latter and computes robust FSCs representing robust policies.

Contribution and Approach
We develop a novel solution for efficiently computing robust
policies for uPOMDPs using robust convex optimization techniques. The method solves uPOMDPs with hundreds of thousands of states, which is out of reach for the state-of-the-art.
Finite memory. The first step of our method is to obtain a
tractable representation of memory. As a concise representation of uPOMDP policies with finite memory, we utilize
FSCs. First, we build the product of the FSC memory and
the uPOMDP. Computing a policy with finite memory for the
original uPOMDP is equivalent to computing a memoryless

