The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mercer Features for Efficient Combinatorial Bayesian Optimization
Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{aryan.deshwal, syrine.belakaria, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

Abstract

et al. 2019). Additionally, these methods can only work with
a limited set of acquisition functions. COMBO (Oh et al.
2019) is the state-of-the-art method that employs a GP-based
complex statistical model using discrete diffusion kernels
and performs local search to select structures.
In this paper, we ask the following question: Can we retain the modeling strength of GP-based model using discrete diffusion kernels and still perform tractable search for
selecting better structures to improve the overall BO performance? To answer this question, we propose a novel
approach referred as Mercer Features for Combinatorial
Bayesian Optimization (MerCBO), pronounced as “Mercè
BO”. The main advantage of COMBO comes from the combinatorial graph representation of input space X that allows
using diffusion kernels to define smooth functions over X.
MercBO computes a closed-form expression of this class of
smooth functions in terms of explicit feature maps of diffusion kernels, which we refer as Mercer features. The key
insight is to exploit the structure of the graph representation
in COMBO to extract powerful low-dimensional features.
One main advantage of Mercer features is that they allow
us to leverage a large number of acquisition functions and
algorithms from the continuous BO literature to improve the
BO performance for combinatorial spaces. In MerCBO, we
employ Thompson sampling (TS) as the acquisition function by sampling parametric functions from GP posterior via
Mercer features. We show that the acquisition function optimization problem with TS is a Binary Quadratic Program
(BQP). Inspired by the success of submodular relaxation in
the structured prediction literature (Gorelick et al. 2014), we
study a fast and scalable submdular relaxation method (Ito
and Fujimaki 2016) to solve BQPs for selecting structures.
The key idea is to construct a lower bound of the BQP problem in terms of unknown relaxation parameters and iteratively optimize those parameters to improve accuracy.
In many scientific applications (e.g., biological sequence
design and chemical design), we have the ability to perform
a large number of parallel experiments. Therefore, there is a
great need for scalable algorithms for selecting batch of inputs for parallel evaluation to quickly uncover diverse and
high-performing structures. MerCBO can be employed to
meet this desiderata as Thompson sampling is embarrassingly parallel and its exploration strategy is highly helpful for diversity. Experiments on multiple real-world bench-

Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient framework for
solving black-box optimization problems with expensive
function evaluations. This paper addresses the BO problem
setting for combinatorial spaces (e.g., sequences and graphs)
that occurs naturally in science and engineering applications.
A prototypical example is molecular optimization guided by
expensive experiments. The key challenge is to balance the
complexity of statistical models and tractability of search to
select combinatorial structures for evaluation. In this paper,
we propose an efficient approach referred as Mercer Features for Combinatorial Bayesian Optimization (MerCBO).
The key idea behind MerCBO is to provide explicit feature
maps for diffusion kernels over discrete objects by exploiting the structure of their combinatorial graph representation.
These Mercer features combined with Thompson sampling as
the acquisition function allows us to employ tractable solvers
to find next structures for evaluation. Experiments on diverse
real-world benchmarks demonstrate that MerCBO performs
similarly or better than prior methods.

Introduction
The problem of black-box optimization over combinatorial
spaces (e.g., sequences and graphs) using expensive evaluations arises in diverse real-world applications. A prototypical example is molecular optimization guided by wet
lab experiments. Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient
framework (Shahriari et al. 2016) for solving such problems and has seen a lot of success for continuous spaces
(Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Wang and Jegelka
2017; Belakaria et al. 2019; Belakaria et al. 2020a; Belakaria, Deshwal, and Doppa 2020a,b). BO algorithms learn
a statistical model, e.g., Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen
and Williams 2006), and employ it to select the sequence of
inputs for evaluation guided by an acquisition function, e.g.,
expected improvement (EI). The key BO challenge for combinatorial spaces is to appropriately trade-off the complexity
of statistical models and tractability of the search process to
select structures for evaluation. Prior methods either employ
simpler models that are amenable for tractable search (Baptista and Poloczek 2018) or perform heuristic search with
complex models (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011; Oh
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7210

