The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DIRV: Dense Interaction Region Voting for End-to-End
Human-Object Interaction Detection
Hao-Shu Fang,1∗ Yichen Xie,1∗ Dian Shao,2 Cewu Lu 1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
fhaoshu@gmail.com, xieyichen@sjtu.edu.cn, sd017@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recent years, human-object interaction (HOI) detection has
achieved impressive advances. However, conventional twostage methods are usually slow in inference. On the other hand,
existing one-stage methods mainly focus on the union regions
of interactions, which introduce unnecessary visual information as disturbances to HOI detection. To tackle the problems
above, we propose a novel one-stage HOI detection approach
DIRV in this paper, based on a new concept called interaction
region for the HOI problem. Unlike previous methods, our
approach concentrates on the densely sampled interaction regions across different scales for each human-object pair, so as
to capture the subtle visual features that is most essential to the
interaction. Moreover, in order to compensate for the detection
flaws of a single interaction region, we introduce a novel voting strategy that makes full use of those overlapped interaction
regions in place of conventional Non-Maximal Suppression
(NMS). Extensive experiments on two popular benchmarks:
V-COCO and HICO-DET show that our approach outperforms
existing state-of-the-arts by a large margin with the highest
inference speed and lightest network architecture. Our code is
publicly available at www.github.com/MVIG-SJTU/DIRV.

Figure 1: Union Regions vs Interaction Regions: Conventional approaches usually pays attention to the union region
(dashed yellow), which contains too much redundant information. Instead, we propose a method focusing on interaction
regions (solid violet) with different scales. In above two figures, despite distinct human/object poses, interaction regions
cover the most critical segments containing the cups, hands
or arms, when detecting holding a cup.

which covers the whole human, object and intermediate context. For instance, existing two-stage algorithms commonly
crop the union region of a human-object pair and then embed its visual features (Gupta, Schwing, and Hoiem 2019;
Gao, Zou, and Huang 2018; Li et al. 2019d), while recent
one-stage methods aim to regress this union region with keypoints (Liao et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020) or anchor boxes
(Kim et al. 2020) and use it to associate the target human and
object.
However, we find that such emphasis on union regions
is counter-intuitive for human beings. In practice, it is not
necessary to observe the whole union region before making
decisions in most situations. For instance, when asked to
determine whether a man is holding a cup, we only need
to notice his hands but never care about where his feet are.
That’s to say, humans can easily target the human-object
pair of an HOI, without the needs of being told the union
regions. Based on these observations, we propose a new
recognition unit for HOI detection, called interaction region.
The interaction region denotes the region that includes the

Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to recognize
and localize the interactions between human-object pairs (e.g.
sitting on a chair, riding a horse, eating an apple, etc.). As a
fundamental task of image semantic understanding, it plays a
vital role in many other computer vision fields such as image
captioning (Guo et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018), visual question
answering (Li et al. 2019b; Norcliffe-Brown, Vafeias, and
Parisot 2018) and action understanding (Pang et al. 2020;
Shao et al. 2020).
For HOI detection, almost all previous methods emphasized the importance of the union regions of an interaction,
∗

Equal contribution. Names in alphabetical order.
Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi
Zhi institute
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1291

