The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contextualized Rewriting for Text Summarization
Guangsheng Bao1,2 , Yue Zhang1,2∗
1

2

School of Engineering, Westlake University
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
{baoguangsheng, zhangyue}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

Source Document: thousands of live earthworms have
been falling from the sky ... a biology teacher discovered
the worms on the surface of the snow while he was skiing
in the mountains near bergen at the weekend ... teacher
karstein erstad told norwegian news website ...

Extractive summarization suffers from irrelevance, redundancy and incoherence. Existing work shows that abstractive
rewriting for extractive summaries can improve the conciseness and readability. These rewriting systems consider extracted summaries as the only input, which is relatively focused but can lose important background knowledge. In this
paper, we investigate contextualized rewriting, which ingests
the entire original document. We formalize contextualized
rewriting as a seq2seq problem with group alignments, introducing group tag as a solution to model the alignments,
identifying extracted summaries through content-based addressing. Results show that our approach significantly outperforms non-contextualized rewriting systems without requiring reinforcement learning, achieving strong improvements
on ROUGE scores upon multiple extractive summarizers.

Gold Summary: teacher karstein erstad found thousands of live worms on top of the snow.
Extractive Summary: a biology teacher discovered the
worms on the surface of the snow while he was skiing in
the mountains near bergen at the weekend.
Rewritten Summary: biology teacher karstein erstad
discovered the worms on the snow.
Figure 1: Example showing that contextual information can
benefit summary rewriting.

Introduction
Extractive text summarization systems (Nallapati, Zhai, and
Zhou 2017; Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018; Liu and Lapata 2019) work by identifying salient text segments (typically sentences) from an input document as its summary.
They have been shown to outperform abstractive systems
(Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015; Nallapati et al. 2016;
Chopra, Auli, and Rush 2016) in terms of content selection
and faithfulness to the input. However, extractive summarizers exhibit several limitations. First, sentences extracted
from the input document tend to contain irrelevant and redundant phrases (Durrett, Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Klein 2016;
Chen and Bansal 2018; Gehrmann, Deng, and Rush 2018).
Second, extracted sentences can be weak in their coherence with regard to discourse relations and cross-sentence
anaphora (Dorr, Zajic, and Schwartz 2003; Cheng and Lapata 2016).
To address these issues, a line of work investigates postediting of extractive summarizer outputs. While grammar
tree trimming has been considered for reducing irrelevant
content within sentences (Dorr, Zajic, and Schwartz 2003),
rule-based methods have also been investigated for reducing redundancy and enhancing coherence (Durrett, BergKirkpatrick, and Klein 2016). With the rise of neural net-

works, a more recent line of work considers using abstractive models for rewriting extracted outputs sentence by sentence (Chen and Bansal 2018; Bae et al. 2019; Wei, Huang,
and Gao 2019; Xiao et al. 2020). Human evaluation shows
that such rewriting systems effectively improve the conciseness and readability. Interestingly, existing rewriters do not
improve the ROUGE scores compared with the extractive
baselines.
Existing abstractive rewriting systems take extracted summaries as the only input. On the other hand, information
from the original document can serve as useful background
knowledge for inferring factual details. Take Figure 1 for
example. A salient summary can be made by extracting the
sentence “a biology teacher...weekend.” While a rewriter can
simplify the sentence for making a better summary, it cannot provide additional details beyond the sentence unless the
document context is also considered. For example, the name
of the teacher is not given by the extractive summary, but we
can infer that the teacher’s name is “karstein erstad” from
the context sentences, thereby making the summary more
informative.
We propose contextualized rewriting by using the full
input document as a context for rewriting extractive summary sentences. Rather than encoding only the extractive
summary, we use a neural representation model to encode

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12544

