The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Model-sharing Games:
Analyzing Federated Learning Under Voluntary Participation
Kate Donahue,1 Jon Kleinberg, 1, 2
1
2

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Information Science, Cornell University
kdonahue@cs.cornell.edu, kleinber@cs.cornell.edu

opt to fit a linear regression model with parameters θ̂. However, because of the limited amount of data the hospital has
access to, this model has relatively high error. Luckily, other
hospitals also have data from implementations of this same
procedure. However, for reasons of privacy, data incompatibility, data size, or other operational considerations, the hospitals don’t wish to share raw patient data. Instead, they they
opt to combine their models by taking a weighted average
of the parameters learned by each hospital. If there are M
hospitals and hospital i has ni samples, the combined model
parameters would look like:

Abstract
Federated learning is a setting where agents, each with access
to their own data source, combine models learned from local data to create a global model. If agents are drawing their
data from different distributions, though, federated learning
might produce a biased global model that is not optimal for
each agent. This means that agents face a fundamental question: should they join the global model or stay with their local
model? In this work, we show how this situation can be naturally analyzed through the framework of coalitional game
theory.
Motivated by these considerations, we propose the following
game: there are heterogeneous players with different model
parameters governing their data distribution and different
amounts of data they have noisily drawn from their own distribution. Each player’s goal is to obtain a model with minimal expected mean squared error (MSE) on their own distribution. They have a choice of fitting a model based solely on
their own data, or combining their learned parameters with
those of some subset of the other players. Combining models
reduces the variance component of their error through access
to more data, but increases the bias because of the heterogeneity of distributions.
In this work, we derive exact expected MSE values for problems in linear regression and mean estimation. We use these
values to analyze the resulting game in the framework of hedonic game theory; we study how players might divide into
coalitions, where each set of players within a coalition jointly
construct model(s). We analyze three methods of federation,
modeling differing degrees of customization. In uniform federation, the agents collectively produce a single model. In
coarse-grained federation, each agent can weight the global
model together with their local model. In fine-grained federation, each agent can flexibly combine models from each other
agent in the federation. For each method, we constructively
analyze the stable partitions of players into coalitions.

f

1

θ̂ = PM

M
X

i=1 ni i=1

θ̂i · ni

The situation described above could be viewed as a stylized model of federated learning. Federated learning is a
distributed learning process that is currently experiencing
rapid innovations and widespread implementation (Li et al.
2020; by: Peter Kairouz and McMahan 2021). It is used in
cases where data is distributed across multiple agents and
cannot be combined centrally for training. For example, federated learning is implemented in word prediction on cell
phones, where transferring the raw text data would be infeasible given its large size (and sensitive content). The motivating factor for using federated learning is that access to more
data will reduce the variance in a learned model, reducing
its error.
However, there could be a downside to using federated
learning. In the hospital example, it seems quite reasonable that certain hospitals might have different true generating models for their data, based on the differences in patient populations or variants of the procedure implementation, for example. Two dissimilar hospitals that are federating together will see a decrease in their model’s error due to
model variance, but an increase in their error due to model
bias. This raises some fundamental questions for each participating hospital - or, more generally, each agent i considering federated learning. Which other agents should i federate
with in order to minimize its error? Will those other agents
be interested in federating with i? Does there exist some stable arrangement of agents into federating clusters, and if so,
what does that arrangement look like?
Numerous works have explored the issue of heterogeneous data in federated learning - we discuss specifically

Introduction
Imagine a situation as follows: a hospital is trying to evaluate
the effectiveness of a certain procedure based on data it has
collected from procedures done on patients in their facilities.
It seems likely that certain attributes of the patient influences
the effectiveness of the procedure, so the hospital analysts
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5303

