The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Provable Benefits of Overparameterization in Model Compression:
From Double Descent to Pruning Neural Networks
Xiangyu Chang1 , Yingcong Li1 , Samet Oymak1 and Christos Thrampoulidis2 *
1

University of California, Riverside
2
University of British Columbia
{cxian008, yli692, soymak}@ucr.edu, cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract

and prune a large model rather than training a small model
from scratch. Unfortunately, the mechanisms behind this
phenomenon are poorly understood especially for practical
gradient-based algorithms. This paper sheds light on this by
answering: What are the optimization and generalization dynamics of pruning overparameterized models? Does gradient descent naturally select the good weights?
Contributions: We analytically study the performance of
popular pruning strategies. First, we analyze linear models,
and then, generalize the results to nonlinear feature maps.
Through extensive simulations, we show that our analytical
findings predict similar behaviors in more complex settings.
(a) Distributional characterization (DC): The key innovation facilitating our results is a theoretical characterization of
the distribution of the solution of overparameterized leastsquares. This DC enables us to accurately answer “what
happens to the accuracy if X% of the weights are pruned?”.
(b) Benefits of overparameterization: Using DC, we obtain rigorous precise characterizations of the pruning performance in linear problems. Furthermore, we use, so called
“linear gaussian equivalences", to obtain sharp analytic predictions for nonlinear maps, which we verify via extensive
numerical simulations. By training models of growing size
and compressing them to fixed sparsity, we identify a novel
double descent behavior, where the risk of the pruned model
is consistently minimized in the overparameterized regime.
Using our theory, we uncover rather surprising scenarios
where pruning an overparameterized model is provably better than training a small model with the exact information of
optimal nonzero locations.
(c) Benefits of retraining: An important aspect of pruning
is retraining the model using the favorable nonzero locations
identified during the initial training. We show that retraining
can actually hurt the performance when features are uncorrelated. However, it becomes critical as correlations increase.
Importantly, we devise the DC of the train→prune→retrain
process (see Figs. 2 and 4 and the discussion around Def. 5
for details), and, we demonstrate that it correctly captures
the pruning performance of random features that are known
to be good proxies for understanding DNN behavior (Jacot,
Gabriel, and Hongler 2018).
We anticipate that our techniques towards establishing the
DC of the overparameterized problems might be useful, beyond the context of pruning, in other statistical inference

Deep networks are typically trained with many more parameters than the size of the training dataset. Recent empirical evidence indicates that the practice of overparameterization not only benefits training large models, but also assists
– perhaps counterintuitively – building lightweight models.
Specifically, it suggests that overparameterization benefits
model pruning / sparsification. This paper sheds light on these
empirical findings by theoretically characterizing the highdimensional asymptotics of model pruning in the overparameterized regime. The theory presented addresses the following core question: “should one train a small model from the
beginning, or first train a large model and then prune?”. We
analytically identify regimes in which, even if the location of
the most informative features is known, we are better off fitting a large model and then pruning rather than simply training with the known informative features. This leads to a new
double descent in the training of sparse models: growing the
original model, while preserving the target sparsity, improves
the test accuracy as one moves beyond the overparameterization threshold. Our analysis further reveals the benefit of retraining by relating it to feature correlations. We find that the
above phenomena are already present in linear and randomfeatures models. Our technical approach advances the toolset
of high-dimensional analysis and precisely characterizes the
asymptotic distribution of over-parameterized least-squares.
The intuition gained by analytically studying simpler models
is numerically verified on neural networks.

1

Introduction

Large model size and overparameterization in deep learning are known to improve generalization performance
(Neyshabur et al. 2017), and, state-of-the-art deep neural
networks (DNNs) can be outrageously large. However, such
large models are not suitable for certain important application domains, such as mobile computing (Tan et al. 2019;
Sandler et al. 2018). Pruning algorithms aim to address the
challenge of building lightweight DNNs for such domains.
While there are several pruning methods, their common goal
is to compress large DNN models by removing weak connections/weights with minimal decline in accuracy. Here, a
key empirical phenomenon is that it is often better to train
* The author names are in alphabetical order.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6974

