The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Coordination Between Individual Agents in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Yang Zhang,1 Qingyu Yang,1,2,3 * Dou An,1,2,3 Chengwei Zhang4
1

Faculty of Electronics and Information, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering (SKLMSE), Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
Ministry of Education (MOE) Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
Xi’an, China
4
Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, China
zy804703098@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yangqingyu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, douan2017@xjtu.edu.cn, chenvy@dlmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

manian et al. 2020). In the global-level coordination based
methods, all agents share observations and actions with
each other and a virtual agent is integrated to learn a centralized value function for all agents. In contrast, in the
neighborhood-level coordination based methods, the coordination exists only in the neighborhood of agents, meaning
that agents share their actions and observations only with
their neighbors. In the training process, agents in the same
neighborhood are integrated into a virtual agent.
Both global-level and neighborhood-level methods attempt to solve the problem of coordination between agents
as a whole, while the coordination between individual agents
is ignored. In many real scenarios, different agents play different roles in the environment, and they cannot be simply
integrated into a virtual agent. For example, in soccer game,
a forward player is in a cooperative relationship with his
teammates, and they all have the same aim to kick the ball
into the other team’s goal; In addition, the forward player
is in a competitive relationship with the opponent players
who try to prevent him from the goal. The two teams of
players cannot be analyzed as an agent because the aim of
them are completely opposite. In the same team, the forward
player also has different correlations with others. Namely, he
has a stronger cooperative relationship with players who are
mainly involved in the offense, such as centers, but a weaker
cooperative relationship with others who are mainly responsible for defense, such as guards. Thus, it is important to
analyze the correlation between individual agents for learning a coordinated strategy. The three coordination structures
of MARL methods (global-level, neighborhood-level, and
agent-level based methods) are illustrated in Figure 1.
Unfortunately, in unknown environments, the correlation
between individual agents is usually not given. During the
interaction with the environment, the information an agent
obtains directly are the state of environment, joint action,
and received rewards. Based on the change in the reward of
different agents, we can analyze the correlation between individual agents preliminarily. If the rewards of two agents increase or decrease simultaneously, the two agents are much
more likely in a cooperative relationship. Conversely, if the
reward of one agent increases while the reward of other
agent decreases, the two agents are much more likely in a
competitive relationship. However, this method is too simple to identify the correlation between agents accurately.

The existing multi-agent reinforcement learning methods
(MARL) for determining the coordination between agents
focus on either global-level or neighborhood-level coordination between agents. However the problem of coordination
between individual agents is remain to be solved. It is crucial for learning an optimal coordinated policy in unknown
multi-agent environments to analyze the agent’s roles and
the correlation between individual agents. To this end, in this
paper we propose an agent-level coordination based MARL
method. Specifically, it includes two parts in our method. The
first is correlation analysis between individual agents based
on the Pearson, Spearman, and Kendall correlation coefficients; And the second is an agent-level coordinated training framework where the communication message between
weakly correlated agents is dropped out, and a correlation
based reward function is built. The proposed method is verified in four mixed cooperative-competitive environments.
The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art MARL methods and can measure the correlation between individual agents accurately.

Introduction
In recent years, the Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) has gained more and more attention with the development of single-agent reinforcement learning (Sutton
and Barto 2018), deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton
2015), and multi-agent systems (Wooldridge 2009). Many
successful single-agent reinforcement learning methods, including the DQN (Mnih et al. 2015) and DDPG (Lillicrap
et al. 2015), have been extended to the multi-agent systems. However, simple extending of the single-agent reinforcement learning methods to the multi-agents environment has faced big challenges, i.e., the coordination between
agents (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019).
Based on the coordination structure between agents, existing studies on the MARL coordination algorithms can
be divided into two groups: global-level coordination based
methods (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Son et al.
2019; Wen et al. 2020), and neighborhood-level coordination based methods (Yang et al. 2018; Ganapathi Subra* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11387

