The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Coupon Design in Advertising Systems
Weiran Shen,1 Pingzhong Tang, 2 Xun Wang, 2 Yadong Xu, 2 Xiwang Yang 3
1

Renmin University of China
2
Tsinghua University
3
ByteDance
shenweiran@ruc.edu.cn, kenshinping@gmail.com, wxhelloworld@outlook.com,
xuyd17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,yangxiwang@bytedance.com
Abstract

is used by Facebook and Bytedance. The difference between
them is that the VCG auction is truthful, i.e., advertisers submit bids that truthfully reveal their valuations, while the GSP
auction is not. However, it has been proved that the GSP auction has a Nash equilibrium whose outcome is equivalent to
that of the VCG auction. Therefore, in this paper, we study
how to maximize the revenue in the VCG auction.
Coupons have been widely studied in economics (Bester
and Petrakis 1996; Moraga-González and Petrakis 1999;
Kang et al. 2006; Board and Skrzypacz 2016). The most
common arguments developed by economists to explain
the use of coupons are twofold: 1) Coupons allow for
price discrimination. 2) Coupons allow for peak-load pricing (Mckenzie 2008). In this work, coupons play the role of
price discrimination. The intuition of revenue increment is
that low-valued advertisers would spontaneously bid higher
if they are provided with coupons, which in turn forces the
high-valued advertisers to pay more when they win based
on the payment rule of the VCG auction. In fact, many
methods can be used to increase revenue, such as reserve
price (Hartline and Roughgarden 2009), boosting (Golrezaei
et al. 2017), squashing (Lahaie and Pennock 2007a), anchoring (Lahaie and Pennock 2007b). Coupons are significantly
different from them. As for coupons, advertisers hold the
right to decide whether to use them. However, they cannot refuse to use the other methods, e.g., advertisers always
want to remove the reserve price but they can not. In fact,
sometimes reserve prices may have a negative effect on revenue (Ostrovsky and Schwarz 2011). Higher reserve prices
make the auction less attractive which results in fewer participated advertisers.
In this work, we generalize (Shen et al. 2020b) to the VCG
auction, including the combination with reserve pricing. The
intuition is that the VCG auction (with heterogeneous slots)
can be decomposed into some tractable sub-VCG auctions
(with homogeneous slots). Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) We generalize the application of coupons
for revenue maximization in advertising systems to more realistic scenarios (i.e., VCG auctions). 2) We propose algorithms for coupon optimization using the properties of the
VCG auction, along with the combination with reserve pricing. 3) Based on both synthetic data and industrial data, extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

Online platforms sell advertisements via auctions (e.g., VCG
and GSP auction) and revenue maximization is one of the
most important tasks for them. Many revenue increment
methods are proposed, like reserve pricing, boosting, coupons
and so on. The novelty of coupons rests on the fact that
coupons are optional for advertisers while the others are compulsory. Recent studies on coupons have limited applications
in advertising systems because they only focus on second
price auctions and do not consider the combination with other
methods. In this work, we study the coupon design problem
for revenue maximization in the widely used VCG auction.
Firstly, we examine the bidder strategies in the VCG auction
with coupons. Secondly, we cast the coupon design problem
into a learning framework and propose corresponding algorithms using the properties of VCG auction. Then we further
study how to combine coupons with reserve pricing in our
framework. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms based on both
synthetic data and industrial data.

Introduction
Online advertising has been one of the most important industry on the Internet. In the United States, its revenue has
grown by 15.9 percent in 2019 compared to 2018, surpassing
124$ billion. 1 Advertising has become one of the key revenue sources for many Internet companies, such as Google,
Facebook, ByteDance. For example, more than 83.8 percent
of Google’s revenue comes from online advertising. And the
market still shows no signs of slowing down. There are various types of online advertising, for example, social media
advertising (e.g., Instagram and Facebook), paid search advertising (e.g., Google and Baidu), and native advertising
(e.g., BuzzFeed and Tiktok), and so on. These advertisements are usually sold via auction mechanisms. The mechanisms determine which advertisements will be presented and
how much the corresponding advertisers need to pay. There
are two widely used auctions, i.e., the GSP auction (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2007) (generalized second
price) which is used by Google and Baidu, and the VCG auction (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves et al. 1973) which
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.statista.com/statistics/183816/us-onlineadvertising-revenue-since-2000/

5717

