The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Incentive-Aware PAC Learning
Hanrui Zhang, Vincent Conitzer
Duke University
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu, conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

their balance being as high as possible, which means they
would submit a statement with the full balance. As a result,
the fact that customers can underreport would not affect the
selection at all. Alternatively, the financial institution could
be a non-profit entity that aims to make a product available
only to those with low savings. In that case, every customer
who wants access to this product would underreport her balance in order to be approved, and this would make the selection effectively meaningless.
More generally, often the right criteria for the selection
may not be clear a priori, but have to be learned from observations. In such cases, the decision maker (e.g., the institution) has access to labeled historical data (e.g., the amount
of savings owned by some customer, and whether the product was successful for the same customer). A classifier (e.g.,
selection criteria) is derived from the data and implemented,
to which future data points (e.g., new customers) to be classified respond in a strategic way. The goal, naturally, is to
classify future data points as accurately as possible, taking
into account that their features may be strategically modified. The key challenge is for the classifier derived to generalize from past unmodified observations to future strategic data points. Such problems are partially captured by the
PAC learning model (discussed in detail below), but also exhibit additional complexity from strategic manipulation of
the features, where the nature of this manipulation is affected
by the choice of classifier. In this paper, we investigate novel
phenomena in PAC learning introduced by the presence of
strategic manipulation.

We study PAC learning in the presence of strategic manipulation, where data points may modify their features in certain predefined ways in order to receive a better outcome.
We show that the vanilla ERM principle fails to achieve
any nontrivial guarantee in this context. Instead, we propose
an incentive-aware version of the ERM principle which has
asymptotically optimal sample complexity. We then focus our
attention on incentive-compatible classifiers, which provably
prevent any kind of strategic manipulation. We give a sample
complexity bound that is, curiously, independent of the hypothesis class, for the ERM principle restricted to incentivecompatible classifiers. This suggests that incentive compatibility alone can act as an effective means of regularization.
We further show that it is without loss of generality to consider only incentive-compatible classifiers when opportunities for strategic manipulation satisfy a transitivity condition. As a consequence, in such cases, our hypothesis-classindependent sample complexity bound applies even without
incentive compatibility. Our results set the foundations of
incentive-aware PAC learning.

1

Introduction

Consider the following scenario. A financial institution
plans to offer a product to a selected group of customers,
and decides that the only thing that should matter in the selection process is the amount of money she currently owns
in savings (possibly held at a different financial institution).
Each customer may prove her savings balance by submitting a bank statement, and the number shown therein will
be used for the selection. However, customers may choose
to underreport their balance, by, for example, temporarily
transferring their money to another account before the statement date. (We assume for the purpose of this example that
overreporting is not possible.) The question is, how does this
ability of customers to strategically underreport their balance affect the selection process?
The answer, as one would expect, depends on the specific
criteria of the selection, which are presumably determined
by the nature of the product. For instance, the product could
be a secured loan that requires the customer to use the savings for collateral. In that case, customers will benefit from

Our results. Two central questions in PAC learning are the
following: statistically, how many labeled data points does
one need to observe in order to derive a classifier of a desired
quality, and computationally, given this many labeled data
points, how can one compute such a classifier? We answer
these questions for arbitrary feature spaces and structures
of strategic manipulation, by presenting an adapted version
of the empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle, which
roughly says that one should simply pick a classifier that has
the best quality on the unmodified labeled data points that are
observed. We show that our incentive-aware version of the
ERM principle requires asymptotically the minimum possible number of labeled data points for any specific problem
setup. This can be viewed as a strategic version of the VC

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5797

