The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Very Important Person Localization in Unconstrained Conditions:
A New Benchmark
Xiao Wang1 , Zheng Wang2,3† , Toshihiko Yamasaki2,3 , Wenjun Zeng4
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology
Research Institute for an Inclusive Society through Engineering (RIISE), The University of Tokyo
3
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, The University of Tokyo
4
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract

Hong, and Zheng 2019), are limited either in the dataset
scale or data diversity. Specifically, the number of images
is often confined in several hundreds, such as 200 in VIP
dataset (Mathialagan, Gallagher, and Batra 2015). It is infeasible to test the robustness of algorithms under large-scale
data. Moreover, in most cases, images are collected in fixed
scenes, such as basketball games in NCAA dataset (Li, Li,
and Zheng 2018), as shown in Figure 1(a). In constrained
conditions, faces of VIPs are in the frontal view, big, and
salient, such as VIPs in MS dataset (Li, Li, and Zheng 2018),
as shown in Figure 1(b). But in reality, faces of VIPs might
not be so salient, e.g., with large view variation, varying
small, or occluded (see Figure 1(c)). As a result, current
methods may be biased toward ideal settings and their effectiveness may be impaired once the model is applied in
reality. To address this problem, it is essential to introduce
datasets that are closer to realistic settings.
Second, few methods addressed the VIPLoc task. As a
representative, the inference-based methods attempt to infer the importance of person directly. (Ramanathan et al.
2016) employed an attention model to predict the importance from persons’ action and appearance. (Mathialagan,
Gallagher, and Batra 2015) used a regression model on spatial and saliency information to infer a relatively important
person. These methods ignored some semantic information
such as relationships among persons, which are essentially
useful to evaluate the importance of persons. As a pioneering work, (Li, Hong, and Zheng 2019; Li, Li, and Zheng
2018) started to mine the relationship between persons. In
reality, the VIP is not only related to other persons but also
associated with some iconic objects in the current occasion.
For example, a birthday star should have a strong interaction
with the birthday cake, blowing out the candle; a football
player may run with a ball, preparing to shoot; a speaker
is giving a talk standing by the lectern. Here, the birthday
star, the football player, and the speaker are the VIPs in each
event image (please refer to Figure 3). The examples above
tell us that individual interactions with objects provide useful information for inferring the VIPs, working as a complementary effect, if we can fuse the respective strengths of
social relation and individual interaction factors.
Considering the above two issues, this paper makes
two contributions. The main contribution is the collection
of a new VIPLoc dataset, named Unconstrained-7k (Fig-

This paper presents a new high-quality dataset for
Very Important Person Localization (VIPLoc), named
Unconstrained-7k. Generally, existing datasets are: 1) limited in scale; 2) built under simple and constrained conditions, where the number of disturbing non-VIPs is not large,
the scene is relatively simple, and the face of VIP is always in frontal view and salient. To tackle these problems,
the proposed Unconstrained-7k dataset is featured in two aspects. First, it contains over 7,000 annotated images, making
it the largest VIPLoc dataset under unconstrained conditions
to date. Second, our dataset is collected freely on the Internet, including multiple scenes, where images are in unconstrained conditions. VIPs in the new dataset are in different
settings, e.g., large view variation, varying sizes, occluded,
and complex scenes. Meanwhile, each image has more persons (> 20), making the dataset more challenging.
As a minor contribution, motivated by the observation that
VIPs are highly related to not only neighbors but also iconic
objects, this paper proposes a Joint Social Relation and Individual Interaction Graph Neural Networks (JSRII-GNN) for
VIPLoc. Experiments show that the JSRII-GNN yields competitive accuracy on NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association), MS (Multi-scene), and Unconstrained-7k datasets.
https://github.com/xiaowang1516/VIPLoc.

1

Introduction

Very Important Person Localization (VIPLoc) aims to automatically locate core individuals that play important roles in
given images. It has a guiding influence on the occurrence of
current events, such as sports games, birthday parties, and
speeches. Localizing important person potentially benefits
person re-identification (Wang et al. 2020c; Yang et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2021), event recognition (Yao et al. 2020) and event
detection (Bhardwaj, Yang, and Cudré-Mauroux 2020; Tong
et al. 2020). In particular, analyzing the action of important
person enables intelligent system to better understand what
has happened and predict what will happen.
Our work is motivated by two aspects. First, most existing
VIPLoc datasets, such as VIP (Mathialagan, Gallagher, and
Batra 2015), NCAA (Li, Li, and Zheng 2018), and MS (Li,
†

Corresponding Author:wangz@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2809

