The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Degree Planning with PLAN-BERT: Multi-Semester Recommendation Using
Future Courses of Interest
Erzhuo Shao1 , Shiyuan Guo2 , Zachary A. Pardos3 *
2

1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
3
Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley
sez20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {shiyuan.guo, pardos}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

both offline and online experiments with the introduction of
PLAN-BERT, the first model to support pre-specified future
reference items to make multiple consecutive recommendations without auto-regression.
We chose Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformer (BERT) (Devlin et al. 2019) as the base architecture for our approach due to the similarity of BERT’s
masked token prediction objective to our planning recommendation scenario. This objective randomly masks a percentage of tokens during training, with the objective of reducing error in predicting them based on context. This is
somewhat analogous to planning-based scenarios in which
we would like a recommender to utilize both users’ past
items and pre-specified future items to generate a plan. Unlike with BERT applied to natural language, where 15%
of tokens are conventionally masked, the majority of tokens may be masked or missing in planning-based scenarios if a user’s pre-specified future items represent only a
small portion of an expected plan. We evaluate PLAN-BERT
on consecutive basket recommendation, though consecutive
and next-item recommendation is a supported special case.
Our introduction of PLAN-BERT makes the following novel
modeling contributions:

Planning scenarios involving user pre-specified items present
themselves frequently in recommender system domains. Although next-item and next-basket recommendation has been
a focus of prior research, multiple consecutive item or basket
approaches are needed for planning. No prior work has leveraged pre-specified future reference items to improve this type
of challenging consecutive prediction task at inference time.
PLAN-BERT is the first to accommodate this general planning scenario. It does so by contributing novel modifications
that take inspiration from the masked training and contextual embedding of self-attention models. To test the model,
we use the domain of student academic degree planning, in
which students’ past course histories and future pre-specified
courses of interest are used to fill in the remainder of their
curriculum. Our offline analyses consist of 15 million historic
course enrollments at 20 institutions and an online evaluation
conducted at one of the institutions. Our results show that
PLAN-BERT outperforms existing models including BERT,
BiLSTM, and a UserKNN baseline, with small numbers of
future reference items substantially improving accuracy. Significant results from our online evaluation show PLAN-BERT
to be strongest in students’ perceptions of personalization.

Introduction

• Inference time utilization of future reference items for
consecutive recommendation
• Explicit user and item features as input to BERT for recommendation
• Multiple consecutive basket prediction without autoregression

Research on session-based predictive approaches have focused on next time slice recommendation (Fang et al. 2019;
Mehta, Hofmann, and Nejdl 2007; Berkovsky, Kuflik, and
Ricci 2007). Much less explored have been models that predict multiple consecutive items, or baskets, for recommendation (Cheng et al. 2013). Unexplored has been the use of
future reference items to aid in this task. Consecutive time
slice recommendations are called for in planning scenarios
and it may be desired or even necessary for a user to select
several individual (i.e., item) or grouped (i.e., basket) future
items ahead of time. Multiple time slice recommendation is
a challenging prediction problem as auto-regressive models
build on earlier assumptions, amplifying error over time as a
result (Liu et al. 2019c). Incorporation of user pre-specified
future items into planning-based models can potentially mitigate this degradation in accuracy and improve the personalization of recommendations. We investigate this potential in

We evaluate PLAN-BERT on the high stakes task of student academic degree planning. This task is well suited for
planning-based recommendation, with semesters of enrollments akin to baskets of items, and consecutive semester
recommendations expected to be made based on past course
histories and future pre-specified courses of interest. Support
for academic planning is important because of the stakes
involved. Course selection decisions can greatly affect students’ careers and enrollment is costly, with annual tuition
ranging from thousands to tens of thousands of dollars. As
noted by Elbadrawy and Karypis (2016), this is also a difficult recommendation task due to students’ multifaceted selection criteria. The task is not only difficult for predictive
models, but for humans too. Completion rates for students at

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14920

