The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Empowering Adaptive Early-Exit Inference with Latency Awareness
Xinrui Tan,1 Hongjia Li,1∗ Liming Wang,1 Xueqing Huang,2 Zhen Xu1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
New York Institute of Technology, New York, USA
{tanxinrui, lihongjia, wangliming, xuzhen}@iie.ac.cn, xhuang25@nyit.edu

Abstract

Another relatively new, yet promising approach to overcome the resource limitation is the adaptive early-exit inference technique (Panda, Sengupta, and Roy 2016; Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and Kung 2016; Stamoulis et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2020; Huang, Lai, and Chen 2017; Goetschalckx
et al. 2018; Cheng et al. 2019; Yokoo, Iizuka, and Fukui
2019; Huang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019; Aketi, Panda,
and Roy 2020; Leroux et al. 2015), which is capable of adjusting the computational effort based on each input sample’s inference difficulty (Venkataramani et al. 2015). This
technique builds upon the idea of distributing computing resources unevenly across easy and hard input samples. In particular, for easy input samples whose patterns can be recognized using the shallow portions of the deep learning model,
an early exit is allowed to avoid the subsequent unnecessary computational expense. While for hard input samples
that constitute only a small fraction of real-world datasets
(Panda, Sengupta, and Roy 2016), the inference task will
execute the computation of the full deep learning model.
As a result, the adaptive early-exit inference technique can
considerably reduce the inference latency for the easy input
samples without sacrificing the overall inference accuracy.

With the capability of trading accuracy for latency on-the-fly,
the technique of adaptive early-exit inference has emerged as
a promising line of research to accelerate the deep learning inference. However, studies in this line of research commonly
use a group of thresholds to control the accuracy-latency
trade-off, where a thorough and general methodology on how
to determine these thresholds has not been conducted yet, especially with regard to the common requirements of average
inference latency. To address this issue and enable latencyaware adaptive early-exit inference, in the present paper, we
approximately formulate the threshold determination problem of finding the accuracy-maximum threshold setting that
meets a given average latency requirement, and then propose
a threshold determination method to tackle our formulated
non-convex problem. Theoretically, we prove that, for certain
parameter settings, our method finds an approximate stationary point of the formulated problem. Empirically, on top of
various models across multiple datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, ImageNet and two time-series datasets), we show that
our method can well handle the average latency requirements,
and consistently finds good threshold settings in negligible
time.

To facilitate the implementation of the adaptive earlyexit inference technique, existing studies (Panda, Sengupta, and Roy 2016; Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and Kung
2016; Stamoulis et al. 2018; Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and
Kung 2017; Wu et al. 2020; Huang, Lai, and Chen 2017;
Goetschalckx et al. 2018; Cheng et al. 2019; Yokoo, Iizuka,
and Fukui 2019; Huang et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019;
Aketi, Panda, and Roy 2020; Leroux et al. 2015; Yuan
et al. 2019) have concentrated heavily on designing architectures of early-exit models with early exit points; most of
these studies have employed a threshold-based mechanism
to control the adaptive inference processes. Broadly speaking, this mechanism requires a predetermined threshold for
each early-exit point, and these thresholds are in turn used
in an inference process to determine after which exit point
the inference process should stop. Despite the simplicity of
the threshold-based mechanism, different threshold settings
explicitly lead to different trade-offs between overall inference accuracy and latency. Since the average inference latency is a common requirement for the long-term running
models, an on-demand method for appropriately determining the thresholds is needed. However, throughout the lit-

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks have reached
or even surpassed human accuracy in many machine learning applications. However, this performance superiority is
strongly connected to the over-parameterized deep learning models. With a highly complex model, it is generally too computationally intensive to perform the subsequent inference task on smartphones or other resourceconstrained Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. To address the
rising challenges of enabling efficient inference with deep
neural networks, various techniques have emerged to guarantee the Quality-of-Service (QoS) of latency-sensitive applications, such as quantization (Courbariaux, Bengio, and
David 2015), pruning (Han et al. 2015), knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), and lightweight network architectures (Howard et al. 2017; Cai, Zhu, and Han
2018a).
∗

Hongjia Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9825

