The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Learning of Deterministic Dialogue Structure with
Edge-Enhanced Graph Auto-Encoder
Yajing Sun1,2 , Yong Shan3 , Chengguang Tang4 * , Yue Hu1,2 * ,
Yinpei Dai4 , Jing Yu1,2 , Jian Sun4 , Fei Huang4 , Luo Si4
2

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
{sunyajing, huyue, yujing02 }@iie.ac.cn, shanyong18s@ict.ac.cn
{chengguang.tcg, yinpei.dyp, jian.sun, f.huang, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com
I'm looking for a restaurant
I want to ﬁnd a cheap
I'm looking for a restaurant
Abstract
User
in Manhattan.
restaurant.
in Manhattan.

It is important for task-oriented dialogue systems to discover
the dialogue structure (i.e. the general dialogue flow) from dialogue corpora automatically. Previous work models dialogue
structure by extracting latent states for each utterance first
and then calculating the transition probabilities among states.
These two-stage methods ignore the contextual information
when calculating the probabilities, which makes the transitions between the states ambiguous. This paper proposes
a conversational graph (CG) to represent deterministic dialogue structure where nodes and edges represent the utterance
and context information respectively. An unsupervised EdgeEnhanced Graph Auto-Encoder (EGAE) architecture is designed to model local-contextual and global-structural information for conversational graph learning. Furthermore, a selfsupervised objective is introduced with the response selection
task to guide the unsupervised learning of the dialogue structure. Experimental results on several public datasets demonstrate that the novel model outperforms several alternatives
in aggregating utterances with similar semantics. The effectiveness of the learned dialogue structured is also verified by
more than 5% joint accuracy improvement in the downstream
task of low resource dialogue state tracking.

System OK. Which kind of food do
you like?

User

I would like Italian food.

0.76
System

Do you have any food
preferences?

0.43

Do you have any
requirements for price?

0.18

OK. Which kind of food do
you like?

I want to ﬁnd a cheap
restaurant.

Do you have any food
preferences?

I would like Italian food.

0.29

Which area would you like
to reserve?

(a) Probabilistic transition in VRNN

Do you have any
requirements for price?

Which area would you like
to reserve?

(b) Deterministic transition in Our Model

Figure 1: An example of dialogue structures generated by
VRNN (Shi, Zhao, and Yu 2019) (a) and our model (b). The
solid and dash lines represent different sessions.

logue structure by extracting latent states for each utterance
first and then calculating the transition probabilities among
states. Zhai and Williams (2014) generated topics from conversations and applied Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to
model typical dialogue flows upon states composed of topics. Compared with their statistical methods, Shi, Zhao,
and Yu (2019) utilized variational recurrent neural network
(VRNN) to capture high non-linear dynamics in dialogue
and learn discrete variables for each utterance. These twostage methods focus more on dialogue state representation
while ignoring the fact that modeling the transitions using
probability without considering the context leads to dialogue
transition ambiguous. Figure 1 gives an example of the dialogue structure learned by Shi, Zhao, and Yu (2019).
The green and blue boxes represent different sessions. After the user replies “I would like Italian food”, the transition
to next state depends on the calculated probability in VRNN
(dashed lines). The transition to “Which area would you like
to reserve” is incorrect for the dash session, and the transition to “Do you have any requirements for price?” is incorrect for the solid session. In fact, the dialogue structure
should have capability to decide the next transition determinately in the specific context. It’s clear that the two-stage
method can’t obtain a deterministic transition in a specific
context.
In this paper, we propose joint-learning of state and
transition considering the context information to address

Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue usually follows a typical dialogue
flow, which can be summarized as a dialogue structure. It
not only describes internal logical structures of specific dialogue scenarios, but also facilitates several downstream dialogue tasks such as dialogue state tracking (Black et al.
2010; Dai et al. 2020), dialogue summarization (Murray, Renals, and Carletta 2005; Liu, Seneff, and Zue 2010) and dialogue generation (Chen, Xu, and Xu 2019). Conventional dialogue systems usually rely on hand-crafted dialogue structure which is time-consuming and unable to be quickly
adapted to new scenarios. It is crucial to discover dialogue
structure from existing dialogue corpus automatically.
Recent studies follow an unsupervised manner to discover the dialogue structure from dialogue corpus without labelling efforts. Generally, these methods model dia* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13869

