The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling the Field Value Variations and Field Interactions Simultaneously for
Fraud Detection
Dongbo Xi,1,2,3 Bowen Song,3,∗ Fuzhen Zhuang,1,2, * Yongchun Zhu,1,2,3
Shuai Chen,3 Tianyi Zhang,3 Yuan Qi,3 Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Alipay (Hangzhou) Information & Technology Co., Ltd.
{xidongbo17s, zhuangfuzhen, zhuyongchun18s, heqing}@ict.ac.cn,
{bowen.sbw, shuai.cs, zty113091, yuan.qi}@antfin.com
Abstract

With the explosive growth of e-payment industry, online
transaction fraud has become one of the biggest challenges
for the business. The historical behavior information of users
provides rich information for digging into the users’ fraud
risk. While considerable efforts have been made in this direction, a long-standing challenge is how to effectively exploit
user’s behavioral information and provide explainable prediction results. In fact, the value variations of same field from
different events and the interactions of different fields within
one event have proven to be strong indicators of fraudulent
behaviors. In this paper, we propose the Dual Importanceaware Factorization Machines (DIFM), which exploits the
inter- and intra-event information among users’ behavior sequence from dual perspectives, i.e., field value variations and
field interactions simultaneously for fraud detection. The proposed model is deployed in Alipay’s risk management system, which provides real-time fraud detection service for ecommerce platforms. Experimental results on industrial data
under various scenarios in the platform clearly demonstrate
that our model achieves significant improvements compared
with various state-of-the-art baseline models. Moreover, the
DIFM could also give an insight into the explanation of the
prediction results from dual perspectives.

Sign up

Sign in

2019/1/5
Beijing
Windows
…

2019/1/6
Beijing
Android
…

historical events

Payment

Payment

2019/1/6
Beijing
Android
￥20 …

2019/6/9
New York
IOS
$300 …

￥ $

fraud?

Figure 1: A typical fraud detection task which exploits the
user’s historical operation events information to determine
the fraudulent risk of target payment event.
Langsdorf, and Hepp 1999; Rosset et al. 1999; Baulier
et al. 2000; Stefano and Gisella 2001; Pathak, Vidyarthi, and
Summers 2005) to neural network-based models (Fu et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2017b; Zhang, Zheng, and Min 2018; Jurgovsky et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2019; Xi
et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020) for fraud detection tasks. The
historical behavior events (activities) of users provide rich
information for digging into the users’ fraud risk as shown
in Figure 1. However, due to the limitation of model structures, it is difficult for the above methods to exploit the internal field information thoroughly among events (e.g., the field
value variations among the historical events or field interactions inside each event) or to provide explainable prediction
results, which is foundational key in fraud detection tasks.
In this paper, we propose the Dual Importance-aware
Factorization Machines (DIFM) to more efficiently take advantage of internal field information among events. It could
not only improve the performance of fraud detection but also
provide explainable prediction results. DIFM captures internal field information from dual perspectives: 1) The Field
Value Variations Perspective captures the value variations
of each field between any two events, and the corresponding
Field Importance-aware module perceives the importance
of different field value variations. 2) The Field Interactions Perspective models the interactions between all fields
within each event, and the corresponding Event Importanceaware module perceives the importance of different histor-

Introduction
With the rapid development of e-commerce and e-payment,
the problem of online transaction fraud has become increasingly prominent (Cao et al. 2019). As an international Fintech company, Alipay provides e-payment service for many
e-commerce platforms, on which millions of transactions
occurred each day. A very small portion of fraudulent transactions could easily lead to huge financial loss and introduce
great security risk to our business.
Therefore, detecting fraudulent risk in real-time, has become a key factor in determining the security and success
of e-payment business. Recently, considerable efforts have
shifted from rule-based expert system (Cohen 1995; Brause,
* Corresponding authors: Fuzhen Zhuang and Bowen Song.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14957

