The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dense Events Grounding in Video
Peijun Bao,1 Qian Zheng,2 Yadong Mu1 *
1

Peking University, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
1
{peijunbao, myd}@pku.edu.cn, 2 zhengqian@ntu.edu.sg
2

This paper explores a novel setting of temporal sentence
grounding for the first time, dubbed as dense events grounding. Given an untrimmed video and a paragraph description,
dense events grounding aims to jointly localize temporal moments of multiple events described in the paragraph. Our
main motivating fact is that multiple events to be grounded
in a video are often semantically related and temporally coordinated according to their order appearing in the paragraph.
This fact sheds light on devising more accurate visual grounding model. In this work, we propose Dense Events Propagation Network (DepNet) for this novel task. DepNet first adaptively aggregates temporal and semantic information of dense
events into a compact set through a second-order attention
pooling, then selectively propagates the aggregated information to each single event with soft attention. Based on such
aggregation-and-propagation mechanism, DepNet can effectively exploit both the temporal order and semantic relations
of dense events. We conduct comprehensive experiments on
large-scale datasets ActivityNet Captions and TACoS. For
fair comparisons, our evaluations include both state-of-art
single-event grounding methods and their natural extensions
to the dense-events grounding setting implemented by us. All
experiments clearly show the performance superiority of the
proposed DepNet by significant margins.

..

The ball goes out of bounds. The man
in green picks up the ball. The man
with red shorts serves the ball. The
man serves the ball again. The ball
goes out of bounds again.

Abstract

The ball goes out of bounds.

..

The man in green picks up the ball.
The man with red shorts serves the ball.

time

The ball goes out of bounds again.

..

The man serves the ball again.

Figure 1: Dense Events Grounding in Video. Given a paragraph description, dense events grounding aims to jointly
localize described dense events in untrimmed video.
tion for contextualized description of multiple events. Compared with single-sentence input, a paragraph of multiple
sentences that describe video events in time order is seemingly more natural and powerful (Krishna et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018). Consider the example in Figure 1, people may be interested in a list of events around the
moment “the man with red shorts serves the ball”, and they
use a paragraph consisting of multiple sentences to describe
these events. Furthermore, events like “the man with red
shorts serves the ball.” appear several times in the video, but
people may only be interested in one of them. To avoid ambiguity, they use a paragraph to describe not only the most
interested event but also its contextual events.
To localize dense events in a paragraph, one can simply
apply some single-event grounding model to each individual sentence in the paragraph. However, the temporal order
of dense events occurred in video is often highly correlated
with their locations in the descriptive paragraph, as demonstrated in relevant tasks such as dense captioning (Krishna
et al. 2017; Regneri et al. 2013). Ignoring the temporal clues
in a paragraph tends to lead inferior performance in precisely
finding the temporal boundary of an event. To illustrate it,
for a pair of events in a video we investigate the consistency between the visual grounding results and their tem-

Introduction
Over the last few years, the computer vision community
has witnessed the success of temporal sentence grounding,
which aims to localize temporal moment described by a sentence description in a given video. A list of promising methods (Anne Hendricks et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017; Wang, Ma,
and Jiang 2020; Ghosh et al. 2019; Rodriguez et al. 2020;
Wang, Huang, and Wang 2019a) have been proposed for
temporal sentence grounding. Several recent works (Hendricks et al. 2018; Zhang, Su, and Luo 2019; Liu et al.
2018a; Stroud et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2020) further explore to localize more complicated sentence
containing compositional activity like “the woman takes the
book across the room to read it on the sofa” .
Most existing methods separately ground an individual
event from a video, which we argue is not an optimal op* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

920

