The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Counterfactual NESS Definition of Causation
Sander Beckers
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy – Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich
srekcebrednas@gmail.com

Abstract

related: the BV definition-2 builds on the simpler BV definition by adding temporal considerations.
The first aim of this paper is to show that the BV definition is in fact a formal integration of the influential Necessary Element of a Sufficient Set definition of causation by
(Wright 1985, 1988, 2011) into the more popular counterfactual approach. In particular, the BV definition turns out to
be equivalent to stating that the NESS definition holds in the
actual scenario and that the NESS definition does not hold in
at least one counterfactual scenario. In other words, it combines the NESS approach with a counterfactual differencemaking condition. What makes this a surprising result, is
that the NESS definition belongs to the regularity approach,
which is claimed to stand in opposition to the counterfactual
character of causal models. A side-by-side analysis of both
approaches reveals that this claim is false.
The second aim of this paper is to modify the BV definitions to overcome two problematic features: they fail to
correctly handle standard cases of both early and late preemption, unless one invokes probabilistic and temporal considerations. By looking at the precise relations between all
definitions here considered I propose a weakening of the
difference-making condition that solves this problem, resulting in the Counterfactual NESS definition of causation, or
CNESS for short. This analysis shows the CNESS definition to offer a natural compromise between two important
approaches to causation.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section introduces the formalism of Structural Equations Modeling
that has become widely adopted in the counterfactual approach to causation. Section 3 offers a detailed comparison
of the NESS approach and the most popular counterfactual
approaches, and then goes on to present a formalization of
the NESS definition using structural equations models. Section 4 discusses the three other attempts at formalizing the
NESS definition that have been put forward, and shows each
of them to be incorrect. Finally, the formalized version of
the NESS definition is used in Section 5 to introduce the BV
definition of causation and discusses how it relates to HPstyle definitions, leading the way to the CNESS definition.

In previous work with Joost Vennekens I proposed a definition of actual causation that is based on certain plausible
principles, thereby allowing the debate on causation to shift
away from its heavy focus on examples towards a more systematic analysis. This paper contributes to that analysis in
two ways. First, I show that our definition is in fact a formalization of Wright’s famous NESS definition of causation
combined with a counterfactual difference-making condition.
This means that our definition integrates two highly influential approaches to causation that are claimed to stand in opposition to each other. Second, I modify our definition to offer
a substantial improvement: I weaken the difference-making
condition in such a way that it avoids the problematic analysis
of cases of preemption. The resulting Counterfactual NESS
definition of causation forms a natural compromise between
counterfactual approaches and the NESS approach.

1

Introduction

Causal models have become very popular tools to offer definitions of actual causation, or token causation, in both philosophy and in computer science. Computer scientists (as
well as scientists in general) like them because their interventionist semantics fit naturally with the manner in which
scientists perform and conceptualize experiments. Philosophers like them because they offer a non-reductive semantics of counterfactuals that avoids the many issues facing
a possible-world semantics. It should therefore come as no
surprise that the definitions of causation which are expressed
using these models fall within the broadly counterfactual approach, which includes interventionist approaches.
Two such definitions have been developed recently by
Vennekens and myself (henceforth the BV definition (Beckers and Vennekens 2017) and the BV definition-2 (Beckers
and Vennekens 2018)). The proposed definitions by Beckers
and Vennekens (BV from now on) distinguish themselves
positively from a range of other definitions that are based
on that of (Halpern and Pearl 2005) – HP-style definitions –
by an explicit focus on certain underlying principles that a
definition of causation should satisfy, instead of a focus on
the – potentially endless – debate regarding many examples
and the intuitions they invoke. Both definitions are closely

2

Structural Equation Models

This section reviews the definition of causal models as
understood in the structural modeling tradition started by

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6210

