The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentiable Inductive Logic Programming for Structured Examples
Hikaru Shindo1 , Masaaki Nishino2 , Akihiro Yamamoto1
1

Kyoto University
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
shindo@iip.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, masaaki.nishino.uh@hco.ntt.co.jp, akihiro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
2

Abstract

existing approaches involve the learning of continuous parameters, not discrete structures. Structure learning (Kok
and Domingos 2005), in which logical expressions are obtained explicitly, presents a challenge to neuro-symbolic approaches (De Raedt et al. 2020).
Evans and Grefenstette proposed (Evans and Grefenstette
2018) Differentiable Inductive Logic Programming (∂ILP),
which is a framework for learning logic programs from
given examples in a differentiable manner. Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) is a sound formalization for finding theories from given examples using firstorder logic as its language (Nienhuys-Cheng et al. 1997).
The ∂ILP framework formulates ILP problems as numerical optimization problems that can be solved by gradient
descent. Its differentiability establishes a seamless combination of ILP and neural networks to deal with subsymbolic
and noisy data.
However, previous work has put severe limitations on expressions for solutions. For instance, no function symbols
are allowed, the arity of predicates must be less than 2, the
number of atoms in the clause body must not exceed 2,
and every program must be comprised of pairs of rules for
each predicate. Thus it is unsuitable for complex structured
data, such as sequences or trees, or complex programs that
are comprised of several clauses for a predicate. One main
characteristic of first-order logic is the expressibility and
learnability for structured data with function symbols (Lloyd
2003; Dantsin et al. 2001; Fredouille et al. 2007). We face
three main challenges to deal with complex programs and
structured data: (i) the number of clauses to be considered
increases, (ii) an infinite number of ground atoms can be
generated with function symbols, and (iii) the memory and
computation costs increase quadratically with respect to the
size of the search space. We address these issues by proposing a new differentiable approach to learning logic programs
by combining adaptive symbolic search methods and continuous optimization methods and make the following contributions for each problem:
Clause Search with Refinement We propose an efficient
clause search method for a differentiable ILP solver. We
generate clauses by beam searching and leveraging the generality of clauses and the given examples. We start from
general (strong) clauses and incrementally specify (weaken)
the clauses. We only take clauses that contribute to accu-

The differentiable implementation of logic yields a seamless combination of symbolic reasoning and deep neural networks. Recent research, which has developed a differentiable
framework to learn logic programs from examples, can even
acquire reasonable solutions from noisy datasets. However,
this framework severely limits expressions for solutions, e.g.,
no function symbols are allowed, and the shapes of clauses
are fixed. As a result, the framework cannot deal with structured examples. Therefore we propose a new framework to
learn logic programs from noisy and structured examples,
including the following contributions. First, we propose an
adaptive clause search method by looking through structured
space, which is defined by the generality of the clauses, to
yield an efficient search space for differentiable solvers. Second, we propose for ground atoms an enumeration algorithm,
which determines a necessary and sufficient set of ground
atoms to perform differentiable inference functions. Finally,
we propose a new method to compose logic programs softly,
enabling the system to deal with complex programs consisting of several clauses. Our experiments show that our new
framework can learn logic programs from noisy and structured examples, such as sequences or trees. Our framework
can be scaled to deal with complex programs that consist of
several clauses with function symbols.

Introduction
Integrating symbolic reasoning and numerical computation
is increasingly becoming a vital factor in artificial intelligence and its applications (De Raedt et al. 2020). Due to the
success of deep neural networks (DNNs), one of the main integrated techniques is to combine DNNs with logical reasoning, which is called neuro-symbolic computation (d’Avila
Garcez et al. 2019). The main goal is to establish a unified framework that can make flexible approximations using
DNNs and perform tractable and multi-hop reasoning using
first-order logic.
Although many approaches have been developed for the
integration of logic and DNNs (Rocktäschel and Riedel
2017; Yang, Yang, and Cohen 2017; Šourek et al. 2018;
Manhaeve et al. 2018; Si et al. 2019; Cohen, Yang, and
Mazaitis 2020; Riegel et al. 2020; Marra et al. 2020), most
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5034

