The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Commonsense Knowledge Augmentation for Low-Resource Languages via
Adversarial Learning
Bosung Kim1∗ , Juae Kim2, 3 ∗ , Youngjoong Ko1 , Jungyun Seo2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University
3
AIRS Company, Hyundai Motor Group
{bosung17, yjko}@skku.edu, {juaekim, seojy}@sogang.ac.kr
two entities. The general triple form is <head entity,
relation, tail entity>. For example, the commonsense knowledge of “A bank can keep your money.”
is represented as a triple form of <bank, CapableOf,
keep money>.
ConceptNet supports 304 languages, but data size differences between English and low-resource languages are
stark. In particular, the English vocabulary consists of 1.8M
words, but 217 languages, including Uyghur, Uzbek, and
Sanskrit, have fewer than 10K words. In the case of Korean,
ConceptNet covers 47K words, but there are only 4,561
triples where both entities are Korean. This is not a sufficient data size for commonsense reasoning. However, it is
very hard to construct commonsense knowledge for all lowresource languages as much as the number of English triples
due to construction costs.
One of the typical methods for triple expansions is to
translate English triples as a source side into low-resource
languages as a target side. However, translation suffers
from the ambiguity problem; one word can be translated
into two or more due to polysemes and homonyms. For
example, in Korean, the word “bank” can be translated
as “eun-haeng1 ” which indicates a financial institution that accepts deposits and “duk,” which is the
sloping land along the side of a river. The phrase “keep
money” is translated as “don-eul bogwanhada.”
For a given triple, <bank, CapableOf, keep
money>, the translated Korean triple of <eun-haeng,
CapableOf, don-eul bogwanhada> is valid, but
<duk, CapableOf, don-eul bogwanhada> is
invalid. Therefore, in this paper, we define the knowledge
augmentation as the task of finding reliable triples with high
validity scores among the translated candidates.
Several studies have proposed scoring methods to measure the validity of the translated triples to resolve the ambiguity problem (Feng et al. 2016; Otani et al. 2018; Anwar et al. 2019; Moussallem, Soru, and Ngomo 2019). The
most common constraint in those studies is that the proposed
methods require manually labeled data or handcrafted templates. For this reason, these studies only validated the effectiveness of their methods for a few languages. These meth-

Abstract
Commonsense reasoning is one of the ultimate goals of artificial intelligence research because it simulates the human
thinking process. However, most commonsense reasoning
studies have focused on English because available commonsense knowledge for low-resource languages is scarce due
to high construction costs. Translation is one of the typical methods for augmenting data for low-resource languages;
however, translation entails ambiguity problems, where one
word can be translated into multiple words due to polysemes
and homonyms. Previous studies have suggested methods
to measure the validity of translated multiple triples by using additional metadata and manually labeled data. However,
such handcrafted datasets are not available for many lowresource languages. In this paper, we propose a knowledge
augmentation method using adversarial networks that does
not require any labeled data. Our adversarial networks can
transfer knowledge learned from a resource-rich language to
low-resource languages and thus measure the validity score
of translated triples even without labeled data. We designed
experiments to demonstrate that high-scoring triples obtained by the proposed model can be considered augmented
knowledge. The experimental results show that our proposed
method for a low-resource language, Korean, achieved 93.7%
precision@1 on a manually labeled benchmark. Furthermore,
to verify our model for other low-resource languages, we introduced new test sets for knowledge validation in 16 different languages. Our adversarial model obtains strong results
for all language test sets. We will release the augmented Korean knowledge and test sets for 16 languages.

Introduction
Commonsense knowledge consists of facts known by almost every human. People use this knowledge as a basis
for their thinking systems to understand, infer and communicate with someone. Therefore, commonsense reasoning
is considered the ultimate goal of artificial intelligence because it simulates human thinking. To turn common sense
into a form of knowledge graph that can be understood by
computers, ConceptNet (Liu and Singh 2004) was launched.
ConceptNet involves knowledge as a triple consisting of a
head entity, tail entity, and one relation that connects the
∗

Equal Contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We denote Korean words as a phonetic expression in English
for readability.

6393

