The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tune-In: Training Under Negative Environments with Interference for Attention
Networks Simulating Cocktail Party Effect
Jun Wang1 , Max W. Y. Lam1 , Dan Su1 , Dong Yu 2
1

Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue WA, USA
{joinerwang, maxwylam, dansu, dyu}@tencent.com
2

Abstract
We study the cocktail party problem and propose a novel
attention network called Tune-In, abbreviated for training under negative environments with interference. It firstly learns
two separate spaces of speaker-knowledge and speech-stimuli
based on a shared feature space, where a new block structure
is designed as the building block for all spaces, and then cooperatively solves different tasks. Between the two spaces,
information is cast towards each other via a novel cross- and
dual-attention mechanism, mimicking the bottom-up and topdown processes of a human’s cocktail party effect. It turns
out that substantially discriminative and generalizable speaker
representations can be learnt in severely interfered conditions
via our self-supervised training. The experimental results verify this seeming paradox. The learnt speaker embedding has
superior discriminative power than a standard speaker verification method; meanwhile, Tune-In achieves remarkably
better speech separation performances in terms of SI-SNRi
and SDRi consistently in all test modes, and especially at lower
memory and computational consumption, than state-of-the-art
benchmark systems.

Introduction
The cocktail party effect (Narayan et al. 2009; Evans et al.
2015; Getzmann, Jasny, and Falkenstein 2016; Getzmann
2015) is the phenomenon of the ability of a human brain
to focus one’s auditory attention to “tune in” a single voice
and “tune out” the competing others. Although how humans
solve the cocktail party problem (Cherry 1953) remains unknown, remarkable progress on speech separation (SS) has
been made thanks to recent advances of deep-learning models. Ground-breaking successful models include the highdimensional embedding-based methods, originally proposed
as the deep clustering network (DPCL) (Hershey et al. 2016),
and its extensions such as DANet (Chen, Luo, and Mesgarani
2017) and DENet (Wang et al. 2018). More recently, the
performance has been improved by the time-domain audio
separation networks (TasNet) (Luo and Mesgarani 2018) and
the time convolutional networks (TCNs) based Conv-TasNet
(Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2018; Luo and Mesgarani 2019;
Lam et al. 2020). Until very recently, State-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance record of TCNs have been further advanced on
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13961

several benchmark datasets by the dual-path RNN (DPRNN)
(Luo, Chen, and Yoshioka 2019) and the dual-path gated
RNN (DPGRNN) (Nachmani, Adi, and Wolf 2020).
Modern deep-learning models also evolve rapidly for
speaker identification and verification tasks (Snyder et al.
2018; Yi Liu 2019; Mirco Ravanelli 2018). A separately
trained speaker identification network is adopted in (Nachmani, Adi, and Wolf 2020) to prevent channel swap for SS.
Other emerging studies (Zeghidour and Grangier 2020; Shi
et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Shi, Xu, and Xu 2019; Wang et al.
2019; Shi, Liu, and Han 2020) suggest bridging the speaker
identification and the SS tasks in a unified network. Especially, Wavesplit in (Zeghidour and Grangier 2020) jointly
trains the speaker stacks and the separation stack to outperform DPRNN and DPGRNN. Similar to (Drude, von Neumann, and Haeb-Umbach 2018), it is based on K-means clustering, which results in significantly higher computational
cost (Pariente et al. 2020). According to its reported parameter setting, the estimated model size is approximately 42.5M,
about 18 times larger than ours. To the best of our knowledge,
higher SOTA scores than DPRNN’s were all achieved by
remarkably larger models. For another example, (Nachmani,
Adi, and Wolf 2020) proposed a model of 7.5M parameters,
about 3 times larger than ours; still, our system outperforms
theirs in terms of SI-SNRi (Le Roux et al. 2019) and SDRi
(Shi et al. 2018) on a benchmark dataset. We believe that it is
only meaningful when the scores are compared under a fair
constraint on the model sizes, as what we followed carefully
and convincingly throughout our experiments.
A neurobiology study in (Evans et al. 2015) examines the
modulation of neural activity associated with the interference
properties. It demonstrates that a competing speech is processed predominantly within the same pathway as the target
speech in the left hemisphere but is not treated equivalently
within that stream. Another inspiring research (Getzmann,
Jasny, and Falkenstein 2016) suggests an acceleration in attention switching and context updating when people have
semantically cued changes (e.g., a word) in target speaker
settings than uncued changes. These recent neurobiology
studies (Evans et al. 2015; Getzmann, Jasny, and Falkenstein
2016; Getzmann 2015; Narayan et al. 2009) together suggest
that, when listening with interference, the neural processes
are more sophisticated than the simplified presumption in the
previous attention-based separation (Shi et al. 2018).

