The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Discourse Analysis for Generating Personalized Feedback in Intelligent
Tutor Systems
Matt Grenander,1 Robert Belfer,2 Ekaterina Kochmar,2,3 Iulian V. Serban,2
François St-Hilaire,2 Jackie C. K. Cheung4,5
1

University of Edinburgh
2
Korbit Technologies
3
University of Cambridge
4
McGill University
5
Mila
matt.grenander@ed.ac.uk, {robert, ekaterina, iulian, francois}@korbit.ai, jcheung@cs.mcgill.ca
System: You are given a dataset of images of wildlife in
Africa. You are tasked with building a model which can
identify animals in the images. Is this a regression or classification problem? Try to explain why.
Student: I think it’s a classification task.
System: ‘it’s a classification task’ is correct. Try supplying a reason for this idea.
Student: It’s a classification task, because each animal is
a discrete class.
System: That’s correct!

Abstract
We explore creating automated, personalized feedback in
an intelligent tutoring system (ITS). Our goal is to pinpoint correct and incorrect concepts in student answers in
order to achieve better student learning gains. Although automatic methods for providing personalized feedback exist,
they do not explicitly inform students about which concepts
in their answers are correct or incorrect. Our approach involves decomposing students answers using neural discourse
segmentation and classification techniques. This decomposition yields a relational graph over all discourse units covered by the reference solutions and student answers. We use
this inferred relational graph structure and a neural classifier
to match student answers with reference solutions and generate personalized feedback. Although the process is completely automated and data-driven, the personalized feedback
generated is highly contextual, domain-aware and effectively
targets each student’s misconceptions and knowledge gaps.
We test our method in a dialogue-based ITS and demonstrate
that our approach results in high-quality feedback and significantly improved student learning gains.

Table 1: An example interaction with the Korbit ITS, with
our feedback mechanism in the red box. The feedback system identifies which concepts are correct and incorrect in the
student answer attempt, then provides guidance to fix their
answer. In this case, the student has forgotten to justify their
answer and is prompted for the missing concept.
In this paper, we present a novel, automated feedback system based on deep learning approaches to discourse. Deep
learning-based discourse models have produced successful
results in recent years across several discourse tasks, such
as segmentation (Wang, Li, and Yang 2018), classification
(Dai and Huang 2018), parsing (Mabona et al. 2019) and
tagging (Dasigi et al. 2017). These successes encourage us
to explore applying neural discourse techniques in an ITS.
Our model takes advantage of established discourse
frameworks such as Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and
Thompson 1988) to break apart student solution attempts
and analyze individual concepts within the student answer.
After the analysis, the system personalizes its feedback to
the student attempt and directly indicates which parts are
correct, incorrect or missing. An example interaction with
the feedback system is shown in Table .
Our method extends beyond simply applying existing discourse analysis techniques, since these methods cannot be
used on their own for providing feedback in ITSs. In particular, we introduce a new structure called an exercise graph.
We construct this graph using discourse components from
reference solutions and previous student solution attempts

Introduction
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) are AI-powered computer
systems that provide personalized tutoring without human
teachers (Nye, Graesser, and Hu 2014). ITSs have been
shown to be more effective teachers than other computer tutoring methods and conventional classroom learning (Kulik
and Fletcher 2016). Dialogue-based ITSs use natural language conversations and are particularly appealing as they
closely simulate natural human-teacher interactions.
Developing dialogue-based ITSs face many challenges
due to the difficulty of parsing and responding to natural
text. One critical issue is their ability to provide effective automated feedback. Conventional tutoring typically includes
direct guidance from a human teacher, and we would like to
incorporate this teaching aspect into ITSs. In fact, previous
work has shown that personalized feedback can considerably improve student learning outcomes in an ITS (Kochmar
et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15534

