The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Adversarial Robustness via Probabilistically Compact Loss with Logit
Constraints
Xin Li* ,Xiangrui Li* , Deng Pan* , Dongxiao Zhu†
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202
{xiangruili, xinlee, pan.deng, dzhu}@wayne.edu

Abstract

improving models’ adversarial robustness is critical to build
trustworthy Artificial Intelligence systems to prevent unforeseen hazardous situations.
To improve CNN’s adversarial robustness, many methods have been proposed. One strategy is to modify the inputs during inference time via noise removal (Meng and
Chen 2017), super-resolution (Mustafa et al. 2019b) and
JPEG compression (Das et al. 2017) to diminish the impact
of perturbation, but can be easily evaded by strong attacks
(Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). Another type of strategy (Tramèr et al. 2017; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio
2016; Sinha, Namkoong, and Duchi 2017; Zhang et al. 2019;
Shafahi et al. 2019) is based on adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) that can effectively increase the model’s robustness by utilizing crafted adversarial examples as data augmentation. However, it is computationally expensive and compromise model classification performance on clean images (Tsipras et al. 2018). Other than
modifying data, some techniques directly enhance model robustness by altering network architectures (Taghanaki et al.
2019; Mustafa et al. 2019a), or constructing ensembles of
networks (Tramèr et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2019b). However,
they require additional processes and are not flexible to be
adopted to other models.
While previous works have successfully improved CNN
robustness against adversarial attacks, the connection of
CNN predictions between adversarial and clean samples is
not known. In this paper, we investigate this connection in
the typical setting when CNNs are trained with the crossentropy (CE) loss. When an adversarial sample successfully
fools the trained CNN with small perturbations, it tends to be
misclassified into the first several most probable false classes
when predicting the original clean sample, i.e., the classes
with larger predicted probabilities. This consistent pattern of
CNN’s predictive behaviors is intuitive and potentially implies a deeper connection between the CNN feature learning
and its adversarial robustness.
The tendency of misclassifying adversarial samples enlightens us that the adversarial robustness of CNN can be
benefited from the training that focuses on the differentiation
between sample’s true class and its first several most probable false classes. Hence, in this paper, we propose a novel
training objective, termed as Probabilistically Compact (PC)
loss with logit constraints, which can improve adversarial

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved stateof-the-art performance on various tasks in computer vision.
However, recent studies demonstrate that these models are
vulnerable to carefully crafted adversarial samples and suffer
from a significant performance drop when predicting them.
Many methods have been proposed to improve adversarial
robustness (e.g., adversarial training and new loss functions
to learn adversarially robust feature representations). Here
we offer a unique insight into the predictive behavior of
CNNs that they tend to misclassify adversarial samples into
the most probable false classes. This inspires us to propose
a new Probabilistically Compact (PC) loss with logit constraints which can be used as a drop-in replacement for crossentropy (CE) loss to improve CNN’s adversarial robustness.
Specifically, PC loss enlarges the probability gaps between
true class and false classes meanwhile the logit constraints
prevent the gaps from being melted by a small perturbation.
We extensively compare our method with the state-of-the-art
using large scale datasets under both white-box and blackbox attacks to demonstrate its effectiveness. The source codes
are available at https://github.com/xinli0928/PC-LC.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved significant progress for various challenging tasks in computer
vision, including image classification (Li et al. 2020), semantic segmentation (He et al. 2017), and image generation (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Despite their success, CNNs
are highly vulnerable to adversarial samples (Szegedy et al.
2013). With imperceptibly small perturbation added to a
clean image, adversarial samples can drastically change
models’ prediction, resulting in a significant drop in CNN’s
predictive performance. This phenomenon poses a serious
threat to security-critical applications of deep learning, such
as autonomous driving (Al-Qizwini et al. 2017), surveillance
system (Sreenu and Durai 2019), and medical imaging system (Li and Zhu 2020). Furthermore, studies have shown
that adversarial robustness is also a key property to obtain
human interpretation in computer vision and other application fields (Noack et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2020). Therefore,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8482

