The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improved Consistency Regularization for GANs
Zhengli Zhao,1,2 Sameer Singh,1 Honglak Lee,2 Zizhao Zhang,2 Augustus Odena,2 Han Zhang2
1

University of California, Irvine
2
Google Research
zhengliz@uci.edu, zhanghan@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has increased the performance of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) by enforcing a consistency cost
on the discriminator. We improve on this technique in several ways. We first show that consistency regularization can
introduce artifacts into the GAN samples and explain how
to fix this issue. We then propose several modifications to
the consistency regularization procedure designed to improve
its performance. We carry out extensive experiments quantifying the benefit of our improvements. For unconditional
image synthesis on CIFAR-10 and CelebA, our modifications
yield the best known FID scores on various GAN architectures.
For conditional image synthesis on CIFAR-10, we improve
the state-of-the-art FID score from 11.48 to 9.21. Finally, on
ImageNet-2012, we apply our technique to the original BigGAN model and improve the FID from 6.66 to 5.38, which is
the best score at that model size.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al.
2014) are a powerful class of deep generative models, but are
known for training difficulties (Salimans et al. 2016). Many
approaches have been introduced to improve GAN performance (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al.
2017; Miyato et al. 2018a; Sinha et al. 2020). Recent work
(Wei et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020) suggests that the performance of generative models can be improved by introducing
consistency regularization techniques – which are popular in
the semi-supervised learning literature (Oliver et al. 2018). In
particular, Zhang et al. (2020) show that Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) augmented
with consistency regularization can achieve state-of-the-art
image-synthesis results. In CR-GAN, real images and their
corresponding augmented counterparts are fed into the discriminator. The discriminator is then encouraged — via an
auxiliary loss term — to produce similar outputs for an image
and its corresponding augmentation.
Though the consistency regularization in CR-GAN is effective, the augmentations are only applied to the real images
and not to generated samples, making the whole procedure
somewhat imbalanced. In particular, the generator can learn
these artificial augmentation features and introduce them into
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

generated samples as undesirable artifacts.1 Further, by regularizing only the discriminator, and by only using augmentations in image space, the regularizations in Wei et al. (2018)
and Zhang et al. (2020) do not act directly on the generator.
By constraining the mapping from the prior to the generated
samples, we can achieve further performance gains on top of
those yielded by performing consistency regularization on
the discriminator in the first place.
In this work, we introduce Improved Consistency Regularization (ICR) which applies forms of consistency regularization to the generated images, the latent vector space,
and the generator. First, we address the lack of regularization
on the generated samples by introducing balanced consistency regularization (bCR), where a consistency term on
the discriminator is applied to both real images and samples coming from the generator. Second, we introduce latent
consistency regularization (zCR), which incorporates regularization terms modulating the sensitivity of both the generator
and discriminator changes in the prior. In particular, given
augmented/perturbed latent vectors, we show that it is helpful
to encourage the generator to be sensitive to the perturbations
and the discriminator to be insensitive. We combine bCR and
zCR, and call it Improved Consistency Regularization (ICR).
ICR yields state-of-the-art image synthesis results. For
unconditional image synthesis on CIFAR-10 and CelebA, our
method yields the best known FID scores on various GAN
architectures. For conditional image synthesis on CIFAR-10,
we improve the state-of-the-art FID score from 11.48 to 9.21.
Finally, on ImageNet-2012, we apply our technique to the
original BigGAN (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019)
model and improve the FID from 6.66 to 5.38, which is the
best score at that model size.

2

For semi-supervised or unsupervised learning, consistency
regularization techniques are effective and have become
broadly used recently (Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and Tasdizen
2016; Laine and Aila 2016; Zhai et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2019;
Berthelot et al. 2019). The intuition behind these techniques
is to encode into model training some prior knowledge: that
the model should produce consistent predictions given input instances and their semantics-preserving augmentations.
1

11033

Improved Consistency Regularization

We show examples in Fig. 5 and discuss further in Section 4.1.

