The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ROSITA: Refined BERT cOmpreSsion with InTegrAted techniques
Yuanxin Liu1,2 Zheng Lin1 * Fengcheng Yuan3†
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Meituan Inc.
{liuyuanxin,linzheng}@iie.ac.cn, yuanfengcheng@meituan.com

Abstract

can be pruned without affecting the performance on downstream tasks. TinyBERT (Jiao et al. 2020) and MobileBERT
(Sun et al. 2020) use knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015) to transfer the power of BERT into
compact models. They compress BERT to approximately
15M parameters with only a marginal drop in performance.
Recently, further progress has been made for both the pruning (Sanh, Wolf, and Rush 2020) and KD methods (Li et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020).

Pre-trained language models of the BERT family have defined the state-of-the-arts in a wide range of NLP tasks.
However, the performance of BERT-based models is mainly
driven by the enormous amount of parameters, which hinders
their application to resource-limited scenarios. Faced with
this problem, recent studies have been attempting to compress BERT into a small-scale model. However, most previous work primarily focuses on a single kind of compression
technique, and few attention has been paid to the combination of different methods. When BERT is compressed with
integrated techniques, a critical question is how to design the
entire compression framework to obtain the optimal performance. In response to this question, we integrate three kinds
of compression methods (weight pruning, low-rank factorization and knowledge distillation (KD)) and explore a range of
designs concerning model architecture, KD strategy, pruning
frequency and learning rate schedule. We find that a careful choice of the designs is crucial to the performance of
the compressed model. Based on the empirical findings, our
best compressed model, dubbed Refined BERT cOmpreSsion
with InTegrAted techniques (ROSITA), is 7.5× smaller than
BERT while maintains 98.5% of the performance on five
tasks of the GLUE benchmark, outperforming the previous
BERT compression methods with similar parameter budget.
The code is available at https://github.com/llyx97/Rosita.

In spite of these successes, most existing BERT compression studies primarily focus on a single technique, while few
attention has been paid to the system designs when multiple
compression techniques work as a whole. Since some compression techniques are naturally complementary to each
other, a combination of them can integrate their respective
advantages. Therefore, it is important to study BERT compression in the context of integrated techniques.
When multiple techniques are integrated to compress
BERT, a critical question is how to design the entire compression framework. To this end, we combine weight pruning, low-rank factorization and KD, and investigate a range
of design choices that concern model architecture, KD strategy, pruning frequency and learning rate schedule. Through
extensive experiments we find that: 1) Different dimensions
of the BERT structure (e.g., layers, neurons and attention
heads) should be compressed at different ratios. Generally,
a deep architecture produces better results than a wide architecture under the same overall compression ratio. 2) It is
beneficial to divide KD into multiple stages. In each stage,
we fully train the student and let it serve as the teacher in the
next stage. In this way, we can provide better supervision
for the students in the subsequent stages and alleviate the
negative effect caused by the structural discrepancy between
teacher and student. 3) In integrated BERT compression, the
pruning frequency (i.e. the speed at which BERT is compressed) has a double-edged effect on the final performance
and the learning rate schedule plays a role in this process.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) have become a popular research topic in recent years, enjoying great breakthroughs in a wide range of NLP tasks. One of the major driving forces behind the PLMs is the huge number of
model parameters. Typical PLMs like BERT (Devlin et al.
2019), GPT (Radford et al. 2018) and XLNet (Yang et al.
2019) have hundreds of millions of parameters. However,
the overparamterized PLMs also suffer from expensive computational overhead, making it intractable to deploy them to
resource-limited scenarios.
In response to the above problem, efforts have been
paid to reduce the size of PLMs. Gordon, Duh, and Andrews (2020) showed that 30 − 40% of BERT’s weights

Based on these findings, we show that BERT compression with integrated techniques can achieve promising results. Given the same parameter budget, our best compressed
model outperforms the state-of-the-art BERT compression
methods on five tasks of the GLUE benchmark.

* Zheng Lin is the corresponding author of this paper.
†

Contribution made at IIE, CAS.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8715

