The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Scalable Reasoning and Learning Approach
for Neural-Symbolic Stream Fusion
Danh Le-Phuoc,1 Thomas Eiter, 2 Anh Le-Tuan 1
1

2

Open Distributed Systems, Technical University Berlin, Germany
Institute of Logic and Computation, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien), Austria
danh.lephuoc@tu-berlin.de, eiter@kr.tuwien.ac.at, anh.letuan@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

weights. In a nutshell, our approach is realized in an integrated framework, Semantic Stream Reasoning (SSR), that
(a) can emulate common computer vision algorithms fusing
multiple deep learning models via imperative programming;
(b) allows one to translate heuristics, multiple hypotheses
(Kim et al. 2015; Rezatofighi et al. 2015) and domain-specific
observations (Ciaparrone et al. 2019) into rules; and (c) can
fit rules with/learn them from labeled data as weight rules
(clustering to if-then-else or classification logics with DNN
models).

Driven by deep neural networks (DNN), the recent development
of computer vision makes vision sensors such as stereo cameras
and Lidars ubiquitous in autonomous cars, robotics and traffic
monitoring. However, a traditional DNN-based data fusion
pipeline like object tracking has to hard-wire an engineered
set of DNN models to a fixed processing logic, which makes it
difficult to infuse new models to that pipeline. To overcome
this, we propose a novel neural-symbolic stream reasoning approach realised by semantic stream reasoning programs which
specify DNN-based data fusion pipelines via logic rules with
learnable probabilistic degrees as weights. The reasoning task
over this program is governed by a novel incremental reasoning
algorithm, which lends itself also as a core building block for
a scalable and parallel algorithm to learn the weights for such
program. Extensive experiments with our first prototype on
multi-object tracking benchmarks for autonomous driving and
traffic monitoring show that our flexible approach can considerably improve both accuracy and processing throughput
compared to the DNN-based counterparts.

Contributions and Novelty
The novelty and advance of our approach consists in the
interwoven combination of the following key contributions.
Integrated framework The first contribution of the paper
is a general integrated framework for semantic stream fusion
and reasoning on top that supports automated learning. The
framework is realized with a sophisticated prototype implementation. A first benefit of having these capabilities in one
framework is that the user is relieved from specifying rule
weights as required in other approaches such as the one in
(Suchan, Bhatt, and Varadarajan 2019). In particular, (Suchan,
Bhatt, and Varadarajan 2019) requires users to have a good
knowledge on ASP (Answer Set Programming) weak constraint rules and to know the right weights to specify the
association hypotheses corresponding to the application logic.
In contrast, our framework can learn such weights from labeled data automatically. This seems to be easy to achieve by
simply using an off-the-self ASP-based learning algorithm
like in (Lee and Wang 2018). However, aligning the semantics
of programs in (Suchan, Bhatt, and Varadarajan 2019) with
the one in (Lee and Wang 2018) is not trivial, and scalability is
an issue. Our unified, clear formalization of a data model, reasoning program and learning task for neural-symbolic stream
data reveals temporal and modularity properties allowing us
to design more efficient and scalable algorithms.

Introduction
The recent development of computer vision (CV) driven by
deep neural networks (DNN) makes visual sensors such as
stereo cameras and Lidars ubiquitous in autonomous cars,
robotics and traffic monitoring. In particular, many DNN
models for object detection (Liu et al. 2019) and tracking (Ciaparrone et al. 2019) are available. For instance, many object
tracking algorithms use the Hungarian method to heuristically
optimise the likelihood of accurately inferring object locations and trajectories. To achieve an expected performance
(accuracy and throughput), one has to manually test several
association hypotheses and tune many parameters to find the
right set of DNN models and wiring logics for a specific
application or dataset. In most of the cases, it is difficult to
explain the outputs of the final algorithms and to reuse some
association hypotheses that might deliver better results for
another parameter configuration or processing pipeline.
To overcome this, we propose a novel neural-symbolic
stream reasoning approach to specify general DNN-based
data fusion pipelines in a semantic stream reasoning program
via logic rules that have learnable probabilistic degrees as

Incremental reasoning algorithm The second contribution
is a novel incremental reasoning algorithm that addresses
the shortcomings of previous works (Suchan, Bhatt, and
Varadarajan 2019; Aditya, Yang, and Baral 2019) which are
similar to ours in incorporating common sense and domain

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4996

