The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Layer Networks for Ensemble Precipitation Forecasts Postprocessing
Fengyang Xu, Guanbin Li, Yunfei Du* , Zhiguang Chen, Yutong Lu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
xufy9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn {yunfei.du, zhiguang.chen, yutong.lu}@nscc-gz.cn

Abstract

atmosphere(Flowerdew 2012), knowing that different forecasts are likely to pick up different nuances in the predicted
weather, which formed ensemble forecasts. A single-model
ensemble forecast is a collection of forecasts from an NWP
model using slightly different initial conditions and model
variants(Gneiting 2014), which is based on the implicit assumption that errors result primarily from uncertainties in
the initial conditions. A multi-model ensemble forecast is
a collection of outputs from different existing NWP models, which avoids the problem of systematic bias that occurs when a single model is used and in addition to having
negligible cost. The average of either kind of ensemble usually has better skill, consistency, quality, and economic value
than other single-valued NWP forecasts of similar grid resolution(Richardson 2000; Wandishin et al. 2001; Zhu et al.
2002; Kalnay 2003), except for rare events(Hamill et al.
2000).
However, the increasing number of ensemble members
still cannot reduce errors caused by insufficient detailed atmospheric observations. Therefore, the calibration of NWP
ensemble forecasts, as part of the precipitation postprocessing, has become a necessary and crucial step for the daily
operational runs at numerical weather prediction centers. In
fact, forecasters with rich practical experience at the bench
routinely use multiple models for guidance, and this calibration is simply a formalization of this process.
In this paper, we use the real observation data of historical
time to calibrate the ensemble forecasts (see Figure 1) and
merge them to a “best estimate”. A significant challenge in
our study is that precipitation forms aloft, which is strongly

The postprocessing method of ensemble forecasts is usually
used to find a more precise estimate of future precipitation,
because dynamic meteorology models have limitations in fitting fine-grained atmospheric processes and precipitation is
driven more often by smaller-scale processes, while ensemble forecasts can hit this precipitation at times. However, the
pattern of these hits cannot be easily summarized. The existing objective postprocessing methods tend to extend the rain
area or false alarm the precipitation intensity categories. In
this work, we introduce a multi-layer structure to simultaneously reduce the bias in forecast ensembles output by meteorology models and merge them to a quality deterministic
(single-valued) forecast using cross-grid information, which
differs quite dramatically from the previous statistical postprocessing method. The multi-layer network is designed to
model the spatial distribution of future precipitation of different intensity categories (IC-MLNet). We provide a comparison of IC-MLNet to simple average as well as another two
state-of-the-art ensemble quantitative precipitation forecasts
(QPFs) postprocessing approaches over both single-model
and multi-model ensemble forecasts datasets from TIGGE.
The experimental results indicate that our model achieves superior performance over the compared baselines in precipitation amount prediction as well as precipitation intensities
categories prediction.

Introduction
Weather forecasting is usually solved by numerical weather
prediction (NWP) models. Among all the atmospheric quantities predicted by the NWP model, precipitation is one of
the most difficult to predict accurately. Errors in QPFs may
arise due to errors in the observations and the forecasting
model itself. Detailed knowledge of atmospheric moisture
and vertical motion fields is essential for predicting the location and amount of precipitation, but these are difficult
to observe accurately. The NWP models cannot adequately
represent the cloud dynamics and microphysical processes
involved in precipitation generation(Ebert 2001).
To compensate for shortcomings in model physics,
weather centers have run a variety of carefully designed
NWP models to generate forecasts of future states of the
* The author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: An ensemble forecast with 50 members (input) and
the corresponding observation (in red block, ground truth)

14966

