The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revisiting Consistent Hashing with Bounded Loads
John Chen, Benjamin Coleman, Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, USA
{johnchen, Ben.Coleman, anshumali} @rice.edu

Abstract

et al. 2005; Pagh and Rodler 2009, 2001, 2004) are inefficient because they reassign all objects when a bin is added
or removed.
Consistent Hashing (CH) (Karger et al. 1997) is a widely
adopted solution to this problem. In CH, objects and bins are
both hashed to random locations on the unit circle. Objects
are initially assigned to the closest bin in the clockwise direction (see Figure 1 and Section ). CH is efficient for the
dynamic setting because the addition or removal of a bin
only affects the objects in the closest clockwise bin.
In practice, we cannot assign an unlimited number of objects to a bin without crashing the corresponding server.
In (Mirrokni, Thorup, and Zadimoghaddam 2018), the authors address
the problem
by setting a maximum bin capac

ity C = (1 + ) nk , where n objects are assigned to k bins,
each with a capacity parameter  ≥ 0. Their hashing scheme
ensures assigns new objects to the closest non-full bin in the
clockwise direction and ensures that the maximum load is
bounded by C. There are also many heuristics, such as timebased expiry and eviction recommended in ASP.net (Anderson, Luo, and Smith 2019), Microsoft (Buck et al. 2017),
Mozilla (Bengtsson et al. 2020), which are used to complement the implementation of Consistent Hashing in practice.
In addition, upon on server failure the cache is usually wiped
and is empty when the server comes back online.
Applications: Dynamic load assignment is a fundamental problem with a variety of concrete, practical applications. CH is a core part of Discord’s 250 million user chat
app (Vishnevskiy 2017), Amazon’s Dynamo storage system
(DeCandia et al. 2007) and Apache Cassandra, a distributed
database system (Lakshman and Malik 2010). Google cloud
and Vimeo video streaming both use CH with load bounds
(Mirrokni and Zadimoghaddam 2017; Rodland 2016). Dynamic load assignment is also a critical topic in ML, particularly in distributed systems, data caching and data parallel
for accelerated ML (Pinto et al. 2018; Mayer and Jacobsen
2020; Ovalle, Ramos-Pollan, and González 2014; Lessley
and Childs 2020; Xing et al. 2016), which is directly related to energy efficiency and other areas. CH is also used
for information retrieval (Grossman and Frieder 2004), distributed databases (Ozsu and Valduriez 2011; Carlson 2013;
Nishtala et al. 2013), and cloud systems (Karger et al. 1999;
Nasri and Sharifi 2009; Wang and Loguinov 2007). Furthermore, CH resolves similar load-balancing issues that arise in

Dynamic load balancing lies at the heart of distributed
caching. Here, the goal is to assign objects (load) to servers
(computing nodes) in a way that provides load balancing
while at the same time dynamically adjusts to the addition
or removal of servers. Load balancing is critical to many areas including cloud systems, distributed databases, and distributed and data-parallel machine learning. A popular and
widely adopted solution to dynamic load balancing is the
two-decade-old Consistent Hashing (CH). Recently, an elegant extension was provided to account for server bounds.
In this paper, we identify that existing methodologies for CH
and its variants suffer from cascaded overflow, leading to poor
load balancing. This cascading effect leads to decreasing performance of the hashing procedure with increasing load. To
overcome the cascading effect, we propose a simple solution
to CH based on recent advances in fast minwise hashing. We
show, both theoretically and empirically, that our proposed
solution is significantly superior for load balancing and is optimal in many senses. On the AOL search dataset and Indiana
University Clicks dataset with real user activity, our proposed
solution reduces cache misses by several magnitudes.

Introduction
Load balancing is critical to achieve low latency with few
server failures and cache misses in networks and web services (Karger et al. 1997; Stoica et al. 2001, 2003). The goal
of load balancing is to assign objects (or clients) to servers
(computing nodes referred to as bins) so that each bin has
roughly the same number of objects. The load of a bin is defined as the number of objects in the bin. In practice, objects
arrive and leave dynamically due to spikes in popularity or
other events. Bins may also be added and removed due to
server failures. The holy grail of distributed caching is to
balance load evenly with minimal cache misses and server
failures. Poor load balancing directly increases latency and
cost of the system (Chawla et al. 2011).
Caching servers often use hashing to implement dynamic
load assignment. Traditional hashing techniques, which assign objects to bins according to fixed or pre-sampled hash
codes, are inappropriate because bins are frequently added
or removed. Standard hashing and Cuckoo hashing (Fotakis
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3976

