The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ESCAPED: Efficient Secure and Private Dot Product Framework for
Kernel-based Machine Learning Algorithms with Applications in Healthcare
Ali Burak Ünal 1 , Mete Akgün 1,2 , Nico Pfeifer 1,3
1

Methods in Medical Informatics, Department of Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Germany
2
Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany
3
Statistical Learning in Computational Biology, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
{uenal,akguen,pfeifer}@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de
Abstract

such information could otherwise be inferred. Several studies
(Lunshof et al. 2008; Azencott 2018; Bonomi, Huang, and
Ohno-Machado 2020) discussed various privacy issues that
occurred in studies using medical data from different aspects.

Training sophisticated machine learning models usually requires many training samples. Especially in healthcare settings
these samples can be very expensive, meaning that one institution alone usually does not have enough. Merging privacysensitive data from different sources is usually restricted by
data security and data protection measures. This can lead to
approaches that reduce data quality by putting noise onto the
variables (e.g., in -differential privacy) or omitting certain
values (e.g., for k-anonymity). Other measures based on cryptographic methods can lead to very time-consuming computations, which is especially problematic for larger multi-omics
data. We address this problem by introducing ESCAPED,
which stands for Efficient SeCure And PrivatE Dot product
framework. ESCAPED enables the computation of the dot
product of vectors from multiple sources on a third-party,
which later trains kernel-based machine learning algorithms,
while neither sacrificing privacy nor adding noise. We have
evaluated our framework on drug resistance prediction for
HIV-infected people and multi-omics dimensionality reduction and clustering problems in precision medicine. In terms
of execution time, our framework significantly outperforms
the best-fitting existing approaches without sacrificing the performance of the algorithm. Even though we only present the
benefit for kernel-based algorithms, our framework can open
up new research opportunities for further machine learning
models that require the dot product of vectors from multiple
sources.

One class of machine learning methods that usually requires gathering the whole data is kernel-based learning methods. To train such a model privately, one of the architectural
models in the literature is the distributed model, where each
party in the computation has its own data, and the desired kernel matrix contains the whole data that all parties have. Note
that throughout this paper, we refer to a source having data
or an entity performing a computation as “party”. Vaidya,
Yu, and Jiang (2008) proposed an algorithm that uses such a
model to compute the gram matrix of the whole data belonging to the parties in the computation and train a support vector
machine (SVM) privately afterwards. The disadvantage of
the proposed algorithm is that it focuses only on binary vectors because it utilizes private set intersection to compute
the dot product. In addition to the distributed model, there
is also the outsourced model where the data is outsourced
after encryption and then these encrypted data are used to
train a kernel-based machine learning method. Liu, Ng, and
Zhang (2015) proposed an approach to use an SVM on the
encrypted outsourced data. Due to the nature of encryption,
the proposed approach is very time consuming. Zhang et al.
(2017) introduced a key-switching (Zhou and Wornell 2014)
based secure dot product calculation method. The basic idea
is to change the key of the dot product of the vectors, which
is originally the combination of the keys utilized to encrypt
these vectors, to the key of the server. Ünal, Akgün, and
Pfeifer (2019) demonstrated the inefficiency of this method
and proposed a randomized encoding based framework to
compute the dot product of the vectors of two parties in a
third-party, which later trains an SVM model. However, the
framework is not extendable to more than two data sources,
since this would compromise the data due to the nature of
elementwise multiplication of the vectors, which they use
to compute the dot product. Furthermore, for the same reason, their approach has a potential privacy leakage for binary
encoded data, even for the case with two data sources. We
will show that our approach outperforms their framework in
such a scenario. Moreover, the randomized encoding itself
(Applebaum, Ishai, and Kushilevitz 2006a) is independently
applicable to our scenario. The authors claimed that any func-

Introduction
In the era of data, the same kind of data is produced by
multiple sources. Utilizing this variety of sources is one of
the easiest ways to satisfy the hunger of machine learning
algorithms for data. Often, one can train a machine learning
model on the pooled data from different sources to get high
accuracy on a particular prediction task. However, gathering
data can compromise the sensitive information of the samples
in the data. Ayday et al. (2015) showed that genomic data can
be used to infer the physical and mental health condition of
a patient with the support of information about the patient’s
lifestyle and environment. Furthermore, Kale, Ayday, and
Tastan (2017) introduced a method to keep kinship private
in an anonymously released genomic dataset, from which
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9988

