The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bringing UMAP Closer to the Speed of Light with GPU Acceleration
Corey J. Nolet1,2 , Victor Lafargue1 , Edward Raﬀ2,3 , Thejaswi Nanditale1 , Tim Oates2 ,
John Zedlewski1 , Joshua Patterson1
1 Nvidia
2 University of Maryland Baltimore County
3 Booz Allen Hamilton

Abstract

(Carter et al. 2019). This combination of features and quality
of results has made UMAP a widely used and popular tool.
The wide array of applications and use of UMAP makes
it desirable to produce faster versions of the algorithm. This
is compounded by an increasing demand for exploratory and
interactive visualization (Carter et al. 2019; Pezzotti et al.
2018; Chatzimparmpas, Martins, and Kerren 2020; Obermayer et al. 2020), that necesitates a lower latency in results.
GPUs are a strong candidate for acheiving faster implementation by trading per-core clock speeds for signﬁcantly more
cores, provided that they can be utilized eﬀectively in parallel
computation. A direct conversion of UMAP to the GPU already exists in the GPUMAP (Pachev and Lupo 2017) project
but, due to technical details, is not always faithful in reproducing the same quality of results. In this work, we show that
applying a few general techniques can produce a version that
is both faster and faithful in its results.
This paper contributes three components to the growing
ecosystem (Okuta et al. 2017; Raschka, Patterson, and Nolet
2020; Johnson, Douze, and Jégou 2019; Paszke et al. 2019)
of GPU-accelerated tools for data science in Python. First,
we contribute a near drop-in replacement of the UMAPlearn Python library, which has been GPU-accelerated endto-end in CUDA/C++. The speedup of this new implementation is evaluated against the current state-of-the-art, including UMAP-learn on the CPU and an existing GPU port of
UMAP. Second, we contribute a GPU-accelerated near-dropin replacement of the trustworthiness score, which is often
used to evaluate the extent to which manifold learning algorithms preserve local neighborhood structure. Finally, we
contribute a distributed version of UMAP and provide empirical evidence of its eﬀectiveness.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows.
We will discuss related work in Section 2, with a brief
review of UMAP in Section 3. Our approach to implementing UMAP for the GPU is detailed in Section 4,
with code available as part of the RAPIDS cuML library
(https://github.com/rapidsai/cuml). Our results show up to
100× speedups in Section 5, followed by our conclusions in
Section 6.

The Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP) algorithm has become widely popular for its ease of
use, quality of results, and support for exploratory, unsupervised, supervised, and semi-supervised learning. While many
algorithms can be ported to a GPU in a simple and direct
fashion, such eﬀorts have resulted in ineﬃcient and inaccurate versions of UMAP. We show a number of techniques that
can be used to make a faster and more faithful GPU version of
UMAP, and obtain speedups of up to 100x in practice. Many
of these design choices/lessons are general purpose and may
inform the conversion of other graph and manifold learning
algorithms to use GPUs. Our implementation has been made
publicly available as part of the open source RAPIDS cuML
library (https://github.com/rapidsai/cuml).

1

Introduction

Like other manifold learning algorithms, the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection algorithm
(UMAP) (McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018) relies upon
the manifold hypothesis (Feﬀerman, Mitter, and Narayanan
2016) to preserve local neighborhood structure by modeling
high-dimensional data in a low-dimensional space. This is
in contrast to linear dimensionality reduction techniques like
PCA, which aim only to preserve global Euclidean structure
(He et al. 2005). UMAP produces low-dimensional embeddings that are useful for both visual analytics and downstream
machine learning tasks. Unlike other manifold learning algorithms, such as IsoMap (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000), Locally Linear Embeddings (LLE) (Roweis and
Saul 2000), Laplacian Eigenmaps (Belkin and Niyogi 2002),
and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embeddings (T-SNE)
(Maaten and Hinton 2008), UMAP has native support for supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised metric learning. Since its introduction in 2018, it has found use in exploratory data analysis applications (Ordun, Purushotham,
and Raﬀ 2020; Wander et al. 2020; Obermayer et al. 2020;
Oden 2020), as well as bioinformatics, cancer research (Andor et al. 2018), single-cell genomics(Travaglini et al. 2019;
Becht et al. 2018; Clara-Parabricks 2020), and the interpretation of highly non-linear models like deep neural networks

2

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

AI and ML research often strikes a balance in scientiﬁc
exploration and software engineering, with well-engineered
418

