The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Truncate Ranked Lists for Information Retrieval
Chen Wu, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Yanyan Lan, and Xueqi Cheng
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wuchen17z, zhangruqing, guojiafeng, fanyixing, lanyanyan, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

additional returned document would lead to some monetary
penalty.
Without loss of generality, there are two typical truncation
requirements in practical IR applications. Firstly, the truncation needs to reach a balance between the precision and
recall of the returned results, leading to the optimization of
a mixed metric of the two, e.g., the F1 score. In other words,
the system needs to automatically determine the cut-off position by predicting the best F1 score. Secondly, in some scenario, recall is very critical which needs to pay more attention. For example, in patent search, users often require the
returned list of patents to reach a target recall as they want
to find whether there exist conflict patents. In such scenario,
the system needs to determine the cut-off position with respect to the target metric such as F1, under some minimal
recall constraint.
The present state-of-the-art method for ranked list truncation is BiCut (Lien, Cohen, and Croft 2019). BiCut takes this
problem as a sequential decision process and adopts a Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) (Graves
2013) model to solve it. Specifically, given a ranked list
of documents with relevance score and document statistical information, BiCut attempts to predict Continue or EOL
(end of the list) at each rank position, and decides to cut
the ranked list at the first occurrence of EOL. The model is
learned towards some pre-defined loss as a proxy objective
of some user-defined metric.
However, the BiCut model suffers from the following two
drawbacks. Firstly, as the truncation problem is formulated
as a sequential decision process, the final cut-off decision is
thus made upon a sequence of local decisions which may
not be optimal from a global view. Secondly, although the
work claims to optimize arbitrary user-defined metrics, the
actually relationship between the defined loss function and
the true F1 metric is not clear.
To address these problems, in this paper, we propose
a global decision based truncation model named AttnCut,
which directly optimizes user-defined objectives for the
ranked list truncation. Specifically, we take the successful
transformer architecture to capture the long-range dependency within the ranked list. In this way, the truncation decision could be made in a global way using the self-attention
mechanism. Meanwhile, we employ the reward augmented
maximum likelihood (RAML) (Norouzi et al. 2016) for the

Ranked list truncation is of critical importance in a variety of
professional information retrieval applications such as patent
search or legal search. The goal is to dynamically determine
the number of returned documents according to some userdefined objectives, in order to reach a balance between the
overall utility of the results and user efforts. Existing methods formulate this task as a sequential decision problem and
take some pre-defined loss as a proxy objective, which suffers from the limitation of local decision and non-direct optimization. In this work, we propose a global decision based
truncation model named AttnCut, which directly optimizes
user-defined objectives for the ranked list truncation. Specifically, we take the successful transformer architecture to capture the global dependency within the ranked list for truncation decision, and employ the reward augmented maximum
likelihood (RAML) for direct optimization. We consider two
types of user-defined objectives which are of practical usage.
One is the widely adopted metric such as F1 which acts as a
balanced objective, and the other is the best F1 under some
minimal recall constraint which represents a typical objective
in professional search. Empirical results over the Robust04
and MQ2007 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach as compared with the state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Existing information retrieval (IR) systems mainly focus on
relevance ranking which returns a ranked list of documents
according to their relevance scores. Recently, ranked list
truncation has attracted much attention in the IR community (Arampatzis, Kamps, and Robertson 2009; Lien, Cohen, and Croft 2019; Culpepper, Diaz, and Smucker 2018).
Generally, the task aims to dynamically determine the number of returned documents according to some user-defined
objectives, so as to reach a balance between the overall relevance or utility of the returned results and user efforts. Such
truncation task is of critical importance in a variety of professional IR applications where user efforts could not be neglected. For example, in patent search (Lupu, Hanbury et al.
2013), it is time-consuming for a user to investigate each returned patent. In paid legal search (Tomlinson et al. 2007),
litigation support professionals are paid by hour, thus each
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4453

