The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Graph Representation Learning for Video Dialog
via Multi-Modal Shuffled Transformers
Shijie Geng1 , Peng Gao2 , Moitreya Chatterjee3 , Chiori Hori4 ,
Jonathan Le Roux4 , Yongfeng Zhang1 , Hongsheng Li2 , Anoop Cherian4
1

Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
4
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, USA
2

Input Video and its Audio

Abstract

Dialog History
Q1: “Is the machine vacuum cleaner?”
A1: “Yes, the machine on the floor is a
vacuum.”

Given an input video, its associated audio, and a brief caption, the audio-visual scene aware dialog (AVSD) task requires an agent to indulge in a question-answer dialog with a
human about the audio-visual content. This task thus poses a
challenging multi-modal representation learning and reasoning scenario, advancements into which could influence several human-machine interaction applications. To solve this
task, we introduce a semantics-controlled multi-modal shuffled Transformer reasoning framework, consisting of a sequence of Transformer modules, each taking a modality as
input and producing representations conditioned on the input question. Our proposed Transformer variant uses a shuffling scheme on their multi-head outputs, demonstrating better regularization. To encode fine-grained visual information, we present a novel dynamic scene graph representation
learning pipeline that consists of an intra-frame reasoning
layer producing spatio-semantic graph representations for every frame, and an inter-frame aggregation module capturing
temporal cues. Our entire pipeline is trained end-to-end. We
present experiments on the benchmark AVSD dataset, both
on answer generation and selection tasks. Our results demonstrate state-of-the-art performances on all evaluation metrics.

…

…

Question
Q2: “What room do you think it is? “
A2: __UNDISCLOSED__

Caption: “A man walks into the room carrying a folder,
that he throws on a pile of clothes. He then picks up a
vacuum, turns it on and vacuums. Then, shuts it off,
and sneezes four times.”

Our generated answer
“It looks like a laundry room”

Figure 1: A result from our proposed model for the AVSD
task. Given a video clip, its caption, dialog history, and a
question, the AVSD generation task aims to generate the answer in natural language form.
et al. 2019; Hori et al. 2019) – that generalizes (i), (ii), and
(iii) – in which the agent needs to produce a natural answer to a question about a given audio-visual clip, in a conversation setting or select the correct answer from a set of
candidates. The AVSD task1 emulates a real-world humanmachine conversation setting that is potentially useful in a
variety of practical applications, such as building virtual assistants (Deruyttere et al. 2019) or in human-robot interactions (Thomason et al. 2019). See Figure 1 for an illustration
of this task.
The generality of the AVSD task, however, poses a challenging multi-modal representation learning and reasoning
problem. Specifically, some of the input modalities to this
task may offer complementary information (such as video
and audio), while a few others may be independent (audio and captions), or even conflict with each other, e.g.,
the provided text (captions/dialogs) may include details
from human experience that are absent in the video (e.g.,
“I think...”), or may include abstract responses (“happy”,
“bored”, etc.) that may be subjective. Thus, the main quest
in this task is to represent these modalities such that inference on them is efficient and effective. Previous approaches to this problem used holistic video features produced by a generic 3D convolutional neural network (Carreira and Zisserman 2017), and either focused on extend-

Introduction
The success of deep learning in producing effective solutions to several fundamental problems in computer vision, natural language processing, and speech/audio understanding has provided an impetus to explore more complex multi-modal problems at the intersections of these domains, attracting wide interest recently (Zhu et al. 2020).
A few notable ones include: (i) visual question answering
(VQA) (Antol et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2003), the goal of
which is to build an agent that can generate correct answers to free-form questions about visual content, (ii) audio/visual captioning (Hori et al. 2017; Venugopalan et al.
2015; Xu et al. 2015; Drossos, Lipping, and Virtanen 2019),
in which the agent needs to generate a sentence in natural
language describing the audio/visual content, (iii) visual dialog (Das et al. 2017), in which the agent needs to engage
in a natural conversation with a human about a static image,
and (iv) audio-visual scene-aware dialog (AVSD) (Alamri
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1415

https://video-dialog.com/

