The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sequential End-to-end Network for Efficient Person Search
Zhengjia Li1,2 , Duoqian Miao1,2 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Ministry of Education, Shanghai 201804, China
zjli1997@tongji.edu.cn, dqmiao@tongji.edu.cn

End-to-end

Abstract

Det

Person search aims at jointly solving Person Detection and
Person Re-identification (re-ID). Existing works have designed end-to-end networks based on Faster R-CNN. However, due to the parallel structure of Faster R-CNN, the extracted features come from the low-quality proposals generated by the Region Proposal Network, rather than the detected
high-quality bounding boxes. Person search is a fine-grained
task and such inferior features will significantly reduce re-ID
performance. To address this issue, we propose a Sequential
End-to-end Network (SeqNet) to extract superior features. In
SeqNet, detection and re-ID are considered as a progressive
process and tackled with two sub-networks sequentially. In
addition, we design a robust Context Bipartite Graph Matching (CBGM) algorithm to effectively employ context information as an important complementary cue for person matching. Extensive experiments on two widely used person search
benchmarks, CUHK-SYSU and PRW, have shown that our
method achieves state-of-the-art results. Also, our model runs
at 11.5 fps on a single GPU and can be integrated into the existing end-to-end framework easily.

Re-ID

Two-stage

Ours

Re-ID

Re-ID
Det

Det

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of three methods for person search.
(a). Existing end-to-end framework. (b). Existing two-stage
framework. (c). Ours.

independent models (two-stage methods) or jointly with a
multi-task model (end-to-end methods).
For end-to-end methods (Xiao et al. 2017, 2019; Munjal
et al. 2019), they design a multi-task framework based on
Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015). A Region Proposal Network (RPN) is built to generate region proposals, which
are then fed into the subsequent parallel detection and reID branches. However, these features extracted by the network come from low-quality proposals rather than detected
accurate BBoxes. Although these inferior features have little impact on the coarse-grained classification task, they will
significantly reduce the performance of the fine-grained reID task. This problem is caused by the parallel structure of
Faster R-CNN. Because detection and re-ID are processed
at the same time, the accurate BBoxes are not available before extracting re-ID features. For two-stage methods, there
is no such problem, because detection and re-ID are tackled
sequentially with two separate models. However, they are
time-consuming and resource-consuming.
Motivated by the above observations, we propose a Sequential End-to-end Network (SeqNet) illustrated in Figure
1 (c) to extract high-quality features. Specifically, detection
and re-ID share the stem representations, but solved with
two head networks sequentially. Compared with baseline,

Introduction
Pedestrian detection (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015;
Ren et al. 2015) aims at detecting the bounding boxes
(BBoxes) of all people in the image. Person re-identification
(re-ID) (Yang et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019;
Fu et al. 2019; Hao et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020) is used to
match the interested person with hand-cropped person images. Although these two fields are widely studied in recent
years, they can not be directly applied to real-world applications due to their limited functionality. To close the gap,
Xu et al. introduce person search task which aims at locating a target person in the scene image (Xu et al. 2014). Person search can be seen as a combination of pedestrian detection and person re-ID. It has broad application prospects
in video surveillance, finding lost children, and self-service
supermarket, etc.
As illustrated in Figure 1, existing works divide the task
into generating BBoxes of all people in the image and person
re-ID. They either tackle the problem separately with two
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2011

