The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Rethinking Object Detection in Retail Stores
Yuanqiang Cai1,2∗ , Longyin Wen3∗ , Libo Zhang1,2† , Dawei Du4 , Weiqiang Wang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, ISCAS, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Bytedance Inc., Mountain View, USA
4
University at Albany, SUNY, USA

Abstract

groups of instances of the same categories. For example, as
shown in Fig. 1(g), it is extremely difficult to annotate the stacked dinner plates even by a well-trained annotator. Meanwhile, it is almost impossible for object detectors to detect
all stacked dinner plates accurately, even for the state-of-theart detectors1 . Thus, it is necessary to rethink the definition
of object detection in such scenarios.
Inspired by the definitions of object detection (Dalal and
Triggs 2005; Zhang et al. 2018) and crowd counting (Lempitsky and Zisserman 2010; Zhang et al. 2016), we propose a
new task, i.e., simultaneously object localization and counting, abbreviated as Locount, which requires algorithms to
localize groups of objects of interest with the number of instances. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1(g) and (h), if some
object instances are severely occluded each other or belonging to the same commodity, we use the minimum enclosing box with a predicted instance number to indicate this
group of instances. To the best of our knowledge, there does
not exist a dataset or benchmark attempt to solve this issue
in the retail scenarios. That is, object detection and crowd
counting problems are considered individually by their own
evaluation protocols.
To solve the above issues, we collect a large-scale object localization and counting dataset at 28 different stores
and apartments, which consists of 50, 394 images with the
JPEG image resolution of 1920×1080 pixels. More than 1.9
million object instances in 140 categories (including Jacket,
Shoes, Oven, etc.) are annotated. To facilitate data usage, we
divide the dataset into two subsets, i.e., training and testing sets, including 34, 022 images for training and 16, 372
images for testing. Meanwhile, to fairly evaluate the performance of algorithms in the Locount task, we design a new evaluation protocol inspired by conventional object detection
and counting protocols (Lin et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2016).
It can penalize algorithms for missing object instances, for
duplicate detections of one instance, for false positive detections, and for false counting numbers of detections.
Moreover, we present a cascaded localization and count-

The conventional standard for object detection uses a bounding box to represent each individual object instance. However, it is not practical in the industry-relevant applications in
the context of warehouses due to severe occlusions among
groups of instances of the same categories. In this paper, we
propose a new task, i.e., simultaneously object localization
and counting, abbreviated as Locount, which requires algorithms to localize groups of objects of interest with the number of instances. However, there does not exist a dataset or
benchmark designed for such a task. To this end, we collect a large-scale object localization and counting dataset with
rich annotations in retail stores, which consists of 50, 394
images with more than 1.9 million object instances in 140
categories. Together with this dataset, we provide a new evaluation protocol and divide the training and testing subsets
to fairly evaluate the performance of algorithms for Locount,
developing a new benchmark for the Locount task. Moreover,
we present a cascaded localization and counting network as a
strong baseline, which gradually classifies and regresses the
bounding boxes of objects with the predicted numbers of instances enclosed in the bounding boxes, trained in an end-toend manner. Extensive experiments are conducted on the proposed dataset to demonstrate its significance and the analysis
is provided to indicate future directions. Dataset is available
at https://isrc.iscas.ac.cn/gitlab/research/locount-dataset.

Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental tasks in
the computer vision community, which aims to answer the
question: “where are the instances of the particular object classes?”. It is extremely useful in the retail scenarios,
such as identifying commodity on the shelves to provide review or price information, and the navigation in supermarkets, to promote the sales. The conventional standard uses
a bounding box to represent object instance. However, it is
not achievable in the industry-relevant applications in the
context of warehouses due to the severe occlusions among
∗
Both authors contributed equally to this work. This work was
done when Longyin Wen worked at JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, USA.
†
Corresponding author: Libo Zhang(libo@iscas.ac.cn).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

Most of the state-of-the-art object detectors use non-maximal
suppression (NMS) to post-process object proposals to produce
final detections. Specifically, it filters the proposals based on
intersection-over-union (IoU) between proposals and then most of
the stacked dinner plates may fail to be detected.

947

