The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DirectQE: Direct Pretraining for Machine Translation Quality Estimation
Qu Cui1 , Shujian Huang1 , Jiahuan Li1 , Xiang Geng1 ,
Zaixiang Zheng1 , Guoping Huang2 , Jiajun Chen1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{cuiq, lijh, gx, zhengzx}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn, donkeyhuang@tencent.com

Abstract

Source

Machine Translation Quality Estimation (QE) is a task of predicting the quality of machine translations without relying on
any reference. Recently, the predictor-estimator framework
trains the predictor as a feature extractor, which leverages the
extra parallel corpora without QE labels, achieving promising QE performance. However, we argue that there are gaps
between the predictor and the estimator in both data quality and training objectives, which preclude QE models from
benefiting from a large number of parallel corpora more directly. We propose a novel framework called DirectQE that
provides a direct pretraining for QE tasks. In DirectQE, a generator is trained to produce pseudo data that is closer to the
real QE data, and a detector is pretrained on these data with
novel objectives that are akin to the QE task. Experiments on
widely used benchmarks show that DirectQE outperforms existing methods, without using any pretraining models such as
BERT. We also give extensive analyses showing how fixing
the two gaps contributes to our improvements.

Translation
HTER

subsequently , each method calls the
superclass version of itself .
anschließend wird in jeder Methode
die übergeordnete Superclass-Version
von selbst aufgerufen .
0.2727

Table 1: An example of QE. Word-level QE assigns labels
to each token/word. For example, some tokens are tagged as
‘BAD’ (marked underline), and the rest are tagged as ‘OK’.
Sentence-level QE labels the whole sentence with a single
quality score, representing the effort to correct the translation manually.

be trained on the amount-limited real QE data to make quality estimations, based on features (Fan et al. 2018) provided
by the predictor1 .
However, we suggest that the ability of the estimator is
limited due to the limited amount of labeled data. On the
other hand, there are two major gaps between the predictor
and the estimator, which may hinder the transfer of bilingual knowledge. Firstly, the predictor is trained on the welltranslated parallel data for MT. In contrast, the estimator
aims to work for the QE task, which deals with imperfect
translations from MT systems as the input. The differences
in data quality may lead to a degradation of QE performance (Shimodaira 2000; Weiss, Khoshgoftaar, and Wang
2016).
Secondly, the predictor is trained with the objective to
make token predictions, but the estimator is trained to do
QE tasks, which discriminate different translation qualities.
The features used to predict tokens may not be suitable to
judge the translation qualities. Moreover, during the training
of the predictor on parallel data, there is no direct supervision from QE tasks. Hence, it is hard for the predictor to
learn QE-related features that the estimator can directly exploit.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called DirectQE that provides a direct pretraining for QE tasks. In
DirectQE, a proposed generator is first trained on parallel
data and then be used to produce a large amount of pseudo

Introduction
Evaluating the results of Machine Translation (MT) usually
requires human translations as references, which are expensive to obtain (Papineni et al. 2002; Denkowski and Lavie
2014). Quality Estimation (QE) aims to directly predict the
quality of translations without relying on any reference. An
example is shown in Table 1.
After those methods relying on hand-crafted features (Kozlova, Shmatova, and Frolov 2016; Sagemo and Stymne
2016), neural QE approaches show promising achievements
(Chen et al. 2017; Shah et al. 2016; Abdelsalam, Bojar, and
El-Beltagy 2016). Because labeled QE data is hard to obtain
and often limited in size, it is natural to transfer bilingual
knowledge from parallel data of the MT tasks (Kepler et al.
2019). One well-known framework for this knowledge transfer is the predictor-estimator framework (Kim, Lee, and Na
2017).
In the predictor-estimator framework, a predictor is
trained on parallel data to extract bilingual features. The
training objective is to predict one target token given the
source sentence and the rest tokens in the reference (Kepler et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2019). Then, an estimator will
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12719

The predictor could also be finetuned on the QE data.

