The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Classifying Sequences of Extreme Length with Constant Memory
Applied to Malware Detection
Edward Raff, 1,2,3 William Fleshman, 4 Richard Zak, 1,2,3
Hyrum S. Anderson, 5 Bobby Filar, 6 Mark McLean 1

1

Laboratory for Physical Sciences, 2 Booz Allen Hamilton, 3 University of Maryland, Baltimore County
4
U.S. Army, 5 Microsoft, 6 Elastic
{edraff, rzak, mrmclea}@lps.umd.edu, {raff edward, zak richard}@bah.com, {raff.edward, richard.zak}@umbc.edu,
william.c.fleshman.mil@mail.mil, hyruma@microsoft.com, robert.filar@elastic.co
Abstract

should be extracted. To quantify the cost of such efforts, a
single program can take weeks for experts with decades of
experience to reverse engineer (Votipka et al. 2019), so the
ability to build models that perform their own feature extraction and construction can save an enormous amount of time
if successful.
Toward this goal, we follow the approach of MalConv,
which proposed to tackle the problem of malware detection
as a time series classification problem (Raff et al. 2018). For
an input file x of T bytes in length, a neural network must
learn to produce an output label y ∈ {Benign, Malicious}.
The MalConv architecture was relatively small (≈ 1 million
parameters) but represented a meaningful malware detector
by performing convolutions over raw byte inputs. Additionally, the work identified a number of challenges with this task.
In particular, their approach would process up to 2 MB of
a file—equivalent to a time series prediction problem with
T = 2, 000, 000 steps. The next longest time series task we
are aware of is only on the order of ≤ 16, 000 steps (van den
Oord et al. 2016). Due to the extreme length of raw byte inputs, the MalConv solution required an NVIDIA DGX-1 with
128 GB of GPU memory to train over one month of compute
time. This has made MalConv difficult to replicate, while
simultaneously neglecting the fact that 2 MB is relatively
small with respect to the distribution of observed executable
file sizes, where the tails can reach in excess of 100 MB.
In this work, we produce a solution to the high memory
cost to train MalConv, making the memory use invariant to
the length of the input — allowing us to train on data points
in excess of 200,000,000 time steps in length using a single
GPU. This reduces the memory used to train MalConv by
a factor of 116× while simultaneously providing an up to
25.8× speedup, reducing the compute requirements from a
DGX-1 down to a free Google Colab instance. Our approach
leverages the sparse gradients of temporal max pooling to cap
the memory requirement during training on long inputs. By
significantly reducing the runtime and memory constraints of
MalConv, we are able to explore more advanced architectures
for the task of time series classification. In particular, we
develop a new global channel gating (GCG) that allows us to
enhance MalConv to learn interactions of features across the
entire input space. GCG can be implemented in only 7 lines
of Python, making it easy to implement while improving the

Recent works within machine learning have been tackling inputs of ever-increasing size, with cybersecurity presenting sequence classification problems of particularly extreme lengths.
In the case of Windows executable malware detection, inputs
may exceed 100 MB, which corresponds to a time series with
T = 100, 000, 000 steps. To date, the closest approach to
handling such a task is MalConv, a convolutional neural network capable of processing up to T = 2, 000, 000 steps. The
O(T ) memory of CNNs has prevented further application of
CNNs to malware. In this work, we develop a new approach
to temporal max pooling that makes the required memory invariant to the sequence length T . This makes MalConv 116×
more memory efficient, and up to 25.8× faster to train on its
original dataset, while removing the input length restrictions
to MalConv. We re-invest these gains into improving the MalConv architecture by developing a new Global Channel Gating
design, giving us an attention mechanism capable of learning
feature interactions across 100 million time steps in an efficient manner, a capability lacked by the original MalConv
CNN. Our implementation can be found at https://github.com/
NeuromorphicComputationResearchProgram/MalConv2

1

Introduction

Cybersecurity has received increased attention from machine
learning practitioners and researchers due to the number of
challenges that exist within the space. Industry datasets are
routinely measured in petabytes (Spafford 2014), have noisy
labels, are both structured and unstructured, suffer from continuous concept drift (Kantchelian et al. 2013), and adversarial attacks have been well motivated as a daily occurrence
for decades (Rajab et al. 2011). In this work we are interested in the task of static malware detection, where using the
on-disk byte representation, one wishes to predict if a new
executable program is benign or malicious. Current industry
models rely heavily on domain knowledge feature extraction,
which is time consuming and expensive, and requires intimate knowledge of Windows and low-level assembly and
software design. Because malware authors adapt, this feature
engineering is a continuous processes, which can require
reverse engineering effort to determine what new features
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9386

