The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Persistence of Anti-vaccine Sentiment in Social Networks Through Strategic
Interactions
A S M Ahsan-Ul Haque1,2 , Mugdha Thakur1 , Matthew Bielskas1, 2 , Achla Marathe1,3 , Anil
Vullikanti1,2
1

Biocomplexity Institute, University of Virginia
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
3
Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia
ah3wj@virginia.edu, mat3kk@virginia.edu, mb6xn@virginia.edu, achla@virginia.edu, vsakumar@virginia.edu
2

Abstract

2020). There is a certain dis-utility an individual gets by not
conforming to their social contacts; on the other hand, the
individual gets a utility by conforming to its social contacts.
This phenomenon can be viewed as a coordination games,
which has been very well studied (Ramazi, Riehl, and Cao
2016; Bramoullé and Kranton 2015; Apt, Simon, and Wojtczak 2015; Vanelli et al. 2019; Apt, Simon, and Wojtczak
2019; Jackson and Zenou 2015; Adam, Dahleh, and Ozdaglar
2012). In its basic form, the utility of a node in a coordination
game is a function of the number of neighbors having the
same state as the node.
In this paper, we extend the framework of coordination
games and incorporate vaccination decisions— this requires
considering two important components, namely, the benefit
a node derives from vaccination, and the benefit of herd immunity that all individuals obtain, if a large enough fraction
of the population is vaccinated. Studying epidemic decisions
from a game-theoretical perspective is not new, e.g. (Bhattacharyya and Ferrari 2017; Shim et al. 2012; Bauch and Earn
2004; Bauch and Bhattacharyya 2012; Aspnes, Chang, and
Yampolskiy 2006; V.S. Anil Kumar et al. 2010). However,
prior work has either ignored the heterogeneity of human
contacts (Bhattacharyya and Ferrari 2017; Shim et al. 2012;
Bauch and Earn 2004; Bauch and Bhattacharyya 2012), or
the peer effects in vaccine decisions (Aspnes, Chang, and
Yampolskiy 2006; V.S. Anil Kumar et al. 2010). In this paper,
we study the role of peer effects on the persistence of antivaccine clusters in social contact networks. Our contributions
are summarized below.
• Game theoretic approach. We use a non-cooperative
game theoretic approach for studying persistence of antivaccine sentiment. We introduce the VACC S EN G AME,
which extends the framework of coordination games, and
incorporates the role of conformity on vaccine sentiment,
along with the benefit of vaccination and herd immunity.
• Structure and complexity of Nash equilibria (NE). We
use NE as the solution concept in such games, and characterize their structure. We show that NE are closely related
to the notion of strong communities (Flake et al. 2002). We
also show a connection between NE and the dynamics of
bootstrap percolation (Ackerman, Ben-Zwi, and Wolfovitz
2010; Feige and Kogan 2019), and use it to find the “worst
NE”, i.e, the one with the largest number of anti-vaccine

Vaccination is the primary intervention for controlling the
spread of infectious diseases. A certain level of vaccination
rate (referred to as “herd immunity”) is needed for this intervention to be effective. However, there are concerns that
herd immunity might not be achieved due to an increasing
level of hesitancy and opposition to vaccines. One of the primary reasons for this is the cost of non-conformance with
one’s peers. We use the framework of network coordination
games to study the persistence of anti-vaccine sentiment in a
population. We extend it to incorporate the opposing forces
of the pressure of conforming to peers, herd-immunity and
vaccination benefits. We study the structure of the equilibria
in such games, and the characteristics of unvaccinated nodes.
We also study Stackelberg strategies to reduce the number of
nodes with anti-vaccine sentiment. Finally, we evaluate our
results on different kinds of real world social networks.

Introduction
Vaccination is one of the safest methods to control highly
contagious childhood diseases, such as measles and smallpox; it is also expected to be one of the primary interventions
in controlling the COVID-19 pandemic. The anti-vaccine
movement was already becoming an issue for measles in
many parts of the US, e.g., in California (Lieu et al. 2015)
and Minnesota (Cadena et al. 2019), leading to a concern
that the immunization rate may fall below the threshold for
herd immunity (Fine 1993; Fine, Eames, and Heymann 2011).
This problem has been exacerbated in the COVID-19 pandemic, with some surveys reporting that over 40% of the
US population might not take the vaccine, when it becomes
available (Cornwall 2020). This poses a significant challenge
in the efforts to eliminate the spread of COVID-19.
There are a number of reasons for the fall in immunization
rates, but the chief ones are concerns about their possible sideeffects, parents’ own religious and philosophical beliefs, and
misperceptions about the risks (SP 2004; Atwell et al. 2013).
It has been observed that peer effects have a significant role in
the spread of anti-vaccine sentiment— individuals with such
sentiment are in communities with similar sentiment (Poland
and Jacobson 2001; Velásquez et al. 2020; Johnson et al.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4812

