The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scheduled Sampling in Vision-Language Pretraining
with Decoupled Encoder-Decoder Network
Yehao Li 1 , Yingwei Pan 1 , Ting Yao 1 , Jingwen Chen 2 , Tao Mei 1
1

JD AI Research, Beijing, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{yehaoli.sysu, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc, chenjingwen.sysu}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com
2

Abstract

not be directly applied to VL generation task as the lack of a
decoder for language modeling. Nevertheless, how to learn
a pre-trainable encoder-decoder over large-scale VL benchmarks that can be fine-tuned on both VL understanding and
generation downstream tasks is a seldom explored territory.
In this work, we target for pretraining a universal encoderdecoder structure, that facilitates both VL understanding
and generation downstream tasks. This direction has recently been studied in Unified VLP (Zhou et al. 2020) by
using a single-stream BERT-based encoder-decoder with a
joint pretraining of VL understanding proxy task (MLM:
masked language modeling) and generation proxy task
(MSG: masked sentence generation). Nevertheless, the design of single-stream structure processes both modality inputs via the same transformer blocks, leaving the inherent
different peculiarity of each modality and each VL proxy
task not fully exploited. That severely limits the generalization of pre-trained encoder-decoder across different kinds of
VL downstream tasks (as observed in (Zhou et al. 2020) that
joint pre-training with MLM & MSG is less effective than
separate pre-training with MLM/MSG on each downstream
task). Instead, this paper considers a two-stream decoupled
design of encoder-decoder, aiming to exploit the mutual relationship between different modalities/VL proxy tasks for
enhancing the robustness on VL downstream tasks. Our design, the Two-stream Decoupled Encoder-decoder Network
(TDEN), consists of two encoders to process each modality
inputs, together with the decoupled cross-modal encoder and
decoder for each kind of proxy task. In particular, the shared
object/sentence encoder independently learns the representations of each modality via intra-interaction, which offers a
fertile ground for multi-modal reasoning that supports both
VL understanding and generation. Moreover, during pretraining, MLM makes the predictions of masked word/visual
tokens in a single shot based on unrestricted message passing between two modalities, while MSG requires the autoregressive reconstruction of input sentence and solely triggers the visual-to-textual message passing. In view of such
fundamental differences in between, we involve two decoupled cross-modal encoder and decoder that separately perform each kind of proxy task in a multi-task fashion.
In the meantime, we notice that several VL proxy tasks,
e.g., MLM and masked object classification (MOC), have
become a default choice for VL pretraining, which replace

Despite having impressive vision-language (VL) pretraining
with BERT-based encoder for VL understanding, the pretraining of a universal encoder-decoder for both VL understanding and generation remains challenging. The difficulty originates from the inherently different peculiarities of the two
disciplines, e.g., VL understanding tasks capitalize on the
unrestricted message passing across modalities, while generation tasks only employ visual-to-textual message passing. In this paper, we start with a two-stream decoupled design of encoder-decoder structure, in which two decoupled
cross-modal encoder and decoder are involved to separately
perform each type of proxy tasks, for simultaneous VL understanding and generation pretraining. Moreover, for VL
pretraining, the dominant way is to replace some input visual/word tokens with mask tokens and enforce the multimodal encoder/decoder to reconstruct the original tokens, but
no mask token is involved when fine-tuning on downstream
tasks. As an alternative, we propose a primary scheduled sampling strategy that elegantly mitigates such discrepancy via
pretraining encoder-decoder in a two-pass manner. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the compelling generalizability of
our pretrained encoder-decoder by fine-tuning on four VL understanding and generation downstream tasks. Source code is
available at https://github.com/YehLi/TDEN.

Introduction
Vision and language are two fundamental capabilities of human intelligence. The interactions in between support the
series of uniquely human capacity, such as visual-language
(VL) understanding (e.g., visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2018)), and VL generation (e.g., image captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015; Pan et al.
2020b; Li et al. 2019c; Yao et al. 2017a) and video captioning (Chen et al. 2019a; Li et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2016; Pan
et al. 2016, 2017)). Inspired by recent development of natural language pretraining (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)),
there has been a steady momentum of breakthroughs that
push the limits of VL tasks via VL pretraining. Most of existing VL pretraining techniques (e.g., ViLBERT (Lu et al.
2019), LXMERT (Tan and Bansal 2019), VL-BERT (Su
et al. 2019)) focus on learning a universal multi-modal encoder for VL understanding downstream tasks, which can
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8518

