The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Non-asymptotic Convergence of Adam-type Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
under Markovian Sampling
Huaqing Xiong,1 * Tengyu Xu,1∗ Yingbin Liang,1 Wei Zhang23†
1

2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University
Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{xiong.309, xu.3260, liang.889}@osu.edu; zhangw3@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract

PG (Sutton et al. 2000) is to parameterize the policy and optimize a target accumulated reward function by (stochastic)
gradient descent. The asymptotic and non-asymptotic convergence have been characterized for PG in various scenarios, which will be further discussed in Related Work.
For the second class of value function based algorithms,
temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton 1988) is a fundamental algorithm which has motivated more advanced algorithms such as Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992),
SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan 1994), etc. TD (Sutton
1988) typically parameterizes the value function of an unknown policy and iteratively finds the true value function
or its estimator by following the (projected) Bellman operation, which is also analogous to a stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) update. The theoretic analysis has been established
for TD in various scenarios, which will be discussed in Related Work.
Despite extensive exploration, all the existing theoretical
studies of PG and TD have focused on SGD-type updates
without adaption on the stepsize. In practice, however, the
adaptive momentum estimation (Adam) method (Kingma
and Ba 2015) has been commonly used in RL (Bello et al.
2017; Stooke and Abbeel 2018). There is so far no theoretic guarantee established to show that RL algorithms that
incorporate the Adam-type updates have provable convergence. The goal of this paper is to theoretically characterize the convergence rate of the Adam-type PG and TD algorithms. Such a study requires new technical tools to analyze the Adam-type algorithms under Markovian sampling.
The analysis does not follow easily from the existing studies of Adam-type algorithms in optimization, which usually
assume independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling. It does not follow from the existing studies of SGDtype RL algorithms because of the unique complication of
adaptive momentum update coupled to the bias errors in
Markovian sampling.

Despite the wide applications of Adam in reinforcement
learning (RL), the theoretical convergence of Adam-type RL
algorithms has not been established. This paper provides the
first such convergence analysis for two fundamental RL algorithms of policy gradient (PG) and temporal difference (TD)
learning that incorporate AMSGrad updates (a standard alternative of Adam in theoretical analysis), referred to as PGAMSGrad and TD-AMSGrad, respectively. Moreover, our
analysis focuses on Markovian sampling for both algorithms.
We show that under general nonlinear function approximation, PG-AMSGrad with a constant stepsize converges to a
neighborhood of a stationary point at the rate of O(1/T )
(where T denotes the number of iterations), and with a diminishing stepsize √
converges exactly to a stationary point at
the rate of O(log2 T / T ). Furthermore, under linear function approximation, TD-AMSGrad with a constant stepsize
converges to a neighborhood of the global optimum at the
rate of O(1/T ), and with a diminishing stepsize converges
√
exactly to the global optimum at the rate of O(log T / T ).
Our study develops new techniques for analyzing the Adamtype RL algorithms under Markovian sampling.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to study how an agent
learns a policy through interacting with its environment to
maximize the accumulative reward. RL has so far accomplished tremendous success in various applications such
as playing video games (Mnih et al. 2013), bipedal walking (Castillo et al. 2019), online advertising (Pednault, Abe,
and Zadrozny 2002), to name a few. In general, there are two
widely used classes of RL algorithms: policy-based methods
and value function based methods.
For the first class, policy gradient (PG) (Sutton et al. 2000)
is a basic algorithm which has motivated many advanced
policy-based algorithms including actor-critic (Konda and
Tsitsiklis 2000), DPG (Silver et al. 2014), TRPO (Schulman
et al. 2015), PPO (Schulman et al. 2017), etc. The idea of

Our Contribution
We provide the first non-asymptotic convergence guarantee for Adam-type PG and TD algorithms that incorporate
the update rule of AMSGrad (referred to as PG-AMSGrad
and TD-AMSGrad, respectively). Our techniques also lead

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10460

