The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Comparison Lift: Bandit-based Experimentation System for Online Advertising
Tong Geng,1 Xiliang Li,1 Harikesh S. Nair,12 Jun Hao,1 Bin Xiang, 1 Shurui Fan 1
1

JD.com,
Stanford University
{tong.geng, xiliang.lin, harikesh.nair, haojun, xiangbin1, fanshurui}@jd.com, harikesh.nair@stanford.edu
2

Abstract

Finally several campaigns tend to be omnichannel, involving search and display advertising and spanning ad inventory across app, browser, PC and mobile modalities. While
the array of options has opened up a golden age of possibilities for digital marketing, it has also produced challenges for
advertisers and marketers in designing effective campaigns
by presenting them with a bewildering number of feasible
design combinations. A principled approach to campaign
design that is data-driven, automated, and based on proper
foundations of causality and incremental response has therefore become key to effective marketing strategy. The product
described in this paper, Comparison Lift (henceforth
“CL”), is a self-serve, advertiser-facing product we designed
and deployed to deliver on this need for the advertising business of JD.com, a large e-commerce company in China (see
https://corporate.jd.com/home for more details).
CL works by leveraging randomized controlled trials to
allow advertisers to directly field-test various target audiences, creatives, and their combinations against one another. The target audiences can be specified flexibly, and
the creatives can comprise most type of media (images, text,
videos), so the scope of tests facilitated by the product is
broad.
The product has three distinguishing features. First, it
implements randomized controlled trials using adaptive,
bandit-based designs. To understand the usefulness of this,
note that a typical solution to the problem of experimentally
finding the best creative amongst a set of possible variants is
to use an “A/B/n” design, sometimes referred to as a “splittest”. This design keeps the sample traffic splits across creatives constant as the test progresses. Therefore, both good
and bad creatives will be allocated the same amount of traffic. In contrast, the bandit-based system implemented here
adapts the traffic allocation dynamically, reducing the allocation of experimental traffic to creatives that are learned to
perform poorly, thus reducing the cost of experimentation
significantly relative to non-adaptive designs. In addition,
by basing the allocation of experimental traffic on maximizing the payoff to the advertiser from the best-discovered creatives, the algorithm aligns the basis for test randomization
directly with the goals of the advertiser from testing.
A second feature is it leverages new algorithms that handle complex target audiences so as to test both target audiences and creatives simultaneously and to identify best

Comparison Lift is an experimentation-as-a-service
(EaaS) application for testing online advertising audiences
and creatives at JD.com. Unlike many other EaaS tools that
focus primarily on fixed sample A/B testing, Comparison
Lift deploys a custom bandit-based experimentation algorithm. The advantages of the bandit-based approach are twofold. First, it aligns the randomization induced in the test with
the advertiser’s goals from testing. Second, by adapting experimental design to information acquired during the test, it
reduces substantially the cost of experimentation to the advertiser. Since launch in May 2019, Comparison Lift has
been utilized in over 1,500 experiments. We estimate that utilization of the product has helped increase click-through rates
of participating advertising campaigns by 46% on average.
We estimate that the adaptive design in the product has generated 27% more clicks on average during testing compared
to a fixed sample A/B design. Both suggest significant value
generation and cost savings to advertisers from the product.

Introduction
Compared to their offline, pre-internet age brethren, online,
internet-enabled digital marketing campaigns are extremely
complex. One source of complexity is targeting. Compared
to age and gender-based targeting that are common in say
television ad-markets, digital marketing campaigns offer targetability of users on the basis of a large variety of demographic, contextual and behavioral features. For instance,
on e-commerce platforms − increasingly large-scale facilitators of online advertising − target audiences can be defined on the basis of very flexible criteria such as “male
iPhone users who bought Nike shoes in the last 6 months
and browsed the shoes category page in the last 3 days.”
Any of these parameters could be changed to obtain a different target audience, producing a large number of potential audiences that could be addressed by a campaign. Another source of complexity is the type of media that can
be used in digital advertising campaigns. A wide variety
of text, images, videos, both short and long form, as well
as landing pages are possible, with different types of variants or combinations targeted to different sub-populations.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15117

