The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private Decomposable Submodular Maximization
Anamay Chaturvedi, Huy Lê Nguyễn, Lydia Zakynthinou
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
chaturvedi.a@northeastern.edu, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu, zakynthinou.l@northeastern.edu

Abstract

teaching (Singla et al. 2014), and exemplar-based clustering (Dueck and Frey 2007; Gomes and Krause 2010).
In most applications, machine learning tools are applied
to users’ sensitive data, causing privacy concerns to become
increasingly important. Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al. 2006) has been widely-accepted as a robust mathematical guarantee that a model produced by a machine learning
algorithm does not reveal sensitive, personal information contained in the training data. Notably, Mitrovic et al. (2017)
gave differentially private algorithms for monotone and nonmonotone submodular maximization under cardinality, matroid, and p-extendible system constraints. Gupta et al. (2010)
studied a variety of combinatorial optimization problems under differential privacy and, in particular, gave a differentially
private algorithm for the Combinatorial Public Projects (CPP)
problem by Papadimitriou, Schapira, and Singer (2008). This
is a special case of monotone submodular maximization under cardinality constraints, as the objective function f is
decomposable (also known as Sum-of-Submodular).
Decomposable submodular functions encompass many examples of submodular functions studied in the context of
machine learning as well as welfare maximization. In the latter, each agent has a valuation function over sets and the goal
is to maximize the sum of the valuations of the agents, i.e., the
“social welfare”. In machine learning, data summarization,
where the goal is to select a representative subset of elements
of small size, falls into this setting and has numerous applications, including exemplar-based clustering, image summarization, recommender systems, active set selection, and corpus
summarization. The line of work of Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi (2016); Mirzasoleiman et al. (2016);
Mirzasoleiman, Zadimoghaddam, and Karbasi (2016) studies
decomposable submbodular maximization under p-systems
constraints in various data summarization settings and takes
different approaches to user privacy.

We study the problem of differentially private constrained
maximization of decomposable submodular functions. A submodular function is decomposable if it takes the form of a sum
of submodular functions. The special case of maximizing a
monotone, decomposable submodular function under cardinality constraints is known as the Combinatorial Public Projects
(CPP) problem (Papadimitriou, Schapira, and Singer 2008).
Previous work by Gupta et al. (2010) gave a differentially
private algorithm for the CPP problem.
We extend this work by designing differentially private algorithms for both monotone and non-monotone decomposable
submodular maximization under general matroid constraints,
with competitive utility guarantees. We complement our theoretical bounds with experiments demonstrating improved
empirical performance.

Introduction
A set function f : 2N → R is submodular if it satisfies
the following property of diminishing marginal returns: for
all sets S ⊆ T ⊆ N and every element u ∈ N \ T ,
f (S ∪{u})−f (S) ≥ f (T ∪{u})−f (T ). Optimization problems involving the maximization of a submodular function
arise naturally in many different applications, which span
a wide range of fields such as combinatorial optimization
(e.g. Max Cut, Max r-Cover, Facility Location, and Generalized Assignment problems), computer vision, operations
research, and electrical networks (see Narayanan 1997; Fujishige 2005; Schrijver 2003). Furthermore, submodular functions are extensively used in economics (e.g. in the problem
of welfare maximization in combinatorial auctions (Dobzinski and Schapira 2006; Feige 2006; Feige and Vondrák 2006;
Vondrák 2008)). Recently, submodular maximization has
found numerous applications to problems in machine learning (Kawahara et al. 2009), such as influence maximization
in social networks (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003;
Borgs et al. 2014; Borodin et al. 2017), result diversification
in recommender systems (Puthiya Parambath, Usunier, and
Grandvalet 2016), feature selection for classification (Krause
and Guestrin 2005), dictionary selection (Krause and Cevher
2010), document and corpus summarization (Lin and Bilmes
2011; Kirchhoff and Bilmes 2014; Sipos et al. 2012), crowd

Our Contributions
We focus on the problem of maximization of a decomposable
submodular function under matroid constraints.
N
Definition
P1. A function f : 2 → R is λ-decomposable if
f (S) = I∈D fI (S) ∀S ⊆ N , for submodular functions
fI : 2N → [0, λ].

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Concretely, suppose there exists a set of agents D of size
6984

