The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Harmonized Dense Knowledge Distillation Training
for Multi-Exit Architectures
Xinglu Wang, Yingming Li ∗
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
{xingluwang,yingming}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-exit architectures, in which a sequence of intermediate classifiers are introduced at different depths of the feature layers, perform adaptive computation by early exiting
“easy” samples to speed up the inference. In this paper, a
novel Harmonized Dense Knowledge Distillation (HDKD)
training method for multi-exit architecture is designed to encourage each exit to flexibly learn from all its later exits. In
particular, a general dense knowledge distillation training objective is proposed to incorporate all possible beneficial supervision information for multi-exit learning, where a harmonized weighting scheme is designed for the multi-objective
optimization problem consisting of multi-exit classification
loss and dense distillation loss. A bilevel optimization algorithm is introduced for alternatively updating the weights
of multiple objectives and the multi-exit network parameters. Specifically, the loss weighting parameters are optimized
with respect to its performance on validation set by gradient
descent. Experiments on CIFAR100 and ImageNet show that
the HDKD strategy harmoniously improves the performance
of the state-of-the-art multi-exit neural networks. Moreover,
this method does not require within architecture modifications and can be effectively combined with other previouslyproposed training techniques and further boosts the performance.

Figure 1: Dense knowledge distillation training for multiexit architecture. Given an input, the prediction of different exits will be sequentially generated. Classification loss
at exit i is denoted as LCE
i . Dense distillation loss from exit
i to exit j, denoted as LKD
ij , allows each exit to learn from
all its later exits.

Deng 2017; Wu et al. 2018). Among them, the adaptive inference has attracted much attention as it does not modify
network structure and can be applied in tandem with other
approaches to further reduce the inference time (Lin et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018a). Given the fact that natural data
is usually composed of easy samples and difficult samples,
adaptive inference aims at achieving efficient resource allocation without loss of accuracy, by positing that during the
inference stage easy samples do not require the full power
of a massive deep neural network.
Multi-exit architecture has emerged as a representative
approach for adaptive inference (Bolukbasi et al. 2017; Li
et al. 2019). It implements adaptive computation by early exiting “easy” samples to speed up the inference. In this architecture, early exits are introduced at different depths of the
feature layers. At these early exits, a sequence of intermediate classifiers of increasing complexity are incorporated. As
shown in the Fig. 1, the representations and computations of
the earlier layers are reused by the later layers. The prediction for an input image is progressively updated throughout

Introduction
Deep learning methods, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable success on a variety of computer vision tasks, such as image classification
and object detection. However, these extraordinary achievements usually rely on very deep models accompanied by
high computational demands, which prevents them from being deployed in resource-constrained platforms like mobile
devices.
Recently, there has been a rising interest in accelerating
CNNs at inference time. Common methods include direct
network pruning (Han et al. 2015; Zhu and Gupta 2017),
knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Romero et al. 2014), weight quantization (Courbariaux and
Bengio 2016; Rastegari et al. 2016), novel architecture designs (Howard et al. 2017), and adaptive inference (Liu and
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10218

