The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Converse, Focus and Guess - Towards Multi-Document Driven Dialogue
Han Liu1 , Caixia Yuan1 * , Xiaojie Wang1 ,
Yushu Yang2 , Huixing Jiang2 , Zhongyuan Wang2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Meituan, Beijing, China
{liuhan,yuancx,xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn, {yangyushu, jianghuixing, wangzhongyuan02}@meituan.com
Abstract
We propose a novel task, Multi-Document Driven Dialogue
(MD3), in which an agent can guess the target document that
the user is interested in by leading a dialogue. To benchmark
progress, we introduce a new dataset of GuessMovie, which
contains 16,881 documents, each describing a movie, and
associated 13,434 dialogues. Further, we propose the MD3
model. Keeping guessing the target document in mind, it converses with the user conditioned on both document engagement and user feedback. In order to incorporate large-scale
external documents into the dialogue, it pretrains a document
representation which is sensitive to attributes it talks about an
object. Then it tracks dialogue state by detecting evolvement
of document belief and attribute belief, and finally optimizes
dialogue policy in principle of entropy decreasing and reward
increasing, which is expected to successfully guess the user’s
target in a minimum number of turns. Experiments show that
our method significantly outperforms several strong baseline
methods and is very close to human’s performance.

Introduction
The recent progress with human-machine dialogue techniques enable conversational agents to be extensively applied in customer service, information retrieval, personal
assistance and so on. In order to assist the user to accomplish specific tasks, the agent must necessarily query external
knowledge. Several works have focused on incorporating
structured knowledge base (KB) into dialogues (Dhingra
et al. 2017; Madotto, Wu, and Fung 2018; Wu, Socher, and
Xiong 2019) through KB lookup. Although these efforts
scales nicely to huge knowledge base, many real-world taskoriented dialogues involve in referring to a great number of
documents (such as manuals, instruction booklets, and other
informational documents). Since the complexity of document
understanding, developing dialogues with many grounding
articles is far from a trial task.
In this paper, we consider in particular the problem of
multi-document driven dialogue (MD3)1 , where the agent
leads a dialogue with the user with a particular conversation
goal and the engagement of multiple documents. To this end,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/laddie132/MD3

13380

we propose a MD3 game—GuessMovie. In the game, the
user selects a movie at the beginning of dialogue, which is
unknown to the agent. The agent is provided with a set of candidate documents, each describing a movie, and tries to guess
which movie the user selects by asking a series questions (e.g.
“Who is the director of the movie?” or “When is it released?”).
The user informs the agent his answer or says “unknown”.
The agent’s goal is to guess the target movie in the shortest dialogue turns. It assumes that only the agent has access to the
documents, and at least one document describing the target
movie. Figure 1 shows an example.
Two key challenges arising from MD3 task is: (1) how
to efficiently encode and incorporate a large scale of long
unstructured documents in a dialogue, and (2) how to learn
optimal dialogue policy to efficiently fulfill dialogue task
with smooth engagement of external documents.
To address the first challenge, we propose an factor aware
document embedding, which assumes that a text is typically
composed of several key factors it wants to narrate. For example, a text describing a movie mainly consists of attributes like
“directed by”, “release year”, “genre”, and so on. For each
attribute, attribute aware document embedding is trained with
the goal of correctly recognizing the document containing the
given attribute and attribute value from a set of documents.
The document is finally represented as the concatenation of
all attribute aware document embeddings.
In order to manipulate the dialogue towards efficiently
guessing the correct target document, the proposed MD3
model traces dialogue state by monitoring a document belief
distribution and attribute belief distribution, both in global
dialogue-level and temporal turn-level, which is viewed an
explicit representation of dialogue dynamics leading to target
movie. Besides, the model also calculates the uncertainty of
each attribute through a document differentiated representation. In order to fulfill the dialogue goal within minimum dialogue turns, at each turn the policy model tends to discussing
the attribute with the highest belief and highest uncertainty
with asking the user. When the belief of a document is higher
than a threshold, the agent will execute a guess action. A
dialogue is deemed as ended up with a guess action.
Remarkably, the above dialogue state tracing and dialogue
policy optimizing are jointly trained using reinforcement
learning.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

