The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Time to Transfer: Predicting and Evaluating Machine-Human Chatting Handoff
Jiawei Liu,1 Zhe Gao,2 Yangyang Kang,2 Zhuoren Jiang,3 Guoxiu He,1
Changlong Sun,2,3 Xiaozhong Liu,4∗ Wei Lu1∗
1

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
4
Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, United States
{laujames2017, guoxiu.he, weilu}@whu.edu.cn, {gaozhe.gz, yangyang.kangyy}@alibaba-inc.com,
jiangzhuoren@zju.edu.cn, changlong.scl@taobao.com, liu237@indiana.edu
Customer

Abstract
Is chatbot able to completely replace the human agent? The
short answer could be – “it depends...”. For some challenging cases, e.g., dialogue’s topical spectrum spreads beyond
the training corpus coverage, the chatbot may malfunction
and return unsatisfied utterances. This problem can be addressed by introducing the Machine-Human Chatting Handoff (MHCH) which enables human-algorithm collaboration.
To detect the normal/transferable utterances, we propose a
Difficulty-Assisted Matching Inference (DAMI) network, utilizing difficulty-assisted encoding to enhance the representations of utterances. Moreover, a matching inference mechanism is introduced to capture the contextual matching features. A new evaluation metric, Golden Transfer within Tolerance (GT-T), is proposed to assess the performance by considering the tolerance property of the MHCH. To provide insights into the task and validate the proposed model, we collect two new datasets. Extensive experimental results are presented and contrasted against a series of baseline models to
demonstrate the efficacy of our model on MHCH.

utter1

MHCH

Galaxy Note 10 plus 5G
comes with a warranty, right?
Normal

utter3

OK. I was wondering if I
could use the Note 10 plus
stylus on Note 9 or Tab S5 ?
Transferable

Detected

Ha

ndo

ff

detecting

Chatbot
Normal
Dear customer, Galaxy Note 10
comes with a one year warranty,
and you can return with 15 days.

utter2

Normal
The S Pen of Note 10 is lighter
and shorter than the S Pen of
Note 9, but offers air actions
and AR Doodle. Order as soon
as you like!

utter4

Human Agent
Normal

utter6

Alright, thank you!
Normal

S Pen can be used on the
Samsung Note or Tab Series.
For the best user’s experience,
please use S Pen with corresponding Galaxy device.

utter5

Normal
You are welcome :)

utter7

Figure 1: A dialogue example in sales customer service,
where orange transferable label denotes this dialogue session needs handoff from chatbot to human agent.

Introduction
Chatbot, as one of the recent successful applications in artificial intelligence, makes many people believe that it will
be able to replace the human agent in the foreseeable future.
Deep learning efforts from industry and academia boost the
development of chatbot and have rewarded many inspiring
accomplishments (High 2012; Zhou et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2020). However, Morar Consulting’s study1 suggests that
only 21% respondents said they would like to be able to purchase goods and services from chatbots. Besides, due to the
complexity of human conversation, automatic chatbots are
not yet able to meet all the needs of users. The unsatisfied
responses from algorithms may deteriorate user experience
and cause business failure (Radziwill and Benton 2017).
While scholars can consistently explore new models to further enhance the performance, in this study, we try to solve
this problem from a perspective by combing chatbots with

human agents. Specifically, we target the Machine-Human
Chatting Handoff (MHCH), which aims to enable smooth
and timely handoff from chatbot to human agent.
Figure 1 depicts an exemplar MHCH case of customer
service for online sales in an E-commerce ecosystem. While
chatbot successfully answers the first question from user
(utter1 and utter2 ), unfortunately, it fails to address the second one decently (utter3 and utter4 ). In the MHCH task, the
model should consistently monitor the progress of conversations, be able to predict the chatbot failures (potential algorithm failures, negative emotions from the user, etc.), and
transfer the conversations to the human agent (a.k.a handoff)
to ensure the smooth dialogue. Recently, there are already
several works focus on the human-machine cooperation for
chatbots. For instance, Huang, Chang, and Bigham (2018)
integrated crowds with multiple chatbots and voting systems. Rajendran, Ganhotra, and Polymenakos (2019) paid
attention to transfer conversations to human agents once encountered new user behaviors. Different from these prior
tasks, the MHCH task aims to sequentially label each utterance in the dialogue as normal or transferable based on the

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.mycustomer.com/service/channels/couldchatbots-ever-completely-replace-human-agents

5841

