The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CPCGAN: A Controllable 3D Point Cloud Generative Adversarial Network with
Semantic Label Generating
Ximing Yang1 , Yuan Wu1,2 , Kaiyi Zhang1 and Cheng Jin1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xmyang19,wuyuan,zhangky20,jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

point clouds from random latent codes have been rarely researched until recent years. (Achlioptas et al. 2017) implements 3D point cloud GAN using simple fully connected
layers. (Valsesia, Fracastoro, and Magli 2018) uses dynamic graph convolutions network(GCN) to deal with local
point cloud features. (Shu, Park, and Kwon 2019) uses treestructured GCN, reducing the computational cost to some
extent. (Hui et al. 2020) proposes a learning-based bilateral
interpolation method to generate more precise point clouds.
Validation metrics aiming to measure the point cloud generation performances are proposed in (Achlioptas et al. 2017;
Shu, Park, and Kwon 2019). Although the methods are getting better on those metrics, the controllability of generation has not been well concerned. Besides, those works(Shu,
Park, and Kwon 2019; Valsesia, Fracastoro, and Magli 2018)
with GCN are somewhat inefficient due to the complexity of
their network structures.
In this paper, we present a novel method called Controllable Point Cloud Generative Adversarial Network (CPCGAN), which can generate 3D point clouds from random
latent codes. CPCGAN can also generate semantic labels
for points and it is controllable for generated shape. Our approach takes the inspiration of S 2 -GAN(Wang and Gupta
2016) and constructs a two-stage GAN, which suits well
on the 3D point cloud generation task. The first-stage GAN
takes a random latent code as input and generates a sparse
point cloud with semantic labels, which we call structure
point cloud. The second-stage GAN takes the output of firststage as input and generates the complete point cloud by
breeding a certain number of points from every structure
point. The semantic label of the structure point will be inherited by the bred points. Some simple fully connected layers
and a self-attention layer are used to construct the generators.
The main contributions of this paper are:

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) are good at generating variant samples of complex data distributions. Generating
a sample with certain properties is one of the major tasks in
the real-world application of GANs. In this paper, we propose a novel generative adversarial network to generate 3D
point clouds from random latent codes, named Controllable
Point Cloud Generative Adversarial Network(CPCGAN). A
two-stage GAN framework is utilized in CPCGAN and a
sparse point cloud containing major structural information
is extracted as the middle-level information between the two
stages. With their help, CPCGAN has the ability to control the
generated structure and generate 3D point clouds with semantic labels for points. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed CPCGAN outperforms state-of-the-art point cloud
GANs.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have attracted
significant research interest because of their successes in
many applications. Those applications on 2D images include
single image super-resolution(Dong et al. 2017; Wang et al.
2018), interactive image generation(Rott Shaham, Dekel,
and Michaeli 2019), image editing(Perarnau et al. 2016),
and image-to-image transformation(Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019; Rott Shaham, Dekel, and Michaeli 2019). Captured
3D information has been garnering attention over the past
few years, and the requirements of expanding or generating 3D data is also growing. Various approaches have been
proposed on 3D data generation. Such as point cloud upsampling(Li et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2018a,b), point cloud completion(Yang et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2018), and 3D data form
transformation(Dai et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018; Zhou and
Tuzel 2018). To use GAN in real-world applications, one
of GANs’ fundamental targets is to construct and learn a
generative model that can be controlled to generate samples
with a certain distribution. Controllable GANs using random
latent codes as input have been well researched on 2D images(Chen et al. 2016; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Mirza
and Osindero 2014; Wang and Gupta 2016).
Owing to the sparse representation of point clouds and
the lack of computational power, GANs for generating 3D

1. A novel CPCGAN method is proposed, which achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both generating results
and computational effectiveness.
2. A two-stage GAN framework is constructed to make the
CPCGAN able to control the generated shapes.
3. A concept of structure point clouds as well as its extraction method are introduced to help the CPCGAN generate
not only point clouds but also semantic labels.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3154

