The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GAN Ensemble for Anomaly Detection
Xu Han* , Xiaohui Chen* , Li-Ping Liu
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University
{Xu.Han, Xiaohui.Chen, Liping.Liu}@tufts.edu

Abstract

2017), f-AnoGAN (Schlegl et al. 2019), EGBAD (Zenati
et al. 2018), GANomaly (Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei, and
Breckon 2018), and Skip-GANomaly (Akcay, AtapourAbarghouei, and Breckon 2019). All these models use an
encoder-decoder as the generator since the generator of a
vanilla GAN cannot check a sample. A synthetic sample
from the decoder is either a reconstruction of a real sample or a new sample. The discriminator needs to distinguish
synthetic samples and normal samples, so the discriminator acquires the ability of differentiate anomalies from normal data. For the discriminator, the training is the same as
binary classification but avoids manual labeling of training
data (Liu and Fern 2012). The anomaly score is usually computed by checking the reconstruction of a sample and the internal representation of a sample in the discriminator. These
models perform well in a series of detection tasks.
There still lacks a thorough understanding of the role of
adversarial training in anomaly detection. Theoretical analysis (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Arora et al. 2017) indicates that
the discriminator should do no better than random guessing at the end of an ideal training procedure. However, the
internal representation of a discriminator is very effective
in differentiating normal samples and anomalies in practice.
Then there is a gap between theory and practice: how does
the discriminator characterize normal samples’ distribution?
Training a GAN is challenging because it needs to optimize multiple deep neural networks in a min-max problem. The optimization often has stability issues. If neural
networks are not carefully regularized, there are also problems of mode collapse. Recent works show multiple generators or/and discriminators help to overcome those problems.
Several studies (Durugkar, Gemp, and Mahadevan 2016;
Neyshabur, Bhojanapalli, and Chakrabarti 2017) use multiple discriminators to provide stable gradients to the generator, making the training process more smooth. Multiple generators, which essentially defines a distribution mixture, can
capture multiple data modes (Hoang et al. 2018). Arora et al.
(2017) analyzes the equilibrium of GAN models and show
that a mixture of both generators and discriminators guarantees an approximate equilibrium in a GAN’s min-max game.
These ensemble methods have improved the performance in
various generation tasks.
In this work, we propose to use GAN ensembles for
anomaly detection. A GAN ensemble consists multiple

When formulated as an unsupervised learning problem, anomaly detection often requires a model to learn
the distribution of normal data. Previous works modify Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) by using
encoder-decoders as generators and then apply them to
anomaly detection tasks. Related studies also indicate
that GAN ensembles are often more stable than single
GANs in image generation tasks. In this work, we propose to construct GAN ensembles for anomaly detection. In this new method, a group of generators interact with a group of discriminators, so every generator
gets feedback from every discriminator, and vice versa.
Compared to a single GAN, an ensemble of GANs
can better model the distribution of normal data and
thus better detect anomalies. We also make a theoretical
analysis of GANs and GAN ensembles in the context of
anomaly detection. The empirical study constructs ensembles based on four different types of detecting models, and the results show that the ensemble outperforms
the single model for all four model types.

Introduction
Anomaly detection is an important problem in machine
learning and has a wide range of applications such as fraud
detection (Abdallah, Maarof, and Zainal 2016; Kou et al.
2004), intrusion detection (Garcia-Teodoro et al. 2009), and
event detection (Atefeh and Khreich 2015). In most anomaly
detection problems, only samples of normal data are given,
and the task is to detect anomalies that deviates from normal
data. A large class of anomaly detection algorithms (Hodge
and Austin 2004; Gupta et al. 2013; Chalapathy and Chawla
2019) directly or indirectly model the data distribution and
then report samples atypical in the distribution as anomalies.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014), which are flexible models for learning data
distributions, provide a new set of tools for anomaly
detection. A GAN consists of a generator network and
a discriminator network, which learn a data distribution
through a two-player game. Several studies apply GANs
to anomaly detection, such as AnoGAN (Schlegl et al.
* The first two authors contribute equally.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4090

