The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DART: Adaptive Accept Reject Algorithm for Non-Linear Combinatorial Bandits
Mridul Agarwal1 , Vaneet Aggarwal 1 , Abhishek Kumar Umrawal1 , Chris Quinn 2 ,
1

Purdue University
Iowa State University
agarw180@purdue.edu, vaneet@purdue.edu, cjquinn@iastate.edu, aumrawal@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

aggregate reward is the sum of the rewards of sub-campaigns
(Zhang et al. 2012; Nuara et al. 2018). Combinatorial MultiArmed Bandit (CMAB) algorithms can solve these problems
in an online manner. For many CMAB algorithms, we can
bound the regret, that is the loss incurred from accidentally
selecting sub-optimal sets some of the time. We aim to find
a space and time efficient CMAB algorithm that minimizes
cumulative regret.
Existing algorithms for K = 1 that use Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) or Bayesian resampling methods (Auer
2002; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Auer and
Ortner 2010; Thompson 1933; Agrawal and Goyal 2012;
Gopalan,
√ Mannor, and Mansour 2014) can bound the regret
by Õ( N T ).These methods can be naturally extended to
the combinatorial setting
where K arms are chosen, treat
N
ing each of the K
possible actions as a distinct ‘arm’.
Unfortunately, this approach has two significant drawbacks.
First, the regret increases exponentially in K as the num
N
ber of total actions to explore has grown from N to K
.
Second, the time and space complexities increase exponentially in K, requiring storage of values for all actions to find
the action with highest UCB (Auer and Ortner 2010; Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) or highest sampled rewards
(Agrawal and Goyal 2012).
This paper addresses the said issues by proposing a novel
algorithm called aDaptive Accept RejecT (DART). To estimate the “goodness” of an arm, we use the mean of the rewards obtained by playing actions containing that arm. In an
adaptive manner, DART moves arms to “accept” or “reject”
sets based on those estimates, reducing the number of arms
that require further exploration. We assume that the expected
joint reward of an arm i and other possible K − 1 arms is
better than the expected joint reward of arm j and other possible K − 1 arms if arm i is better than arm j. This assumption is naturally satisfied in many reward setups such as click
bandits (Kveton et al. 2015a). We then use Lipschitz continuity of the joint reward function to relate orderings between
pairs of arms i and j to orderings between pairs of actions
containing those arms. We construct a martingale sequence
to analyze the regret bound of DART. Furthermore, DART
achieves a space complexity of O(N ) and a per-round time
complexity of Õ(N ).
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized

We consider the bandit problem of selecting K out of N arms
at each time step. The joint reward can be a non-linear function of the rewards of the selected individual arms. The direct use of a multi-armed bandit algorithm requires choosing
among all possible combinations, making the action space
large. To simplify the problem, existing works on combinatorial bandits typically assume feedback as a linear function
of individual rewards. In this paper, we prove the lower bound
for top-K subset selection with bandit feedback with possibly correlated rewards. We present a novel algorithm for the
combinatorial setting without using individual arm feedback
or requiring linearity of the reward function. Additionally, our
algorithm works on correlated rewards of individual arms.
Our algorithm, aDaptive Accept RejecT (DART), sequentially finds good arms and eliminates bad arms based on confidence bounds. DART is computationally efficient and uses
storage linear
in N . Further, DART achieves a regret bound
√
matches the
of Õ(K KN T ) for a time horizon T , which √
lower bound in bandit feedback up to a factor of log 2N T .
When applied to the problem of cross-selling optimization
and maximizing the mean of individual rewards, the performance of the proposed algorithm surpasses that of state-ofthe-art algorithms. We also show that DART significantly
outperforms existing methods for both linear and non-linear
joint reward environments.

Introduction
The problem of finding the best K out of N items to optimize a possibly non-linear function of reward of each item
arises in a number of settings. For example, in the problem of erasure-coded storage (Xiang et al. 2016), the agent
chooses K out of N servers to obtain the content for each
request; the final reward is the negative of the time taken
by the slowest server. A recommendation system agent may
present a list of K items out of N items to user for a nonzero reward only if the user selects an item (Kveton et al.
2015a) from the list. Similarly, in cross-selling item selection, a retailer creates a bundle with K items, and the joint
reward is a quadratic function of the selected items’ individual rewards (Raymond Chi-Wing Wong, Ada Wai-Chee Fu,
and Wang 2003). The problem of a daily advertising campaign is characterized by a set of sub-campaigns where the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6557

