The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ActionBert: Leveraging User Actions for Semantic Understanding of User
Interfaces
Zecheng He 1 , Srinivas Sunkara 2 , Xiaoxue Zang 2 , Ying Xu 2 , Lijuan Liu 2 , Nevan Wichers 2 ,
Gabriel Schubiner 2 , Ruby Lee 1 , Jindong Chen 2
1

Princeton University
2
Google Research
{zechengh, rblee}@princeton.edu, {srinivasksun, xiaoxuez, yingyingxuxu, lijuanliu, wichersn, gsch, jdchen}@google.com
Abstract

However, UI understanding is a challenging and lessstudied area. First, there are various tasks related to UI understanding. Usually, these tasks are cross-modal and crossdomain, e.g., clicking a button through voice command and
retrieving an icon via a semantically similar one. Previous
works in this field usually target one single task at a time.
Training a different complex model for each task is not efficient for on-device model deployment. Moreover, models
may suffer from overfitting if the task-specific data is limited. Pre-training models on large-scale datasets to extract
features has shown great power in multiple domains, e.g.,
ResNet (He et al. 2016) in computer vision and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) in natural language processing. There is no
such generic feature representation for user interfaces and it
is not clear if a pre-trained feature extraction model can help
improve multiple UI related tasks.
Second, the data source and format of UIs are different
from natural image and language corpuses. For example, the
View Hierarchy (VH) in mobile apps and Document Object
Model (DOM) in web pages are tree structures representing
the UI layout. The VH and DOM contain structural and semantic information about the UI, however they are not generally visible to the users and they also contain short phrases
with hints about functionality. Effectively making use of this
domain-specific knowledge for general UI understanding is
an unsolved problem.
Third, understanding the functionality of UIs is more
challenging than learning about their appearance. It is common that UI elements of similar appearance have very different semantic meanings, and vice versa. In the example in
Figure 1, all The icons look similar to each other (“houses”),
however, they have different functionalities which can only
be interpreted with additional context.
In this paper, we propose ActionBert, a pre-trained
transformer-style (Vaswani et al. 2017) model that leverages sequential user action information for UI understanding. Our key intuition is that the semantic meaning of a UI,
and the functionality of UI components can be captured by
user actions, e.g. a sequence of clicks and their effect on the
UI. This model takes advantage of the representation power
of transformer models, and integrates domain-specific information like VH and user actions to build embeddings reflecting the functionality of different UI elements. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the first attempt to build a generic fea-

As mobile devices are becoming ubiquitous, regularly interacting with a variety of user interfaces (UIs) is a common
aspect of daily life for many people. To improve the accessibility of these devices and to enable their usage in a variety
of settings, building models that can assist users and accomplish tasks through the UI is vitally important. However, there
are several challenges to achieve this. First, UI components of
similar appearance can have different functionalities, making
understanding their function more important than just analyzing their appearance. Second, domain-specific features like
Document Object Model (DOM) in web pages and View Hierarchy (VH) in mobile applications provide important signals about the semantics of UI elements, but these features
are not in a natural language format. Third, owing to a large
diversity in UIs and absence of standard DOM or VH representations, building a UI understanding model with high coverage requires large amounts of training data.
Inspired by the success of pre-training based approaches in
NLP for tackling a variety of problems in a data-efficient
way, we introduce a new pre-trained UI representation model
called ActionBert. Our methodology is designed to leverage
visual, linguistic and domain-specific features in user interaction traces to pre-train generic feature representations of UIs
and their components. Our key intuition is that user actions,
e.g., a sequence of clicks on different UI components, reveals
important information about their functionality. We evaluate
the proposed model on a wide variety of downstream tasks,
ranging from icon classification to UI component retrieval
based on its natural language description. Experiments show
that the proposed ActionBert model outperforms multi-modal
baselines across all downstream tasks by up to 15.5%.

Introduction
Given the prevalence and importance of smart devices in our
daily life, the ability to understand and operate User Interfaces (UIs) has become an important task for Artificial Intelligence. For instance, a model that can find a UI component
by its description can be very useful for voice interfaces,
and a model that can predict the expected output of clicking
a button can help page navigation. To successfully operate a
UI, the models need to understand the user task and intents,
and how to perform the tasks in the given UI.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5931

