The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Few-shot Learning for Multi-label Intent Detection
Yutai Hou, Yongkui Lai, Yushan Wu, Wanxiang Che* , Ting Liu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{ythou, yklai, car, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn, wuyushan@hit.edu.cn

Query Instance

Abstract

𝒙: What time do I go to yoga and who is going with me

In this paper, we study the few-shot multi-label classification for user intent detection. For multi-label intent detection, state-of-the-art work estimates label-instance relevance
scores and uses a threshold to select multiple associated intent labels. To determine appropriate thresholds with only a
few examples, we first learn universal thresholding experience on data-rich domains, and then adapt the thresholds to
certain few-shot domains with a calibration based on nonparametric learning. For better calculation of label-instance
relevance score, we introduce label name embedding as anchor points in representation space, which refines representations of different classes to be well-separated from each
other. Experiments on two datasets show that the proposed
model significantly outperforms strong baselines in both oneshot and five-shot settings. Data and code are available at
https://github.com/AtmaHou/FewShotMultiLabel.

Query Reps.
Label Reps.

Label-Instance
Relevance Score

Threshold

𝑌 =?

query_time,
{ query_people
}

𝒙1 : What is the time and location of my next meeting 𝑌1 : {query_time, query_loc}
𝒙2 : Who will attend my dinner
𝑌2 : {query_people}
A Few Labeled Support Examples

Figure 1: Example for one-shot multi-label intent detection.

challenges for both threshold estimation and label-instance
relevance scoring.
For thresholding, previous works explore to tune a fixed
threshold (Gangadharaiah and Narayanaswamy 2019; Qin
et al. 2020) or to learn thresholds from data (Xu et al. 2017).
But, these thresholds work well only when learning examples are sufficient. In few-shot scenarios, it is pretty hard to
determine appropriate thresholds with only a few examples.
Besides, it is also difficult to directly transfer the pre-learned
thresholds due to the domain differences, such as differences
in label number per instance, score density and scale.
Estimation of the label-instance relevance scores is also
challenging. Few-shot learning has achieved impressive
progress with similarity-based methods (Vinyals et al. 2016;
Bao et al. 2020), where the relevance scores can be modeled as label-instance similarities. And the label representations can be obtained from corresponding support examples. Unfortunately, despite huge success in previous singlelabel tasks, these similarity-based methods become impractical for multi-label problems. When instances have multiple
labels, representations of different labels may be obtained
from the same support examples and become confused with
each other. For the example in Fig 1, intents of query time
and query loc share the same support example x1 and thus
have the same label representation, which makes it impossible to predict correct labels with similarity scores.
In this paper, we study the few-shot learning problem of
multi-label intent detection and propose a novel framework
to tackle the challenges from both thresholding and labelinstance relevance scoring.
To solve the thresholding difficulties of prior-knowledge

Introduction
Intent detection, a fundamental component of task-oriented
dialogue system (Young et al. 2013), is increasingly raising attention as a Multi-Label Classification (MLC) problem
(Xu and Sarikaya 2013; Qin et al. 2020), since a single utterance often carries multiple user intents (See examples in
Fig 1). In real-world scenarios, intent detection often suffers
from lack of training data, because dialogue tasks/domains
change rapidly and new domains usually contain only a few
data examples. Recent success of Few-Shot Learning (FSL)
presents a promising solution for such data scarcity challenges. It provides a more human-like learning paradigm
that generalizes from only a few learning examples (usually
one or two per class) by exploiting prior experience.
State-of-the-art works for multi-label intent detection focus on threshold-based strategy, where a common practice is
estimating label-instance relevance scores and picking the
intent labels with score higher than a threshold value (Xu
et al. 2017; Gangadharaiah and Narayanaswamy 2019; Qin
et al. 2020). Usually, the coordination and respective quality
of the two modules, i.e. thresholding and relevance scoring,
are crucial to the performance of MLC models. However,
in few-shot scenarios, such multi-label setting poses unique
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13036

