The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimating α-Rank by Maximizing Information Gain
Tabish Rashid* ,1 Cheng Zhang,2 Kamil Ciosek2
1

University of Oxford
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
tabish.rashid@cs.ox.ac.uk, {cheng.zhang, kamil.ciosek}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

is designed with intransitive interactions in mind. Because
measuring payoffs can be very expensive, it is important to
do it by using as few samples as possible. For example, playing a match of chess (Silver et al. 2017) can take roughly 40
minutes (assuming a typical game-length of 40 and up to 1
minute per move as used during evaluation), and playing a
full game of Dota 2 can take up to 2 hours (Berner et al.
2019). Our objective is thus to accurately estimate the αrank using a small number of payoff queries.

Game theory has been increasingly applied in settings where
the game is not known outright, but has to be estimated by
sampling. For example, meta-games that arise in multi-agent
evaluation can only be accessed by running a succession of
expensive experiments that may involve simultaneous deployment of several agents. In this paper, we focus on α-rank,
a popular game-theoretic solution concept designed to perform well in such scenarios. We aim to estimate the α-rank
of the game using as few samples as possible. Our algorithm
maximizes information gain between an epistemic belief over
the α-ranks and the observed payoff. This approach has two
main benefits. First, it allows us to focus our sampling on the
entries that matter the most for identifying the α-rank. Second, the Bayesian formulation provides a facility to build in
modeling assumptions by using a prior over game payoffs.
We show the benefits of using information gain as compared
to the confidence interval criterion of ResponseGraphUCB,
and provide theoretical results justifying our method.

1

Rowland et al. (2019) proposed ResponseGraphUCB
(RG-UCB) for this purpose, inspired by pure exploration
bandit literature. RG-UCB maintains confidence intervals
over payoffs. When they don’t overlap, it draws a conclusion about their ordering, until all comparisons relevant for
the computation of α-rank have been made. While this is
provably sufficient to determine the true α-rank with a high
probability in the infinite-α regime, their approach has two
important limitations. First, since the frequentist criterion is
indirect, relying on payoff ordering rather than the α-rank,
the obtained payoffs aren’t always used optimally. Second,
it is nontrivial to include useful domain knowledge about the
entries or structure of the payoff matrix.

Introduction

Traditionally, game theory is applied in situations where
the game is fully known. More recently, empirical game
theory addresses the setting where this is not the case, instead, the game is initially unknown and has to be interacted
with by sampling (Wellman 2006). One area in which this
is becoming increasingly common is the ranking of trained
agents relative to one another. Specifically, in the field of
Reinforcement Learning game-theoretic rankings are used
not just as a metric for measuring algorithmic progress
(Balduzzi et al. 2018), but also as an integral component
of many population-based training methods (Muller et al.
2020; Lanctot et al. 2017; Vinyals et al. 2019). In particular, for ranking, two popular solution concepts have recently
emerged: Nash averaging (Balduzzi et al. 2018; Nash 1951)
and α-rank (Omidshafiei et al. 2019).
In this paper, we aim to estimate the α-rank of a game using as few samples as possible. We use the α-rank solution
concept for two reasons. First, it admits a unique solution
whose computation easily scales to K-player games. Second, unlike older schemes such as Elo (Elo 1978), α-rank

To remedy these problems, we propose a Bayesian approach. Specifically, we utilize a Gaussian Process to maintain an epistemic belief over the entries of the payoff matrix, providing a powerful framework in which to supply domain knowledge. This payoff distribution induces an epistemic belief over α-ranks. We determine which payoff to
sample by maximizing information gain between the α-rank
belief and the obtained payoff. This allows us to focus our
sampling on the entries that are expected to have the largest
effect on our belief over possible α-ranks.
Contributions: Theoretically, we justify the use of information gain by showing a regret bound for a version of
our criterion in the infinite-α regime. Empirically, our contribution is threefold. First, we compare to RG-UCB on stylized games, showing that maximizing information gain provides competitive performance by focusing on sampling the
more relevant payoffs. Second, we evaluate another objective based on minimizing the Wasserstein divergence, which
offers competitive performance while being computationally
much cheaper. Finally, we demonstrate the benefit of building in prior assumptions.

* Work done during an internship at MSR Cambridge.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5673

