The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Positions, Channels, and Layers: Fully Generalized Non-Local Network for Singer
Identification
I-Yuan Kuo, Wen-Li Wei, Jen-Chun Lin
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
iyuan.i.kuo@gmail.com, lilijinjin@gmail.com, jenchunlin@gmail.com

Abstract

focus, but also improves the feature representation by capturing long-range spatial (or spatio-temporal) dependencies
(Wang et al. 2018; Vaswani et al. 2017; Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015; Ramachandran et al. 2019). Among a mass
of attention mechanisms, a non-local (NL) operation that
belongs to the self-attention mechanism has recently been
proposed, and has achieved great success in various vision
and audio processing tasks (Wang et al. 2018; Hsieh et al.
2019; Jung et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019).
As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), the NL operation computes
the response at a position in an image (or audio frame) by
attending to all positions and taking their weighted average in an embedding space to achieve the goal of capturing
long-range dependencies. Despite its excellent performance,
the original NL module only considers the global spatial
(or spatio-temporal) correlation by merging channels, which
would lose important cues across channels and layers.
To mimic the functionalities of the human auditory system and improve the effectiveness in singer identification
(SID) task, this study proposes a fully generalized non-local
(FGNL) module that extends the NL module by learning
explicit correlations among all of the elements (positions)
across channels and layers, as shown in Figure 1 (b). Specifically, FGNL module contributes in three key aspects. First,
we propose the FGNL operation, which scales up the representation power of NL operation to attend the interaction among feature maps across channels and layers and reveal the mutual similarity of the corresponding parts. Second, we suppress the noise in each feature map by integrating the Gaussian smoothing filter into the FGNL operation.
Third, we modify the squeeze-and-excitation (SE) scheme
(Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018) into the end of the FGNL module to adaptively recalibrate channel-wise feature responses
by explicitly modeling inter-dependencies among channels.
Figure 2 illustrates the details of the FGNL module.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to introduce the attention mechanism for solving the SID task.
Extensive experimental results show that: 1) Compared with
the NL module, our FGNL module can capture richer feature representations and distinctive cues for prediction, and
achieve the state-of-the-art results on the SID task; 2) The
proposed FGNL module is flexible in the sense that it can
be integrated into different deep-net architectures and be
trained in an end-to-end fashion.

Recently, a non-local (NL) operation has been designed as
the central building block for deep-net models to capture
long-range dependencies (Wang et al. 2018). Despite its excellent performance, it does not consider the interaction between positions across channels and layers, which is crucial
in fine-grained classification tasks. To address the limitation,
we target at singer identification (SID) task and present a fully
generalized non-local (FGNL) module to help identify finegrained vocals. Specifically, we first propose a FGNL operation, which extends the NL operation to explore the correlations between positions across channels and layers. Secondly,
we further apply a depth-wise convolution with Gaussian kernel in the FGNL operation to smooth feature maps for better
generalization. More, we modify the squeeze-and-excitation
(SE) scheme into the FGNL module to adaptively emphasize
correlated feature channels to help uncover relevant feature
responses and eventually the target singer. Evaluating results
on the benchmark artist20 dataset shows that the FGNL module significantly improves the accuracy of the deep-net models in SID. Codes are available at https://github.com/ian-k1217/Fully-Generalized-Non-Local-Network.

Introduction
The ability of humans to identify singers under limited guidance is remarkable. Take, for example, humans can quickly
learn to identify singers by listening to only a few clips of
music from those singers. Even without prior knowledge
about singers, the human auditory system has evolved to
be able to handle such a task by performing different functionalities that include exhibiting attention for specific frequency bands, capturing long-range dependencies of audio
features as a whole, and extracting distinctive cues for comparison. All these can be done under the influence of background instrumental music and subtle sound variations from
different singers (fine-grained vocals).
The functionalities provided by the human auditory system were a perfect match to a particular class of deep learning algorithms called attention mechanism. Attention mechanism is an attempt to mimic human brain action, that is,
to selectively concentrate on a few relevant things, while ignoring others in deep-net models. It not only tells where to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8217

