The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Coupling Macro-Sector-Micro Financial Indicators for Learning
Stock Representations with Less Uncertainty
Guifeng Wang, 1 Longbing Cao, 2 Hongke Zhao, 3 Qi Liu, 1 Enhong Chen 1∗
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Computer Science,
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney,
3
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University
wgf1109@mail.ustc.edu.cn, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au, hongke@tju.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
While the stock movement prediction has been intensively
studied, existing work suffers from weak generalization because of the uncertainty in both data and modeling. On one
hand, training a stock representation on stochastic stock data
in an end-to-end manner may lead to excessive modeling,
which involves the model uncertainty. On the other, the analysis of correlating stock data with its relevant factors involves
the data uncertainty. To simultaneously address such uncertainty both from data and modeling perspectives, a fundamental yet challenging task is to learn a better stock representation
with less uncertainty by considering hierarchical couplings
from the macro-level to the sector-and micro-level. Accordingly, we propose a copula-based contrastive predictive coding (Co-CPC) method. Co-CPC first models the dependence
between a certain stock sector and relevant macroeconomic
variables that are sequential and heterogeneous, e.g., macrovariables are associated with different time intervals, scales,
and distributions. Then, by involving a macro-sector context,
stock representations are learned in a self-supervised way that
can further be used for downstream tasks like stock movement prediction. Extensive experiments on two typical stock
datasets verify the effectiveness of our Co-CPC method.

(a) Co-CPC and LSTM

(b) LSTM with varied inputs

Figure 1: The training and validation performance of two
models on stock movement prediction. Noted that the predictor structure of Co-CPC and LSTM are the same.

depend on the uncertain data (we call it model uncertainty),
which may drag down the improvement from training examples to unknown validation examples.
In addition, recent efforts are made on incorporating relevant explicit and implicit financial indicators, e.g., trading
behaviors (Cao, Ou, and Yu 2012; Vo and Phan 2019), social
media data (Sun et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2016), and other financial indicators or markets (Gao et al. 2016; Cao, Hu, and
Cao 2015), to model their influence on stock price movement. To some extent, these additional indicators can be seen
as an attempt to mitigate the randomness of stock prices at
the micro-level from the data perspective. While the mitigation of uncertainty both from data (i.e., further consider the
macro-level) and model perspectives has not been studied.
From the data perspective, although the micro-level indicators are more relevant to the fluctuation of stock prices
thanks to their fast updating speed, it tends to capture the
short-term and local influence relationships, which is an
advantage but can also suffer from overlooking the partial relevance. To deal with that, it is necessary to consider the effect both from micro-level and macro-level aspects. In economics, fundamental macroeconomic variables
such as exchange rate, interest rate, industrial production
and inflation are believed to be associated with or influence
stock prices (Adam and Tweneboah 2008; Beber and Brandt
2008). Although economic studies have empirically shown

Introduction
Predicting stock price movement continuously attracts interest in particular in advanced machine learning including
deep learning (Lin, Guo, and Aberer 2017). However, the
highly volatile and non-stationary nature of stock markets
often challenges the generalization of stock price predictors.
As shown in Figure 1(a), the training and validation loss
scores of two models show different trends. Obviously, a
model with good generalization means its validation loss follows the decreasing trend of training loss like of the Co-CPC
model rather than the LSTM one with very little decrease.
The main reason behind it is that the encoder-decoder-based
model directly adopts the stochastic variables as input and
the back-propagation loss also consists of future uncertain
data. That means the encoder and decoder simultaneously
∗

Corresponding author: Enhong Chen
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4418

