The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proxy Synthesis: Learning with Synthetic Classes for Deep Metric Learning
Geonmo Gu∗1 , Byungsoo Ko∗1 , Han-Gyu Kim 2
1

NAVER/LINE Vision, 2 NAVER Clova Speech
korgm403@gmail.com, kobiso62@gmail.com, hangyu.kim@navercorp.com

Abstract

such as contrastive (Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun 2005),
triplet (Weinberger and Saul 2009), N-pair loss (Sohn 2016),
etc. However, they require high training complexity and
empirically suffer from sampling issues (Movshovitz-Attias
et al. 2017). To address these issues, the concept of proxy has
been introduced. A proxy is a representative of each class,
which can be trained as a part of the network parameters.
Given a selected data point as an anchor, proxy-based losses
consider its relations with proxies. This alleviates the training complexity and sampling issues because only data-toproxy relations are considered with a relatively small number of proxies compared to that of data points.
Although the performance of metric learning losses has
been improved, a network trained only with training (seen)
data can be overfitted to the seen classes and suffer from low
generalization on unseen classes. To resolve this problem,
previous works (Zheng et al. 2019; Gu and Ko 2020; Ko
and Gu 2020) have generated synthetic samples to exploit
additional training signals and more informative representations. However, these methods can only be used for pairbased losses; thus, they still suffer from the training complexity and sampling issues.
In this paper, we propose Proxy Synthesis (PS), which is
a simple regularizer for proxy-based losses that encourages
networks to construct better generalized embedding space
for unseen classes. As illustrated in Figure 1, our method
generates synthetic embeddings and proxies as synthetic
classes for computing a proxy-based loss. Proxy Synthesis
exploits synthetic classes generated by semantic interpolations to mimic unseen classes, obtaining smooth decision
boundaries and an embedding space considering class relations. Moreover, the proposed method can be used with
any proxy-based loss, including softmax loss and its variants. We demonstrate that our proposed method yields better robustness on unseen classes and deformation on the input and embedding feature. We achieve a significant performance boost on every proxy-based loss with Proxy Synthesis
and obtain state-of-the-art performance with respect to four
famous benchmarks in image retrieval tasks.

One of the main purposes of deep metric learning is to construct an embedding space that has well-generalized embeddings on both seen (training) classes and unseen (test) classes.
Most existing works have tried to achieve this using different types of metric objectives and hard sample mining strategies with given training data. However, learning with only
the training data can be overfitted to the seen classes, leading
to the lack of generalization capability on unseen classes. To
address this problem, we propose a simple regularizer called
Proxy Synthesis that exploits synthetic classes for stronger
generalization in deep metric learning. The proposed method
generates synthetic embeddings and proxies that work as synthetic classes, and they mimic unseen classes when computing proxy-based losses. Proxy Synthesis derives an embedding space considering class relations and smooth decision
boundaries for robustness on unseen classes. Our method is
applicable to any proxy-based losses, including softmax and
its variants. Extensive experiments on four famous benchmarks in image retrieval tasks demonstrate that Proxy Synthesis significantly boosts the performance of proxy-based losses
and achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our implementation is available at github.com/navervision/proxy-synthesis.

1

Introduction

Deep metric learning aims to learn a similarity metric among
arbitrary data points so that it defines an embedding space
where semantically similar images are close together, and
dissimilar images are far apart. Owing to its practical significance, it has been used for a variety of tasks such as
image retrieval (Gordo et al. 2016; Sohn 2016), person reidentification (Yu et al. 2018; Hermans, Beyer, and Leibe
2017), zero-shot learning (Zhang and Saligrama 2016), and
face recognition (Wen et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2019). The
well-structured embedding is requested to distinguish the
unseen classes properly, where the model is required to
learn image representation from seen classes. This has been
achieved by loss functions, which can be categorized into
two types: pair-based and proxy-based loss.
The pair-based losses are designed based on the pairwise similarity between data points in the embedding space,

2

Related Work

Sample Generation: To achieve better generalization,
previous works (Zhao et al. 2018; Duan et al. 2018; Zheng
et al. 2019) have leveraged a generative network to cre-

∗

Authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1460

