The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Savable but Lost Lives when ICU Is Overloaded: a Model from 733 Patients in
Epicenter Wuhan, China
Tingting Dan1, ∗ , Yang Li1, ∗ , Ziwei Zhu1, ∗ , Xijie Chen1 , Wuxiu Quan1 , Yu Hu1 , Guihua Tao1 ,
Lei Zhu1 , Jijin Zhu2 , Hongmin Cai1, 3, † , Hanchun Wen2, †
1
South China University of Technology
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
hmcai@scut.edu.cn, wenhanchun@gxmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

countries have taken measures of lockdown, whereas it has
undoubtedly caused indelible losses to the economy.
The genetic characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 is significantly different from SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Voo,
Clapham, and Tam 2020). The most worrying aspect is that
the virus of SARS-CoV-2 has super spreadability, which
seems to spread by any means (respiratory droplet transmission, close contact transmission, air aerosol transmission, etc.). The analysis, modeling and forecasting of clinical characteristics for patients diagnosed with COVID-19,
are of great significance for the evaluation of new severe patients. Many scholars have done abundantly research on the
clinical manifestations, epidemiological characteristics and
treatment methods of infected patients (Hessami et al. 2020;
Onder, Rezza, and Brusaferro 2020; Suleyman et al. 2020;
Tong et al. 2020; Wu, Leung, and Leung 2020; Zeng et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2021).
The COVID-19 costed average mortality of 2.3% worldwide. Yet the reported mortality is largely different, with
as high as 29.1% in Yemen and as low as 0.05% in Singapore (Updated on December 10th) (Dong, Du, and Gardner
2020). It remains unknown on such differences. The plausible explanation includes the low ratio of infected people
among the whole population, high level of medical standard
and ICU ward per capita. In a radical time of shorting ICU
beds, a very tough decision needs be made to grant high priority for the patient with the hope of survival in serious conditions. Estimate the mortality of the critical patients who
failed to receive ICU will further help to explain the differences in mortality rate across countries, and optimize the
assignment on ICU resources.
In this study, 733 patients from Huangpi Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine (Wuhan, China) were collected
and analyzed by benchmark machine learning methods. The
patients were systematically reviewed and the disease progression was carefully quantified. The study aimed to estimate the mortality for the critical patient who should be
admitted into the ICU intervention in early time yet did not
due to various causes. To this end, a prognostic system was
built to identify those patients who were more likely to need
ICU care, thereby helping to estimate the number of ICU
beds needed for early preparation.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) causes a sudden
turnover to bad at some checkpoints and thus needs the intervention of intensive care unit (ICU). This resulted in urgent and large needs of ICUs posed great risks to the medical system. Estimating the mortality of critical in-patients
who were not admitted into the ICU will be valuable to optimize the management and assignment of ICU. Retrospective,
733 in-patients diagnosed with COVID-19 at a local hospital
(Wuhan, China), as of March 18, 2020. Demographic, clinical and laboratory results were collected and analyzed using
machine learning to build a predictive model. Considering the
shortage of ICU beds at the beginning of disease emergence,
we defined the mortality for those patients who were predicted to be in needing ICU care yet they did not as Missing-ICU
(MI)-mortality. To estimate MI-mortality, a prognostic classification model was built to identify the in-patients who may
need ICU care. Its predictive accuracy was 0.8288, with an
AUC of 0.9119. On our cohort of 733 patients, 25 in-patients
who have been predicted by our model that they should need
ICU, yet they did not enter ICU due to lack of shorting ICU
wards. Our analysis had shown that the MI-mortality is 41%,
yet the mortality of ICU is 32%, implying that enough bed of
ICU in treating patients in critical conditions.

Introduction
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2), has rapidly spread around the world. As of December
10th, 68, 165, 877 have been diagnosed and 1, 557, 385
deaths have occurred, with a mortality rate of 2.3%. At the
peak of the outbreak, the mortality was increasing in an upward trend every day, posing a serious challenge to medical resources around the world (Chai et al. 2020). This has
aroused extreme attention from the World Health Organization (WHO) (https://www.who.int/) and all national health
organizations. Currently, a new round of epidemic seems to
be coming quietly, to mitigate the spread of the virus, most
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4804

