The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Automaton-Guided Reward Shaping for Monte Carlo Tree Search
Alvaro Velasquez1 , Brett Bissey2 , Lior Barak2 , Andre Beckus1 , Ismail Alkhouri2 , Daniel Melcer3 ,
George Atia2
1
Information Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida
3
Department of Computer Science, Northeastern University
{alvaro.velasquez.1, andre.beckus}@us.af.mil, {brettbissey, lior.barak, ialkhouri}@knights.ucf.edu,
melcer.d@northeastern.edu, george.atia@ucf.edu
2

Abstract

Given an automaton representation of the underlying
agent objective, we investigate how to guide and accelerate the derivation of decision-making policies by leveraging this structured representation. This use of automata allows us to reason about non-Markovian reward signals that
account for the prior state history of the agent, which is
useful and sometimes necessary in domains with sparse rewards or partial observability (Toro Icarte et al. 2019). In
particular, we make two main contributions. First, we introduce Automaton-Guided Reward Shaping (AGRS) for
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms as a means to
mitigate the sparse rewards problem by leveraging the empirical expected value of transitions within the automaton
representation of the underlying objective. In this sense, expected value denotes the frequency with which transitions
in the automaton have been observed as part of a trajectory which satisfies the given objective. We integrate the
proposed AGRS within modern implementations of MCTS
that utilize deep reinforcement learning to train Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for policy prediction and
value estimation. Our second contribution entails the use of
the aforementioned automata as a means to transfer learned
information between two problem instances that share the
same objective. In particular, we record the empirical expected value of transitions in the objective automaton in a
simple environment and use these to bootstrap the learning
process in a similar, more complex environment. We demonstrate the effectiveness of AGRS within MCTS, henceforth
referred to as MCTSA , by comparing the win-rate curves to
those of a vanilla MCTS baseline on randomized grid-world
problems.
The foregoing is useful as a complement to existing approaches by reasoning over both the learned representation
of agent-environment dynamics through deep CNNs as well
as the learned representation of the underlying objective via
automata. We argue that this is particularly useful due to
the typically low dimensionality of the automaton that represents the objective. This means that individual transitions
within the automaton correspond to potentially many different transitions within the environment and, hence, within the
Monte Carlo tree. Thus, reward shaping defined over the former can be used to accelerate learning over many instances
of the latter.

Reinforcement learning and planning have been revolutionized in recent years, due in part to the mass adoption of deep
convolutional neural networks and the resurgence of powerful methods to refine decision-making policies. However,
the problem of sparse reward signals and their representation
remains pervasive in many domains. While various rewardshaping mechanisms and imitation learning approaches have
been proposed to mitigate this problem, the use of humanaided artificial rewards introduces human error, sub-optimal
behavior, and a greater propensity for reward hacking. In this
paper, we mitigate this by representing objectives as automata
in order to define novel reward shaping functions over this
structured representation. In doing so, we address the sparse
rewards problem within a novel implementation of Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) by proposing a reward shaping
function which is updated dynamically to capture statistics on
the utility of each automaton transition as it pertains to satisfying the goal of the agent. We further demonstrate that such
automaton-guided reward shaping can be utilized to facilitate transfer learning between different environments when
the objective is the same.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning and planning settings, a reward
signal over state-action pairs is used to reinforce and deter
positive and negative action outcomes, respectively. However, from a practical perspective, it is common to have a
high-level objective which can be captured as a language
of what would constitute good behaviors. Such objectives
can be represented via various types of automata. For example, the deterministic finite automata we consider in this
paper can represent any regular language and thus afford a
large space of possibilities for defining objectives. If these
objectives are expressed in natural language, there are translation mechanisms for obtaining the corresponding automaton (Brunello, Montanari, and Reynolds 2019). On the other
hand, there are also approaches for learning the graph structure of the automaton that represents a given reward signal
(Xu et al. 2020; Gaon and Brafman 2020; Toro Icarte et al.
2019), so such approaches could be used to learn the automaton structure from a reward signal.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12015

