The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SSD-GAN: Measuring the Realness in the Spatial and Spectral Domains
Yuanqi Chen1,2 , Ge Li1 * , Cece Jin1,2 , Shan Liu4 , Thomas Li1,3
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University 4 Tencent America
cyq373@pku.edu.cn, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn, fordacre@pku.edu.cn, shanl@tencent.com, tli@aiit.org.cn

Abstract
This paper observes that there is an issue of high frequencies
missing in the discriminator of standard GAN, and we reveal
it stems from downsampling layers employed in the network
architecture. This issue makes the generator lack the incentive from the discriminator to learn high-frequency content of
data, resulting in a significant spectrum discrepancy between
generated images and real images. Since the Fourier transform is a bijective mapping, we argue that reducing this spectrum discrepancy would boost the performance of GANs. To
this end, we introduce SSD-GAN, an enhancement of GANs
to alleviate the spectral information loss in the discriminator.
Specifically, we propose to embed a frequency-aware classifier into the discriminator to measure the realness of the input
in both the spatial and spectral domains. With the enhanced
discriminator, the generator of SSD-GAN is encouraged to
learn high-frequency content of real data and generate exact
details. The proposed method is general and can be easily integrated into most existing GANs framework without excessive cost. The effectiveness of SSD-GAN is validated on various network architectures, objective functions, and datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/cyq373/SSD-GAN.

Real

SGAN

SSD-GAN

Figure 1: Standard GAN (SGAN) fails to learn high frequencies of real data. In this toy example, the real data is a single 16 × 16 image with a checkerboard pattern, which contains significant high frequencies. Unlike SGAN, our proposed SSD-GAN alleviates the spectral information loss in
the discriminator and can well reproduce the real data. The
detailed experimental setup is described in the supplemental
materials.

significant high frequencies, standard GAN might fail to reproduce the desired data distribution. Moreover, since the
Fourier transform is a bijective mapping, the frequency spectrum discrepancy between real data and the generated samples also indicates that the data distribution in image space
is not well captured. We believe that reducing the spectrum
discrepancy would boost the performance of GANs.
In this paper, we first attempt to explore why there is
a spectrum discrepancy between real data and the generated samples. By investigating the downsampling techniques widely used in the discriminator networks, we reveal
that both of these downsampling strategies, downsampling
with anti-aliasing and downsampling without anti-aliasing,
would lead to high frequencies missing in the discriminator.
Since the training of GANs is a two-player minimax game,
the generator lacks incentives from the discriminator to learn
the high-frequency information of the data.
To address the issue of high frequencies missing in the
discriminator, we propose SSD-GAN, whose discriminator
can measure the realness of the input in both the spatial and
spectral domains. To instantiate the idea, we introduce an
additional spectral classifier to detect frequency spectrum
discrepancy between real and generated images and integrate it into the discriminator of GANs. With the enhanced
discriminator, the generator of SSD-GAN is encouraged to

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) involve training a generator and discriminator
network in an adversarial manner, such that the generator
learns to reproduce the desired data distribution. Despite the
remarkable achievements in image generation tasks (Isola
et al. 2017; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019), as shown in recent
works (Zhang, Karaman, and Chang 2019; Durall, Keuper,
and Keuper 2020; Dzanic and Witherden 2019; Frank et al.
2020), we can efficiently distinguish GAN-generated images
from real images in the frequency domain, which indicates
that existing GANs fail to learn the spectral distributions.
Recent studies (Dzanic and Witherden 2019; Frank et al.
2020) show that the frequency spectrum discrepancy mainly
exists at high frequencies. Because high-frequency components of images influence the exactness of details, the discrepancy cannot be ignored for generative tasks where details matter. As shown in Fig. 1, when real data contains
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1105

