The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Near Lossless Transfer Learning for Spiking Neural Networks
Zhanglu Yan∗ , Jun Zhou∗ , Weng-Fai Wong
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{zhangluyan, zhoujun, wongwf}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Taherkhani et al. 2019). Many of these are based on spiketiming-dependent plasticity (Vigneron and Martinet 2020).
However, to date, such approaches only seems to work for
shallow networks, and simple datasets. Another approach is
tandem training where forward passes are made on a CNN
model and its twin SNN model (Wu et al. 2019a). On a
backward training pass, errors and gradients from the SNN
model are used to drive the learning in the CNN twin. The
updated weights in the CNN is then transferred to the SNN
for the next forward pass. Good accuracy for up to 14 layers on the DVS-CIFAR10 dataset was achieved (Wu et al.
2019a). However, this method requires both the CNN and
SNN models during training, and hence cost more in terms
of resources. The final approach, and the approach taken by
this paper, is to train an equivalent CNN using the standard
back propagation methods, then transfer the weights to the
SNN. However, if done naı̈vely, there is a significant drop
in accuracy. This brings us to the main contribution of this
paper. Essentially, we propose a series of extensions to the
basic back propagation framework that accounts for the idiosyncrasies of the SNN that the weights are intended for.
The end result is what we called the CQ training (‘clamped
and quantized’) algorithm. After CQ training, the weights of
the CNN can be directly transferred over to the equivalent
SNN with nearly no loss in accuracy. We have verified this
for up to 21 layers of a CNN (VGG-19) on a complex series
of dataset. The contributions of this paper are:

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) significantly reduce
energy consumption by replacing weight multiplications with additions. This makes SNNs suitable for
energy-constrained platforms. However, due to its discrete activation, training of SNNs remains a challenge.
A popular approach is to first train an equivalent CNN
using traditional backpropagation, and then transfer the
weights to the intended SNN. Unfortunately, this often results in significant accuracy loss, especially in
deeper networks. In this paper, we propose CQ training
(Clamped and Quantized training), an SNN-compatible
CNN training algorithm with clamp and quantization
that achieves near-zero conversion accuracy loss. Essentially, CNN training in CQ training accounts for certain
SNN characteristics. Using a 7 layer VGG-∗ and a 21
layer VGG-19, running on the CIFAR-10 dataset, we
achieved 94.16% and 93.44% accuracy in the respective
equivalent SNNs. It outperforms other existing comparable works that we know of. We also demonstrate
the low-precision weight compatibility for the VGG19 structure. Without retraining, an accuracy of 93.43%
and 92.82% using quantized 9-bit and 8-bit weights,
respectively, was achieved. The framework was developed in PyTorch and is publicly available.1

Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) differs from traditional artificial neural networks such as the highly successful convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in that the activation data
is transmitted among layers as sequences of binary spikes
that are the result of some firing rules, instead of floatingpoint or fixed-point numbers. A key advantage of doing so is
the elimination of expensive multiplications, making SNNs
promising for resource-constrained devices like those used
in edge AI. Unfortunately, their discrete activations render
them non-differentiable, and hence unsuitable for the traditional back propagation training algorithms that relies on the
chain rule applied to various partial derivatives. There are
several ways around this problem. The first is to use training algorithms that are specific to SNNs (Wu et al. 2019b;

• We introduce a near lossless transfer learning method
CQ training for spiking neural networks, especially deep
SNNs. Activation clamping and quantization are adapted
for each convolutional layer during the SNN-compatible
CNN training, which significantly reduces the approximation error and deepens SNNs layers. Both the forward and
backward propagation have been updated in this paper.
• A comprehensive discussion on SNN transfer learning
problems is made in this paper. This includes new input spiking generation methods, low-precision weight exploration (weight quantization), weighted sum with batch
normalization, and approximation reduction study.
• We introduce a fast and easy-to-program framework for
CQ back propagation training, weight transfer, and SNN
testing. This is evaluated on large SNNs (equivalent of
VGG-19) running the MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100

∗
Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/zhoujuncc1/shenjingcat

10577

