The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Nested Named Entity Recognition with Partially-Observed TreeCRFs
Yao Fu1∗ , Chuanqi Tan2∗† , Mosha Chen2 , Songfang Huang2 , Fei Huang2
1

University of Edinburgh
2
Alibaba Group
yao.fu@ed.ac.uk {chuanqi.tcq, chenmosha.cms, songfang.hsf, f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com

PER

Abstract

GPE

Named entity recognition (NER) is a well-studied task in
natural language processing. However, the widely-used sequence labeling framework is difficult to detect entities with
nested structures. In this work, we view nested NER as constituency parsing with partially-observed trees and model it
with partially-observed TreeCRFs. Specifically, we view all
labeled entity spans as observed nodes in a constituency tree,
and other spans as latent nodes. With the TreeCRF we achieve
a uniform way to jointly model the observed and the latent
nodes. To compute the probability of partial trees with partial
marginalization, we propose a variant of the Inside algorithm,
the M ASKED I NSIDE algorithm, that supports different inference operations for different nodes (evaluation for the observed, marginalization for the latent, and rejection for nodes
incompatible with the observed) with efficient parallelized
implementation, thus significantly speeding up training and
inference. Experiments show that our approach achieves the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) F1 scores on the ACE2004, ACE2005
dataset, and shows comparable performance to SOTA models on the GENIA dataset. We release the code at https:
//github.com/FranxYao/Partially-Observed-TreeCRFs.

GPE

US officials publicly declined to confirm any of North Korea ’s
PER
PER
ORG
GPE

announcements with US State Department spokesman Richard Boucher …

Figure 1: An example sentence in the ACE dataset with
its nested entities. Viewing the nested entity structure as a
partially observed tree, a key observation is that other spans
without annotation can be modeled as latent nodes (dashed
lines) in a full tree. This observation motivates us to model
nested NER with partially-observed constituency trees.

These observations motivate us to formulate nested NER as
parsing with partially observed constituency trees: we can
view entities with annotations as observed constituents, and
assume a distribution of latent constituents over spans without annotation. For example, State Department and Richard
Boucher can be two possible latent entities in Figure 1.
In this work, we propose to model observed and latent entities jointly with a TreeCRF (Zhang, Zhou, and Li 2020;
Rush 2020). Specifically, we use a pretrained encoder to
obtain word representations, a biaffine scoring mechanism
(Dozat and Manning 2017) to obtain log potentials, and a
TreeCRF to decode full constituency trees. Using TreeCRFs
gives the advantage of modeling different types of entities
in a probabilistically principled way and properly handling
the ambiguities of the latent constituents. For optimization,
we marginalize all latent constituents out, and maximize the
resulting probability of observed partial trees.
Previously, the application of TreeCRFs for parsing is
limited by the cubic time complexity of the Inside algorithm (Eisner 2016). Recent works show that it is possible to
parallelize the Inside algorithm on modern hardware (Rush
2020). While a vanilla Inside algorithm sums over all possible trees, in our setting, we require an Inside-styled partial marginalization which only sums over latent nodes. To
adapt the Inside algorithm to partial summation, we propose
a masking method that differentiates different nodes during
marginalization. Furthermore, to efficiently compute partial

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a fundamental task
in natural language processing (McCallum and Li 2003).
Although recent work shows huge success in flat NER
with modern neural architectures and pretrained encoders
(Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015; Devlin et al. 2019), NER with
nested structures is still difficult since simple sequence labeling techniques cannot model these structures (Finkel and
Manning 2009). Nested NER is also important because entities of nested structures are observed in many domains due
to their compositionality (Alex, Haddow, and Grover 2007)
and consequently involved in many real-world applications
(Kim et al. 2003).
Figure 1 gives an example sentence with nested entities.
We observe that an inner entity can be part of an outer entity, which is quite similar to the constituency structure. Additionally, the boundaries of nested entities cannot cross.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12839

