The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Certification of Spatial Robustness
Anian Ruoss, Maximilian Baader, Mislav Balunović, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
anruoss@ethz.ch
{mbaader, mislav.balunovic, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent work has exposed the vulnerability of computer vision
models to vector field attacks. Due to the widespread usage
of such models in safety-critical applications, it is crucial to
quantify their robustness against such spatial transformations.
However, existing work only provides empirical robustness
quantification against vector field deformations via adversarial
attacks, which lack provable guarantees. In this work, we propose novel convex relaxations, enabling us, for the first time,
to provide a certificate of robustness against vector field transformations. Our relaxations are model-agnostic and can be
leveraged by a wide range of neural network verifiers. Experiments on various network architectures and different datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability of our method.

1

(a) Original

(b) δ = 1, γ = ∞

(c) δ = 3, γ = 0.25

Figure 1: Image instances and corresponding deforming vector fields (γ and δ explained below): (a) original, (b) adversarially deformed (label 5) by non-smooth vector field, and
(c) adversarially deformed (label 3) by smooth vector field.

To address this issue, our goal is to provide a provable
certificate that a neural network is robust against all possible
deforming vector fields within an attack budget for a given
dataset of images. While various certification methods exist,
they are limited to noise-based perturbations (Katz et al. 2017;
Gehr et al. 2018; Wong and Kolter 2018; Singh et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018) or compositions of common geometric
transformations (e.g., rotations and translations) (Pei et al.
2017; Singh et al. 2019b; Balunovic et al. 2019; Mohapatra
et al. 2020) and thus cannot be applied to our setting.
A common approach in robustness certification is to compute, for a given image, pixel bounds containing all possible
perturbed images within some attack budget, and then propagate these bounds through the network to obtain bounds
on the output neurons. Then, if all images within the output
bounds classify to the correct label, the network is provably
robust against all attacks limited to the same attack budget.
In our work, we intuitively parametrize the attack budget by
the magnitude of pixel displacement, denoted by δ, and the
smoothness of the vector field, denoted by γ. This allows
us to efficiently compute the tightest-possible pixel interval
bounds on vector field deformations limited to a given displacement magnitude δ by using a mathematical analysis
of the transformation. However, even small but non-smooth
vector fields (i.e., small δ but large γ) can generate large
pixel differences, resulting in recognizably perturbed images
(Figure 1b) and leading to large pixel bounds, which limit
certification performance. Thus, a key challenge is to define
smoothness constraints that can be efficiently incorporated
with neural network verifiers to enable certification of smooth
vector fields with large displacement magnitude (Figure 1c).

Introduction

It was recently shown that neural networks are susceptible not only to standard noise-based adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018) but also
to spatially transformed images that are visually indistinguishable from the original (Kanbak, Moosavi-Dezfooli, and
Frossard 2018; Alaifari, Alberti, and Gauksson 2019; Xiao
et al. 2018; Engstrom et al. 2019). Such spatial attacks can be
modeled by smooth vector fields that describe the displacement of every pixel. Common geometric transformations,
e.g., rotation and translation, are particular instances of these
smooth vector fields, which indicates that they capture a wide
range of naturally occurring image transformations.
Since the vulnerability of neural networks to spatially transformed adversarial examples can pose a security threat to
computer vision systems relying on such models, it is critical
to quantify their robustness against spatial transformations.
A common approach to estimate neural network robustness
is to measure the success rate of strong attacks (Carlini and
Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018). However, many networks
that are indeed robust against these attacks were later broken
using even more sophisticated attacks (Athalye and Carlini
2018; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Engstrom, Ilyas,
and Athalye 2018; Tramèr et al. 2020). The key issue is that
such attacks do not provide provable robustness guarantees.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2504

