The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Model Design and Benchmarking of Deep Learning Models for
COVID-19 Detection with Chest CT Scans
Xin He,1 Shihao Wang,1 Xiaowen Chu,1 * Shaohuai Shi,2 Jiangping Tang,3 Xin Liu,3
Chenggang Yan,3 Jiyong Zhang,3∗ Guiguang Ding4
1

Dept. Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
Dept. Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University 4 School of Software, Tsinghua University
chxw@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, jzhang@hdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

without any symptoms, which would easily cause delayed
treatments and lead to a sudden exacerbation of the condition. Therefore, a fast and accurate method of diagnosing
COVID-19 infection is crucial.
Currently, there are two commonly used methods for
COVID-19 diagnosis. One is viral testing, which uses realtime reverse transcription-prognosis chain reaction (rRTPCR) to detect viral RNA fragments. The other is making
diagnoses based on characteristic imaging features on chest
X-rays or computed tomography (CT) scan images. (Ai et al.
2020) conducted the effectiveness comparison between the
two diagnosis methods and concluded that chest CT has a
faster detection from the initial negative to positive than rRTPCR. However, the manual process of analyzing and diagnosing based on CT images highly relies on professional
knowledge and is time-consuming to analyze the features
of the CT images. Therefore, many recent studies have tried
to use deep learning (DL) methods to assist COVID-19 diagnosis with chest X-rays or CT scan images.
However, the reported accuracy of the existing DL-based
COVID-19 detection solutions spans a broad spectrum because they were evaluated on different datasets, making it
difficult to achieve a fair comparison. Besides, most studies
focus on 2D CT datasets (Singh et al. 2020; Ardakani et al.
2020; Alom et al. 2020). However, the real CT scan is usually the 3D data. Thus it is necessary to use 3D models to
classify 3D CT scan data. To this end, we use three state-ofthe-art (SOTA) 3D DL models to establish the baseline performance on three open-source 3D chest CT scan datasets:
CC-CCII1 (Zhang et al. 2020b), MosMedData (Morozov
et al. 2020) and COVID-CTset (Rahimzadeh, Attar, and
Sakhaei 2020). The details are shown in Table 2.
In addition, designing a high-quality model for the specific medical image dataset is a time-consuming task and
requires much expertise, which hinders the development of
DL technology in the medical field. Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) has become a prevalent topic, as it can
efficiently discover high-quality DL models automatically.
Many studies have used the NAS technique to image classification and object detection tasks (Pham et al. 2018; Liu, Si-

The COVID-19 pandemic has spread globally for several
months. Because its transmissibility and high pathogenicity
seriously threaten people’s lives, it is crucial to accurately
and quickly detect COVID-19 infection. Many recent studies have shown that deep learning (DL) based solutions can
help detect COVID-19 based on chest CT scans. However,
most existing work focuses on 2D datasets, which may result
in low quality models as the real CT scans are 3D images.
Besides, the reported results span a broad spectrum on different datasets with a relatively unfair comparison. In this paper,
we first use three state-of-the-art 3D models (ResNet3D101,
DenseNet3D121, and MC3 18) to establish the baseline performance on three publicly available chest CT scan datasets.
Then we propose a differentiable neural architecture search
(DNAS) framework to automatically search the 3D DL models for 3D chest CT scans classification and use the Gumbel Softmax technique to improve the search efficiency. We
further exploit the Class Activation Mapping (CAM) technique on our models to provide the interpretability of the results. The experimental results show that our searched models (CovidNet3D) outperform the baseline human-designed
models on three datasets with tens of times smaller model
size and higher accuracy. Furthermore, the results also verify
that CAM can be well applied in CovidNet3D for COVID19 datasets to provide interpretability for medical diagnosis.
Code: https://github.com/HKBU-HPML/CovidNet3D.

Introduction
The Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is
an ongoing pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The SARS-CoV-2
virus can be easily spread among people via small droplets
produced by coughing, sneezing, and talking. COVID-19 is
not only easily contagious but also a severe threat to human lives. The COVID-19 infected patients usually present
pneumonia-like symptoms, such as fever, dry cough and
dyspnea, and gastrointestinal symptoms, followed by a severe acute respiratory infection. The usual incubation period
of COVID-19 ranges from one to 14 days. Many COVID19 patients do not even know that they have been infected
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We find there are some errors and noises in the original dataset
(Version 1.0). Therefore we built our version based on it.

4821

