The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Integrated Recommendation
Ruobing Xie* , Shaoliang Zhang∗ , Rui Wang, Feng Xia, Leyu Lin
WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent, China
ruobingxie@tencent.com

Abstract

ences on both item and channel levels, making the systems
more attractive and friendly.

Integrated recommendation aims to jointly recommend heterogeneous items in the main feed from different sources via
multiple channels, which needs to capture user preferences on
both item and channel levels. It has been widely used in practical systems by billions of users, while few works concentrate on the integrated recommendation systematically. In this
work, we propose a novel Hierarchical reinforcement learning framework for integrated recommendation (HRL-Rec),
which divides the integrated recommendation into two tasks
to recommend channels and items sequentially. The low-level
agent is a channel selector, which generates a personalized
channel list. The high-level agent is an item recommender,
which recommends specific items from heterogeneous channels under the channel constraints. We design various rewards
for both recommendation accuracy and diversity, and propose
four losses for fast and stable model convergence. We also
conduct an online exploration for sufficient training. In experiments, we conduct extensive offline and online experiments
on a billion-level real-world dataset to show the effectiveness
of HRL-Rec. HRL-Rec has also been deployed on WeChat
Top Stories, affecting millions of users. The source codes are
released in https://github.com/modriczhang/HRL-Rec.

1

HRL-Rec

millions
hundreds

Video channel
Breaking
news for
AAAI
News channel
Top 10 popular food

Matching
millions separately hundreds Ranking top 10
and
in
mixing
different
channels hundreds

WeChat Top Stories
Breaking
news for
AAAI

Top 10 popular food

Beijing documentary

millions

jointly ranking with
heterogeneous items
Article channel

Figure 1: A real-world integrated recommendation system.
A good integrated recommendation system should provide user-interested, diversified and stable results from heterogeneous channels. However, integrated recommendation
faces more challenges than conventional homogeneous recommendation: (1) heterogeneous items from multiple channels usually have different features and ranking strategies. It
is extremely difficult to compare items in different channels
for joint ranking. (2) Users have personalized preferences on
both item and channel levels. The coarse-grained user preference on channels also has essential impacts on recommendation. (3) Real-world integrated recommendation highly
values the online model stability. A small disturbance in one
channel (e.g., data or model updating) may result in serious
influences on the overall performances. Although integrated
recommendation is widely deployed in practice, there are
still few works focusing on these challenges systematically.
Currently, most real-world integrated recommendation systems jointly rank heterogeneous items with CTR-oriented
objectives and rule-based strategies. However, merely relying on CTR may lead to homogenization and biases in both
items and channels (e.g., videos usually have higher CTR
compared to articles), which will harm the channel diversity
and user experience eventually. Simple empirical rule-based
strategies will inevitably reduce the personalization.
To address these challenges and improve the overall performance of integrated recommendation, we propose a novel
Hierarchical reinforcement learning framework for integrated recommendation (HRL-Rec), which captures user

Introduction

Personalized recommendation systems can help users to get
various types of information including news (Zheng et al.
2018), videos (Hidasi et al. 2016), products (Sun et al. 2019)
and tags (Liu et al. 2020c). Integrated recommendation is
proposed to simultaneously recommend these heterogeneous
items from different sources (i.e., channels) in a single recommendation system, which has been widely deployed by
real-world content providers such like WeChat Top Stories,
Google and Baidu Feed (Xie et al. 2020b). Fig. 1 gives a
classical architecture of a real-world integrated recommendation. It first combines heterogeneous items from different channels (e.g., article, video and news channels), and
then jointly ranks them in the main feed. Integrated recommendation is more convenient for information acquisition. Moreover, it greatly increases users’ choices on different types/sources of information to meet user diverse prefer* indicates equal contribution. Ruobing Xie is the corresponding author (ruobingxie@tencent.com).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4521

