The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

If You Like Shapley Then You’ll Love the Core
Tom Yan,1 Ariel D. Procaccia 2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Harvard University
tyyan@cmu.edu, arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

assigned payoffs in a way that satisfies four axioms; roughly
speaking, a player’s payoff is their average marginal contribution to a coalition consisting of other players.

The prevalent approach to problems of credit assignment in
machine learning — such as feature and data valuation — is
to model the problem at hand as a cooperative game and apply the Shapley value. But cooperative game theory offers a
rich menu of alternative solution concepts, which famously
includes the core and its variants. Our goal is to challenge the
machine learning community’s current consensus around the
Shapley value, and make a case for the core as a viable alternative. To that end, we prove that arbitrarily good approximations to the least core — a core relaxation that is always
feasible — can be computed efficiently (but prove an impossibility for a more refined solution concept, the nucleolus).
We also perform experiments that corroborate these theoretical results and shed light on settings where the least core may
be preferable to the Shapley value.

This intense focus on the Shapley value is surprising,
however, as — once we have accepted that problems of
credit assignment in machine learning can be modeled as
cooperative games — there are a plethora of other solution
concepts (Peleg and Sudhölter 2007). In particular, there is
a seminal solution concept in cooperative game theory that
is as prominent as the Shapley value: the core. This solution concept seeks to achieve maximal stability amongst all
possible coalitions of the players in the game — an idea that
dates back to the writings of Edgeworth on market equilibrium theory in 1881. Since then, it has found extensive applications in economics and beyond (Telser 1994).

Introduction

Specifically, according to the core, the total payoff to each
coalition should be at least its value. When this is not possible, the maximum deficit (difference between value and payoff) of any coalition should be minimized — this is known
as the least core. The (least) core can be seen as a notion
of group fairness, in that each group of players (or coalition) gets its dues. Moreover, it is especially apt in the valuation setting, where the data vendors or feature annotators
are paid in a way that disincentivizes (to the extent possible) any coalition of vendors from choosing to opt out and
not contribute; if a coalition S if not paid at least its value
v(S) then the coalition would be better off separating from
the so-called grand coalition. Indeed, the core values may
be seen as the set of all economically plausible payoffs to
participants that compensate them for their contributions.

As machine learning systems become more capable, they are
increasingly used in our society to automate tasks and generate value. This has lead to a surge in the attention given to
explainability for machine learning: how features and data
contribute to the performance of ML models. To ensure ML
models are functioning as intended, much work has been devoted to studying feature attribution: how the features used
to represent the data influence the model’s predictions (Cohen, Dror, and Ruppin 2007; Štrumbelj and Kononenko
2010; Datta et al. 2015; Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Chen et al. 2019). Related to feature
attribution is data valuation (Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Jia
et al. 2019a,b; Ohrimenko, Tople, and Tschiatschek 2019;
Agarwal, Dahleh, and Sarkar 2019), which studies how data
points contribute to model performance. With ML models
now generating profit for enterprises, this understanding is
important in order to fairly compensate data suppliers for
their training data. Central to both pursuits is an equitable
means of credit assignment.
Virtually all papers, including every single paper cited
above, deem the Shapley value (or close variants thereof) to
be the “right” way to carry out credit assignment. The Shapley value is a solution concept from cooperative game theory
in which players — in this case features or data points — are

In this paper, we provide a much needed comparison of
the two solution concepts and show that the (least) core is,
practically and conceptually, an attractive alternative to the
Shapley value for credit assignment in machine learning. In
doing so, we hope to raise awareness of the core as a natural solution concept for fair credit assignment, challenge the
wide-ranging usage of the Shapley value and inspire a closer
examination of cases where one solution concept should be
preferred over the other. It is worth emphasizing that, to the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to consider using the
core for explainability of machine learning models.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5751

