The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeHiB: Deep Hidden Backdoor Attack on Semi-supervised Learning via
Adversarial Perturbation
Zhicong Yan1 , Gaolei Li1 * , Yuan Tian1 , Jun Wu1 * , Shenghong Li1 * ,
Mingzhe Chen2 , H. Vincent Poor2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Princeton University, Princeton, USA
{zhicongy, gaolei li, ee tianyuan, junwuhn, shli}@sjtu.edu.cn, {mingzhec, poor}@princeton.edu
Abstract

Poisoned
unlabelled data

Backdoor Attack

The threat of data-poisoning backdoor attacks on learning
algorithms typically comes from the labeled data used for
learning. However, in deep semi-supervised learning (SSL),
unknown threats mainly stem from unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose a novel deep hidden backdoor (DeHiB) attack for SSL-based systems. In contrast to the conventional
attacking methods, the DeHiB can feed malicious unlabeled
training data to the semi-supervised learner so as to enable
the SSL model to output premeditated results. In particular,
a robust adversarial perturbation generator regularized by a
unified objective function is proposed to generate poisoned
data. To alleviate the negative impact of trigger patterns on
model accuracy and improve the attack success rate, a novel
contrastive data poisoning strategy is designed. Using the
proposed data poisoning scheme, one can implant the backdoor into the SSL model using the raw data without handcrafted labels. Extensive experiments based on CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 datasets demonstrates the effectiveness and crypticity of the proposed scheme.

Attacker

Victims
AIoT Devices
AI Assistant
Automatic Drive

labelled data

Semi-supervised
Learning

Semi-supervised Learners
Poisoned Unlabeled Data

Backdoored model

Figure 1: Illustration of proposed DeHiB attack against
semi-supervised learning. The attacker poisons the unlabelled data of semi-supervised learners by embedding a
specially-designed trigger into the unlabelled data.

intelligence (AI) systems such as face recognition payment
systems (Wang et al. 2019), auto-driving systems and recommendation systems (Nassi et al. 2020). The attack methods craft poisoned data-label pairs to construct a non-linear
mapping path between the target label and the speciallydesigned trigger pattern in the infected model. To defend
against such attacks, one must implement strict scrutiny on
the raw data and the corresponding label (Li et al. 2020).
Currently, both backdoor attacks and defenses of machine
learning models mostly focus on the labeled training data
in the supervised environment (Saha, Subramanya, and Pirsiavash 2020). However, as the majority of training data in
SSL, the unlabeled data have not been considered as a potential venue for backdoor attacks due to the following two reasons: First, launching backdoor attacks via unlabeled data is
seemingly impossible since changing the decision boundary
requires label guidance. Second, the trigger pattern is invalid
for SSL since SSL is naturally robust to randomized noise on
unlabeled data (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Li et al. 2019).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to use
the unlabeled data to launch backdoor attacks on machine
learning models.
To break the stereotype and facilitate the construction of
secure SSL, we demonstrate that one can easily backdoor the
SSL systems by adversarially poisoning the unlabeled data,
as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, the success of our attack

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an approach to machine
learning that can significantly reduce the inherent dependencies on human supervision (Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien
2006). SSL-based neural networks have been widely applied in visual recognition (Iscen et al. 2019; Sohn et al.
2020), object detection (Gao et al. 2019), and graph computing (Kipf and Welling 2017). Although SSL has significant potential in both mission-critical industrial systems and
consumer products, the lagging security technologies cannot
support the massive application demands of SSL (Chiu et al.
2020). Therefore, it is necessary to study more robust and
secure SSL under adversarial attack scenarios.
Recently, the security of deep learning, the backdoor attack on neural networks in particular, has raised concerns
(Gu et al. 2019). Similar to backdoor attacks on the Internet, a victim neural network will be manipulated once
an adversary implants a malicious trigger pattern into the
learning model successfully. Backdoor attacks in neural networks exist and significantly affect many typical artificial
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10585

