The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning with Group Noise
Qizhou Wang1,2, * , Jiangchao Yao3, * , Chen Gong2,4,† ,
Tongliang Liu5 , Mingming Gong6 , Hongxia Yang3 , Bo Han 1,†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of MoE,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Data Analytics and Intelligence Lab, Alibaba Group
4
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
6
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne
2

Abstract
Machine learning in the context of noise is a challenging but
practical setting to plenty of real-world applications. Most of
the previous approaches in this area focus on the pairwise relation (casual or correlational relationship) with noise, such as
learning with noisy labels. However, the group noise, which
is parasitic on the coarse-grained accurate relation with the
fine-grained uncertainty, is also universal and has not been
well investigated. The challenge under this setting is how to
discover true pairwise connections concealed by the group
relation with its fine-grained noise. To overcome this issue,
we propose a novel Max-Matching method for learning with
group noise. Specifically, it utilizes a matching mechanism
to evaluate the relation confidence of each object (cf. Figure 1) w.r.t. the target, meanwhile considering the Non-IID
characteristics among objects in the group. Only the most
confident object is considered to learn the model, so that the
fine-grained noise is mostly dropped. The performance on a
range of real-world datasets in the area of several learning
paradigms demonstrates the effectiveness of Max-Matching.

INSTANCE

LABEL

INSTANCE

INSTANCE

LABEL

INSTANCE

INSTANCE

LABEL

INSTANCE

LABEL

(b)

(a)
ITEM

LABEL
LABEL

INSTANCE

LABEL

ITEM

ITEM

ITEM

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Illustration of the supervised learning with pairwise noise (a) and three settings with group noise (b)-(d), in
which the objects are realized by instances, labels, and items
respectively. In the figure, black lines represent the correct
relations, while red lines mean the incorrect relations.

type of noise, which is implicitly parasitic on the weak relations as illustrated in Figure 1(b)-(d), is also general but has
not been well investigated. We specially term it group noise
based on the two following characteristics: 1) it occurs in the
group whose coarse-grained relation to the target is correct,
while the fine-grained relation of each object in the group to
the target might be inaccurate; 2) it is not proper to independently consider fine-grained noisy relations like Figure 1(a),
since objects in one group exhibit strong Non-IID characteristics. Correlation analysis for each group of objects can
help us discover better evidences to this type of noise. In the
following, we enumerate some examples about group noise.

Introduction
The success of machine learning is closely related to the
availability of data with accurate relation descriptions. However, the data quality usually cannot be guaranteed in many
real-world applications, e.g., image classification (Li et al.
2017), machine translation (Belinkov and Bisk 2017), and
object recognition (Yang et al. 2020). To overcome this issue, learning from cheap but noisy assignments has attracted
intensive attention. Especially, in the recent years, lots of
works have contributed to learning with label noise (Xia
et al. 2020; Han et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020).
Nevertheless, most of the previous works focus on the
pairwise relation with noise as characterized in Figure 1(a).
For notion simplicity, we call it pairwise noise. Another

• Figure 1(b): In region-proposal-based object localization,
each group is a set of regions of one image. Given the
image-level label, we aim to find its corresponding regions and remove the irrelevant and background parts.
Here, a group of instances (or regions) are weakly supervised by a category label, while some instances are mismatched to this category. This is like the multiple-instance
learning problem in the case of the instance-level classi-

* Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding authors. Emails: chen.gong@njust.edu.cn,
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10192

