The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MiniSeg: An Extremely Minimum Network for Efficient COVID-19 Segmentation
Yu Qiu1 , Yun Liu2* , Shijie Li3 , Jing Xu1 *
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University
College of Computer Science, Nankai University
3
Department of Information Systems and Artificial Intelligence, University of Bonn
yqiu@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {vagrantlyun, jason.li.nku}@gmail.com, xujing@nankai.edu.cn
2

Abstract

When it comes to computer-aided COVID-19 screening,
deep-learning-based technology is a good choice due to its
uncountable successful stories (Sun et al. 2014; He et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2019, 2020, 2018a,b). However, directly
applying traditional deep learning models for COVID-19
screening is suboptimal. On the one hand, these models usually have millions of parameters and thus require a large
amount of labeled data for training. The problem is that
the publicly available COVID-19 data are limited and thus
easy to cause overfitting for traditional data-hungry models.
On the other hand, traditional deep learning methods, especially the ones for image segmentation, are usually computationally intensive. Considering the current severe pandemic situation, fast training/testing and low computational
load are essential for quick deployment and development of
computer-aided COVID-19 screening systems.
It is a widely accepted concept that overfitting is easier to
happen when a model has more parameters and less training
data. To solve the above problems of COVID-19 segmentation, we observe that lightweight networks are not only
uneasy to overfit owing to their small number of parameters but also likely to be efficient, making them suitable
for computer-aided COVID-19 screening systems. Therefore, we think lightweight COVID-19 segmentation should
be the technical solution of this paper. The key is to achieve
accurate segmentation under the constraints of the number
of network parameters and high efficiency. To achieve this
goal, we find that the accuracy of image segmentation can
be improved with effective multi-scale learning, which has
significantly pushed forward the state of the arts of segmentation (Chen et al. 2018a, 2017, 2018b; Yang et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2017; Mehta et al. 2018, 2019; Pohlen et al. 2017;
Yu et al. 2018b). Hence, we resort to multi-scale learning to
ensure the segmentation accuracy of lightweight networks.
With the above analyses, our effort starts with the design
of an Attentive Hierarchical Spatial Pyramid (AHSP) module for effective, lightweight multi-scale learning. AHSP
first builds a spatial pyramid of dilated depthwise separable convolutions and feature pooling for learning multiscale semantic features. Then, the learned multi-scale features are fused hierarchically to enhance the capacity of
multi-scale representation. Finally, the multi-scale features
are merged under the guidance of the attention mechanism,
which learns to highlight essential information and filter out

The rapid spread of the new pandemic, i.e., COVID-19,
has severely threatened global health. Deep-learning-based
computer-aided screening, e.g., COVID-19 infected CT area
segmentation, has attracted much attention. However, the
publicly available COVID-19 training data are limited, easily
causing overfitting for traditional deep learning methods that
are usually data-hungry with millions of parameters. On the
other hand, fast training/testing and low computational cost
are also necessary for quick deployment and development of
COVID-19 screening systems, but traditional deep learning
methods are usually computationally intensive. To address
the above problems, we propose MiniSeg, a lightweight deep
learning model for efficient COVID-19 segmentation. Compared with traditional segmentation methods, MiniSeg has
several significant strengths: i) it only has 83K parameters
and is thus not easy to overfit; ii) it has high computational
efficiency and is thus convenient for practical deployment;
iii) it can be fast retrained by other users using their private
COVID-19 data for further improving performance. In addition, we build a comprehensive COVID-19 segmentation
benchmark for comparing MiniSeg to traditional methods.

Introduction
As one of the most severe pandemics in human history, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) threatens global health
with thousands of newly infected patients every day. Effective screening of infected patients is of high importance to
the fight against COVID-19. The gold standard for COVID19 diagnosis is the tried-and-true Reverse Transcription
Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) testing (Wang et al.
2020). Unfortunately, the sensitivity of RT-PCR testing is
not high enough to prevent the spread of COVID-19 (Ai
et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2020). Hence, computed tomography (CT) is used as a complementary tool for RT-PCR testing to improve screening sensitivity (Ai et al. 2020; Fang
et al. 2020). Besides, CT analysis is necessary for clinical
monitoring of disease severity (Inui et al. 2020). However,
CT examination needs expert radiologists, but we severely
lack experienced radiologists during this pandemic. Therefore, computer-aided systems are expected for automatic CT
interpretation.
* Yun Liu and Jing Xu are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4846

