The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Classification with Strategically Withheld Data∗
Anilesh K. Krishnaswamy,1 Haoming Li,2 David Rein,1 Hanrui Zhang,1 Vincent Conitzer1
1

Duke University, 2 University of Southern California
anilesh@cs.duke.edu, haoming.li@usc.edu, irving.rein@duke.edu, hrzhang@cs.duke.edu, conitzer@cs.duke.edu

they think it will hurt their application) or report both.2 The
key issue here is that it is impossible to distinguish between
an applicant who takes both tests but reports only one, and
an applicant that takes only one test—for example because
the applicant simply took the one required by her school, the
dates for the other test did not work with her schedule, or for
other reasons that are not strategic in nature.3
Say a college wants to take a principled machine learning approach to making admission decisions based on the
scores from these two tests. For simplicity, assume no other
information is available. Assume that the college has enough
historical examples that contain the scores of individuals (on
whichever tests are taken, truthfully reported) along with the
corresponding ideal (binary) admission decisions.4 Based
on this data, the college has to choose a decision function
that determines which future applicants are accepted. If this
function is known to the applicants, they are bound to strategize and use their knowledge of the decision function to decide the scores they report.4 How can the classifier be trained
to handle strategic reporting of scores at prediction time?
To see the intricacies of this problem, let us consider a
simple example.

Abstract
Machine learning techniques can be useful in applications
such as credit approval and college admission. However, to
be classified more favorably in such contexts, an agent may
decide to strategically withhold some of her features, such as
bad test scores. This is a missing data problem with a twist:
which data is missing depends on the chosen classifier, because the specific classifier is what may create the incentive
to withhold certain feature values. We address the problem of
training classifiers that are robust to this behavior.
We design three classification methods: M INCUT, H ILL C LIMBING (HC) and Incentive-Compatible Logistic Regression (IC-LR). We show that M INCUT is optimal when the
true distribution of data is fully known. However, it can produce complex decision boundaries, and hence be prone to
overfitting in some cases. Based on a characterization of
truthful classifiers (i.e., those that give no incentive to strategically hide features), we devise a simpler alternative called
HC which consists of a hierarchical ensemble of out-of-thebox classifiers, trained using a specialized hill-climbing procedure which we show to be convergent. For several reasons,
M INCUT and HC are not effective in utilizing a large number of complementarily informative features. To this end, we
present IC-LR, a modification of Logistic Regression that removes the incentive to strategically drop features. We also
show that our algorithms perform well in experiments on realworld data sets, and present insights into their relative performance in different settings.

1

Example 1. Say the scores for each of the two tests (SAT and
ACT) take one of two values: h (for high) or l (for low). Let ∗
denote a missing value. Then there are eight possible inputs
(excluding (∗, ∗) since at least one score is required): (h, h),
(h, l), (l, h), (l, l), (h, ∗), (∗, h), (l, ∗) and (∗, l). Assume
the natural distribution (without any withholding) over these
inputs is known, and so are the conditional probabilities of
the label Y ∈ {0, 1}, as shown below:

Introduction

Applicants to most colleges in the US are required to submit their scores for at least one of the SAT and the ACT.
Both tests are more or less equally popular, with close to
two million taking each in 2016 (Adams 2017). Applicants
usually take one of these two tests – whichever works to their
advantage.1 However, given the growing competitiveness of
college admissions, many applicants now take both tests and
then strategically decide whether to drop one of the scores (if

X
(h, h) (h, l) (l, h) (l, l) (h, ∗) (∗, h) (l, ∗) (∗, l)
P r(X)
1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8
P r(Y = 1 | X) 0.9 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2
P r(Y = 0 | X) 0.1 0.3 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.8 0.8

Table 1: True distribution of inputs and targets:
2

https://blog.collegevine.com/should-you-submit-your-satact-scores/
3
https://blog.prepscholar.com/do-you-need-to-take-both-theact-and-sat
4
We make these assumptions more generally throughout the paper.

∗

A version of the paper including the Supplement is available
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.10203
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.princetonreview.com/college/sat-act

5514

