The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from the Best: Rationalizing Prediction by
Adversarial Information Calibration
Lei Sha,1 Oana-Maria Camburu,1,2 Thomas Lukasiewicz1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
{lei.sha, oana-maria.camburu, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

P(Crime of theft)=0.99

P(Crime of theft)=0.64

Explaining the predictions of AI models is paramount
in safety-critical applications, such as in legal or medical domains. One form of explanation for a prediction
is an extractive rationale, i.e., a subset of features of an
instance that lead the model to give its prediction on the
instance. Previous works on generating extractive rationales usually employ a two-phase model: a selector that
selects the most important features (i.e., the rationale)
followed by a predictor that makes the prediction based
exclusively on the selected features. One disadvantage
of these works is that the main signal for learning to
select features comes from the comparison of the answers given by the predictor and the ground-truth answers. In this work, we propose to squeeze more information from the predictor via an information calibration
method. More precisely, we train two models jointly:
one is a typical neural model that solves the task at hand
in an accurate but black-box manner, and the other is
a selector-predictor model that additionally produces a
rationale for its prediction. The first model is used as a
guide to the second model. We use an adversarial-based
technique to calibrate the information extracted by the
two models such that the difference between them is an
indicator of the missed or over-selected features. In addition, for natural language tasks, we propose to use a
language-model-based regularizer to encourage the extraction of fluent rationales. Experimental results on a
sentiment analysis task as well as on three tasks from
the legal domain show the effectiveness of our approach
to rationale extraction.

Predictor

Predictor

The defendant Zhang XX
lives in the dormitory of an
electric company. When the
victim left the dormitory, he
stole a VIVO X9 mobile
phone of the victim (valued
at RMB 2198) in a black
bag on the balcony and
placed it on the left side of
the room’s entrance. ……..

The defendant Zhang XX
lives in the dormitory of an
electric company. When the
victim left the dormitory, he
stole a VIVO X9 mobile
phone of the victim (valued
at RMB 2198) in a black
bag on the balcony and
placed it on the left side of
the room’s entrance. ……..

1

Sample 1

Selector

Sample 2

The defendant Zhang XX lives in the dormitory of an electric company.
When the victim left the dormitory, he stole a VIVO X9 mobile phone of
the victim (valued at RMB 2198) in a black bag on the balcony and
placed it on the left side of the room’s entrance. ……..
Figure 1: A sample rationale in legal judgement prediction.
The human-provided rationale is shown in bold in Sample 1.
In Sample 2, the selector missed the key information “he
stole a VIVO X9”, but the predictor only tells the selector
that the whole extracted rationale (in bold) is not so informative, by producing a low probability of the correct crime.

which models rely for their predictions on the instances, can
be used as evidence for humans to decide whether or not to
trust a predicted result and, more generally, to trust a model.
Previous works mainly use selector-predictor types of
neural models to provide extractive rationales, i.e., models
composed of two modules: (i) a selector that selects a subset
of important features, and (ii) a predictor that makes a prediction based solely on the selected features. For example,
Yoon, Jordon, and van der Schaar (2018) and Lei, Barzilay,
and Jaakkola (2016) use a selector network to calculate a selection probability for each token in a sequence, then sample
a set of tokens that is exclusively passed to the predictor.
An additional typical desideratum in natural language
processing (NLP) tasks is that the selected tokens form a
semantically fluent rationale. To achieve this, Lei, Barzilay,

Introduction

Although deep neural networks have recently been contributing to state-of-the-art advances in various areas
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; Hinton et al.
2012; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), such black-box
models may not be deemed reliable in situations where
safety needs to be guaranteed, such as legal judgment prediction and medical diagnosis. Interpretable deep neural networks are a promising way to increase the reliability of neural models (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017). To this end,
extractive rationales, i.e., subsets of features of instances on
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13771

