The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive Adversarial Learning for Person Independent Facial Emotion
Recognition
Daeha Kim, Byung Cheol Song
Department of Electronic Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
kdhht5022@gmail.com, bcsong@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

Hasani, Negi, and Mahoor 2020) depend on supervision information, they tend to be biased toward given data, i.e.,
person-dependent. In particular, this phenomenon often occurs in complex or strong facial expressions (Zeng, Shan,
and Chen 2018). For example, when a person’s emotion is
angry, meaningful changes occur in the lips and eyes, etc.
This change may vary depending on the intrinsic mood or
the other person’s emotions (Russell 2017). So, successfully capturing the diversity of such complex emotions is the
key to the person-independent FER. However, if the compressed characteristics of persons/subjects is simply utilized
through a deep network, diversity analysis will become difficult. Therefore, an advanced learning for dealing with diversity analysis plays an important role in designing a personindependent FER model.
Inspired from (Goodfellow et al. 2014), this paper proposes a new structure that learns the difference in emotional
intensity adversarially, and adopts the learned information
as auxiliary data for FER in the AV domain. Since the main
goal of adversarial learning is to understand the characteristics of a target distribution, adversarial learning enables the
proposed network to better understand the embedding representation of strong or complex emotions (Yang, Ciftci, and
Yin 2018). Thus, the proposed method is not only based on
the AV domain but also is independent of persons, so it can
recognize more sophisticated and generalized emotions.
Specifically, the proposed method consists of three steps
as shown in Figure 1: 1) Emotional binarization process
based on Otsu thresholding (arrow 1 ), 2) adversarial learning based on critic network in latent feature space (arrows
2 and 3 ), 3) AV domain emotion learning (arrow 4 ).
Here, the strong and weak emotion image sets generated
through the binarization process include both facial expressions as well as inner emotions, which stands out in relatively strong emotions (Balconi, Vanutelli, and Finocchiaro
2014). In other words, changes in inner emotions that are not
revealed in facial expressions, such as hidden emotions, can
also be used for adversarial learning.
On the other hand, the loss function of the critic network
can be defined using Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)
(Gretton et al. 2012) or Integral Probability Metric (IPM)
(Mroueh, Sercu, and Goel 2017), which quantifies and dis-

Since most facial emotion recognition (FER) methods significantly rely on supervision information, they have a limit to
analyzing emotions independently of persons. On the other
hand, adversarial learning is a well-known approach for generalized representation learning because it never requires supervision information. This paper presents a new adversarial learning for FER. In detail, the proposed learning enables
the FER network to better understand complex emotional elements inherent in strong emotions by adversarially learning
weak emotion samples based on strong emotion samples. As
a result, the proposed method can recognize the emotions independently of persons because it understands facial expressions more accurately. In addition, we propose a contrastive
loss function for efficient adversarial learning. Finally, the
proposed adversarial learning scheme was theoretically verified, and it was experimentally proven to show state of the art
(SOTA) performance.

Introduction
With rapid development of deep learning, facial emotion
recognition (FER) is being studied more and more actively.
Until now, FER based on several discrete emotion categories
has been dominantly developed (Vielzeuf, Pateux, and Jurie
2017). However, discrete domain FER is limited in capturing the rich emotions of a person. For example, although
previous approach (Harmon-Jones et al. 2011) could judge
that a certain person’s emotion was anger, it could not catch
the strength of the emotion.
Arousal-valence (AV) domain FER technology which
represents and analyzes more sophisticated emotions are receiving much attention (Zafeiriou et al. 2017). Arousal indicates how active the emotion is, and valence indicates how
positive or negative the emotion is. Note that AV labels are
classified as a regression task because they have continuous
values. Recently, several continuous domain datasets have
been released, and AV domain FER methods for the datasets
have been proposed (Mollahosseini, Hasani, and Mahoor
2017; Kossaifi et al. 2017).
However, conventional FER methods in AV domain have
a critical disadvantage. Since they (Kossaifi et al. 2020;
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5948

