The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Embodied Visual Active Learning for Semantic Segmentation
David Nilsson1,2∗ , Aleksis Pirinen1 , Erik Gärtner1,2∗ , Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Google Research
{david.nilsson, aleksis.pirinen, erik.gartner, cristian.sminchisescu}@math.lth.se

Abstract

and object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016).
Such systems may however be challenged by unusual viewpoints or domains, as noted e.g. by Ammirato et al. (2017)
and Yang et al. (2019b). Moreover, a mobile household
robot should ideally operate with lightweight, re-trainable
and task-specific perception models, rather than large and
comprehensive ones, which could be demanding computationally and not tailored to the needs of a specific house.
In practice, even in closed but large environments, developing robust scene understanding by exhaustive approaches
may be difficult, as looking everywhere requires an excessive amount of annotation labor. All views are however not
equally informative, as a view containing many diverse objects is likely more useful than one covering a single semantic class, e.g. a wall. This suggests that in learning visual perception one does not have to label exhaustively. As new, potentially difficult arrangements appear in an evolving environment, it would be useful to identify those automatically,
based on the task and demand, rather than programmatically,
by periodically re-training a complete model. Moreover, the
agent could make the most out of its embodiment by propagating a given ground truth annotation using motion – as
measured by the perceived optical flow – in that neighborhood. The agent can then self-train, online, for increased
performance. The key questions are how should one explore
the environment, how to select the most informative views
to annotate, and how to make the most out of them. We analyze these questions in an embodied visual active learning
framework, illustrated in fig. 1.
To ground the embodied visual active learning task, in this
work we measure visual perception ability as semantic segmentation accuracy. The agent is equipped with a semantic segmentation system and must move around and request
annotations in order to refine it. After exploring the scene
the agent should be able to accurately segment all views in
the explored area. This requires an exploration policy covering different objects from diverse viewpoints and selecting
sufficiently many annotations to train the perception model.
The agent can also propagate annotations to different nearby
viewpoints using optical flow and then self-train. We develop a battery of methods, ranging from pre-specified ones
to a fully trainable deep reinforcement learning-based agent,
which we evaluate extensively in the photorealistic Matterport3D environment (Chang et al. 2017).

We study the task of embodied visual active learning, where
an agent is set to explore a 3d environment with the goal
to acquire visual scene understanding by actively selecting
views for which to request annotation. While accurate on
some benchmarks, today’s deep visual recognition pipelines
tend to not generalize well in certain real-world scenarios,
or for unusual viewpoints. Robotic perception, in turn, requires the capability to refine the recognition capabilities for
the conditions where the mobile system operates, including
cluttered indoor environments or poor illumination. This motivates the proposed task, where an agent is placed in a novel
environment with the objective of improving its visual recognition capability. To study embodied visual active learning,
we develop a battery of agents – both learnt and pre-specified
– and with different levels of knowledge of the environment.
The agents are equipped with a semantic segmentation network and seek to acquire informative views, move and explore in order to propagate annotations in the neighbourhood
of those views, then refine the underlying segmentation network by online retraining. The trainable method uses deep
reinforcement learning with a reward function that balances
two competing objectives: task performance, represented as
visual recognition accuracy, which requires exploring the environment, and the necessary amount of annotated data requested during active exploration. We extensively evaluate
the proposed models using the photorealistic Matterport3D
simulator and show that a fully learnt method outperforms
comparable pre-specified counterparts, even when requesting
fewer annotations.

1

Introduction

Imagine a household robot in a home it has never been before and equipped with a visual sensing module to perceive
its environment and localize objects. If the robot fails to
recognize some objects, or to adapt to changes in the environment, over time, it may not be able to properly perform
its tasks. Much of the recent success of visual perception
has been achieved by deep CNNs, e.g. in image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017)
∗

Work was partially performed during a Google internship.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2373

