The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gene Regulatory Network Inference as Relaxed Graph Matching
Deborah Weighill,1 Marouen Ben Guebila,1 Camila Lopes-Ramos, 1 Kimberly Glass, 1 2 3 John
Quackenbush, 1 2 3 John Platig, 2 3 Rebekka Burkholz 1
1

Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115
2
Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
3
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
dweighill@hsph.harvard.edu, benguebila@hsph.harvard.edu, rekrg@channing.harvard.edu, rejhp@channing.harvard.edu,
johnq@hsph.harvard.edu, camilaramos@hsph.harvard.edu, rburkholz@hsph.harvard.edu
(TF–TF cooperation) and W T W (gene–gene interactions,
see Fig. 2). The general objective of this work is to infer W based on noisy observations of its projections P ≈
W W T and C ≈ W T W . We formulate this task as a
non-convex optimization problem, OTTER (Optimize to
Estimate Regulation). It is related to inexact graph matching, as it seeks agreement between two graphs P and C.
W could be interpreted as relaxed permutation matrix that
matches nodes in P (TFs) with nodes in C (genes). As relaxed graph matching, OTTER is theoretically tractable but
the solutions are non-unique, since information about W is
lost as a consequence of projecting. To select a solution, we
need a good initial guess W0 of the bipartite network as input in addition to P and C.

Abstract
Bipartite network inference is a ubiquitous problem across
disciplines. One important example in the field molecular biology is gene regulatory network inference. Gene regulatory
networks are an instrumental tool aiding in the discovery of
the molecular mechanisms driving diverse diseases, including cancer. However, only noisy observations of the projections of these regulatory networks are typically assayed. In
an effort to better estimate regulatory networks from their
noisy projections, we formulate a non-convex but analytically
tractable optimization problem called OTTER. This problem
can be interpreted as relaxed graph matching between the
two projections of the bipartite network. OTTER’s solutions
can be derived explicitly and inspire a spectral algorithm, for
which we provide network recovery guarantees. We also provide an alternative approach based on gradient descent that is
more robust to noise compared to the spectral algorithm. Interestingly, this gradient descent approach resembles the message passing equations of an established gene regulatory network inference method, PANDA. Using three cancer-related
data sets, we show that OTTER outperforms state-of-the-art
inference methods in predicting transcription factor binding
to gene regulatory regions. To encourage new graph matching applications to this problem, we have made all networks
and validation data publicly available.

Our first contribution is to fully characterize OTTER’s solution space, which depends on the spectral decomposition
of C and P . Hence, two natural choices to solve OTTER are
(1) a spectral algorithm and (2) gradient descent. For both,
we provide theoretical network recovery guarantees. While
the spectral method is robust to small noise, gradient descent
is more reliable in higher noise settings, which are common
in biological applications. As we show on three benchmark
data sets related to gene regulation and cancer, optimizing OTTER using gradient descent outperforms state-of-theart gene regulatory network inference techniques. Among
these techniques is PANDA (Passing Attributes between
Networks for Data Assimilation (Glass et al. 2013)), an established GRN inference method. OTTER gradient descent
resembles the corresponding message passing updates, and
it can therefore be interpreted as simplified, theoretically
tractable formulation of PANDA. This formulation enables
us to provide network recovery guarantees and analyze the
effects of noise on the network reconstruction.

Introduction
Bipartite networks are studied across disciplines ranging
from machine learning (Yamanishi 2009), ecology, and economics to biology. They focus on the interaction of different types of nodes like vertices in different graphs, pollinators and plants, countries and products, or compounds
and proteins. Another prominent example are gene regulatory networks consisting of transcription factors (TFs) and
genes (see Fig. 1). These are fundamental objects of study in
molecular biology and their analysis provides insights into
mechanisms underlying the progression of various diseases,
including cancer (Lopes-Ramos et al. 2018; Burkholz and
Quackenbush 2021; Lopes-Ramos et al. 2020).
Often, we do not observe the bipartite network W (e.g.
representing TF–gene interactions) directly but instead have
information about its two associated projections W W T

Gene regulation Next generation genome sequencing
technology has revolutionized biomedical research and provides data at an unprecedented scale and speed. The low cost
of this technology facilitates large, genome-scale studies
which provide new insights into gene regulation. The human
genome encodes about 25,000 genes, but not all genes are
activated, or ”expressed,” in every cell type. Gene expression
distinguishes tissues from each other can make the difference between health and disease, as it controls the production of proteins. These proteins influence higher level cel-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10263

