The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards More Practical and Efficient Automatic Dominance Breaking
Jimmy H.M. Lee and Allen Z. Zhong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
{jlee, zwzhong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

speed up solving. The framework is able to identify dominance breaking nogoods that had not been discovered before
but are stronger than the manually constructed constraints.
In this paper, we extend the applicability of Lee and
Zhong’s work with two theoretical and practical innovations.
First, the original Lee and Zhong method requires all constraints to be efficiently checkable (EC) to guarantee the efficiency of the nogood generation process. We prove formally
on when and how non-EC constraints can be ignored in nogood generation by not exploring nogoods that contain variables in the non-EC constraints. This way, sufficient useful
nogoods can still be generated when the number of variables
in non-EC constraints are relatively small compared to all
variables of the problem. Second, we show that some generated nogoods make no contributions in pruning since they
are both logically and propagation redundant (Choi, Lee,
and Stuckey 2003) with respect to other nogoods. We propose Common Assignment Elimination to ban generation of
such fruitless nogoods, thus speeding up the generation process substantially. Experimentation confirms the enhanced
applicability of our theory-backed methods, which allow us
to tackle benchmarks that could not be handled by the original Lee and Zhong method.

Dominance breaking is shown to be an effective technique to
improve the solving speed of Constraint Optimization Problems (COPs). The paper proposes separate techniques to generalize and make more efficient the nogood generation phase
of an automated dominance breaking framework by Lee and
Zhong’s. The first contribution is in giving conditions that allow skipping the checking of non-efficiently checkable constraints and yet still produce sufficient useful nogoods, thus
opening up possibilities to apply the technique on COPs that
were previously impractical. The second contribution identifies and avoids the generation of dominance breaking nogoods that are both logically and propagation redundant. The
nogood generation model is strengthened using the notion
of Common Assignment Elimination to avoid generation of
nogoods that are subsumed by other nogoods, thus reducing the search space substantially. Extensive experimentation
confirms the benefits of the new proposals.

Introduction
Dominance relations in Constraint Optimization Problems
(COPs) describe relations between two full assignments
where one is known to be subordinate compared with another with respect to satisfiability and/or objective value.
Such relations, if and when discovered, can be used to
speed up the Branch and Bound solving process by reducing the search space significantly. A wealth of research investigates the exploitation of dominance relations in COPs,
most of which focuses on problem-specific dominance relations and usually requires sophisticated insights of the problem structure (Getoor et al. 1997; Aldowaisan 2001; Korf
2004; Prestwich and Beck 2004; Monette et al. 2007). Chu
and Stuckey (2012) presents a generic method for identifying and exploiting dominance relations, and it is automated
to a large extent by Mears and Garcia de la Banda (2015)
which still calls for human interventions in the selection of
effective dominance breaking constraints.
Lee and Zhong (2020) give the theories and techniques
that allow the mechanical construction of a CSP model to
generate dominance breaking nogoods for a useful class of
COPs, which can then be added to the problem model to

Background
Constraint Satisfaction and Optimization
A Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) P is a tuple
(X, D, C) consisting of a finite set of variables X =
{x1 , . . . , xn }, a mapping D from variable x ∈ X to its finite
domain D(x) and a set of constraints C, where each constraint c ∈ C is a subset of the Cartesian product D(xi1 ) ×
· · · × D(xik ) over the var(c) = {xi1 , . . . , xik } ⊆ X. A
Constraint Optimization Problem (COP) (X, D, C, f ) extends a CSP with an objective function f .
An assignment x = v is an equational constraint which
assigns a value v ∈ D(x) to variable x ∈ X. A partial
assignment θ on variables X 0 is a set of assignments, one
for each variable in X 0 ⊂ X, i.e. θ = {xij = vij | xij ∈
X 0 ∧ ∀ij 6= ij 0 , xij 6= xij0 }, where the set X 0 = var(θ)
is the scope of θ. When the context is clear, we use θ to
denote the tuple (vi1 , . . . , vil ), where ij < ij+1 , xij ∈ X 0
and |X 0 | = l. Note that a partial assignment can also be
interpreted as a conjunction of equational constraints, and a

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3868

