The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from History: Modeling Temporal Knowledge Graphs with Sequential
Copy-Generation Networks
Cunchao Zhu1 , Muhao Chen2 , Changjun Fan1 , Guangquan Cheng1 , Yan Zhang3
1

College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California, USA
3
École Pour l’Informatique et les Techniques Avancées, France
fanchangjun@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

Large knowledge graphs often grow to store temporal
facts that model the dynamic relations or interactions of
entities along the timeline. Since such temporal knowledge graphs often suffer from incompleteness, it is important to develop time-aware representation learning
models that help to infer the missing temporal facts.
While the temporal facts are typically evolving, it is
observed that many facts often show a repeated pattern along the timeline, such as economic crises and
diplomatic activities. This observation indicates that a
model could potentially learn much from the known
facts appeared in history. To this end, we propose a new
representation learning model for temporal knowledge
graphs, namely CyGNet
, based on a novel timeaware copy-generation mechanism. CyGNet is not only
able to predict future facts from the whole entity vocabulary, but also capable of identifying facts with repetition and accordingly predicting such future facts with
reference to the known facts in the past. We evaluate
the proposed method on the knowledge graph completion task using five benchmark datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CyGNet for
predicting future facts with repetition as well as de novo
fact prediction.

1

Figure 1: A snippet of ICEWS showing several records of
diplomatic activities.

(Boschee et al. 2015), which are two well-known eventbased data repository that store evolving knowledge about
entity interactions across the globe. Figure 1 shows a snippet of ICEWS, which shows several records of diplomatic
activities for different timestamps.
Recently, many research efforts have put into representation learning for TKGs. Relevant methods typically encode
the temporally evolving facts of entity relations with timespecific embeddings. This provides a versatile and efficient
tool to complete future facts of TKGs based on the embedding representations of the past facts. Moreover, it benefits
a wide range of downstream applications, e.g. transaction
recommendation (Wang, Hu, and Cao 2017), event process
induction (Du et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2020) and social
relation prediction (Zhou et al. 2018a). Several temporal
knowledge graph embedding (TKGE) methods only focus
on calculating latent representations for each snapshot separately, and thus are not capable of capturing the long-term
dependency of facts in consecutive time snapshots (Jiang
et al. 2016; Dasgupta, Ray, and Talukdar 2018; Wang and
Li 2019; Ma, Tresp, and Daxberger 2019; Lacroix, Obozinski, and Usunier 2019). Some other recent attempts encode

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are widely used resources for
knowledge representations of real-world facts (or events),
inasmuch as it supports countless knowledge-driven tasks in
areas such as information retrieval (Liu et al. 2018), natural
language understanding (Chen, Chen, and Yu 2019; He et al.
2017), recommender systems (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky
2009) and healthcare (Hao et al. 2020). Traditionally, a KG
only possesses facts in a static snapshot, while currently the
rapid growing data often exhibit complex temporal dynamics. This calls for new approaches to model such dynamics
of facts by assigning the interactions of entities with temporal properties (i.e., known as temporal knowledge graphs, or
TKGs.). Representative TKGs include Global Database of
Events, Language, and Tone (GDELT) (Leetaru and Schrodt
2013) and Integrated Crisis Early Warning System (ICEWS)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4732

