The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Meta Sampling for Multilingual Low-Resource Speech Recognition
Yubei Xiao1 , Ke Gong3 , Pan Zhou4 , Guolin Zheng1 , Xiaodan Liang2,3 , Liang Lin1,3 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Dark Matter AI Research, 4 SalesForce
{xiaoyb5,zhengglin}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {kegong936,xdliang328}@gmail.com, pzhou@salesforce.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Low-resource automatic speech recognition (ASR) is challenging, as the low-resource target language data cannot well train
an ASR model. To solve this issue, meta-learning formulates
ASR for each source language into many small ASR tasks and
meta-learns a model initialization on all tasks from different
source languages to access fast adaptation on unseen target
languages. However, for different source languages, the quantity and difficulty vary greatly because of their different data
scales and diverse phonological systems, which leads to taskquantity and task-difficulty imbalance issues and thus a failure
of multilingual meta-learning ASR (MML-ASR). In this work,
we solve this problem by developing a novel adversarial meta
sampling (AMS) approach to improve MML-ASR. When sampling tasks in MML-ASR, AMS adaptively determines the task
sampling probability for each source language. Specifically,
for each source language, if the query loss is large, it means
that its tasks are not well sampled to train ASR model in terms
of its quantity and difficulty and thus should be sampled more
frequently for extra learning. Inspired by this fact, we feed
the historical task query loss of all source language domain
into a network to learn a task sampling policy for adversarially
increasing the current query loss of MML-ASR. Thus, the
learnt task sampling policy can master the learning situation
of each language and thus predicts good task sampling probability for each language for more effective learning. Finally,
experiment results on two multilingual datasets show significant performance improvement when applying our AMS on
MML-ASR, and also demonstrate the applicability of AMS
to other low-resource speech tasks and transfer learning ASR
approaches.

Introduction
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) has attracted a lot of attention recently and achieved significant improvements (Chan
et al. 2016; Graves et al. 2006; Pratap et al. 2019) brought by
the success of deep neural networks. However, building an
end-to-end deep ASR model often requires huge transcribed
training data, which is impractical for the low-resource languages due to the scarcity of audio data and the huge labor
resources consumed in transcription.
To solve this issue, many works are devoted to develop
low-resource ASR approaches. The representative methods in
* Liang Lin is the corresponding author of this work.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14112

this line are transfer learning ASR (TL-ASR) (Hu et al. 2019;
Kunze et al. 2017), multilingual transfer learning ASR (MTLASR) (Adams et al. 2019; Cho et al. 2018; Tong, Garner, and
Bourlard 2017) and multilingual meta-learning ASR (MMLASR) (Hsu, Chen, and yi Lee 2020) that all aim to learn an
ASR model initialization from source languages such that the
initialization can quickly adapt to target language via finetuning on a few data. Among them, TL-ASR considers one
source language and regards the pretrained ASR model on the
source data as a model initialization. But as shown in Fig. 1
(a), the learnt initialization by TL-ASR often overfits the
source language and cannot quickly adapt to a different target
language. To resolve this issue, MTL-ASR and MML-ASR
consider multiple source languages. Inspired by multi-task
learning, they both sample partial data from each language
domain to construct a small speech recognition task. Then for
each sampled task, MTL-ASR directly trains its model on this
task, while MML-ASR adapts its ASR model to the validation
data of the task via fine-tuning on a few training data of the
task and minimizes the validation loss. In this way, the learnt
initializations by MTL-ASR and MML-ASR can usually fast
adapt to the target low-resource language, as both MTL-ASR
and MML-ASR learn the common knowledge from all tasks
from different language domains which facilitates learning
target languages.
However, when sampling tasks from these language domains, MTL-ASR and MML-ASR often ignore the underlying task imbalance issues which could result in unsatisfactory
performance. First, different kinds of languages have different training data scales so the underlying task quantity
for each language domain varies greatly, which leads to the
task-quantity imbalance. Second, as different languages
have diverse phonological systems, the tasks drawn from
different language domains have various recognition difficulties, causing the task-difficulty imbalance. In this way,
for MTL-ASR and MML-ASR, both uniform sampling that
uniformly samples tasks from each language domain and
more advanced task-quantity-balanced sampling whose
sampling rate for each domain positively relies on its task
quantity (data scale) cannot handle the task imbalance issue.
Uniform sampling neither considers the task-quantity imbalance nor the task-difficulty imbalance, while task-quantitybalanced sampling directly ignores task-difficulty imbalance.
So the learnt initializations by MTL-ASR and MML-ASR

