The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Supervised Multi-Head Self-Attention Network for Nested Named Entity
Recognition
Yongxiu Xu,1,2 Heyan Huang, 3 * Chong Feng, 3 Yue Hu 1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
xuyongxiu@iie.ac.cn, {hhy63,fengchong}@bit.edu.cn, huyue@iie.ac.cn
2

Here we map the [cis-acting elements]DNA that mediate interleukin
responsiveness of the [[mouse IL-2R alpha]Protein gene]DNA using a [thymic
lymphoma-derived hybridoma]Cell_line.

Abstract
In recent years, researchers have shown an increased interest in recognizing the overlapping entities that have nested
structures. However, most existing models ignore the semantic correlation between words under different entity types.
Considering words in sentence play different roles under different entity types, we argue that the correlation intensities
of pairwise words in sentence for each entity type should be
considered. In this paper, we treat named entity recognition
as a multi-class classification of word pairs and design a simple neural model to handle this issue. Our model applies a
supervised multi-head self-attention mechanism, where each
head corresponds to one entity type, to construct the wordlevel correlations for each type. Our model can flexibly predict the span type by the correlation intensities of its head
and tail under the corresponding type. In addition, we fuse
entity boundary detection and entity classification by a multitask learning framework, which can capture the dependencies
between these two tasks. To verify the performance of our
model, we conduct extensive experiments on both nested and
flat datasets. The experimental results show that our model
can outperform the previous state-of-the-art methods on multiple tasks without any extra NLP tools or human annotations.

DNA :
(cis-acting, elements), (mouse, gene)
Cell_line : (thymic, hybridoma)
Protein:

(mouse,alpha)

Figure 1: An example in the GENIA dataset. For different
given entity types, we will generate the head-tail pair of entities with corresponding types.

Liu et al. 2017), question answering (Wang et al. 2017), entity linking (Gupta, Singh, and Roth 2017; Martins, Marinho, and Martins 2019) and coreference resolution (Chang,
Samdani, and Roth 2013; Fragkou 2017).
Numerous approaches for nested NER have been proposed in recent years. One representative category is based
on the sequence labeling (Liu et al. 2019; Xin et al. 2018)
that convert the nested structures into flat structures by various transform operations, such as (Finkel and Manning
2009) construct a syntactic constituency tree, (Lu and Roth
2015; Muis and Lu 2017; Wang and Lu 2018; Clark et al.
2018) build hyper-graphs. However, they need a lot of human efforts to annotate the corpus for complex transformations, suffering from error propagation and recognition inaccuracy. Another appealing category is based on span classification that classify candidate spans based on span representations. (Xia et al. 2019) recently propose a Multi-Grained
Named Entity Recognition (MGNER) model contains a Detector for detecting all possible word segments and a Classifier for classifying these segments into the pre-defined types.
Although the span-based model overcomes the drawbacks
of the sequence labeling based models, it still has some obvious issues. First, learning the span representation for all
possible spans in the sentence is computationally expensive.
Second, they ignore the explicit boundary information when
classify spans, leading to detecting boundaries of entities inaccurate. Observing the problems of span-based models, two
recent works (Zheng et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2020) introduce
boundary-aware neural models to solve these problems by
classifying entity types following entity boundary identification.
Despite the significant progress that has been made by

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is an important task in
Natural Language Processing (NLP), which aims to identify text spans to specific entity types such as Person, Location, Organization, etc. Although various NER methods have
been proposed, the widely-used models usually regard NER
as a sequence labeling task, which implicitly assumes each
token only has one tag. For example, (Lample et al. 2016;
Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015) exploit a LSTM-CRF neural network which encodes tokens by a Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) layer and predicts labels by a Conditional Random
Fields (CRF) layer. However, entities with nested structures
are common in various domains (Alex, Haddow, and Grover
2007; Byrne 2007; Villodre et al. 2007; Wang 2009). As
shown in Figure 1, the entity [mouse IL-2R alpha] is nested
in the entity [mouse IL-2R alpha gene]. Taking nested entities into consideration can facilitate many downstream NLP
tasks, including relation extraction (Miwa and Bansal 2016;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14185

