The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

UBAR: Towards Fully End-to-End Task-Oriented Dialog System with GPT-2
Yunyi Yang,Yunhao Li, Xiaojun Quan*
Sun Yat-sen University
{yangyy37, liyh355}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, quanxj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

User

This paper presents our task-oriented dialog system UBAR
which models task-oriented dialogs on a dialog session level.
Specifically, UBAR is acquired by fine-tuning the large pretrained unidirectional language model GPT-2 on the sequence
of the entire dialog session which is composed of user utterance, belief state, database result, system act, and system response of every dialog turn. Additionally, UBAR is evaluated
in a more realistic setting, where its dialog context has access
to user utterances and all content it generated such as belief
states, system acts, and system responses. Experimental results on the MultiWOZ datasets show that UBAR achieves
state-of-the-art performances in multiple settings, improving
the combined score of response generation, policy optimization, and end-to-end modeling by 4.7, 3.5, and 9.4 points respectively. Thorough analyses demonstrate that the sessionlevel training sequence formulation and the generated dialog
context are essential for UBAR to operate as a fully end-toend task-oriented dialog system in real life. We also examine
the transfer ability of UBAR to new domains with limited
data and provide visualization and a case study to illustrate
the advantages of UBAR in modeling on a dialog session
level.1

System

Hi, I need a guest house with free WiFi please.
Belief State: hotel-{type=guest house,
internet=yes}

Database

System Act :
hotel-request-{area}
hotel-inform-{Internet,
choice}
I have 33 guest houses with Internet, which
area would you prefer?

I also need free parking, and I would prefer a
4 star place.
Belief State: hotel-{type=guest house,
internet=yes, parking=yes, stars=4}

Database

System Act :
hotel-inform-{price,
name, choice, Internet,
parking, stars}
You do have a few options, including Alexander b&b
which offers free WiFi as well as free parking. It is also
inexpensive, and rated 4 stars.

Introduction
Task-oriented dialog (TOD) systems aim to assist users with
various tasks such as hotel reservations and ticket booking
through natural language conversations. Recent years have
seen a rapid growth of interest in developing data-driven approaches for this task from both the research community and
industry (Zhang et al. 2020b). The presence of wide range of
domains requires TOD systems to have better transfer ability
while remaining practical in real conversations.
The functions of a task-oriented dialog system can be understood by introducing the traditional pipeline approach
which consists of several consecutive modules. As shown
in Figure 1, a dialog state tracker (DST) is equipped to estimate the belief state from the user utterance. The belief
state can be used to query a task-related database (DB) for
results such as the number of entities that match the user’s

Great. Can you book that for 4 nights?

……
Figure 1: An example of the first two-turn interactions between a user and a TOD system.

goal. Then, a dialog policy learning module is applied to determine the next system act, followed by a natural language
generation (NLG) module that maps the system act to a natural language response. These modules are often modeled and
evaluated separately. The apparent drawback of the pipeline
approach is that error propagation from the cascaded components can be detrimental to the subsequent subtasks (Liu
and Lane 2018).
From a big picture perspective, the methodology for
task-oriented dialog systems is gradually progressing from
pipeline approaches to end-to-end modeling. Recently, some

* Xiaojun Quan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and technical appendix available at https://github.com/
TonyNemo/UBAR-MultiWOZ

14230

