The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Teaching of Temporal Logic Formulas to Preference-based Learners
Zhe Xu1 , Yuxin Chen2 , Ufuk Topcu3
1

Arizona State University
2
University of Chicago
3
University of Texas at Austin
xzhe1@asu.edu, chenyuxin@uchicago.edu, utopcu@utexas.edu

Abstract

data. Unfortunately, finding the optimal teaching sequence
with minimal teaching cost is notoriously hard (Goldman
and Kearns 1995). As task specifications are often timerelated and the demonstration data are trajectories with a
time evolution, an exhaustive search even for the myopic solution (i.e., one-step optimal demonstration from the greedy
algorithm) has exponential time complexity with the time
span of the task, making it prohibitive to run existing myopic teaching algorithms in practice.
In this paper, we investigate machine teaching of target hypothesis represented in temporal logic (Pnueli 1977),
which has been used to express task specifications in many
applications in robotics and artificial intelligence (KressGazit, Wongpiromsarn, and Topcu 2011; To et al. 2015).
Specifically, we use a fragment of parametric linear temporal logic (pLTL) (Chakraborty and Katoen 2014; Alur et al.
2001). We derive a necessary condition for the minimal time
length of a demonstration so that a set of pLTL formulas
can be eliminated by this demonstration. Utilizing this necessary condition, we provide a myopic teaching approach by
solving a sequence of integer programming problems which,
under certain conditions, guarantees a logarithmic factor of
the optimal teaching cost.
We evaluate the proposed algorithm extensively under a
variety of learner types (i.e., learner with different preference models) and interactive protocols (i.e., batched and
adaptive). The results show that the proposed algorithm can
efficiently teach a given target hypothesis under various settings, and that there are significant gains of teaching efficacy
when the teacher adapts to the learner’s current hypotheses
(up to 31.15% reduction in teaching cost compared to the
non-adaptive setting) or with oracles (up to 75% reduction
in teaching cost compared to the myopic setting).

Machine teaching is an algorithmic framework for teaching
a target hypothesis via a sequence of examples or demonstrations. We investigate machine teaching for temporal logic
formulas—a novel and expressive hypothesis class amenable
to time-related task specifications. In the context of teaching
temporal logic formulas, an exhaustive search even for a myopic solution takes exponential time (with respect to the time
span of the task). We propose an efficient approach for teaching parametric linear temporal logic formulas. Concretely,
we derive a necessary condition for the minimal time length
of a demonstration to eliminate a set of hypotheses. Utilizing
this condition, we propose an efficient myopic teaching algorithm by solving a sequence of integer programming problems. We further show that, under two notions of teaching
complexity, the proposed algorithm has near-optimal performance. We evaluate our algorithm extensively under different classes of learners (i.e., learners with different preferences over hypotheses) and interaction protocols (e.g., nonadaptive and adaptive). Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in teaching temporal logic formulas; in particular, we show that there are significant gains
of teaching efficacy when the teacher adapts to feedback of
the learner, or adapts to a (non-myopic) oracle.

1

Introduction

Machine teaching, also known as algorithmic teaching, is an
algorithmic framework for teaching a target hypothesis via a
sequence of examples or demonstrations (Zhu 2015). Due to
limited availability of data or high cost of data collection in
real-world learning scenarios, machine teaching provides a
viable solution for optimizing the training data for a learner
to efficiently learn a target hypothesis.
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in designing learning algorithms for inferring task specifications
from data (e.g., in robotics) (Kong, Jones, and Belta 2017;
Vazquez-Chanlatte et al. 2018). Machine teaching can be
used to optimize the training data for various learning algorithms (Dasgupta et al. 2019), hence it can be potentially
used for task specification inference algorithms. Machine
teaching can be also used in adversarial settings (Ma et al.
2019) where an attacker (machine teaching algorithm) manipulates specification inference by modifying the training

Related Work
There has been a surge of interest in machine teaching in several different application domains, including personalized educational systems (Zhu 2015), citizen sciences
(Chen et al. 2018a; Mac Aodha et al. 2018), adversarial attacks (Ma et al. 2019) and imitation learning (Brown and
Niekum 2019). Most theoretical work in algorithmic machine teaching assumes the version space model (Goldman
and Kearns 1995; Gao et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018b; Mansouri et al. 2019). Recently, some teaching complexity re-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5061

