The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Continuous High-Dimensional Models using
Mutual Information and Copula Bayesian Networks
Marvin Lasserre,1 Régis Lebrun, 2 Pierre-Henri Wuillemin 1
1

2

Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
Airbus Central Research & Technology, 22 rue du Gouverneur Général Eboué, 92130 Issy les Moulineaux, France
marvin.lasserre@lip6.fr, regis.lebrun@airbus.com, pierre-henri.wuillemin@lip6.fr
Abstract

On the other hand, copula function allows to model the
dependence structure between continuous variables, ruling
out the marginal behavior of each variable. From a constructive perspective, this allows to dissociate the choice of the
marginals from the choice of the dependence structure. In
practice, however, copulas are limited to a few variables and
constructing or manipulating high-dimensional ones is difficult.
The Copula Bayesian Network model (CBN) (Elidan
2010) takes advantage of both copula theory and BNs to
model continuous high-dimensional multivariate distributions. Whereas there have been many attempts to merge the
two frameworks such as the pair-copula construction (Czado
2010), the Vine model (Bedford, Cooke et al. 2002) or the
cumulative distribution network (Huang 2009), the CBN
model is the most attractive since it uses the same graphical language as a classical BN.
This paper focuses on learning continuous graphical models from data. While there is many learning algorithm in
the discrete case (Neapolitan et al. 2004), they can hardly
be extended to the continuous models (Romero, Rumı́, and
Salmerón 2006). This is mainly due to the number of parameters of these models which makes the computing of scores
or statistics difficult. They can be applied for simpler models such as the linear Gaussian model (Lauritzen and Wermuth 1989), but the model itself lacks of expressiveness. For
the reason given in the last paragraph, the CBN model gives
access to similar learning techniques as for discrete BNs.
Score based (Elidan 2010) and constraint-based (Lasserre,
Lebrun, and Wuillemin 2020) methods have been proposed
to learn a CBN structure from data. The latter, named CPC,
relies on a PC-algorithm and has shown better performances
than the former which relies on a BIC score and a local
search optimization. However, it is well-known (Colombo
and Maathuis 2014) that such constraint-based methods suffer from the need of an ordering over the variables and can
lead to significantly different results. In the discrete case, the
MIIC algorithm (Verny et al. 2017) avoid this ordering by
driving the algorithm with a ranking relying on the mutual
information.
The contributions of this paper are the following. First, we
extend the link between the copula entropy and the mutual
information proved in (Ma and Sun 2011) to the conditional
and three-point mutual information. We then describe non-

We propose a new framework to learn non-parametric graphical models from continuous observational data. Our method
is based on concepts from information theory in order to
discover independences and causality between variables: the
conditional and multivariate mutual information (such as
(Verny et al. 2017) for discrete models). To estimate these
quantities, we propose non-parametric estimators relying on
the Bernstein copula and that are constructed by exploiting
the relation between the mutual information and the copula entropy (Ma and Sun 2011; Belalia et al. 2017). To our
knowledge, this relation is only documented for the bivariate case and, for the need of our algorithms, is here extended
to the conditional and multivariate mutual information. This
framework leads to a new algorithm to learn continuous nonparametric Bayesian networks. Moreover, we use this estimator to speed up the BIC algorithm proposed in (Elidan 2010)
by taking advantage of the decomposition of the likelihood
function in a sum of mutual information (Koller and Friedman 2009). Finally, our method is compared in terms of performances and complexity with other state of the art techniques to learn Copula Bayesian Networks and shows superior results. In particular, it needs less data to recover the
original structure and generalizes better on data that are not
sampled from Gaussian distributions.

1

Introduction

Modeling multivariate continuous distributions is a task of
central interest in statistics and machine learning with many
applications in science and engineering. In general, highdimensional distributions are difficult to manipulate and
may lead to intractable computations. Bayesian networks
(BNs) exploit conditional independences between random
variables to reduce the complexity of a joint probability
distribution by expressing it as a set of conditional probability distributions (CPDs) of lower dimension. These independences are encoded by a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) (Koller and Friedman 2009) and to each node is
associated a CPD. The representation of CPD is complex
and led to numerous and very different solutions: discretization, parametric representation (for instance using the Gaussian hypothesis), approximation using truncated basis functions (Shenoy and West 2011; Langseth et al. 2012), etc.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12139

