The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalization in Portfolio-Based Algorithm Selection
Maria-Florina Balcan,1 Tuomas Sandholm,1,2,3,4 Ellen Vitercik1
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2
Optimized Markets, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
3
Strategic Machine, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
4
Strategy Robot, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{ninamf, sandholm, vitercik}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

Brown 2010; Kadioglu et al. 2010), planning (Núñez, Borrajo, and López 2015), and many other domains.
Both the portfolio and the algorithm selector are often
chosen using a training set of problem instances from the
application domain at hand. This training set is typically assumed to be drawn from an unknown, application-specific
distribution. The portfolio and algorithm selector are chosen
to have strong average performance (quantified by low average runtime, for example) over the training set. We investigate whether the learned algorithm selector also has strong
expected performance on problems from the same application domain. The difference between average performance
and expected performance is known as generalization error.
If the generalization error is small, every parameter setting’s
average performance over the training set is close to its expected performance, so the learned algorithm selector will
not overfit. When overfitting occurs, the learned selector has
strong average performance over the training set but poor
expected performance on the true distribution.
There are multiple reasons the generalization error might
be large in this setting: 1) the learning-theoretic complexity
of the algorithm selector, 2) the size of the portfolio, and 3)
the learning-theoretic complexity of the algorithm’s performance as a function of its parameters. We provide end-toend bounds in terms of all three elements simultaneously.
The multitude of factors impacting generalization differentiates this paper from prior research on generalization in algorithm configuration (e.g., Gupta and Roughgarden 2017;
Balcan et al. 2017; Garg and Kalai 2018; Liu et al. 2020).
That research focuses on learning a single good configuration rather than a portfolio together with an algorithm selector. In the former case, generalization error only grows with
(3)—just one of the sources of error we must contend with.
Our bounds apply to the widely-applicable setting where
on any fixed input, algorithmic performance is a piecewiseconstant function of its parameters with at most t pieces, for
some t ∈ Z. This structure has been observed in algorithm
configuration for integer programming, greedy algorithms,
clustering, and computational biology (Gupta and Roughgarden 2017; Balcan et al. 2017, 2018, 2021; Balcan 2020).
Given a training set of size Nq
, we prove that the generaliza

tion error is bounded1 by Õ
d¯ + κ log t /N , where

Portfolio-based algorithm selection has seen tremendous
practical success over the past two decades. This algorithm
configuration procedure works by first selecting a portfolio
of diverse algorithm parameter settings, and then, on a given
problem instance, using an algorithm selector to choose a parameter setting from the portfolio with strong predicted performance. Oftentimes, both the portfolio and the algorithm
selector are chosen using a training set of typical problem instances from the application domain at hand. In this paper, we
provide the first provable guarantees for portfolio-based algorithm selection. We analyze how large the training set should
be to ensure that the resulting algorithm selector’s average
performance over the training set is close to its future (expected) performance. This involves analyzing three key reasons why these two quantities may diverge: 1) the learningtheoretic complexity of the algorithm selector, 2) the size
of the portfolio, and 3) the learning-theoretic complexity of
the algorithm’s performance as a function of its parameters.
We introduce an end-to-end learning-theoretic analysis of the
portfolio construction and algorithm selection together. We
prove that if the portfolio is large, overfitting is inevitable,
even with an extremely simple algorithm selector. With experiments, we illustrate a tradeoff exposed by our theoretical
analysis: as we increase the portfolio size, we can hope to include a well-suited parameter setting for every possible problem instance, but it becomes impossible to avoid overfitting.

1

Introduction

Algorithms often come with a variety of tunable parameters.
With a deft parameter tuning, these algorithms can often efficiently solve computationally challenging problems. However, the best parameter setting for one problem is rarely
optimal for another. Algorithm portfolios, which are finite
sets of parameter settings, are used in practice to deal with
this variability. A portfolio is often used in conjunction with
an algorithm selector, which is a function that determines
which configuration in the portfolio to employ on any input
problem instance. Portfolio-based algorithm selection has
fueled breakthroughs in combinatorial auction winner determination (Leyton-Brown 2003; Sandholm 2013), SAT (Xu
et al. 2008), integer programming (Xu, Hoos, and LeytonCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12225

Here we assume that algorithmic performance is a quantity in

