The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Efficient Allocations with Limited Demands
Sushirdeep Narayana, Ian A. Kash
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
snaray25@uic.edu, iankash@uic.edu

Abstract

as those used in Hindman et al. (2011), Vavilapalli et al.
(2013), and Grandl et al. (2016).
The addition of limited demands does not change the fairness and incentive properties, but has a substantial effect
on efficiency. Consider the following simple example. There
are two agents and one (divisible) resource, and each agent
needs a single unit of the resource to complete its task. The
DRF allocation evenly shares the resource between the two
agents, so both complete at time 2. Instead, a shortest job
first approach will have one agent complete at time 1 and
the other complete at time 2. This makes one agent strictly
better off and the other no worse off showing that the result of DRF is no longer Pareto optimal in this setting. Of
course, this allocation is not envy-free, as the agent scheduled second envies the agent scheduled first. Nevertheless,
if we randomize which agent is scheduled first, it would be
envy-free in expectation.
While shortest job first is envy-free in expectation and
Pareto efficient, with multiple resources it too can pass up
opportunities to make desirable trade-offs. Consider two
tasks of similar length: one memory-limited and one CPUlimited. Shortest job first will pass up the opportunity to run
both at the same time, which would slightly slow down the
first completion time but substantially speed up the second.
By most metrics of interest (e.g. mean completion time or
makespan) this is an improvement.
Thus, a natural goal is an algorithm that can provide a
trade off between sharing and shortest job first to achieve efficiency as well as fairness. Prior systems work (Grandl et al.
(2016)) has developed heuristic solutions to this problem;
our contribution is a principled fair division approach. We
propose the Least Cost Product (LCP) mechanism, which
minimizes the product of completion times (costs) in the
same way Maximum Nash Welfare (MNW) mechanisms
maximize the product of utilities.1 We provide a characterization of the structure of solutions it finds and show
that the LCP mechanism satisfies sharing incentives and is
Pareto optimal but not strategy-proof. We show that it satisfies envy-freeness in expectation for two special cases: when
there is only a single resource or when there are only two
agents. When more agents or resources are involved, we

We study the fair division problem of allocating multiple resources among a set of agents with Leontief preferences that
are each required to complete a finite amount of work, which
we term “limited demands.” We examine the behavior of the
classic Dominant Resource Fairness (DRF) mechanism in
this setting and show it is fair but only weakly Pareto optimal and inefficient in many natural examples. We propose
as an alternative the Least Cost Product (LCP) mechanism,
a natural adaptation of Maximum Nash Welfare to this setting. We characterize the structure of allocations of the LCP
mechanism in this setting, show that it is Pareto efficient, and
that it satisfies the relatively weak fairness property of sharing
incentives. While we prove it satisfies the stronger fairness
property of (expected) envy freeness in some special cases,
we provide a counterexample showing it does not do so in
general, a striking contrast to the “unreasonable fairness” of
Maximum Nash Welfare in other settings. Simulations suggest, however, that these violations of envy freeness are rare
in randomly generated examples.

Introduction
Large computational tasks, including those found in cloud
computing systems, data centers, and high-performance
computing clusters, require multiple heterogeneous resources such as CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. For
these systems to be effective, it is important that these and
other resources be allocated among various tasks in a fair
and efficient manner.
One popular approach to resource allocation in this setting is the Dominant Resource Fairness (DRF) mechanism,
which achieves a number of desirable properties including
efficiency (Pareto optimality), fairness (sharing incentives
and envy-freeness), and strategy-proofness (Ghodsi et al.
2011; Parkes, Procaccia, and Shah 2015). However, these
results are obtained under the assumption that the utility of
each task is determined by the amount of resources it receives. We argue that a more natural model for many applications is that they have limited demands: each task has a
finite amount of work to do and would like to complete as
soon as possible. Such a model can be applied to the frameworks of job schedulers of modern computing clusters such

1
In fact, if utility is defined to be the reciprocal of completion
time, our mechanism chooses exactly the MNW solution.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5620

