The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Task-Agnostic Exploration via Policy Gradient
of a Non-Parametric State Entropy Estimate
Mirco Mutti1,2, * , Lorenzo Pratissoli1,∗ , and Marcello Restelli1
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
mirco.mutti@polimi.it, lorenzo.pratissoli@mail.polimi.it, marcello.restelli@polimi.it
2

a transferable meta-reward function. Other works (Jin et al.
2020; Tarbouriech et al. 2020) consider the active estimation
of the environment dynamics as an unsupervised objective.
Another promising approach, which is the one we focus in
this paper, is to incorporate the unsupervised knowledge into
a task-agnostic exploration policy, obtained by maximizing some entropic measure over the state space (Hazan et al.
2019; Tarbouriech and Lazaric 2019; Mutti and Restelli 2020;
Lee et al. 2019). Intuitively, an exploration policy might be
easier to transfer than a transition model, which would be
hardly robust to changes in the environment, and more ready
to use than a meta-reward function, which would still require optimizing a policy as an intermediate step. An ideal
maximum-entropy policy, thus inducing a uniform distribution over states, is an extremely general starting point to
solve any (unknown) subsequent goal-reaching task, as it
minimizes the so-called worst-case regret (Gupta et al. 2018,
Lemma 1). In addition, by providing an efficient estimation of any, possibly sparse, reward function, it significantly
reduces the burden on reward design. In tabular settings,
Tarbouriech and Lazaric (2019); Mutti and Restelli (2020)
propose theoretically-grounded methods for learning an exploration policy that maximizes the entropy of the asymptotic
state distribution, while Mutti and Restelli (2020) concurrently consider the minimization of the mixing time as a
secondary objective. In (Hazan et al. 2019), authors present
a principled algorithm (MaxEnt) to optimize the entropy of
the discounted state distribution of a tabular policy, and a
theoretically-relaxed implementation to deal with function
approximation. Similarly, Lee et al. (2019) design a method
(SMM) to maximize the entropy of the finite-horizon state distribution. Both SMM and MaxEnt learn a maximum-entropy
mixture of policies following this iterative procedure: first,
they estimate the state distribution induced by the current
mixture to define an intrinsic reward, then, they learn a policy
that optimizes this reward to be added to the mixture. Unfortunately, the literature approaches to state entropy maximization either consider impractical infinite-horizon settings (Tarbouriech and Lazaric 2019; Mutti and Restelli 2020), or
output a mixture of policies that would be inadequate for
non-episodic tasks (Hazan et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019). In
addition, they would still require a full model of the transition
dynamics (Tarbouriech and Lazaric 2019; Mutti and Restelli
2020), or a state density estimation (Hazan et al. 2019; Lee

Abstract
In a reward-free environment, what is a suitable intrinsic objective for an agent to pursue so that it can learn an optimal taskagnostic exploration policy? In this paper, we argue that the
entropy of the state distribution induced by finite-horizon trajectories is a sensible target. Especially, we present a novel and
practical policy-search algorithm, Maximum Entropy POLicy optimization (MEPOL), to learn a policy that maximizes
a non-parametric, k-nearest neighbors estimate of the state
distribution entropy. In contrast to known methods, MEPOL
is completely model-free as it requires neither to estimate the
state distribution of any policy nor to model transition dynamics. Then, we empirically show that MEPOL allows learning
a maximum-entropy exploration policy in high-dimensional,
continuous-control domains, and how this policy facilitates
learning meaningful reward-based tasks downstream.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and
Barto 2018) has achieved outstanding results in remarkable
tasks, such as Atari games (Mnih et al. 2015), Go (Silver et al.
2016), Dota 2 (Berner et al. 2019), and dexterous manipulation (Andrychowicz et al. 2020). To accomplish these feats,
the learning process usually requires a considerable amount
of human supervision, especially a hand-crafted reward function (Hadfield-Menell et al. 2017), while the outcome rarely
generalizes beyond a single task (Cobbe et al. 2019). This
barely mirrors human-like learning, which is far less dependent on exogenous guidance and exceptionally general.
Notably, an infant would go through an intrinsically-driven,
nearly exhaustive, exploration of the environment in an early
stage, without knowing much about the tasks she/he will face.
Still, this same unsupervised process will be consequential
to solve those complex, externally-driven tasks, when they
will eventually arise. In this perspective, what is a suitable
task-agnostic exploration objective to set for the agent in an
unsupervised phase, so that the acquired knowledge would
facilitate learning a variety of reward-based tasks afterwards?
Lately, several works have addressed this question in different directions. In (Bechtle et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020), authors investigate how to embed task-agnostic knowledge into
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9028

