The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Beyond Low-frequency Information in Graph Convolutional Networks
Deyu Bo1 , Xiao Wang1 , Chuan Shi1 ∗ , Huawei Shen2
1

2

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{bodeyu, xiaowang, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, shenhuawei@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

the low-frequency information all we need and what roles
do other information play in GNNs? This is a fundamental
question which motivates us to rethink whether GNNs comprehensively exploit the information in node features when
learning node representation.
Firstly, the low-pass ﬁlter in GNNs mainly retains the commonality of node features, which inevitably ignores the difference, so that the learned representations of connected nodes
become similar. Thanks to the smoothness of low-frequency
information, this mechanism may work well for assortative
networks, i.e., similar nodes tend to connect with each other
(Xu et al. 2019a). However, the real-world networks are not
always assortative, but sometimes disassortative, i.e., nodes
from different classes tend to connect with each other (Newman 2003). For example, the chemical interactions in proteins
often occur between different types of amino acids (Zhu et al.
2020). If we force the representation of connected proteins
to be similar by employing low-pass ﬁlter, obviously, the
performance will be largely hindered. The low-frequency
information here is insufﬁcient to support the inference in
such networks. Under the circumstances, the high-frequency
information, capturing the difference between nodes, may
be more suitable. Even the raw features, containing both
low- and high-frequency information, are alternative solution
(Wang et al. 2020b). Secondly, it is well established that the
node representation will becomes indistinguishable when we
always utilize low-pass ﬁlter, causing over-smoothing (Oono
and Suzuki 2020). This reminds us that low-pass ﬁlter of current GNNs is distant from optimal for real world scenarios.
To provide more evidence for the above analysis, we focus
on low-frequency and high-frequency signals as an example,
and present experiments to assess their roles (details can be
seen in Section ). The results clearly show that both of them
are helpful for learning node representations. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁnd that when a network exhibits disassortativity, highfrequency signals perform much better than low-frequency
signals. This implies that the high-frequency information,
which is largely eliminated by the current GNNs, is not always useless, and the low-frequency information is not always optimal for the complex networks. Once the weakness
of low-frequency information in GNNs is identiﬁed, a natural question is how to use signals of different frequencies
in GNNs and, at the same time, makes GNNs suitable for
different type of networks?

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proven to be effective in various network-related tasks. Most existing GNNs usually exploit the low-frequency signals of node features, which
gives rise to one fundamental question: is the low-frequency
information all we need in the real world applications? In this
paper, we ﬁrst present an experimental investigation assessing
the roles of low-frequency and high-frequency signals, where
the results clearly show that exploring low-frequency signal
only is distant from learning an effective node representation in different scenarios. How can we adaptively learn more
information beyond low-frequency information in GNNs? A
well-informed answer can help GNNs enhance the adaptability.
We tackle this challenge and propose a novel Frequency Adaptation Graph Convolutional Networks (FAGCN) with a selfgating mechanism, which can adaptively integrate different
signals in the process of message passing. For a deeper understanding, we theoretically analyze the roles of low-frequency
signals and high-frequency signals on learning node representations, which further explains why FAGCN can perform well
on different types of networks. Extensive experiments on six
real-world networks validate that FAGCN not only alleviates
the over-smoothing problem, but also has advantages over the
state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Networks, such as social networks, citation networks and
molecular networks, are ubiquitous in the real world. Recently, the emerging graph neural networks (GNNs) have
demonstrated powerful ability to learn node representations
by jointly encoding network structures and node features (Wu
et al. 2020; Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2020; Wang et al. 2020a).
This strategy has been proven to be effective in various tasks,
including link prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018), node classiﬁcation (Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018)
and graph classiﬁcation (Errica et al. 2020).
In general, GNNs update node representations by aggregating information from neighbors, which can be seen as a
special form of low-pass ﬁlter (Wu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019).
Some recent studies (NT and Maehara 2019; Xu et al. 2019a)
show that the smoothness of signals, i.e., low-frequency information, are the key to the success of GNNs. However, is
∗

Corresponding author
c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3950

