The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Synergetic Learning of Heterogeneous Temporal Sequences
for Multi-Horizon Probabilistic Forecasting
Longyuan Li1,2∗ , Jihai Zhang3∗ , Junchi Yan1,3† , Yaohui Jin1,2 † ,
Yunhao Zhang3 , Yanjie Duan4 , Guangjian Tian4
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
State Key Lab of Advanced Optical Communication System and Network, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jeffli,yunfan243332345,yanjunchi,jinyh, zhangyunhao}@sjtu.edu.cn, {duanyanjie1,tian.guangjian}@huawei.com
2

Abstract

many business processes. One particular setting is to forecast
long term multi-step future time-series as a whole. The hope
is to avoid error accumulation that is common in single-step
autoregressive models (Benidis et al. 2020).
While there have been recent works on modeling timeseries (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2012; Makridakis,
Spiliotis, and Assimakopoulos 2018; Mariet and Kuznetsov
2019; Li et al. 2019b; Rangapuram et al. 2018; Salinas et al.
2019b) and event sequence (Du et al. 2016; Bacry, Mastromatteo, and Muzy 2015; Xiao et al. 2016, 2017; Wu et al.
2018). Most of them are focused on one of these two types
and the research in these two directions are conducted separately and independently. However, the two types of temporal
data are usually strongly correlated and are likely to have
lead-lag relationships. In other words, time-series is influenced by temporal events, and temporal events may also be
caused or influenced by certain fluctuations in time-series.
For example, traffic accidents may lead to high road occupancy rate, and constant high road occupancy rate over time
can cause traffic accidents or traffic jams.
Since the two types of data are interrelated, using only
one can possibly lead to deviation in prediction. We believe
there is a real need to jointly model both types of data. There
are related efforts in linking the synchronous time-series and
asynchronous event sequences to each other. One way is to
aggregate event sequences to fixed-interval count sequences
to extract aligned time-series data. The other is to convert
time-series to event sequences by extracting events from timeseries based on human-defined rules (Bacry, Mastromatteo,
and Muzy 2015). However, such coarse treatments can lead
to loss of key information about the actual dynamics of either
two processes (Bińkowski, Marti, and Donnat 2017).
This paper addresses the problem of jointly modeling timeseries and event sequences for multi-horizon time-series forecasting. We propose Variational Synergetic Multi-Horizon
Network (VSMHN). The basic idea is to learn the probability distribution of future values conditioned on heterogeneous past sequences (i.e. time-series and event sequence).
Our model is based on conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) (Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015). We devise a hybrid recognition model which combines advances in deep point processes models and variational recurrent neural networks. The

Time-series is ubiquitous across applications, such as transportation, finance and healthcare. Time-series is often influenced by external factors, especially in the form of asynchronous events, making forecasting difficult. However, existing models are mainly designated for either synchronous
time-series or asynchronous event sequence, and can hardly
provide a synthetic way to capture the relation between them.
We propose Variational Synergetic Multi-Horizon Network
(VSMHN), a novel deep conditional generative model. To
learn complex correlations across heterogeneous sequences, a
tailored encoder is devised to combine the advances in deep
point processes models and variational recurrent neural networks. In addition, an aligned time coding and an auxiliary
transition scheme are carefully devised for batched training
on unaligned sequences. Our model can be trained effectively
using stochastic variational inference and generates probabilistic predictions with Monte-Carlo simulation. Furthermore, our
model produces accurate, sharp and more realistic probabilistic forecasts. We also show that modeling asynchronous event
sequences is crucial for multi-horizon time-series forecasting.

Introduction
Temporal data streams are ubiquitous in areas including
transportation, electronic health, economics, environment
monitoring. One major type of temporal data is time-series
(also known as synchronous sequence, e.g. temperature, economic index, ECG records), which consists of successive
evenly-sampled discrete-time data points. Another type of
temporal data is event sequence (also known as asynchronous
sequence, e.g. e-commerce transactions, social interactions,
extreme weathers), which consists of data points irregularly
dispersed in the continuous-time domain (Xiao et al. 2017).
Both types carry rich information about the evolution of
complex systems, based on which effective predictions are
crucial to subsequent decision making, especially for those
time-sensitive cases. Multi-horizon time-series forecasting
has wide application scenarios that can be integrated into
∗

The first two authors have made equal contribution.
Corresponding authors are Junchi Yan and Yaohui Jin.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8420

