The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Structured Co-reference Graph Attention for Video-grounded Dialogue
Junyeong Kim, Sunjae Yoon, Dahyun Kim, Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{junyeong.kim, sunjae.yoon, dahyun.kim, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
A video-grounded dialogue system referred to as the Structured Co-reference Graph Attention (SCGA) is presented for
decoding the answer sequence to a question regarding a given
video while keeping track of the dialogue context. Although
recent efforts have made great strides in improving the quality of the response, performance is still far from satisfactory. The two main challenging issues are as follows: (1)
how to deduce co-reference among multiple modalities and
(2) how to reason on the rich underlying semantic structure
of video with complex spatial and temporal dynamics. To
this end, SCGA is based on (1) Structured Co-reference Resolver that performs dereferencing via building a structured
graph over multiple modalities, (2) Spatio-temporal Video
Reasoner that captures local-to-global dynamics of video via
gradually neighboring graph attention. SCGA makes use of
pointer network to dynamically replicate parts of the question for decoding the answer sequence. The validity of the
proposed SCGA is demonstrated on AVSD@DSTC7 and
AVSD@DSTC8 datasets, a challenging video-grounded dialogue benchmarks, and TVQA dataset, a large-scale videoQA
benchmark. Our empirical results show that SCGA outperforms other state-of-the-art dialogue systems on both benchmarks, while extensive ablation study and qualitative analysis
reveal performance gain and improved interpretability.

Figure 1: Illustration of the intuition behind SCGA as a
video-grounded dialogue system. Left: video with detected
objects, Middle: dialogue history, current Q&A. Most informative history is indicated by green box. Right: structured
co-reference graph representing the underlying semantic dependencies between nodes (darker links indicate higher dependencies).

free-form natural language answer to the question. Videogrounded dialogue appears often in many real-world humancomputer conversations, and VGDS can potentially provide
assistance to various subsections of the population especially to those subgroups suffering from sensory impairments. Although recent years has witnessed impressive advancement in performance, current VGDSs are still struggling with the following two challenging issues: (1) how to
fully co-reference among multiple modalities, and (2) how
to reason on the rich underlying semantic structure of video
with complex spatial and temporal dynamics.
The first challenging issue of co-referencing among multiple modalities is illustrated in Figure 1: To the question in
Q6 “Does he play with it?” contains pronouns for which the
noun referent or antecedent must be identified. Henceforth,
this task of identifying the pronoun’s antecedent will be refer to as ”dereferencing”. Our study shows that nearly all
dialogues and 61% of questions in the audio visual sceneaware dialogue (AVSD) dataset contains at least one pronoun (e.g., “it”, “they”) which makes “dereferencing” indispensable. Existing VGDSs have treated dialogue history
just as any another input modality, but by recognizing and
resolving its unique issue regarding pronoun reference, the

Introduction
Understanding visual information along with the natural language appears to be a desiderata in our community. Thus far,
notable progress has been made towards bridging the fields
of computer vision and natural language processing that
includes video moment retrieval (Ma et al. 2020), imagegrounded question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Anderson
et al. 2018) / dialogue (Das et al. 2017; de Vries et al.
2017), and video-grounded question answering (Tapaswi
et al. 2016; Lei et al. 2018) / dialogue (Alamri et al. 2019a).
Among those, we focus on video-grounded dialogue system
(VGDS) that allows an AI agent to ‘observe’ (i.e., understand a video) and ‘converse’ (i.e., communicate the understanding in a dialogue). To be specific, given a video,
dialogue history consisting of a series of QA pairs, and a
follow-up question about the video, the goal is to infer a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1789

