The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exacerbating Algorithmic Bias through Fairness Attacks
Ninareh Mehrabi1,2 , Muhammad Naveed1 , Fred Morstatter1,2 , Aram Galstyan1,2
1

University of Southern California - 2 Information Sciences Institute
{ninarehm, mnaveed}@usc.edu, {fredmors, galstyan}@isi.edu

Abstract

appear unfair in order to depreciate their value and credibility. Some adversaries can even profit from such attacks by
biasing decisions for their benefit, e.g., in credit or loan applications. Thus, one should consider fairness when assessing
the robustness of ML systems.
Our contributions. In this work, we propose data poisoning attacks that target fairness. We propose two families of
poisoning attacks: anchoring and influence1 . In anchoring
attacks the goal is to place poisoned points to affect fairness
without modifying the attacker loss. On the other hand, our
influence attack on fairness can affect both fairness and accuracy by injecting poisoned points during train time via a
specific adversarial loss that regularizes between fairness and
accuracy losses. Some adversaries may want to harm systems
with regard to fairness and accuracy at the same time, while
others might only consider one that can be achieved by this
regularization. In the anchoring attack, we place poisoned
points to bias the decision boundary; in the influence attack,
we target fairness measures by incorporating a loss function
maximizing and attacking which can degrade fairness by
maximizing the covariance between the decision outcome
and sensitive attributes.
Through experimentation on three different datasets with
different fairness measures and definitions, we show the effectiveness of our attacks in achieving the desired goal of
affecting fairness. In addition, we incorporate different baseline models to evaluate different aspects of our attacks. We
demonstrate that original data poisoning attacks designed
to attack accuracy are not suitable for fairness attacks, thus
highlighting the importance of attacks designed for fairness.
We also compare our methods against concurrent work on
adversarial attacks on fairness and show the effectiveness of
our methods in comparison.

Algorithmic fairness has attracted significant attention in recent years, with many quantitative measures suggested for
characterizing the fairness of different machine learning algorithms. Despite this interest, the robustness of those fairness
measures with respect to an intentional adversarial attack has
not been properly addressed. Indeed, most adversarial machine
learning has focused on the impact of malicious attacks on the
accuracy of the system, without any regard to the system’s fairness. We propose new types of data poisoning attacks where
an adversary intentionally targets the fairness of a system.
Specifically, we propose two families of attacks that target
fairness measures. In the anchoring attack, we skew the decision boundary by placing poisoned points near specific target
points to bias the outcome. In the influence attack on fairness,
we aim to maximize the covariance between the sensitive attributes and the decision outcome and affect the fairness of
the model. We conduct extensive experiments that indicate the
effectiveness of our proposed attacks.

Introduction
With proliferation of machine learning (ML) applications in
everyday life, it is imperative that ML algorithms underlying
those applications do not discriminate, especially when it
comes to potentially sensitive and consequential decisions,
such as bail decisions (Dressel and Farid 2018). Thus, recent
research has looked into possible biases present in ML algorithms, and proposed different measures and definitions
for characterizing fairness (Dwork et al. 2012; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Kusner et al. 2017; Verma and Rubin 2018;
Mehrabi et al. 2019).
Despite this interest, not much is known about the robustness of various fairness measures with respect to random,
or perhaps malicious, perturbations. Indeed, it is known that
machine learning models can be susceptible to various types
of adversarial attacks targeted to degrade the performance of
machine learning models. However, research in adversarial
machine learning has mostly focused on targeting accuracy
(Chakraborty et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018). We argue that, like
accuracy, fairness measures can be targeted by malicious adversaries as well. For instance, adversaries can attack models
used by a government agency with the goal of making them

Background on Poisoning Attacks
Consider a supervised learning problem characterized by a
loss function L(θ; D) and an adversarial loss Ladv (θ̂; D),
where θ̂ is the set of learnable parameters and D is a labeled
dataset. Let Dtrain be the training dataset. We assume that
the adversary can poison a fraction of those data points, so
that Dtrain = Dc ∪ Dp , where Dc and Dp are the set of
clean and poisoned data points, respectively. We assume

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8930

https://github.com/Ninarehm/attack

