The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Competitive Analysis for Two-Level Ski-Rental Problem
Binghan Wu, Wei Bao, Dong Yuan
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
biwu6051@uni.sydney.edu.au, wei.bao@sydney.edu.au, dong.yuan@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

Nevertheless, the combo purchase covers all individual purchases, forming a two-level hierarchy. This brings new challenges to decision-markers as payment options are now correlated, and cannot be addressed by existing solutions.
We present a few real-world examples of the TLSR problem:
1. Mobile data plan reservation with sponsored data.
A user uses multiple apps on a mobile phone, and these apps
generate data traffic. To cover the cost of data usage, the user
has to choose among different payment options provided by
the Internet Service Provider (ISP) and Content Providers
(CPs). Three payment methods are available: 1) Pay-as-yougo (PAYG). There is no upfront fee and each MB of data
volume incurs a constant fee. 2) Sponsored data plan (SDP).
There is an upfront fee at the beginning and then there is
no more fee on the data generated by a specific app in one
month. 3) All-in-one plan (AIP). There is a (much) higher
upfront fee at the beginning and then there is no more fee on
the data generated by all apps in one month. For this problem, apps can be viewed as instances. PAYG can be viewed
as rent. The SDP and AIP can be regarded as single purchase
and combo purchase respectively.
2. Bahncard reservation with multiple zones. A traveller frequently takes subways in a city with multiple
zones. Three payment methods are offered: 1) Pay-as-yougo (PAYG). There is no upfront fee and each travel incurs
a cost. 2) Zone pass. There is an upfront fee and then travels within one zone will be free of charge in one month. 3)
City pass. There is an upfront fee and then travels within all
zones in the city will be free of charge in one month. In this
example, zone pass and city pass can be regarded as single
purchase and combo purchase respectively.
The bahncard/mobile plan in the real world is usually
valid for each calendar month, and they expire at the end
of each calendar month. Therefore, in two different calendar
months, the decisions are independent. The decision on bahncard/mobile plan purchase can be regarded as an individual
two-level ski-rental problem in each calendar month.
Our Contributions. In this paper, we study the TLSR
problem, in which rental, single purchases, and the combo
purchase are available. We propose an optimal deterministic
online algorithm with two fixed thresholds. When the rental
cost of a single instance (resp. all instances) exceeds the
threshold, the single purchase (resp. combo purchase) will

In this paper, we study a two-level ski-rental problem. There
are multiple commodities, each one can be “rented” (paying
for on-demand usage) or “purchased” (paying for life-time
usage). There is also a combo purchase available so that all
commodities can be purchased as a combo. Since the usages
of the commodities in future are not known in advance, to
minimize the overall cost, we design an online algorithm to
decide if we rent a commodity, purchase a commodity, or
make a combo purchase. We first propose a deterministic online algorithm. It can achieve 3 competitive ratio, which is
optimal and tight. Next, we further propose a randomized onσ
line algorithm, leading to a eσe−1 competitive ratio, where σ
is the ratio between the price of a single commodity and the
price of combo purchase. Finally, we apply simulation to verify the theoretical competitive ratios and evaluate the actual
performance against benchmarks.

Introduction
The ski-rental problem (Karlin, Kenyon, and Randall 2003)
is the dilemma in which a customer trades off between two
payment options without the knowledge of future: rental,
i.e., paying for on-demand usage, and purchase, i.e., paying
for life-time usage at once. Literature has derived the optimal online algorithms with minimized competitive ratio and
it has been applied to different fields such as transportation
system (Karlin, Kenyon, and Randall 2003), cloud systems
(Yang, Pan, and Liu 2019), and energy systems (Lee et al.
2017). However, existing work cannot address many realworld problems, when options are more complex.
In this paper, we consider the two-level ski-rental problem (TLSR) when a decision-maker need to trade off between rental and purchase of multiple instances. (We use the
term instance instead of commodity in the rest of the paper
as users can purchase intangible service, such as mobile data
plans and bus tickets.) For each instance, the decision-maker
can rent it or purchase it (which is called single purchase
in this paper). In addition, the decision-maker can purchase
all instances as a combo purchase at a reduced cost. Please
note that this problem is equivalent to multiple independent
classic ski-rental problems if we ignore the combo purchase.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12034

