The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SMIL: Multimodal Learning with Severely Missing Modality
Mengmeng Ma1 , Jian Ren2 , Long Zhao3 , Sergey Tulyakov2 , Cathy Wu1 , Xi Peng1
1

University of Delaware, 2 Snap Inc., 3 Rutgers University
{mengma, wuc, xipeng}@udel.edu, {jren, stulyakov}@snap.com, lz311@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract

Train

A common assumption in multimodal learning is the completeness of training data, i.e., full modalities are available
in all training examples. Although there exists research endeavor in developing novel methods to tackle the incompleteness of testing data, e.g., modalities are partially missing in
testing examples, few of them can handle incomplete training modalities. The problem becomes even more challenging
if considering the case of severely missing, e.g., ninety percent of training examples may have incomplete modalities.
For the first time in the literature, this paper formally studies
multimodal learning with missing modality in terms of flexibility (missing modalities in training, testing, or both) and efficiency (most training data have incomplete modality). Technically, we propose a new method named SMIL that leverages
Bayesian meta-learning in uniformly achieving both objectives. To validate our idea, we conduct a series of experiments
on three popular benchmarks: MM-IMDb, CMU-MOSI, and
avMNIST. The results prove the state-of-the-art performance
of SMIL over existing methods and generative baselines including autoencoders and generative adversarial networks.

Test

(a) Train: Full modality (paired).
Test: Full modality (paired).
Train

Test

(c) Train: Full modality (unpaired).
Test: Full modality (paired).

Train

Test

(b) Train: Full modality (paired).
Test: Missing modality.
Train

Test

(d) Train: Missing modality.
Test: Missing modality.

Figure 1: Multimodal learning configurations. (a) Train and
test with full and paired modality (Ngiam et al. 2011);
(b) Testing with missing modality (Tsai et al. 2019); (c)
Training with unpaired modality (Shi et al. 2020); (d) We
study the most challenging configurations of severely missing modality in training, testing, or both.

Introduction
Although there exist a bunch of research efforts (Tsai et al.
2019; Pham et al. 2019) in developing novel methods to
tackle the incompleteness of testing data, few of them can
handle incomplete training modalities. An interesting yet
challenging research question then arises: Can we learn a
multimodal model from an incomplete dataset while its performance should as close as possible to the one that learns
from a full-modality dataset?
In this paper, we systematically study this problem
by proposing multimodal learning with severely missing
modality (SMIL). We consider an even more challenging
setting that the missing ratio can be as much as 90%. More
specifically, we design two objectives for SMIL: flexibility
and efficiency. The former requires our model to uniformly
tackle three different missing patterns in training, testing, or
both. The latter enforces our model to effectively learn from
incomplete modality as fast as possible.
To jointly achieve both objectives, we leverage Bayesian
meta-learning framework in designing a new method. The
key idea is to perturb the latent feature space so that embeddings of single modality can approximate ones of full
modality. We highlight that our method is better than typi-

Multimodal learning attracts intensive research interest
because of broad applications such as intelligent tutoring (Petrovica, Anohina-Naumeca, and Ekenel 2017),
robotics (Noda et al. 2014), and healthcare (Frantzidis et al.
2010). Generally speaking, existing research efforts mainly
focus on how to fuse multimodal data effectively (Liu et al.
2018; Zadeh et al. 2017a) and how to learn a good representation for each modality (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020).
A common assumption underlying multimodal learning
is the completeness of modality as illustrated in Figure 1.
Existing methods (Ngiam et al. 2011; Zadeh et al. 2017b;
Hou et al. 2019) often assume full and paired modalities are
available in both training and testing data. However, such an
assumption may not always hold in real world due to privacy
concerns or budget limitations. For example, in social network, we may not be able to access full-modality data since
users would apply various privacy and security constraints.
In autonomous driving, we may collect many imaginary data
but not as so for 3D point cloud because LiDARs are much
less affordable than cameras.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2302

