The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Brain Decoding Using fNIRS
Lu Cao1∗ , Dandan Huang2,3∗ , Yue Zhang2,3† , Xiaowei Jiang4 , Yanan Chen4
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University, China,
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, China
4
Henan University, China
lu cao@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {huangdandan, zhangyue}@westlake.edu.cn, jiangxiaowei@aipsycho.com, chenyn@henu.edu.cn

Abstract
Brain activation can reflect semantic information elicited by
natural words and concepts. Increasing research has been conducted on decoding such neural activation patterns using representational semantic models. However, prior work decoding semantic meaning from neurophysiological responses has
been largely limited to ECoG, fMRI, MEG, and EEG techniques, each having its own advantages and limitations. More
recently, the functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
has emerged as an alternative hemodynamic-based approach
and possesses a number of strengths. We investigate brain
decoding tasks under the help of fNIRS and empirically compare fNIRS with fMRI. Primarily, we find that: 1) like fMRI
scans, activation patterns recorded from fNIRS encode rich
information for discriminating concepts, but show limits on
the possibility of decoding fine-grained semantic clues; 2)
fNIRS decoding shows robustness across different brain regions, semantic categories and even subjects; 3) fNIRS has
higher accuracy being decoded based on multi-channel patterns as compared to single-channel ones, which is in line
with our intuition of the working mechanism of human brain.
Our findings prove that fNIRS has the potential to promote a
deep integration of NLP and cognitive neuroscience from the
perspective of language understanding. We release the largest
fNIRS dataset by far to facilitate future research.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Schematic representation of fNIRS-based brain
decoding: (a) emitter and detector probes are positioned over
the scalp surface; (b) stimuli are presented to participants; (c)
participants’ neural activation are recorded by fNIRS; (d) a
decoder is trained to take brain images as input and output
the corresponding text semantic vectors.

the stimulus word evoking such a neural pattern,
v = f (i),

Introduction
The increasing development and use of neuroimaging techniques represent a significant advance in the field of brain
decoding, in which computational scientists interpret implicit
brain activities based on explicit linguistic representations
and deep-learning algorithms (Mitchell et al. 2008; Wehbe
et al. 2014b; Hale et al. 2018; Gauthier and Levy 2019; Cao
and Zhang 2019). The main research task is to establish a
mapping between the concepts and neural activation patterns
through neuroimaging experiments. As shown in the Equation 1, given brain images which imply mental content for
words or text snippets, the task of brain decoding is to predict
∗

The first two authors have equal contribution.
Yue Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12602

(1)

where i, v is the brain activation image and the stimulus word,
respectively. The target is to learn the mapping function f (·),
which in most cases is a linear model (Mitchell et al. 2008).
Brain decoding is a significant fundamental research topic
both for cognitive science and artificial intelligence. For neuroimaging research, brain decoding methods are appreciated
tools for localizing and distinguishing intricate brain response
patterns and making predictions about undetectable neural
states (Shinkareva et al. 2008; Just et al. 2010). And for artificial intelligence research, in particular the domain of natural
language processing (NLP), the appealing properties of brain
decoding technology are increasingly being used to explore
to what extent the intelligent language understanding behaviors captured by those artificial models are consistent with
human reading physiology (Gauthier and Levy 2019; Abnar
et al. 2019). The underlying theory is that the brain neural
basis and the corpus distributional properties of the same
word are highly correlated (Mitchell et al. 2008).
However, as an important prerequisite of brain decoding,
the measurement of brain activation remains a challenge
due to limitations on neuroimaging technology. Existing
methods include electrocorticography (ECoG) (Kuruvilla
and Flink 2003), electroencephalogram (EEG) (Murphy, Baroni, and Poesio 2009), functional magnetic resonance imag-

