The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

U NICORN on R AINBOW:
A Universal Commonsense Reasoning Model on a New Multitask Benchmark
Nicholas Lourie,1 Ronan Le Bras,1 Chandra Bhagavatula,1 Yejin Choi 1,2
1

2

Allen Institute for AI, WA, USA,
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, WA, USA
{nicholasl, ronanlb, chandrab, yejinc}@allenai.org

Abstract
Commonsense AI has long been seen as a near impossible
goal—until recently. Now, research interest has sharply increased with an influx of new benchmarks and models.
We propose two new ways to evaluate commonsense models,
emphasizing their generality on new tasks and building on
diverse, recently introduced benchmarks. First, we propose a
new multitask benchmark, R AINBOW, to promote research on
commonsense models that generalize well over multiple tasks
and datasets. Second, we propose a novel evaluation, the cost
equivalent curve, that sheds new insight on how the choice
of source datasets, pretrained language models, and transfer
learning methods impacts performance and data efficiency.
We perform extensive experiments—over 200 experiments
encompassing 4800 models—and report multiple valuable
and sometimes surprising findings, e.g., that transfer almost
always leads to better or equivalent performance if following a particular recipe, that QA-based commonsense datasets
transfer well with each other, while commonsense knowledge
graphs do not, and that perhaps counter-intuitively, larger
models benefit more from transfer than smaller ones.
Last but not least, we introduce a new universal commonsense reasoning model, U NICORN, that establishes new
state-of-the-art performance across 8 popular commonsense
benchmarks, αNLI (→87.3%), C OSMOS QA (→91.8%),
H ELLA SWAG (→93.9%), PIQA (→90.1%), S OCIAL IQ A
(→83.2%), W INO G RANDE (→86.6%), C YC IC (→94.0%)
and C OMMONSENSE QA (→79.3%).

1

Figure 1: Cost equivalent curves comparing transfer learning from GLUE, S UPER GLUE, and R AINBOW onto C OM MONSENSE QA. Each curve plots how much training data
the single-task baseline (the x-axis) needs compared to the
multitask method (the y-axis) to achieve the same performance (shown on the top axis in accuracy). Curves below
the diagonal line (y = x) indicate that the multitask method
needs less training data from the target dataset than the
single-task baseline for the same performance. Thus, lower
curves mean more successful transfer learning.

leaderboards (Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2019b; Raffel et al. 2019). On the other hand, pretrained language models continue to make surprisingly silly
and nonsensical mistakes, even the recently introduced GPT3.1 This motivates new, relatively under-explored research
avenues in commonsense knowledge and reasoning.
In pursuing commonsense AI, we can learn a great deal
from mainstream NLP research. In particular, the introduction of multitask benchmarks such as GLUE (Wang et al.
2019b) and S UPER GLUE (Wang et al. 2019a) has encouraged fundamental advances in the NLP community, accelerating research into models that robustly solve many tasks
and datasets instead of overfitting to one in particular. In
contrast, commonsense benchmarks and models are relatively nascent, thus there has been no organized effort, to

Introduction

In AI’s early years, researchers sought to build machines
with common sense (McCarthy 1959); however, in the following decades, common sense came to be viewed as a near
impossible goal. It is only recently that we see a sudden increase in research interest toward commonsense AI, with an
influx of new benchmarks and models (Mostafazadeh et al.
2016; Talmor et al. 2019; Sakaguchi et al. 2020).
This renewed interest in common sense is ironically encouraged by both the great empirical strengths and limitations of large-scale pretrained neural language models. On
one hand, pretrained models have led to remarkable progress
across the board, often surpassing human performance on

1
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/22/1007539/
gpt3-openai-language-generator-artificial-intelligence-ai-opinion/

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13480

