The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The LOB Recreation Model: Predicting the Limit Order Book from TAQ History
Using an Ordinary Differential Equation Recurrent Neural Network
Zijian Shi, Yu Chen, John Cartlidge
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol
Bristol, BS8 1UB, United Kingdom
zijian.shi@bristol.ac.uk, yc14600@bristol.ac.uk, john.cartlidge@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

mechanism and LOB determine the market microstructure
(O’Hara 1997) and enable a price formation process such
that the instantaneous price of a financial asset is entirely
determined by the contemporaneous demand and supply in
the market. In this manner, prices fluctuate freely and evolve
over time as orders are submitted, cancelled, and executed
in the market.
Given the tight association between the LOB of a financial asset and its price evolution, LOB data is a valuable resource for financial practitioners and academic researchers;
enabling back-testing of trading algorithms, offering the potential to forecast price movements, and providing a resource to understand market dynamics. However, because
of this value, full LOB data is often supplied at considerable
cost, with subscription fees reaching tens of thousands of
dollars annually.1 In contrast, trades and quotes (TAQ) data
– trade executions and orders at the top of the LOB, which
represent the current best bid and ask (i.e., the highest priced
bid, and the lowest priced ask) – is much more readily available and often freely reported as an asset’s current price and
last trade price (Bouchaud et al. 2018). This situation provides strong motivation to attempt a recreation of the LOB
at depth using only the TAQ data stream as input.

In an order-driven financial market, the price of a financial asset is discovered through the interaction of orders - requests
to buy or sell at a particular price - that are posted to the
public limit order book (LOB). Therefore, LOB data is extremely valuable for modelling market dynamics. However,
LOB data is not freely accessible, which poses a challenge
to market participants and researchers wishing to exploit this
information. Fortunately, trades and quotes (TAQ) data - orders arriving at the top of the LOB, and trades executing in
the market - are more readily available. In this paper, we
present the LOB recreation model, a first attempt from a deep
learning perspective to recreate the top five price levels of the
LOB for small-tick stocks using only TAQ data. Volumes of
orders sitting deep in the LOB are predicted by combining
outputs from: (1) a history compiler that uses a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) module to selectively compile prediction
relevant quote history; (2) a market events simulator, which
uses an Ordinary Differential Equation Recurrent Neural Network (ODE-RNN) to simulate the accumulation of net order
arrivals; and (3) a weighting scheme to adaptively combine
the predictions generated by (1) and (2). By the paradigm of
transfer learning, the source model trained on one stock can
be fine-tuned to enable application to other financial assets of
the same class with much lower demand on additional data.
Comprehensive experiments conducted on two real world intraday LOB datasets demonstrate that the proposed model can
efficiently recreate the LOB with high accuracy using only
TAQ data as input.

Contribution This paper presents a novel limit order book
recreation model (LOBRM), where order volumes resting at
different price levels of the LOB are predicted using only
TAQ data. The LOBRM consists of three components: (i) a
history compiler (HC), which uses a Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) module (Cho et al. 2014) to compile the evolving
history of quote volumes; (ii) a market events simulator
(ES), which uses an Ordinary Differential Equation Recurrent Neural Network (ODE-RNN) module with gating control (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019) to encode TAQ
history into a continuous latent state that is then decoded by
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) into vectors of order arrival
rates at different price levels; and (iii) an adaptive weighting
scheme (WS), which fuses the output from (1) and (2) to
make a final prediction.

Introduction
The majority of today’s financial markets are order-driven,
with traders submitting orders – requests to buy or sell some
quantity at a particular price – to a public limit order book
(LOB). Orders resting in the LOB form the instantaneous
supply and demand for an asset, with buy orders (or bids)
representing quantity demanded at each price level and sell
orders (or asks) representing quantity supplied at each price
level. Orders are matched using the continuous double auction (CDA) mechanism such that a buyer or seller can submit
an order at any time and a trade execution will occur whenever prices cross; i.e., when an ask (order to sell) price is
less than or equal to a bid (order to buy) price. The CDA
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

548

http://www.nasdaqtrader.com/Trader.aspx?id=DPUSdata

