The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Maximin Support Method: An Extension of the D’Hondt Method to
Approval-Based Multiwinner Elections
Luis Sánchez-Fernández,1 Norberto Fernández Garcı́a,2 Jesús A. Fisteus,1 Markus Brill 3
1

Dept. Telematic Engineering, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, E-28911 Leganés, Spain
2
Centro Universitario de la Defensa, Escuela Naval Militar, E-36920 Marı́n, Spain
3
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, Technische Universität Berlin, D-10587 Berlin, Germany
luiss@it.uc3m.es, norberto@cud.uvigo.es, jesus.arias@uc3m.es, brill@tu-berlin.de
Abstract

the state, or that the number of seats assigned to a political
party in a parliament should be proportional to the number
of votes the party received in an election. An important apportionment method is named after Victor D’Hondt.1
The apportionment problem has an illustrious history and
has given rise to an elegant mathematical theory (Balinski
and Young 1982; Pukelsheim 2014), but it is not without
limitations. For example, requiring voters in a parliamentary election to choose among political parties is often described as restrictive, as it prevents them from expressive
more fine-grained preferences (Renwick and Pilet 2016).
Furthermore, apportionment methods are not applicable in
scenarios where attributes (such as party affiliation) are not
available. These limitations have led a number of scholars to explore more general settings (e.g., Hylland 1992;
Kilgour, Brams, and Sanver 2006). One important generalization is the setting of approval-based multiwinner elections mentioned above. Apportionment problems constitute
the special case where approval sets partition the candidate space. Thus, every approval-based multiwinner voting
rule induces an apportionment method (Brill, Laslier, and
Skowron 2018). Indeed, some of the most studied approvalbased multiwinner voting rules, those of Phragmén (1894)
and Thiele (1895), have been devised as extensions of the
D’Hondt method of apportionment (Janson 2016).
In this paper, we introduce a novel approval-based multiwinner voting rule. Like Phragmén and Thiele, we take
the D’Hondt apportionment method as our point of departure. In contrast to earlier proposals, we focus on a compelling “maximin” characterization of the method in terms
of voter support: The D’Hondt method always selects committees maximizing the voter support for the least supported
candidate in the committee. We generalize the notion of
maximin support to approval-based multiwinner elections.
When applying this concept iteratively (adding candidates
to the committee one at a time), we obtain the maximin support method (MMS). We establish that MMS is an efficiently
computable extension of the D’Hondt method that satisfies
committee monotonicity, (weak) support monotonicity, and
proportional justified representation (PJR).

We propose the maximin support method, a novel extension of the D’Hondt apportionment method to approval-based
multiwinner elections. The maximin support method is a sequential procedure that aims to maximize the support of the
least supported elected candidate. It can be computed efficiently and satisfies (adjusted versions of) the main properties
of the original D’Hondt method: house monotonicity, population monotonicity, and proportional representation. We also
establish a close relationship between the maximin support
method and alternative D’Hondt extensions due to Phragmén.

1

Introduction

In a multiwinner election, the goal is to select a fixed number
of candidates (a so-called committee) based on the preferences of a set of agents (Faliszewski et al. 2017). Multiwinner voting rules have a wide variety of applications including political elections (Brams, Kilgour, and Potthoff 2019),
medical diagnostic decision-making (Gangl et al. 2019), and
the selection of validators who participate in the consensus
protocol of a blockchain (Cevallos and Stewart 2020).
Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in settings where the agents express their preferences via approval
ballots: For each candidate, an agent has the choice between
approving or disapproving the candidate. A particular focus of the approval-based multiwinner voting literature (see
Lackner and Skowron, 2020, for a recent survey) has been
on the proportional representation of agents’ preferences in
the committee (Aziz et al. 2017; Sánchez-Fernández et al.
2017; Brill et al. 2017, 2020; Peters and Skowron 2020).
A simpler setting in which proportional representation has
been extensively studied is that of apportionment (Balinski
and Young 1982). Here, both candidates and agents have attributes and the goal is to select a committee such that the
distribution over attributes in the committee resembles as
closely as possible the distribution over attributes among the
agents. In classical applications of apportionment, attributes
refer to either geographical location or political party affiliation; proportionality then suggests, for instance, that the
number of seats assigned to a state of a union in a representative body should be proportional to the population size of

1

In the US, the method is named after Thomas Jefferson, the
third president of the United States. In fact, Jefferson introduced
the method already in 1792, whereas D’Hondt described it in 1878.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5690

