The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MUFASA: Multimodal Fusion Architecture Search for Electronic Health Records
Zhen Xu1∗ , David R. So1∗ , Andrew M. Dai1
1
Google Research,
Mountain View, USA
{zhenxu, davidso, adai}@google.com

Abstract

Vancomycin
Lisinopril

Chest X-ray

One important challenge of applying deep learning to electronic health records (EHR) is the complexity of their multimodal structure. EHR usually contains a mixture of structured (codes) and unstructured (free-text) data with sparse
and irregular longitudinal features – all of which doctors utilize when making decisions. In the deep learning regime, determining how different modality representations should be
fused together is a difficult problem, which is often addressed
by handcrafted modeling and intuition. In this work, we extend state-of-the-art neural architecture search (NAS) methods
and propose MUltimodal Fusion Architecture SeArch (MUFASA) to simultaneously search across multimodal fusion
strategies and modality-specific architectures for the first time.
We demonstrate empirically that our MUFASA method outperforms established unimodal NAS on public EHR data with
comparable computation costs. In addition, MUFASA produces architectures that outperform Transformer and Evolved
Transformer. Compared with these baselines on CCS diagnosis
code prediction, our discovered models improve top-5 recall
from 0.88 to 0.91 and demonstrate the ability to generalize to
other EHR tasks. Studying our top architecture in depth, we
provide empirical evidence that MUFASA’s improvements are
derived from its ability to both customize modeling for each
data modality and find effective fusion strategies.

Encounters
Procedure
Medication
Labs
Notes
Day 1

Day 2
Heart Rate: 71
Resp. Rate: 18

Day 3
... she was having
difficulty swallowing
and breathing ...

Figure 1: An illustrative example of a patient’s record. It
contains multiple feature modalities, including categorical
features, continuous features and clinical notes across time.

Introduction
In recent years, hospitals have begun adopting electronic
health record (EHR) systems (Adler-Milstein et al. 2015).
This digitization of large amounts of medical data offers
an unprecedented opportunity for deep learning to improve
healthcare, such as by predicting diagnoses (Lipton et al.
2015; Miotto et al. 2016), reducing healthcare costs (Bates
et al. 2014; Krumholz 2014), and modeling the temporal correlation among medical events (Che et al. 2018; Xue et al.
2020). However, EHR data’s intrinsic longitudinal and multimodal nature adds distinct complexity that is absent from
common academic datasets, such as ImageNet and WMT,
that are often used to develop machine learning models.
Reflecting the complexity of real-world medical information, EHR data contains multiple modalities, both structured
(codes and labs) and unstructured (free-text) (Figure 1). For
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10532

instance, EHR usually contains: (1) contextual features, such
as patient age and sex; (2) longitudinal categorical features,
such as procedure codes, medication codes, and condition
codes; (3) longitudinal continuous features, such as blood
pressure, body temperature, and heart rate; and (4) longitudinal free-text clinical notes, which are often lengthy and
contain a lot of medical terminology. These data types differ
not only in feature spaces and dimensionalities, but also in
data generation processes and measurement frequencies. For
example, lab tests and procedures are ordered at the physician’s discretion, while blood pressure and body temperature
can be monitored on an hourly basis.
Synthesizing complimentary information across these multiple modalities allows doctors to make higher quality decisions. For instance, lab tests (continuous features) provide
detailed information about a patient’s physiological condition, while diagnosis codes (categorical features) capture
a system-level view of the patient’s state. These modalities
have complex interactions; for example, a patient’s lab results
and diagnoses should be considered when trying to predict
what effect a blood pressure medication would have on them.
Doctors consider this diverse data, as well as previous doctors’ notes, when making decisions. Thus, modeling these
modalities jointly has strong machine learning potential, but
needs to be done with care, as adding modalities naively risks

