The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Decoupled and Memory-Reinforced Networks:
Towards Effective Feature Learning for One-Step Person Search
Chuchu Han1 , Zhedong Zheng2,3 , Changxin Gao1 * , Nong Sang1 , Yi Yang2
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia 3 Baidu Research, China
{hcc, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, zhedong.zheng@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au
Detection

Abstract

Class
subnet

CONV

The goal of person search is to localize and match query persons from scene images. For high efficiency, one-step methods have been developed to jointly handle the pedestrian detection and identification sub-tasks using a single network.
There are two major challenges in the current one-step approaches. One is the mutual interference between the optimization objectives of multiple sub-tasks. The other is the
sub-optimal identification feature learning caused by small
batch size when end-to-end training. To overcome these problems, we propose a decoupled and memory-reinforced network (DMRNet). Specifically, to reconcile the conflicts of
multiple objectives, we simplify the standard tightly coupled
pipelines and establish a deeply decoupled multi-task learning framework. Further, we build a memory-reinforced mechanism to boost the identification feature learning. By queuing
the identification features of recently accessed instances into
a memory bank, the mechanism augments the similarity pair
construction for pairwise metric learning. For better encoding consistency of the stored features, a slow-moving average
of the network is applied for extracting these features. In this
way, the dual networks reinforce each other and converge to
robust solution states. Experimentally, the proposed method
obtains 93.2% and 46.9% mAP on CUHK-SYSU and PRW
datasets, which exceeds all the existing one-step methods.

Box
subnet

Proposals

CONV CONV

Feature Maps

Input

Flatten

ID Feature
FC

ResNet50-FPN

ROI Align

Re-ID

Figure 1: The inference of the proposed one-step framework.

Chen et al. 2020; Zhong, Wang, and Zhang 2020). Given an
uncropped input image, one-step models predict the bounding boxes and the corresponding identification features of all
the detected persons.
Although significant progress has been made in the onestep person search, there are two crucial issues that have
not been fully solved by previous works. The first issue is
that coupling the two sub-tasks in a shared network may be
detrimental to the learning of each task. Specifically, popular one-step methods based on the Faster R-CNN (Ren et al.
2015) supervise the shared Region-of-Interest (RoI) features with multi-task losses, i.e., regression loss, foregroundbackground classification loss, and identification loss. The
competing objectives of these sub-tasks make the RoI features difficult to optimize, as pointed in (Chen et al. 2018).
The second issue lies in the constrained small batch size under the end-to-end fashion, caused by limited GPU memory.
It leads to sub-optimal identification feature learning since
metric learning requires vast informative similarity pairs.
Previous works tackle this issue by maintaining an exponential moving average (EMA) feature proxy for every identity, i.e., a look-up table. However, when an identity is infrequently visited, its feature proxy could be outdated as the
weights of the model evolve. It is unclear that this strategy
could be scaled to larger datasets with numerous identities.
In the paper, we rethink the decoupling and integration of
pedestrian detection and identification in the one-step person search framework. Considering that RoI features contain the detailed recognition patterns of detected persons,
they can be specific to the re-ID task. On the other hand,
bounding box regression and foreground-background classification do not have to rely on the fine-grained RoI features

Introduction
Person search aims at localizing and identifying a query person from a gallery of uncropped scene images. This task
is generally decomposed into two sub-tasks, i.e., pedestrian
detection, and person re-identification (re-ID) (Zheng et al.
2019). Based on this, two-step and one-step methods have
been developed. Two-step methods sequentially process the
sub-tasks with two separate networks, where a detector is
applied to raw images for localization and a followed reID network extracts identification features from the detected
person images (Zheng et al. 2017; Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018;
Chen et al. 2018; Han et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2020). In contrast, one-step methods learn person localization and identification in parallel within a single network, exhibiting higher efficiency (Xiao et al. 2017, 2019;
Munjal et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2020b,a;
* Corresponding author: cgao@hust.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1505

