The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Diverse Characteristics and Adversarial Ambivalence for Domain
Adaptive Segmentation
Bowen Cai1,2 , Huan Fu1 , Rongfei Jia1 , Binqiang Zhao1 , Hua Li2 and Yinghui Xu1
1

Alibaba Group
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{kevin.cbw, fuhuan.fh, rongfei.jrf, binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com
{lihua}@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

diverse characteristics. For example, the images taken in the
same place with the same viewpoint may show significant
differences because of weather changes.
The above analysis motivates us to study a more realistic
UDA setting for semantic segmentation, i.e., the images in a
target domain has diverse characteristics. Taking “weather”
as an example, a naive idea is to enlarge the synthetic dataset
to cover as many weather conditions as possible and then
directly adopt existing high-performing UDA methods. Unluckily, we find that the performance gains are not that remarkable. A possible reason is that the adversarial adaptation learning process may be more challenging when images in both domains show multiple modalities, resulting
in semantic distortion translations and ambiguous feature
alignment near weather condition boundaries. In fact, minimizing the discrepancy between synthetic and real domains
is challenging (Saito et al. 2018), not to mention that each
domain consists of several sub-domains (e.g., Cityscapes∗ :
{Cloudy, F oggy, Rainy}). Moreover, the learned pseudolabels for target images contain significant noise when the
atmosphere states are unconstrained.
In this paper, we argue that carefully reasoning about the
diverse characteristics in the target domain may improve
the effectiveness of adapted segmentation model. Towards
this goal, we propose a condition guided adaptation framework (DCAA) empowered by a special attentive progressive adversarial training (APAT) mechanism and a novel
self-training policy. We illustrate our observations and idea
in Figure 1. For the APAT strategy, we first introduce a
condition-guided style translator to generate realistic characteristic conditionable samples from synthetic images. Furthermore, we develop a condition attention module to exploit
the complementarities of multi-modalities. Lastly, we study
condition-specific adversarial training to align semantic feature distributions under each condition and further mitigate
the global discrepancy.
For the novel self-training scheme, we investigate the correlations among target sub-domains to produce robust attentive pseudo-labels for target images. Importantly, we point
out that the dense output from the discriminators implies adversarial ambivalence for hard adaptation regions. We thus
consider the ambivalence to further improve the self-training
process by revising the pseudo-labels and emerging the hard
adaptation regions. We evaluate our DCAA on several chal-

Adapting semantic segmentation models to new domains is
an important but challenging problem. Recently enlightening progress has been made, but the performance of existing methods is unsatisfactory on real datasets where the new
target domain comprises of heterogeneous sub-domains (e.g.,
diverse weather characteristics). We point out that carefully
reasoning about the multiple modalities in the target domain
can improve the robustness of adaptation models. To this
end, we propose a condition-guided adaptation framework
that is empowered by a special attentive progressive adversarial training (APAT) mechanism and a novel self-training
policy. The APAT strategy progressively performs conditionspecific alignment and attentive global feature matching. The
new self-training scheme exploits the adversarial ambivalences of easy and hard adaptation regions and the correlations among target sub-domains effectively. We evaluate our
method (DCAA) on various adaptation scenarios where the
target images vary in weather conditions. The comparisons
against baselines and the state-of-the-art approaches demonstrate the superiority of DCAA over the competitors.

Introduction
Due to the expensive labeling costs, there is a growing interest in studying weakly-supervised or unsupervised approaches for semantic segmentation in recent years. One of
the widely investigated techniques is synthetic-to-real unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Hoffman et al. 2016;
Tsai et al. 2018; Zhang, David, and Gong 2017; Zou et al.
2019), which expects to transfer knowledge from labeled
synthetic datasets to unlabeled real domains. Recent solutions can be mainly divided into two streams, including feature alignment and self-training. The former utilizes adversarial training to align both the image styles and semantic feature distributions. As a promising alternative, selftraining focuses on iteratively generating pseudo-labels with
high confidence and fewer noises for target images, and retrain the networks using the produced labels. However, the
performance of these models is still far from satisfactory on
real datasets. One possible reason is that existing methods
assume that images in the target domain are captured under similar conditions, while a new real domain can have
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6850

