The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Author Homepage Discovery in CiteSeerX
Krutarth Patel,1 Cornelia Caragea, 2 Doina Caragea, 1 C. Lee Giles 3
1

Computer Science, Kansas State University
Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University
kipatel@ksu.edu, cornelia@uic.edu, dcaragea@ksu.edu, giles@ist.psu.edu
2

Abstract

In order to enlarge its document collection, CiteSeerX
maintains whitelists / blacklists of URLs and lists of researchers’ homepages to direct the crawl for documents.
Thus, maintaining comprehensive, up-to-date collections of
researchers’ homepages is an essential component in CiteSeerX. However, this task is very challenging since not only
do new authors emerge, but also existing authors may stop
publishing or may change affiliations, resulting in outdated
(4XX error) or invalid URLs. An analysis of a subset of
13, 239 homepages available in DBLP revealed that ≈ 42%
of them were outdated within a time span of three years. This
represents about half of the original homepages in the set.
Given this challenge, how can we automatically augment
and maintain accurate lists of researchers’ homepages?
One approach would be to crawl academic websites (e.g.,
from a university domain) and use a machine learning classifier to predict whether a website accessed during the crawl
is an author homepage or not (Gollapalli et al. 2013). However, this approach: (1) is still inefficient (e.g., in terms of
bandwidth and storage resources) since only a small fraction of the websites hosted in an academic domain are author homepages (with many websites corresponding to departments, courses, groups, etc), and (2) misses homepages
from research industry labs, which do not belong to the academic domain (e.g., ∼51% of the homepages in our dataset
are not from the .edu domain). An alternative, more efficient
approach, is to use a broader Web search for author discovery together with an accurate homepage classifier.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel search-thenclassify approach to find researchers homepages on the Web
and identify them with powerful deep learning models. Our
approach is inspired from the way humans search for scholarly information on the Web. Precisely, humans may directly
employ an author name as a query, or may issue a “navigational query” (Broder 2002) comprising of representative
keywords (or paper titles) of the author, if the author’s name
(or the correct spelling) is not known. Using hints from the
titles, snippets and the URL strings, human searchers are often able to locate the correct homepage from the Web search
results, e.g., by navigating from the paper URL to the index
of the homepage where the paper is located. To illustrate
this process, Figure 1 shows an example of a Web search
using the Bing search engine for the title of a paper published in WWW 2008. In the figure, the link shown in hosted

Scholarly digital libraries provide access to scientific publications and comprise useful resources for researchers. CiteSeerX is one such digital library search engine that provides
access to more than 10 million academic documents. We propose a novel search-driven approach to build and maintain a
large collection of homepages that can be used as seed URLs
in any digital library including CiteSeerX to crawl scientific
documents. Precisely, we integrate Web search and classification in a unified approach to discover new homepages: first,
we use publicly-available author names and research paper
titles as queries to a Web search engine to find relevant content, and then we identify the correct homepages from the
search results using a powerful deep learning classifier based
on Convolutional Neural Networks. Moreover, we use SelfTraining in order to reduce the labeling effort and to utilize
the unlabeled data to train the efficient researcher homepage
classifier. Our experiments on a large scale dataset highlight
the effectiveness of our approach, and position Web search
as an effective method for acquiring authors’ homepages. We
show the development and deployment of the proposed approach in CiteSeerX and the maintenance requirements.

Introduction
CiteSeerX is a scientific literature digital library and search
engine that focuses primarily on the literature in computer
and information science. CiteSeerX aims to improve the dissemination of scientific literature and to provide improvements in functionality, usability, availability, cost, comprehensiveness, efficiency, and timeliness in the access of scientific and scholarly knowledge. Besides search capabilities, CiteSeerX provides access to over 10 million academic
documents (metadata information along with the full documents), which have been used in many applications such
as expert search (Balog and De Rijke 2007), author name
disambiguation (Kim et al. 2018; Khabsa, Treeratpituk, and
Giles 2014), keyphrase extraction (Patel et al. 2020; Patel and Caragea 2019; Alzaidy, Caragea, and Giles 2019;
Gollapalli and Caragea 2014; Caragea et al. 2014; Florescu
and Caragea 2017), citation indexing (Giles, Bollacker, and
Lawrence 1998), topic classification (Lu and Getoor 2003;
Caragea, Bulgarov, and Mihalcea 2015), and collaboration
network formation (Chen et al. 2011).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15146

