The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learnable Dynamic Temporal Pooling for Time Series Classification
Dongha Lee1 , Seonghyeon Lee2 , Hwanjo Yu2∗
1

2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Republic of Korea
{dongha.lee, sh0416, hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

of high-level features for their classification. On top of convolutional layers, the CNN classifiers adopt global average
pooling (GAP) or global max pooling (GMP) that simply
aggregates all hidden vectors along the time axis. By doing so, they can obtain a global representation for an input
time series, as well as avoid the overfitting problem with the
help of much fewer model parameters. Nevertheless, such
global aggregation discards the temporal position of the hidden features, which makes the CNN learn only positioninvariant temporal features. Since each temporal position itself could be a useful feature for discrimination among different classes in time series classification, the global pooling
layer eventually degrades the performance of the classifiers.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel pooling method that effectively reduces the temporal size (i.e.,
length) of network outputs while minimizing the loss of
temporal information. Motivated by the observations that
time series instances consist of multiple segments with distinct patterns, our dynamic temporal pooling (DTP) outputs
a pooled vector for each segment rather than the one for a
whole series. The DTP layer produces segment-level representations by aggregating hidden vectors in each segment,
thus it enables to model the classification score based on
segment-specific class weights. In other words, our CNN
classifiers replace the global pooling with the segmentlevel pooling (being followed by a fully-connected layer),
which allows extracting further class-discriminative features
and improves the classification accuracy. We additionally
present the class activation map (CAM) specifically for our
DTP layer, indicating how much each temporal region contributes to predicting the class label of an input time series.
The challenge here is to find out consistent segments from
input time series instances that are not temporally aligned
with each other. To this end, the DTP layer performs semantic segmentation by using dynamic time warping (DTW).
We first introduce trainable latent vectors as many as the
number of segments to be identified, termed as prototypical hidden series, for encoding the prototypical features of
each segment into them in a temporal order. Then, the DTP
layer aligns the network outputs (i.e., the series of hidden
vectors) with the prototypical hidden series while keeping
their temporal order based on DTW; this generates the set of
consecutive time points matching with each segment. In the
end, we simultaneously optimize the network parameters of

With the increase of available time series data, predicting
their class labels has been one of the most important challenges in a wide range of disciplines. Recent studies on time
series classification show that convolutional neural networks
(CNN) achieved the state-of-the-art performance as a single classifier. In this work, pointing out that the global pooling layer that is usually adopted by existing CNN classifiers
discards the temporal information of high-level features, we
present a dynamic temporal pooling (DTP) technique that reduces the temporal size of hidden representations by aggregating the features at the segment-level. For the partition of
a whole series into multiple segments, we utilize dynamic
time warping (DTW) to align each time point in a temporal
order with the prototypical features of the segments, which
can be optimized simultaneously with the network parameters
of CNN classifiers. The DTP layer combined with a fullyconnected layer helps to extract further discriminative features considering their temporal position within an input time
series. Extensive experiments on both univariate and multivariate time series datasets show that our proposed pooling
significantly improves the classification performance.

Introduction
In the last two decades, time series classification has
been dominated by nearest neighbor classifiers which utilize handcrafted feature-based representations (Baydogan,
Runger, and Tuv 2013; Schäfer 2015) or various distance
measures between time series (Zhao and Itti 2018; Yuan
et al. 2019b). Recently, there have been several attempts to
exploit deep neural networks (DNN) for time series classifiers (Zheng et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2017; Wang, Yan, and
Oates 2017); they do not require heavy crafting on feature
engineering or data preprocessing, and easily be applied to
multivariate time series as well. In practice, fully convolutional networks (FCN) and residual networks (ResNet) designed for time series classification (Wang, Yan, and Oates
2017) showed the state-of-the-art accuracy among various
DNN competitors (Fawaz et al. 2019).
However, the existing convolutional neural networks
(CNN) are not able to fully utilize the temporal information
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8288

