The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Toward Robust Long Range Policy Transfer
Wei-Cheng Tseng1 , Jin-Siang Lin1 , Yao-Min Feng1 , Min Sun1,2,3
1

National Tsing Hua University
2
Appier Inc., Taiwan
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
{weichengtseng, linjinsiang, yaominlouis}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract

transfer learning in RL may face some fundamental problems. First, unlike supervised learning, the transitions and
trajectories are sampled during the training phase based on
the interacted policy (Rothfuss et al. 2019). Since the reward
distributions are different between the pre-training task and
the transferring task, directly finetuning the pre-training policy on transferring tasks may make the agent perform biased
structured exploration and get stuck in many low reward trajectories. Second, dynamics shifts between pre-training and
transferring tasks may induce the pre-training policy to perform unstructured exploration (Clavera et al. 2019; Nachum
et al. 2020). Although domain randomization (Tobin et al.
2017; Nachum et al. 2020) in the pre-training phase may
mitigate this problem, we prefer the pre-trained policies to
gradually fit the transferring tasks.

Humans can master a new task within a few trials by drawing
upon skills acquired through prior experience. To mimic this
capability, hierarchical models combining primitive policies
learned from prior tasks have been proposed. However, these
methods fall short comparing to the human’s range of transferability. We propose a method, which leverages the hierarchical structure to train the combination function and adapt
the set of diverse primitive polices alternatively, to efficiently
produce a range of complex behaviors on challenging new
tasks. We also design two regularization terms to improve
the diversity and utilization rate of the primitives in the pretraining phase. We demonstrate that our method outperforms
other recent policy transfer methods by combining and adapting these reusable primitives in tasks with continuous action
space. The experiment results further show that our approach
provides a broader transferring range. The ablation study also
show the regularization terms are critical for long range policy transfer. Finally, we show that our method consistently
outperforms other methods when the quality of the primitives
varies.

1

Some methods intend to limit dependency between pretraining policy and task-specific information (Goyal et al.
2019; Galashov et al. 2019) by using information bottleneck
(Alemi et al. 2017) and variational inference (Kingma and
Welling 2013). That way, that pre-training policy does not
overfit to a specific task and can be transferred to other tasks.
Besides, some methods achieve task transfer by embedding
tasks into a latent distribution (Merel et al. 2019; Hausman et al. 2018). However, the latent distribution should be
smooth and contain a diverse set of tasks to perform behavior well. Some works propose a hierarchical policy (Frans
et al. 2018; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017; Peng et al. 2019),
which contains a combination function to control how to select or combine a set of primitives. Those works acquire a
new selection or combination strategy to control the primitives to master the transferring task if we attain a set of
task-agnostic primitives. We find that hierarchical architecture has the potential to enable a better transferring range in
continuous control problems.

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has lots of success in various
applications, such as game playing (Brockman et al. 2016;
Silver et al. 2017; Mnih et al. 2015), robotics control (Tassa
et al. 2018), molecule design (You et al. 2018), and computer system optimization (Mao et al. 2019a,b). Typically,
researchers use RL to solve each task independently and
from scratch, which makes RL confronted with low sample efficiency. However, compared with humans, the transferability of RL is limited. Especially, humans can learn to
solve complex continuous problems (both state space and
action space are continuous) efficiently by utilizing prior
knowledge. In this work, we want agents to efficiently solve
the complex continuous problem by exploiting prior experiences that provide structured exploration based on effective
representation.
To this end, we formulate transfer learning in RL as following. We train a policy with one of the RL optimization strategies on the pre-training task. Then, we intend to
leverage the policy to master the transferring task. However,

We propose a transfer learning method in RL. Our pretraining method leverages existing hierarchical structure in
the policy consisting of a combination function and a set of
primitive policies. We also design objectives to encourage
the set of primitives to be diverse and more evenly utilized in
pre-training tasks. Notice that we do not use reference data
since we expect our method to be generally applicable to all
tasks. In many cases, such as flying creatures (Won, Park,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9958

