The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Extracting Zero-shot Structured Information from Form-like Documents:
Pretraining with Keys and Triggers
Rongyu Cao1,2 , Ping Luo1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
{caorongyu19b, luop}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we revisit the problem of extracting the values
of a given set of key fields from form-like documents. It is
the vital step to support many downstream applications, such
as knowledge base construction, question answering, document comprehension and so on. Previous studies ignore the
semantics of the given keys by considering them only as the
class labels, and thus might be incapable to handle zero-shot
keys. Meanwhile, although these models often leverage the
attention mechanism, the learned features might not reflect
the true proxy of explanations on why humans would recognize the value for the key, and thus could not well generalize
to new documents. To address these issues, we propose a KeyAware and Trigger-Aware (KATA) extraction model. With the
input key, it explicitly learns two mappings, namely from key
representations to trigger representations and then from trigger representations to values. These two mappings might be
intrinsic and invariant across different keys and documents.
With a large training set automatically constructed based on
the Wikipedia data, we pre-train these two mappings. Experiments with the fine-tuning step to two applications show that
the proposed model achieves more than 70% accuracy for the
extraction of zero-shot keys while previous methods all fail.

legend
key

trigger
value
telephone

total

telephone date

total

Figure 1: Examples of two labeled receipt documents. The
green box, blue box and red box represent key, trigger and
value, respectively.

tracted as a class label, and then predict the class label of
each word in the document. However, such standard protocol might be incapable to handle the keys that are omitted
from the training set, since these zero-shot keys correspond
to no training instances. Meanwhile, in real-world production, the amount of keys needed to extract might be indeed
massive, and thus labeling large-scale training data for each
key is both labor-intensive and unscalable [Li, Min, and Fu
2019]. In this scenario, we want to learn key-invariant feature representation such that the model can generalize to
zero-shot keys without additional annotation cost.
On the other hand, when a human searches for the value of
a given key from a document, she always recognizes certain
words or phrases that act as cues in advance. For instance,
“total payable” and “total rounded” are distinct cue phrases
of the same key “total” (shown in Figure 1). Then, the values “50.60” and “13.10” are easy to extract since they locate
in the same row as the cue phrase according to the implicit
tabular format. For clarity, we call such cue phrase as trigger, which can be defined as continuous or discontinuous
words in the document that explain the key suitably and instruct the proper position of the value. Note that, the trigger
should be a sufficient evidence to recognize the value even

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in extracting structured information from form-like documents
in various vertical domains, such as invoices, purchase orders, tax forms, etc. [Zhao, Wu, and Wang 2019; Lin et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2019]. In this paper, we revisit the problem
of Key Information Extraction (KIE), namely extracting the
values of a set of keys from given documents [Huang et al.
2019]. For example, in Figure 1 given a set of keys (“telephone”, “total”) and the left receipt document, KIE task aims
to extract the value “03-55423228” for “telephone” and the
value “50.60” for “total”. The extracted structured information is essential for a wide range of downstream tasks such
as knowledge base construction, question answering, document comprehension and so on [Liu and Croft 2002; Sen Wu
et al. 2018; Geva and Berant 2018].
Most existing studies [Zhao, Wu, and Wang 2019; Lin
et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2019] pre-define each key to be exCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12612

