The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Heterogeneous Graph Structure Learning for Graph Neural Networks
Jianan Zhao,1,2∗ Xiao Wang,1∗ Chuan Shi,1† Binbin Hu,3 Guojie Song,4 Yanfang Ye2
1

School of CS, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Department of CDS, Case Western Reserve University, OH, USA
3
Ant Group
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Ministry of Education, Peking University
jxz1244@case.edu, {xiaowang, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn,
bin.hbb@antfin.com, gjsong@pku.edu.cn, yanfang.ye@case.edu
Abstract

Neural Networks (HGNNs) are brought forward and have
achieved remarkable improvements on series of applications
(Wang et al. 2020a; Hu et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2019; Hu et al.
2019a; Fan et al. 2019a; Wang et al. 2020b).
Most HGNNs follow a message-passing scheme where
the node embedding is learned by aggregating and transforming the embeddings of its original neighbors (Zhang
et al. 2019a; Hu et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2020a; Hong et al.
2020) or metapath-based neighbors (Wang et al. 2019b; Yun
et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020). These methods rely on one
fundamental assumption, i.e. the raw heterogeneous graph
structure is good. However, as heterogeneous graphs are
usually extracted from complex interaction systems by some
predefined rules, such assumption cannot be always satisfied. One reason is that, these interaction systems inevitably
contain some uncertain information or mistakes. Taking a
user-item graph built from recommendation as an example,
it is well accepted that users may misclick some unwanted
items, bringing noisy information to the graph. The other
reason is that, the heterogeneous graphs are often extracted
with data cleaning, feature extraction and feature transformation by some predefined rules, which are usually independent to the downstream tasks and lead to the gap between
the extracted graph and the optimal graph structure for the
downstream tasks. Therefore, learning an optimal heterogeneous graph for GNN is a fundamental problem.
Recently, to adaptively learn graph structures for GNNs,
graph structure learning (GSL) methods (Franceschi et al.
2019; Jiang et al. 2019; Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2019; Jin et al.
2020) are proposed, most of which parameterize the adjacency matrix and optimize it along with the GNN parameters toward downstream tasks. However, these methods are
all designed for homogeneous graphs, which can not be directly applied to heterogeneous graphs with the following
challenges: (1) The heterogeneity in heterogeneous graphs
When learning a homogeneous graph with only one type
of relation, we usually only need to parameterize one adjacency matrix. However, a heterogeneous graph consists
of multiple relations, each of which reflects one aspect of
the heterogeneous graph. Since treating these heterogeneous
relations uniformly will inevitably restrict the capability of
graph structure learning. How to deal with this heterogeneity is a challenging problem. (2) The complex interactions
in heterogeneous graphs. Different relations and node fea-

Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs) have
drawn increasing attention in recent years and achieved outstanding performance in many tasks. The success of the existing HGNNs relies on one fundamental assumption, i.e.,
the original heterogeneous graph structure is reliable. However, this assumption is usually unrealistic, since the heterogeneous graph in reality is inevitably noisy or incomplete.
Therefore, it is vital to learn the heterogeneous graph structure for HGNNs rather than rely only on the raw graph structure. In light of this, we make the first attempt towards learning an optimal heterogeneous graph structure for HGNNs and
propose a novel framework HGSL, which jointly performs
Heterogeneous Graph Structure Learning and GNN parameter learning for classification. Different from traditional homogeneous graph structure learning, considering the heterogeneity of different relations in heterogeneous graph, HGSL
generates each relation subgraph separately. Specifically, in
each generated relation subgraph, HGSL not only considers
the feature similarity by generating feature similarity graph,
but also considers the complex heterogeneous interactions
in features and semantics by generating feature propagation
graph and semantic graph. Then, these graphs are fused to a
learned heterogeneous graph and optimized together with a
GNN towards classification objective. Extensive experiments
on real-world graphs demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Many real-world interaction systems can be viewed as
graphs, such as bibliographic graphs, citation graphs, and social media graphs. Graph Neural Network (GNN), as a powerful deep representation learning tool to deal with graph
data, has drawn increasing attention and is widely applied
to node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic
et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019), graph classification (Duvenaud
et al. 2015; Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019), and recommendation (Ying et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2019b; Wang et al. 2019a).
Recently, with the proliferation of real-world applications
on heterogeneous graphs, which consist of multiple types
of nodes and links (Shi et al. 2017), Heterogeneous Graph
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4697

