The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sketch and Customize: A Counterfactual Story Generator
Changying Hao,1,2 Liang Pang,1,2 * Yanyan Lan,1,2 Yan Wang,3 Jiafeng Guo,1,2 Xueqi Cheng1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent AI Lab
{haochangying18s, pangliang, lanyanyan, guojiafeng, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, brandenwang@tencent.com
Abstract

Original Story

Recent text generation models are easy to generate relevant
and fluent text for the given text, while lack of causal reasoning ability when we change some parts of the given text.
Counterfactual story rewriting is a recently proposed task to
test the causal reasoning ability for text generation models,
which requires a model to predict the corresponding story ending when the condition is modified to a counterfactual one.
Previous works have shown that the traditional sequence-tosequence model cannot well handle this problem, as it often
captures some spurious correlations between the original and
counterfactual endings, instead of the causal relations between
conditions and endings. To address this issue, we propose a
sketch-and-customize generation model guided by the causality implicated in the conditions and endings. In the sketch
stage, a skeleton is extracted by removing words which are
conflict to the counterfactual condition, from the original ending. In the customize stage, a generation model is used to fill
proper words in the skeleton under the guidance of the counterfactual condition. In this way, the obtained counterfactual
ending is both relevant to the original ending and consistent
with the counterfactual condition. Experimental results show
that the proposed model generates much better endings, as
compared with the traditional sequence-to-sequence model.

Premise
Counterfactual Story
Mary loved flowers.

Original Condition
She decided to go to the park.

Counterfactual Condition
She decided to go to the florist.

Original Ending
1. She smelled all the flowers
growing in the field.
2. She picked a few flowers
and brought them home.
3. She placed them in a vase.

Counterfactual Ending
1. She smelled all the flowers
growing in the building.
2. She bought a few flowers
and brought them home.
3. She placed them in a vase.

Figure 1: An example of an original story and counterfactual
story pair. Black words in the two endings are background
content, colored words are causal content.

Introduction
Conditional text generation has been a research hotspot
in recent years, and various kinds of conditions such as
context (Sordoni et al. 2015; Jaech and Ostendorf 2018),
topic (Xing et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018), personality (Li
et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018), emotion (Zhou et al. 2018; Fu
et al. 2018) have been used to guide the generation. Most
of those conditional text generation tasks focus on how to
generate good texts under certain conditions, while few work
concentrates on how the consequence changes when the condition is modified. That is, the causal relationship between
condition and its corresponding generation is not well studied
in these tasks. To facilitate the study of causal reasoning in
text generation, Qin et al. (2019) propose a novel counterfactual story generation task that cares more about how to revise
an original story ending guided by a modified condition.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12955

As shown in Figure 1, in this dataset, given an entire
original story (consisting of a one-sentence premise, a onesentence condition, and a three-sentence ending) and an intervening counterfactual condition, some phrases in the original
ending may conflict with the new condition. For example,
in the new condition, “she decided to go to the florist” instead of the park. As a result, the place field and the action
picked in the original ending should be replaced by some new
words to eliminate the conflict. To rewrite a counterfactual
ending compatible with the given counterfactual condition,
an intelligent model should notice the condition changes
and revise the conflict words in the original ending properly
(field→building and picked→bought in Figure 1).
Qin et al. (2019) use a standard sequence-to-sequence
model to conduct the generation process. Specifically, this
work concatenates the entire original story and the counterfactual condition as the source sequence and treats the
counterfactual ending as the target sequence. Experimental
results show that the model has difficulty in well capturing
the causal relations between conditions and endings. For
example, when the condition changes, the model often directly copies the original ending without knowing which part
should be changed in the counterfactual ending. As a result,
the generated counterfactual ending usually has some conflict
with the counterfactual condition.
From the causal perspective, we can split both the original
and counterfactual ending into two parts, the background

