The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FontRL: Chinese Font Synthesis via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Yitian Liu, Zhouhui Lian∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
{lsflyt, lianzhouhui}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

split

Automatic generation of Chinese fonts is a valuable but challenging task in areas of AI and Computer Graphics, mainly
due to the huge amount of Chinese characters and their complex glyph structures. In this paper, we propose FontRL, a
novel method for Chinese font synthesis by using deep reinforcement learning. Specifically, we first train a deep reinforcement learning model to obtain the Thin-Plate Spline
(TPS) transformation that is able to modify the reference
stroke skeleton in a mean font style into the skeleton of a
required style for each stroke of every unseen Chinese character. Afterwards, we utilize a CNN model to predict the location and scale information of these strokes, and then assemble
them to get the skeleton of the corresponding character. Finally, we convert each synthesized character skeleton into the
glyph image via an image-to-image translation model. Both
quantitative and qualitative experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed FontRL compared to the state
of the art. Our code is available at https://github.com/lsflytpku/FontRL.

modify

source
mean character
skeleton

relocate and
rescale
render

combine

target

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed FontRL.

acters in a font library by training on a small number of input
character images.
Automatic generation of Chinese fonts is a challenging
task that has attracted many researchers in the last few years.
Those existing methods can be roughly divided into two
groups which process glyph images and sequential data, respectively.
The methods in the first group treat a given Chinese character as an image. To be specific, they typically use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract the content and
style features of characters, and then reconstruct features to
convert glyph images in the source font to the target font.
For example, based on pix2pix (Isola et al. 2017), Tian 1
proposed zi2zi by designing an encode-decode network and
adding a non-trainable gaussian noise as category embedding for one-to-many modeling. DCFont (Jiang et al. 2017)
replaces the above-mentioned random gaussian noise embedding with style features extracted from the font feature
reconstruction network, and then establishes the mapping
from the reference font to the target font by using residual
blocks. Some researchers added extra prior knowledge of
Chinese characters to generative models to guide the generation, such as SA-VAE (Sun et al. 2017) and SCFont (Jiang
et al. 2019). In this type of methods, most of them directly
use CNNs to extract and transfer font styles to generate
glyph images in the target style. However, they ignore the
high-level information of Chinese characters, and thus often
obtain synthesis results with incorrect topological structures
and blurry contours.

Introduction
Computer fonts are widely used in our daily lives. Human
beings often express various meanings by writing different
words which can also contain different emotional feelings
by adopting different font styles. As now more and more
people are seeking their personalized fonts, existing commercial font libraries cannot satisfy the rapidly-increasing
demands. The demand gap problem is hard to resolve for
writing systems that consist of large numbers of characters (e.g., Chinese). For example, there are 6,763 Chinese
characters in a GB2312 (an official standard) font library,
while the GB18030-2005 character set contains more than
70,000 Chinese characters whose glyph structures are typically complicated. Since the number of characters contained
in a Chinese font library is so large that it is quite timeconsuming and costly to design new Chinese fonts. Moreover, the quality of font design relies heavily on the designer’s capability and experience. To alleviate the workload
and cost of designing a new font library, this paper aims to
automatically synthesize glyph images for all Chinese char∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2198

https://kaonashi-tyc.github.io/2017/04/06/zi2zi.html

