The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tripartite Collaborative Filtering with Observability and Selection for Debiasing
Rating Estimation on Missing-Not-at-Random Data
Qi Zhang,1,2 Longbing Cao, 2 Chongyang Shi, 1,∗ Liang Hu3,2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 University of Technology Sydney, 3 DeepBlue Academy of Science Shanghai
zhangqi cs@bit.edu.cn, lonbing.cao@uts.edu.au, cy shi@bit.edu.cn, rainmilk@gmail.com

Abstract
Most collaborative filtering (CF) models estimate missing ratings with an implicit assumption that the ratings are missingat-random, which may cause the biased rating estimation and
degraded performance since recent deep exploration shows
that ratings may likely be missing-not-at-random (MNAR).
To debias MNAR rating estimation, we introduce item observability and user selection to depict the generation of
MNAR ratings and propose a tripartite CF (TCF) framework
to jointly model the triple aspects of rating generation: item
observability, user selection, and ratings, and to estimate the
MNAR ratings. An item observability variable is introduced
to a complete observability model to infer whether an item
is observable to a user. TCF also conducts a complete rating model for rating generation and utilizes a user selection
model dependent on the item observability and rating values to model user selection of the observable items. We further elaborately instantiate TCF as a Tripartite Probabilistic
Matrix Factorization model (TPMF) by leveraging the probabilistic matrix factorization. Besides, TPMF introduces multifaceted dependency between user selection and ratings to
model the influence of user selection on ratings. Extensive
experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show that
modeling item observability and user selection effectively debias MNAR rating estimation, and TPMF outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in estimating the MNAR ratings.

Rate

Select

Observe

4
: Item

: Observable Item

1

1

1 1
1
1
1

1
1

Observability

5

: Unselected Item

1 0 0 1 0
0 1 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 1
0 1 0 1 0
1 0 0 0 1
Selection

: Selected Item

5

3
4 5
5

4

2

4

3
Rating

Figure 1: The influence of item observability and user selection on the rating generation.

specific users/items by averaging over the ratings available.
This analysis of the potential rating generation process and
the dependencies between the missing ratings and the generation process indicates that ratings may be missing-not-atrandom (MNAR) instead of following the MAR assumption.
The MAR-based rating estimation may cause biased rating
estimation and degraded performance.
Some recent studies further explore the MNAR rating issue (Yang et al. 2015; Schnabel et al. 2016; Wang et al.
2019) to debias the rating estimation. For example, a classic
debiasing approach (Little and Rubin 1986) to the MNAR
data is the probabilistic theory of missing data. Such methods (Marlin and Zemel 2009; Ling et al. 2012; HernándezLobato et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2018) treat the problem as
missing data imputation based on the joint likelihood of the
missing rating model and the complete rating model, where
the missed ratings (i.e., non-selections) are dependent on the
rating values. The intuition behind these methods is that all
ratings are firstly generated by the complete rating model
and the missing rating model then estimates which entries to
be selected (or missed) according to their rating values.
Beyond the dependency on rating values, we argue that
the generation process of ratings may be actually more
complicated with the MNAR ratings. Revisiting movie recommendation, movie recommenders often suggest those
movies that they believe interesting to users, e.g., popular
movies, but rarely suggest movies potentially less interesting. Meanwhile, users cannot select and rate those movies
unobservable to them. The observability of movies to users

Introduction
The research on recommender systems continues with major challenges on more precisely estimating ratings where
a large proportion of ratings were missing (Liu et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019). A general and evolving approach is to build collaborative filtering (CF) models (Lin et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2016). Those models typically assume that rating data is missing-at-random (MAR),
i.e., the process that generates the available ratings is independent of the values of missing ratings (Hernández-Lobato
et al. 2014). In reality, such an assumption may not hold.
Taking movie recommendation as an example, users tend
to rate preferred movies but rarely rate movies they dislike, rendering usually lower-valued ratings missed and obtaining biased results when estimating missing ratings for
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4671

