The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Commonsense Knowledge Aware Concept Selection for
Diverse and Informative Visual Storytelling
Hong Chen

1,3 *

1

2,3

, Yifei Huang , Hiroya Takamura , Hideki Nakayama

1,3

1

The University of Tokyo, Japan
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
3
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
{chen, nakayama}@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, hyf@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, takamura.hiroya@aist.go.jp
2

Abstract
Visual storytelling is a task of generating relevant and interesting stories for given image sequences. In this work we
aim at increasing the diversity of the generated stories while
preserving the informative content from the images. We propose to foster the diversity and informativeness of a generated story by using a concept selection module that suggests
a set of concept candidates. Then, we utilize a large scale pretrained model to convert concepts and images into full stories.
To enrich the candidate concepts, a commonsense knowledge graph is created for each image sequence from which
the concept candidates are proposed. To obtain appropriate
concepts from the graph, we propose two novel modules that
consider the correlation among candidate concepts and the
image-concept correlation. Extensive automatic and human
evaluation results demonstrate that our model can produce
reasonable concepts. This enables our model to outperform
the previous models by a large margin on the diversity and
informativeness of the story, while retaining the relevance of
the story to the image sequence.

Figure 1: Stories generated by the state-of-the-art
model (Jung et al. 2020) and our proposed model using concept selection (red). The state-of-the-art model
tends to generate similar stories (blue) for different inputs.
Compared with it, our model can generate more informative
and diverse stories.

Introduction
Telling a story based on a sequence of images is a natural
task for humans and a fundamental problem for machine intelligence for various scenarios such as assisting the visually
impaired people. Also known as visual storytelling (VST),
the task has raised extensive research attention, since VST
requires the model to not only understand the complex content within one image but also reason about the event across
images as they occur and change. Since image sequences
contain rich and diverse information, it is especially difficult
for a model to tell a relevant story that is both informative of
the image content and diverse in story style.
Most previous works on VST construct end-to-end frameworks (Yang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018; Jung et al.
2020; Yu, Bansal, and Berg 2017). However, although these
methods can produce legitimate stories with high score in
automatic metrics like BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), it is
shown that the stories tend to be monotonous which contains

limited lexical diversity and knowledge (Hsu et al. 2019a)
(see the example in Figure 1). Recently, two-stage generation methods, also known as plan-write strategy, aroused
much research attention in story generation tasks (Yao et al.
2019; Martin et al. 2017; Ammanabrolu et al. 2020). When
adopted to the task of VST, Hsu et al. (2019a) shows that
this strategy is capable of generating more diverse stories
compared with end-to-end methods. However, their method
directly generates concepts from the images using sequenceto-sequence models. Since the concept is selected from the
full vocabulary, this kind of direct generation often produces
concepts of low quality which affects the informativeness of
the story.
In this work we aim to generate stories that are both diverse and informative for a given input image sequence.
Taking the advantage of the previous two-stage models,
we detect image concepts and construct concept graphs for
proposing a set of concept candidates, and propose two

*

With help from the AAAI Publications Committee.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

999

