The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Deeper Look at the Hessian Eigenspectrum of Deep Neural Networks and its
Applications to Regularization
Adepu Ravi Sankar1 ∗ , Yash Khasbage 1 ∗ , Rahul Vigneswaran 1 , Vineeth N Balasubramanian 1
1

Dept of Computer Science & Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India.
cs14resch11001@iith.ac.in, cs17btech11044@iith.ac.in, rahulvigneswaran@gmail.com, vineethnb@cse.iith.ac.in
Abstract

assumptions, and characterized its properties. For example,
(Baldi and Hornik 1988), (Anna, LeCun, and Arous 2015)
and (Kawaguchi 2016) have shown from different perspectives that every local minimum can be a global minimum for
DNNs under certain conditions (which do not hold in practice though). (Hardt and Ma 2017) specifically focused on
networks with residual connections and showed that arbitrary deep linear residual networks have zero spurious local
minima, while (Auer, Warmuth, and K 1996) showed that
there are an exponentially high number of equivalent local
minima in high dimensions as in DNN models.
From an empirical and analytical perspective, the last
few years have seen reasonable efforts in studying the ‘flatness’ of the minima that DNNs converge to. In a seminal
work, (Hochreiter 1997) studied the relation between generalization ability and loss landscape geometry many years
ago, and hypothesized that flat minima provide better solutions. More recently, (Keskar et al. 2017) empirically verified that small batch training leads to flat local minima, and
hence better generalization. This also led to methods such as
Entropy-SGD in (Chaudhari et al. 2017) which aim to bias
SGD into flatter minima. On a different note, (Dinh et al.
2017) showed that it is possible for sharp minima to generalize well too, but this is work entirely theoretical with
no empirical evidence yet. A popular understanding at this
time, however, is that - largely driven by empirical studies flat minima exhibit better generalization than sharp minima.
The connection between the curvature of the minima (flatness or sharpness) and the quality of the obtained solution
(trained DNN model) has resulted in efforts that have attempted to study the loss landscape via the eigenspectrum of
the Hessian matrix of the loss function. Considering that the
explicit computation of Hessian matrix is computationally
infeasible, several approximations have been used to this
end. In this work, we propose the analysis of the layerwise
loss surface of DNN models using their Hessian eigenspectra, as well as the evolution of the eigenspectra over training.
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no explicit effort on studying loss surfaces layerwise before. The other
notable effort that studied layers recently is (Zhang, Bengio, and Singer 2019), which however had a different objective and provided evidence for the heterogeneity of layers. Studying the layerwise Hessian is also more computationally feasible today than earlier, and was perhaps not at-

Loss landscape analysis is extremely useful for a deeper understanding of the generalization ability of deep neural network models. In this work, we propose a layerwise loss landscape analysis where the loss surface at every layer is studied
independently and also on how each correlates to the overall
loss surface. We study the layerwise loss landscape by studying the eigenspectra of the Hessian at each layer. In particular, our results show that the layerwise Hessian geometry is
largely similar to the entire Hessian. We also report an interesting phenomenon where the Hessian eigenspectrum of
middle layers of the deep neural network are observed to
most similar to the overall Hessian eigenspectrum. We also
show that the maximum eigenvalue and the trace of the Hessian (both full network and layerwise) reduce as training of
the network progresses. We leverage on these observations to
propose a new regularizer based on the trace of the layerwise
Hessian. Penalizing the trace of the Hessian at every layer
indirectly forces Stochastic Gradient Descent to converge to
flatter minima, which are shown to have better generalization
performance. In particular, we show that such a layerwise regularizer can be leveraged to penalize the middlemost layers
alone, which yields promising results. Our empirical studies
on well-known deep nets across datasets support the claims
of this work.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been immensely successful in challenging real-world problems in image, video,
text, and speech domains. Despite their tremendous success,
several questions remain as to why DNNs generalize well
despite the very high dimensions of the data involved, nonconvexity of the optimization, as well as overparametrization of the models. This has led to explicit efforts over
the last few years on trying to understand loss surfaces of
DNN models. (Anna, LeCun, and Arous 2015) specifically
pointed out the understanding of loss surfaces as a key open
problem in deep learning.
From a theoretical standpoint, efforts such as (Baldi and
Hornik 1988; Auer, Warmuth, and K 1996; Anna, LeCun,
and Arous 2015; Kawaguchi 2016) have studied the loss
landscape of deep linear/non-linear networks under certain
∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9481

