The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GradingNet: Towards Providing Reliable Supervisions for Weakly Supervised
Object Detection by Grading the Box Candidates
Qifei Jia1,2 , Shikui Wei1,2∗ , Tao Ruan1,2 , Yufeng Zhao3 , Yao Zhao1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China
3
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China
1,2
{18120303,shkwei,16112064,yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, 3 snowmanzhao@163.com
Abstract

and classifier estimation. Though many exciting results have
been achieved, they are still far from comparable to fully supervised methods (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015; Redmon
et al. 2016). This is mainly because fully supervised methods make use of the strong learning ability of CNN to fit the
datasets with accurate region-level annotations. Therefore,
multiple instance learning networks can only solve part of
the WSOD problem, and some methods treat it as a sub-task
of WSOD and then carry out a series of follow-up processing to pursue higher performance.
Recently, some works (Tang et al. 2017, 2018; Yang, Li,
and Dou 2019) solve the WSOD problem with a two-stage
framework, which uses the top-ranked proposal produced by
the weakly-supervised method to train a supervised detector.
Since the top-ranked proposal only finds one ground-truth
for each category, it will lose many informative proposals in
complex visual scenes. To handle this problem, W2F (Zhang
et al. 2018) reports a PGE algorithm to better find the pseudo ground-truth. However, since some weakly-supervised
detectors are unstable, the generated proposals have some
randomness. The mechanical processing method, like PGE,
sometimes results in worse effects.
In addition to the above shortcomings, these methods also have a common problem, i.e., they focus only on the
performance-boosting of the first stage (weakly-supervised)
and assume that the pseudo ground-truth produced by it is
accurate in the second stage. However, due to the inherent
shortcomings of the weakly-supervised detector, the detected proposals are generally incomplete and inaccurate. Using these proposals as pseudo ground-truth to train a fullysupervised detector in the second stage (fully-supervised)
will lead to two problems. Firstly, some of the anchors generated by using the pseudo ground-truth will be misclassified, which will greatly mislead the model. Secondly, lots of
pseudo ground-truths can only cover a small and discriminative part of objects, while some can cover the whole object
regions.
To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose a
new solution for the WSOD problem, which divides it into a preliminary WSOD problem and a mixed problem of
incomplete and inaccurate supervision (Zhou 2018). Boxes
Grading Module (BGM) and Informative Boosting Module
(IBM) are carefully designed to solve the two-stage problem separately. BGM evaluates the quality of each propos-

Weakly-Supervised Object Detection (WSOD) aims at training a model with limited and coarse annotations for precisely
locating the regions of objects. Existing works solve the WSOD problem by using a two-stage framework, i.e., generating candidate bounding boxes with weak supervision information and then refining them by directly employing supervised object detection models. However, most of such works
focus mainly on the performance-boosting of the first stage,
while ignoring the better usage of generated candidate bounding boxes. To address this issue, we propose a new two-stage
framework for WSOD, named GradingNet, which can make
good use of the generated candidate bounding boxes. Specifically, the proposed GradingNet consists of two modules:
Boxes Grading Module (BGM) and Informative Boosting
Module (IBM). BGM generates proposals of the bounding
boxes by using standard one-stage weakly-supervised methods, then utilizes the Inclusion Principle to pick out highlyreliable boxes and evaluate the grade of each box. With the
above boxes and their grade information, an effective anchor
generator and a grade-aware loss are carefully designed to
train the IBM. Taking the advantages of the grade information, our GradingNet achieves state-of-the-art performance
on COCO, VOC 2007, and VOC 2012 benchmarks.

Introduction
Object detection aims at locating and recognizing objects of interest in given images of various scenes. For a long
period of time, a number of methods were proposed to
solve the challenges of object detection (Lin et al. 2017;
Dai et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019). Although remarkable
progress has been achieved, it is time-consuming and laborintensive to annotate accurate object bounding boxes for a
dataset. Therefore, weakly-supervised object detection (WSOD), which only uses image-level labels for training, is
considered a promising solution to the problem.
Traditionally, most of the previous methods (Bilen, Pedersoli, and Tuytelaars 2015; Song et al. 2014; Li et al. 2016;
Hoffman et al. 2015) attempt to address the WSOD problem
by employing Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) network. In
particular, they first decompose images into object proposals
and then use MIL to iteratively perform proposal selection
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1682

