The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Foresee then Evaluate: Decomposing Value Estimation
with Latent Future Prediction
Hongyao Tang,1∗ Zhaopeng Meng,1 Guangyong Chen,3 Pengfei Chen,4 Chen Chen,2
Yaodong Yang,2 Luo Zhang,1 Wulong Liu,2 Jianye Hao1,2†
1

3

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{bluecontra,mengzp,luozhang}@tju.edu.cn, gy.chen@siat.ac.cn, pfchen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,
{chenchen9,yang.yaodong,liuwulong,haojianye}@huawei.com
Abstract

2015; Silver et al. 2016; Vinyals et al. 2019; Hafner et al.
2020; Schreck, Coley, and Bishop 2019).
Value functions define the expected cumulative rewards
(i.e., returns) of a policy, indicating how a state or taking
an action under a state could be beneficial when performing the policy. A value function is usually estimated directly
from rewards through Monte Carlo (MC) or Temporal Difference (TD) algorithms (Sutton and Barto 1988), without
explicitly dealing with the entanglement of reward signals
and environmental dynamics. However, learning with such
entanglement can be challenging in practical problems due
to the complex interplay between highly stochastic environmental dynamics and noisy and even delayed rewards. Besides, it is apparent that the dynamics information is not
well considered and utilized during the learning process of
value functions. Intuitively, human beings usually not only
learn the reward feedback of their behaviors but also understand the dynamics of the environment impacted by their
polices. To evaluate a policy, it can commonly be the case
of the following two steps: first foresee how the environment could change afterwards, and then evaluate how beneficial the dynamics could be. Similar ideas called Prospective Brain are also studied in cognitive behavior and neuroscience (Atance and O’Neill 2001; Schacter, Addis, and
Buckner 2007; Schacter and Addis 2007). Therefore, we argue that it can be important to disentangle the dynamics and
returns of value function for better value estimation and then
ensure effective policy improvement.
Following the above inspiration, in this paper we consider that value estimation can be explicitly conducted in a
two-step way: 1) an agent first predicts the following environmental dynamics regarding a specific policy in a latent
representation space, 2) then it evaluates the value of the
predicted latent future. Accordingly, we look into the value
function and re-write it in a composite form of: 1) a rewardindependent predictive dynamics function, which defines the
expected representation of future state-action trajectory; and
2) a policy-independent trajectory return function that maps
any trajectory (representation) to its discounted cumulative
reward. This provides a new decomposed view of value
function and induces a trajectory-based way to disentangle
the dynamics and returns accordingly, namely Value De-

Value function is the central notion of Reinforcement Learning (RL). Value estimation, especially with function approximation, can be challenging since it involves the stochasticity
of environmental dynamics and reward signals that can be
sparse and delayed in some cases. A typical model-free RL
algorithm usually estimates the values of a policy by Temporal Difference (TD) or Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms directly
from rewards, without explicitly taking dynamics into consideration. In this paper, we propose Value Decomposition with
Future Prediction (VDFP), providing an explicit two-step understanding of the value estimation process: 1) first foresee
the latent future, 2) and then evaluate it. We analytically decompose the value function into a latent future dynamics part
and a policy-independent trajectory return part, inducing a
way to model latent dynamics and returns separately in value
estimation. Further, we derive a practical deep RL algorithm,
consisting of a convolutional model to learn compact trajectory representation from past experiences, a conditional variational auto-encoder to predict the latent future dynamics and a
convex return model that evaluates trajectory representation.
In experiments, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach for both off-policy and on-policy RL in several OpenAI Gym continuous control tasks as well as a few
challenging variants with delayed reward.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to obtain the optimal policy in sequential decision-making problems. One of the most appealing characteristics of RL is
that policy can be learned in a model-free fashion, without
the access to environment models. Value functions play an
important role in model-free RL (Sutton and Barto 1988),
which are usually used to derive a policy implicitly in valuebased methods (Mnih et al. 2015) or guide the policy updates in policy-based methods (Schulman et al. 2015; Silver
et al. 2014). With deep neural networks, value functions can
be well approximated even for continuous state and action
space, making it practical for model-free RL to deal with
more challenging tasks (Lillicrap et al. 2015; Mnih et al.
∗

Work partially done as an intern at Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9834

