The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Pose Regression Network for Pose-Invariant Face Recognitions
Pengyu Li1 , Biao Wang1 , Lei Zhang1,2
1

Artificial Intelligence Center, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
lipengyu007@gmail.com, wangbiao225@foxmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

changes. It makes identity representations fail to be poseinvariant. However, the existing algorithms for PIFR (Yin
and Liu 2017; Tran, Yin, and Liu 2017; Shen et al. 2018;
Peng et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2018a; Chen et al. 2016; Wang
et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2018) only focus
on the final identity representations. Few of them have researched the hidden feature maps. Besides, most of the existing works (Tran, Yin, and Liu 2017; Shen et al. 2018; Deng
et al. 2018) based on the adversarial learning defined pose
discriminator as a classification task and need to generate
synthetic faces. However, the pose estimation is contiguous
in its 3D space objectively, and generating semantic identityinvariant synthetic faces is a challenging task that requiring
lots of computational consumptions in the training phase.
Motivated by our observation, we propose a plug-andplay structure, which we name as Adversarial Pose Regression Network (APRN), to make the face recognition networks extract pose-invariant representations by reducing the
pose variation in the hidden feature maps. The architecture
of our proposal includes two modules, an APRN module and
a face recognition network module. The pose discriminator
in the APRN module employs the hidden feature maps of
the face recognition network as inputs to estimate the facial poses, while the face recognition network reduces the
pose variation to trick the discriminator and extracts representations for identification. The visualization of our architecture is in the supplementary material. Because the APRN
module is removed in the inference phase, our APRN architecture has no extra computational costs for its inference.
Besides, There is NO GENERATOR in our APRN, and it
does not need to generate any identity-invariant synthetic
faces. It makes our APRN much easier to be trained and
needs less computational costs in each training iteration than
other works (Tran, Yin, and Liu 2017; Shen et al. 2018;
Deng et al. 2018). What’s more, the APRN can be embedded
in other existing general face recognition techniques (Deng
et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019) to improve
their performance additionally.
To model the pose discriminator as a regression task in its
3D space, we propose a novel Adversarial Regression Loss
Function and extend the adversarial learning from classification problems to regression problems.
This paper makes the following theoretical contributions:

Face recognition has achieved significant progress in recent
years. However, the large pose variation between face images remains a challenge in face recognition. We observe that
the pose variation in the hidden feature maps is one of the
most critical factors to hinder the representations from being
pose-invariant. Based on the observation, we propose an Adversarial Pose Regression Network (APRN) to extract poseinvariant identity representations by disentangling their pose
variation in hidden feature maps. To model the pose discriminator in APRN as a regression task in its 3D space, we also
propose an Adversarial Regression Loss Function and extend
the adversarial learning from classification problems to regression problems in this paper. Our APRN is a plug-andplay structure that can be embedded in other state-of-the-art
face recognition algorithms to improve their performance additionally. The experiments show that the proposed APRN
consistently and significantly boosts the performance of baseline networks without extra computational costs in the inference phase. APRN achieves comparable or even superior to
the state-of-the-art on CFP, Multi-PIE, IJB-A and MegaFace
datasets. The code will be released1 , hoping to nourish our
proposals to other computer vision fields.

Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most challenging topics in the
computer vision field. Its performance has been significantly
improved with the help of large-scale datasets (Guo et al.
2016) and the Convolutional Neural Network (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Even through top face recognition algorithms (Deng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2017; Duan,
Lu, and Zhou 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019a; Wang
et al. 2019) have surpassed human performance in several
evaluation datasets, Sengupta et al.(Sengupta et al. 2016)
showed that the large intra-person variations caused by their
poses degraded the performance of all state-of-the-art face
recognition algorithms. The Pose-Invariant Face Recognition (PIFR) is far from being solved.
In this paper, we observe and prove that the hidden feature maps of the face recognition network are prone to pose
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/pengyuLPY/Adversarial-Pose-RegressionNetwork-for-Pose-Invariant-Face-Recognitions

• We observe and prove that feature maps from the hidden
1940

