The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bike-Repositioning Using Volunteers: Crowd Sourcing with Choice Restriction
Jinjia Huang, Mabel C. Chou, Chung-Piaw Teo
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
oraahj@nus.edu.sg, bizchoum@nus.edu.sg, bizteocp@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

for the afternoon moves. They identified those stations in the
system that typically faced shortage of bikes and docks during peak hours as drop-off stations and pick-up stations, respectively. Members are encouraged to earn points by taking
a bike from a pick-up station and returning it to a neutral or
drop-off station; or by taking a bike from a neutral station
and returning it to a drop-off station. The neutral stations
here function more like transit stations, where bikes can be
brought in or out of the stations. We denote the above as the
“fixed pick-up/drop-off structure.” Note that the above essentially restricts the origin-destination (OD) pairs that the
Angels can choose for re-balancing bikes - either between a
pick-up or neutral station and a drop-off station, or between
a pick-up and neutral station. The flows among other pairs
of stations are not rewarded. Citi Bike has recently changed
to a dynamic map, with the status of the stations determined
according to real time usage information. This allows angels
to re-balance bikes in any pair of stations depending on actual usage and forecast demands. As we will demonstrate
later, while this natural deployment scheme gives volunteers
the maximum flexibility to choose between pick-up/neutral
and neutral/drop-off stations (i.e., fully flexible system), the
system becomes less capable in directing the flow of empty
bikes since the moves are decided by volunteers, which can
lead to an excessive amount of redundant moves, without
improving the number of rides satisfied in any significant
manner.

Motivated by the Bike Angels Program in New York’s Citi
Bike and Boston’s Blue Bikes, we study the use of (registered) volunteers to re-position empty bikes for riders in a
bike sharing system. We propose a method that can be used
to deploy the volunteers in the system, based on the real
time distribution of the bikes in different stations. To account
for (random) route demand in the network, we solve a related transshipment network design model and construct a
sparse structure to restrict the re-balancing activities of the
volunteers (concentrating re-balancing activities on essential
routes). We also develop a comprehensive simulation model
using a threshold-based policy to deploy the volunteers in real
time, to test the effect of choice restriction on volunteers (suitably deployed) to re-position bikes. We use the Hubway system in Boston (with 60 stations) to demonstrate that using
a sparse structure to concentrate the re-balancing activities
of the volunteers, instead of allowing all admissible flows in
the system (as in current practice), can reduce the number of
re-balancing moves by a huge amount, losing only a small
proportion of demand satisfied.

Introduction
We study an innovative bike re-positioning scheme that
helps maintain the availability of bikes for regular riders in
the system. This is a volunteer-based re-balancing system
adopted by many bike sharing systems (BSS) such as New
York’s Citi Bike Program - one of the largest BSS in the
world. We are motivated by the following practical challenge
- When a volunteer arrives at a station, which destination do
we want the volunteer to move an empty bike to (and be rewarded for making this move)?
In May 2016, Citi Bike launched a pilot program, called
Bike Angels, which pays registered members to redistribute
the bikes themselves. Some other players, such as GoBike
in San Francisco and Blue Bike in Boston have also started
to adopt the Bike Angels system (Lefkowitz 2018). For a
rigorous assessment of the impact of this program on bike
re-balancing and dock relocation, see (Freund, Henderson,
and Shmoys 2017; McGowen 2018; Freund et al. 2020). In
the early days of the program, Citi Bike provided two static
maps to the angels, one for the morning moves, and the other

Most of the earlier work in bike re-distribution focus on
the operational problem of moving bikes using special vehicles deployed for this purpose. For related studies on the
static bike re-positioning problem (SBRP), see (Benchimol
et al. 2011; Angeloudis, Hu, and Bell 2014; Li et al. 2016;
Kloimüllner and Raidl 2017; Schuijbroek, Hampshire, and
Van Hoeve 2017). While these techniques are effective in reducing the re-positioning cost to some extent, the solutions
could not incorporate the real-time demand of the users in
their approach. To tackle this problem, other scholars study
dynamic bike re-positioning problem (DBRP), which focus
on assessing the demand and re-positioning bikes dynamically in search for better solution (Shu et al. 2013; Zhang
et al. 2017; O’Mahony and Shmoys 2015; Ghosh et al.
2017). However, (Bonnotte et al. 2015) point out that bike
re-positioning by vehicles could be costly and not effective. Different pricing schemes have been proposed to en-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11844

