The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MolGrow: A Graph Normalizing Flow for Hierarchical Molecular Generation
Maksim Kuznetsov, Daniil Polykovskiy
Insilico Medicine
kuznetsov@insilico.com, daniil@insilico.com

Abstract

• We propose a hierarchical normalizing flow model for
generating molecular graphs. The model gradually increases graph size during sampling, starting with a single
node;

We propose a hierarchical normalizing flow model for generating molecular graphs. The model produces new molecular
structures from a single-node graph by recursively splitting
every node into two. All operations are invertible and can
be used as plug-and-play modules. The hierarchical nature
of the latent codes allows for precise changes in the resulting
graph: perturbations in the top layer cause global structural
changes, while perturbations in the consequent layers change
the resulting molecule marginally. The proposed model outperforms existing generative graph models on the distribution
learning task. We also show successful experiments on global
and constrained optimization of chemical properties using latent codes of the model.

• We propose a fragment-oriented atom ordering that improves our model over commonly used breadth-first
search ordering;
• We apply our model to distribution learning and property
optimization tasks. We report distribution learning metrics (Fréchet ChemNet distance and fragment distribution) for graph generative models besides providing standard uniqueness and validity measures.

Background: Normalizing Flows
Introduction

Normalizing flows are generative models that transform a
prior distribution p(z) into a target distribution p(x) by composing invertible functions fk :

Drug discovery is a challenging multidisciplinary task that
combines domain knowledge in chemistry, biology, and
computational science. Recent works demonstrated successful applications of machine learning to the drug development process, including synthesis planning (Segler, Preuss,
and Waller 2018), protein folding (Senior et al. 2020), and
hit discovery (Merk et al. 2018; Zhavoronkov et al. 2019).
Advances in generative models enabled applications of machine learning to drug discovery, such as distribution learning and molecular property optimization. Distribution learning models train on a large dataset to produce novel compounds (Polykovskiy et al. 2020); property optimization
models search the chemical space for molecules with desirable properties (Brown et al. 2019). Often researchers combine these tasks: they first train a distribution learning model
and then use its latent codes to optimize molecular properties
(Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018). For such models, proper latent codes are crucial for molecular space navigation.
We propose a new graph generative model—MolGrow.
Starting with a single node, it iteratively splits every node
into two. Our model is invertible and maps molecular structures onto a fixed-size hierarchical manifold. Top levels of
the manifold define global structure, while the bottom levels
influence local features.
Our contributions are three-fold:

z = fK ◦ ... ◦ f2 ◦ f1 (x),

(1)

−1
−1
x = f1−1 ◦ ... ◦ fK−1
◦ fK
(z).

(2)

We call Equation 1 a forward path, and Equation 2 an inverse path. The prior distribution p(z) is often a standard
multivariate normal distribution N (0, I). Such models are
trained by maximizing training set log-likelihood using the
change of variables formula:


K
X
dhi
log p(x) = log p(z) +
log det
, (3)
dhi−1
i=1
where hi = fi (hi−1 ), h0 = x. To efficiently train the model
and sample from it, inverse transformations and Jacobian determinants should be tractable and computationally efficient.
In this work, we consider three types of layers: invertible
linear layer, actnorm, and real-valued non-volume preserving transformation (RealNVP) (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and
Bengio 2017). We define these layers below for arbitrary
d-dimensional vectors, and extend these layers for graphstructured data in the next section.
We consider an invertible linear layer parameterization by
Hoogeboom, Van Den Berg, and Welling (2019) that uses
QR decomposition of a weight matrix: h = QR · z, where
Q is an orthogonal matrix (QT = Q−1 ), and R is an upper

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8226

