The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

NuQClq: An Effective Local Search Algorithm
for Maximum Quasi-Clique Problem
Jiejiang Chen1 , Shaowei Cai2,4 , Shiwei Pan1 , Yiyuan Wang1,3 * , Qingwei Lin5 ,
Mengyu Zhao1 , Minghao Yin1,3∗
1
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
Microsoft Research, China
{chenjj016, pansw779, zhaomy588, ymh}@nenu.edu.cn, caisw@ios.ac.cn, yiyuanwangjlu@126.com, qlin@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

quasi-clique problem (MQCP), which has been used in various real-world domains (On et al. 2006; Tsourakakis et al.
2013; Lee and Lakshmanan 2016). For example, Zheng et
al. (2019) proposed a new method for author set identification, i.e., matching the information of reviewers and papers
by encoding this problem to the MQCP.
Given a graph G = (V, E) and a fixed constant γ ∈ (0,1],
a γ-quasi-clique is a subset S of V such that the edge density
of the subgraph induced by S is at least γ. The MQCP aims
to identify the γ-quasi-clique with the maximum size in a
graph. It is easy to see that MCP is a special case of MQCP.
The MQCP is NP-hard for every fixed constant γ ∈ (0,1]
(Pattillo et al. 2013).
There are mainly two types of algorithms for the MQCP,
i.e., exact algorithms and heuristic algorithms. Recently,
many exact algorithms (Pattillo et al. 2013; Pajouh, Miao,
and Balasundaram 2014; Veremyev et al. 2016; Pastukhov
et al. 2018; Ribeiro and Riveaux 2019; Marinelli, Pizzuti,
and Rossi 2020; Miao and Balasundaram 2020) have been
proposed for solving the MQCP. Although exact algorithms
can guarantee the optimality of their solutions, they may fail
to solve large-size instances.
To deal with hard instances of large scale, lots of fast
heuristic algorithms have been designed for solving the
MQCP, which can obtain a good approximate solution
within reasonable time. An early heuristic algorithm for
solving the MQCP was proposed in (Abello, Resende, and
Sudarsky 2002), which relied on efficient semi-external
memory algorithms and greedy randomized adaptive search
procedures. Brunato et al. (2007) introduced two highperformance stochastic local search algorithms according to
new data structures and some basic operators. Khosraviani
and Sharifi (2011) developed an MQCP algorithm based on
MapReduce programming model. Tsourakakis et al.(2013)
designed two efficient algorithms for the MQCP, including a greedy algorithm and a heuristic based on the localsearch paradigm. Oliveira et al. (2013) presented a restart
iterative greedy algorithm named RIG∗ . Afterwards, some
different versions of biased random-key genetic algorithm
(BRKGA) for the MQCP were proposed (Pinto et al. 2015,
2018, 2019). Among these versions, BRKGA-LSQClique

The maximum quasi-clique problem (MQCP) is an important extension of maximum clique problem with wide applications. Recent heuristic MQCP algorithms can hardly solve
large and hard graphs effectively. This paper develops an efficient local search algorithm named NuQClq for the MQCP,
which has two main ideas. First, we propose a novel vertex
selection strategy, which utilizes cumulative saturation information to be a selection criterion when the candidate vertices
have equal values on the primary scoring function. Second, a
variant of configuration checking named BoundedCC is designed by setting an upper bound for the threshold of forbidding strength. When the threshold value of vertex exceeds
the upper bound, we reset its threshold value to increase the
diversity of search process. Experiments on a broad range
of classic benchmarks and sparse instances show that NuQClq significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MQCP algorithms for most instances.

Introduction
Given a graph, a clique is a subset of vertices in which each
pair of vertices are adjacent. Clique is an important concept
in graph theory, and the maximum clique problem (MCP) is
a classic graph-theoretic problem. The clique model is well
known for its applications in social network analysis (Luce
and Perry 1949; Wasserman, Faust et al. 1994), and there are
also interests in its applications to cluster detection in different fields such as bioinformatics, chemoinformatics, financial networks, and telecommunications (Wu and Hao 2015).
Nevertheless, the concept of clique is too strict for many
real-world applications, as it requires each pair of vertices
in the clique to be adjacent. In fact, most information arisen
from real world is incomplete or erroneous, which motivates the development of clique relaxations. There have been
various clique relaxations: k-clubs (Pajouh and Balasundaram 2012), k-defective cliques (Trukhanov et al. 2013),
k-plexes (Gao et al. 2018), and γ-quasi-cliques (Zhou, Benlic, and Wu 2020). In this paper, we focus on the maximum
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12258

