The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploration via State Influence Modeling
Yongxin Kang1,2 * , Enmin Zhao2,1 * , Kai Li2 , Junliang Xing2†
1

School of artificial intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{kangyongxin2018, zhaoenmin2018, kai.li}@ia.ac.cn, jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Authority

This paper studies the challenging problem of reinforcement
learning (RL) in hard exploration tasks with sparse rewards.
It focuses on the exploration stage before the agent gets the
first positive reward, in which case, traditional RL algorithms
with simple exploration strategies often work poorly. Unlike
previous methods using some attribute of a single state as the
intrinsic reward to encourage exploration, this work leverages
the social influence between different states to permit more
efficient exploration. It introduces a general intrinsic reward
construction method to evaluate the social influence of states
dynamically. Three kinds of social influence are introduced
for a state: conformity, power, and authority. By measuring
the state influence, agents quickly find the focus state during
the exploration process. The proposed RL framework with
state influence evaluation works well in hard exploration task.
Extensive experimental analyses and comparisons in Grid
Maze and many hard exploration Atari 2600 games demonstrate its high exploration efficiency.

(b) Traditional MDP model in RL

Focus state
Power

(a) A person’s social influence

(c) State influence model

Figure 1: (a) The social influence of one person in a social
network. Three characteristics are often used to represent a
person’s social influence: 1) the size of the node indicates
his conformity, 2) the blue dotted line indicates his power
which is usually related to the number of connections within
his group, and 3) the solid orange line indicates the authority,
that is, how many followers a person has. The most influential person in a social network is called the focus. Similarly,
we regard the states in (b) the traditional MDP model in RL
as the nodes in (c) social network and obtain the focus state
by measuring the states’ social influence. The focus state
will be related to more states, and the exploration of it can
accelerate the agent’s cognition of the environment.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) in hard exploration tasks with
sparse rewards is an essential problem in artificial intelligence. Unlike typical RL problems, hard exploration tasks
with sparse rewards often consist of two stages. First, there
is a long period of exploration before the agent obtains a new
reward, which we term the no-reward exploration stage. Second, after the agent obtains some local rewards, it follows a
process of experience utilization and continuing to explore,
which we term the local-reward exploitation stage. In this
paper, we focus on the first and more difficult no-reward exploration stage.
During the no-reward exploration stage, traditional RL
algorithms based on value function (Mnih et al. 2015;
Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016) or policy gradient (Schulman et al. 2015, 2017) often get trapped in some
confusing states because the state value they used is only
evaluated by the reward. Since only a few states contain rewards, the agent cannot distinguish between those no-reward
states, even if it have experienced them many times.

To deal with the hard exploration tasks with sparse rewards, many previous works try to imitate expert demonstrations (DQFD) (Hester et al. 2018) or their own successful experience (SIL) (Oh et al. 2018). In practice, however, expert demonstrations are often unavailable, and SIL
focuses on the second stage, where the agent has already
received local rewards. In the no-reward exploration stage,
HER (Andrychowicz et al. 2017) randomly sets virtual goals
from the experience replay buffer, regardless of which experience might be the most valuable. So it suffers from low
sampling efficiency. To explore more meaningful directions,
some researchers design intrinsic rewards based on the curiosity of states, where curiosity is measured by prediction
errors (Pathak et al. 2017), reachability (Savinov et al. 2019)
or pseudo-count (Bellemare et al. 2016). Although have
achieved some success, they only consider the attributes of
the state itself but ignore the relationships between states.

* Equal contribution, † corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8047

