The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Prediction of Landfall Intensity, Location, and Time of a Tropical Cyclone
Sandeep Kumar1, 2 , Koushik Biswas 1 , Ashish Kumar Pandey3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, IIIT Delhi, India 110020
Department of Mathematics, Shaheed Bhagat Singh College, University of Delhi, India 110017
3
Department of Mathematics, IIIT Delhi, India 110020
sandeep kumar@sbs.du.ac.in, koushikb@iiitd.ac.in, ashish.pandey@iiitd.ac.in
Abstract

The prediction of the intensity, location and time of the landfall of a tropical cyclone well advance in time and with high
accuracy can reduce human and material loss immensely. In
this article, we develop a Long Short-Term memory based
Recurrent Neural network model to predict intensity (in terms
of maximum sustained surface wind speed), location (latitude
and longitude), and time (in hours after the observation period) of the landfall of a tropical cyclone which originates in
the North Indian ocean. The model takes as input the best
track data of cyclone consisting of its location, pressure, sea
surface temperature, and intensity for certain hours (from 12
to 36 hours) anytime during the course of the cyclone as a
time series and then provide predictions with high accuracy.
For example, using 24 hours data of a cyclone anytime during
its course, the model provides state-of-the-art results by predicting landfall intensity, time, latitude, and longitude with a
mean absolute error of 4.24 knots, 4.5 hours, 0.24 degree, and
0.37 degree respectively, which resulted in a distance error of
51.7 kilometers from the landfall location. We further check
the efficacy of the model on three recent devastating cyclones
Bulbul, Fani, and Gaja, and achieved better results than the
test dataset.

Grade

Low pressure system

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Low Pressure Area (LP)
Depression (D)
Deep Depression (DD)
Cyclonic Storm (CS)
Severe Cyclonic Storm (SCS)
Very Severe CS (VSCS)
Extremely Severe CS (ESCS)
Super Cyclonic Storm (SS)

MSWS
(knots)
<17
17-27
28-33
34-47
48-63
64-89
90-119
≥120

Table 1: The Grade classification of the low pressure systems
by IMD.
the ranges of the Maximum Sustained Surface Wind Speed
(MSWS)1 as shown in Table 1. The prediction of cyclone’s
trajectory and intensity is crucial to save both material loss
and human lives. Track and intensity prediction of a cyclone,
well advance in time is not an easy task because of the complex and non-linear relationship between its cause factors
which also include external factor like terrain.
The most widely used cyclone track and intensity prediction techniques can be classified into statistical, dynamical, and ensemble models2 . However these methods have
their own limitations in terms of huge computation power
required and the requirement of long duration data (Wang
et al. 2009; Hall and Jewson 2007; Krishnamurti et al. 1999).
In recent years, with the increase in computational power
and availability of huge data, new models using Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs) have been increasingly used to
forecast track and intensity of cyclones (Leroux et al. 2018;
Alemany et al. 2018; Giffard-Roisin et al. 2020; Moradi Kordmahalleh, Gorji Sefidmazgi, and Homaifar 2016).
The most important prediction about a TC is its arrival at
land, known as landfall of a cyclone. The accurate prediction
about the location and time of the landfall, and intensity of
the cyclone at the landfall will hugely help authorities to take
preventive measures and reduce material and human loss. In
this work, we attempt to predict intensity, location, and time

Introduction
Tropical cyclones (TC) are one of the most devastating natural phenomenon that originates on tropical and subtropical waters and a commonly occurring natural disaster in
coastal area. TC is characterised by warm core, and a low
pressure system with a large vortex in the atmosphere. TC
brings strong winds, heavy precipitation and high tides in
coastal areas and resulted in huge economic and human loss.
Over the years, many destructive TCs have originated in the
North Indian Ocean (NIO), consisting of the Bay of Bengal
and the Arabian Sea. In 2008, Nargis, one of the disastrous
TC in recent times, originated in the Bay of Bengal and resulted in 13,800 casualties alone in Myanmar and caused
US$15.4 billion economic loss (Fritz et al. 2009). In 2018,
Fani cyclone caused 89 causalities in India and Bangladesh,
and US$9.1 billion economic loss (Kumar, Lal, and Kumar
2020). Indian Meteorological department (IMD) defines the
intensity of a TC in terms of “Grade”, which is derived from

1

FAQ on Tropical Cyclones - http://www.rsmcnewdelhi.imd.
gov.in/images/pdf/cyclone-awareness/terminology/faq.pdf
2
Track and Intensity models - https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/
modelsummary.shtml

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14831

