The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Minimizing Energy Use of Mixed-Fleet Public Transit for Fixed-Route Service
Amutheezan Sivagnanam1 , Afiya Ayman1 , Michael Wilbur2 ,
Philip Pugliese3 , Abhishek Dubey2 , Aron Laszka1
1

University of Houston, 2 Vanderbilt University, 3 Chattanooga Area Regional Transportation Authority

Abstract

tal energy use is for transportation (EIA 2019). While public transit services can be very energy-efficient compared to
personal vehicles, their environmental impact is significant
nonetheless. For example, bus transit services in the U.S.
may be responsible for up to 21.1 million metric tons of CO2
(EPA 2020b) emission every year.
Electric vehicles (EVs) can have much lower operating
costs and lower environmental impact during operation than
comparable internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs),
especially in urban areas. Unfortunately, EVs are also much
more expensive than ICEVs: typically, diesel transit buses
cost less than $500K, while electric ones cost more than
$700K, or close to around $1M with charging infrastructure. As a result, many public transit agencies can afford
only mixed fleets of transit vehicles, which may consist of
EVs, hybrid vehicles (HEVs), and ICEVs.
Public transit agencies that operate such mixed fleets of
vehicles face a challenging optimization problem. First, they
need to decide which vehicles are assigned to serving which
transit trips. Since the advantage of EVs over ICEVs varies
depending on the route and time of day (e.g., advantage
of EVs is higher in slower traffic with frequent stops, and
lower on highways), the assignment can have a significant
impact on energy use and, hence, on costs and environmental impact. Second, transit agencies need to schedule when
to charge electric vehicles because EVs have limited battery
capacity and driving range, and may need to be recharged
during the day between serving transit trips. Since agencies
often have limited charging capabilities (e.g., limited number of charging poles, or limited maximum power to avoid
high peak loads on the electric grid), charging constraints
can significantly increase the complexity of the assignment
and scheduling problem.
Contributions: While an increasing number of transit
agencies face these problems, there exist no practical solutions to the best of our knowledge. In this paper, we present
a novel problem formulation and algorithms for assigning
a mixed fleet of transit vehicles to trips and for scheduling
the charging of electric vehicles. We developed this problem
formulation in collaboration with the Chattanooga Area Regional Transportation Authority (CARTA), the public transit agency of Chattanooga, TN, which operates a fleet of
EVs, HEVs, and ICEVs. To solve the problem, we introduce an integer program as well as greedy and simulated an-

Affordable public transit services are crucial for communities
since they enable residents to access employment, education,
and other services. Unfortunately, transit services that provide
wide coverage tend to suffer from relatively low utilization,
which results in high fuel usage per passenger per mile, leading to high operating costs and environmental impact. Electric vehicles (EVs) can reduce energy costs and environmental impact, but most public transit agencies have to employ
them in combination with conventional, internal-combustion
engine vehicles due to the high upfront costs of EVs. To make
the best use of such a mixed fleet of vehicles, transit agencies
need to optimize route assignments and charging schedules,
which presents a challenging problem for large transit networks. We introduce a novel problem formulation to minimize fuel and electricity use by assigning vehicles to transit trips and scheduling them for charging, while serving an
existing fixed-route transit schedule. We present an integer
program for optimal assignment and scheduling, and we propose polynomial-time heuristic and meta-heuristic algorithms
for larger networks. We evaluate our algorithms on the public transit service of Chattanooga, TN using operational data
collected from transit vehicles. Our results show that the proposed algorithms are scalable and can reduce energy use and,
hence, environmental impact and operational costs. For Chattanooga, the proposed algorithms can save $145,635 in energy costs and 576.7 metric tons of CO2 emission annually.

1

Introduction

Affordable public transit services are the backbones of many
communities, providing diverse groups of people with access to employment, education, and other services. Affordable transit services are especially important in low-income
neighborhoods where residents might not be able to afford personal vehicles. However, transit services that provide wide and equitable coverage tend to suffer from low
utilization—compared to concentrating service into a few
high-density areas—which leads to higher fuel usage per
passenger per mile. This in turn results in higher operating
costs, which threatens affordability—a problem that has recently been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Further, low utilization also leads to high environmental impact per passenger per mile. In the U.S., 28% of toCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14930

