The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Smoothed Complexity of Computing Kemeny and Slater Rankings
Lirong Xia1 and Weiqiang Zheng2
1

2

RPI
CFCS, Computer Science Dept., Peking University
xial@cs.rpi.edu, weiqiang.zheng@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

is sensitive to the choice of the distribution over input instances, which may itself be unrealistic. To tackle this problem, Spielman and Teng (2004) introduced smoothed complexity analysis to generalize and combine the worst-case
analysis and the average-case analysis. The idea is that the
input ~x of an algorithm Alg is often a noisy perception of the
ground truth input ~x∗ . Consequently, let TimeAlg (~x) denote
the runtime of Alg when the input is ~x, the worst-case is analyzed by assuming that an adversary chooses a ground truth
~x∗ and then Nature adds a noise ~ (e.g. a Gaussian noise) to
it, so that the algorithm’s input becomes ~x = ~x∗ + ~. Then,
the expected runtime is evaluated according to the noise introduced by Nature. Formally, the smoothed runtime of Alg
is defined as:

The computational complexity of winner determination under common voting rules is a classical and fundamental topic
in the field of computational social choice. Previous work has
established the NP-hardness of winner determination under
some commonly-studied voting rules, such as the Kemeny
rule and the Slater rule. In a recent position paper, Baumeister, Hogrebe, and Rothe (2020) questioned the relevance of
the worst-case nature of NP-hardness in social choice and
proposed to conduct smoothed complexity analysis (Spielman and Teng 2009) under Bläser and Manthey’s (2015)
framework.
In this paper, we develop the first smoothed complexity
results for winner determination in voting. We prove the
smoothed hardness of Kemeny and Slater using the classical smoothed runtime analysis, and prove a parameterized typical-case smoothed easiness result for Kemeny. We
also make an attempt of applying Bläser and Manthey’s
(2015) smoothed complexity framework in social choice
contexts by proving that the framework categorizes an
always-exponential-time brute force search algorithm as being smoothed poly-time, under a natural noise model based
on the well-studied Mallows model in social choice and
statistics. Overall, our results show that smoothed complexity
analysis in computational social choice is a challenging and
fruitful topic.

1

max~x∗ {E~ [TimeAlg (~x∗ + ~)]}
This
generalizes
the
worst-case
runtime
max~x∗ [TimeAlg (~x∗ )] and the average-case runtime
E~x∗ ∼π [TimeAlg (~x∗ )] under a distribution π over inputs.
Smoothed complexity analysis has been applied to a wide
range of problems in mathematical programming, machine
learning, numerical analysis, discrete math, combinatorial
optimization, and equilibrium analysis and price of anarchy, see the survey by Spielman and Teng (2009). In a recent position paper, Baumeister, Hogrebe, and Rothe (2020)
proposed to conduct smoothed complexity analysis in computational social choice under Bläser and Manthey’s (2015)
framework and proposed a natural noise model that leverages the celebrated Mallows (1957) model. However, we are
not aware of a technical result on the smoothed complexity
of winner determination in voting. The following question
remains open.

Introduction

The computational complexity of winner determination under common voting rules is a classical and fundamental
topic in the field of computational social choice (Brandt
et al. 2016, Section 1.2.3). A low computational complexity of winner determination is desirable and is indeed the
case for many commonly-studied and widely-applied voting rules. On the other hand, winner determination has been
proved to be NP-hard for some classical voting rules such
as the Kemeny rule, the Slater rule, the Dodgson rule, and
the Young rule (Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1989; Conitzer
2006; Rothe, Spakowski, and Vogel 2003).
To address the worst-case nature of NP-hardness,
average-case analysis was conducted to provide a more realistic analysis of algorithms. However, average-case analysis

What is the smoothed complexity of winner determination
under commonly-studied voting rules?
As illustrated in the following example, the question is
highly relevant not only in the theory of computational social choice, but also in AI-aided group decision-making.
Example 1. Suppose the developer of an intelligent system
is planning to implement a voting rule for group decision
making. Kemeny is being considered, but the system needs
to estimate the practical runtime of computing Kemeny to
decide how much computational resource is sufficient for a
timely decision. The system can learn and predict agents’

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5742

