The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Anytime Heuristic and Monte Carlo Methods for
Large-Scale Simultaneous Coalition Structure Generation and Assignment
Fredrik Präntare, Herman Appelgren and Fredrik Heintz
Linköping University
581 83 Linköping, Sweden
{fredrik.prantare, herman.appelgren, fredrik.heintz}@liu.se

Abstract

showed that this separation may potentially lead to arbitrarily bad coalition structures (or an unmotivated exponential
increase in computational complexity) when distinct coalitional goals are involved—for example when each coalition
that is generated has a specific task that it needs to perform.
To remedy this, they presented the simultaneous coalition
structure generation and assignment (SCSGA) problem—
a difficult combinatorial optimization problem that generalizes both the linear assignment problem (Kuhn 1955), and
the CSG problem for characteristic function games (Sandholm et al. 1999; Rahwan et al. 2015). This is a central
problem in both artificial intelligence, operations research,
and algorithmic game theory; with applications in optimal
task/resource allocation (Präntare 2017), winner determination for combinatorial auctions (Sandholm et al. 2002), and
team/coalition formation (Präntare and Heintz 2020). More
formally, the SCSGA problem is defined as follows:

Optimal simultaneous coalition structure generation and assignment is computationally hard. The state-of-the-art can
only compute solutions to problems with severely limited
input sizes, and no effective approximation algorithms that
are guaranteed to yield high-quality solutions are expected
to exist. Real-world optimization problems, however, are often characterized by large-scale inputs and the need for generating feasible solutions of high quality in limited time. In
light of this, and to make it possible to generate better feasible solutions for difficult large-scale problems efficiently,
we present and benchmark several different anytime algorithms that use general-purpose heuristics and Monte Carlo
techniques to guide search. We evaluate our methods using
synthetic problem sets of varying distribution and complexity. Our results show that the presented algorithms are superior to previous methods at quickly generating near-optimal
solutions for small-scale problems, and greatly superior for
efficiently finding high-quality solutions for large-scale problems. For example, for problems with a thousand agents
and values generated with a uniform distribution, our best
approach generates solutions 99.5% of the expected optimal within seconds. For these problems, the state-of-the-art
solvers fail to find any feasible solutions at all.

Input: a tuple hA, T, vi, where A = {a1 , ..., an } is a set of
agents, T = ht1 , ..., tm i is a tuple of alternatives (e.g., tasks),
and v : 2A × T 7→ R is a function that maps a value to every
possible pairing of a coalition C ⊆ A to an alternative t ∈ T .
Output: an ordered coalition
structure (Definition 1)
P
m
hC1 , ..., Cm i over A that maximizes i=1 v(Ci , ti ).

Introduction
The coalition structure generation (CSG) problem is a major
algorithmic challenge in cooperative game theory and multiagent systems. It is central to coalition formation (Osborne
and Rubinstein 1994), and it has been studied extensively in
many contexts (Rahwan et al. 2015).
In other research fields (e.g., operations research), assignment algorithms have been used to allocate tasks and coordinate entities. These algorithms seek to find an optimal
matching between the elements of sets, with the objective
to maximize the aggregated value of assignments. There are
numerous variations on this problem. See (Pentico 2007) for
an extensive summary.
From an algorithmic perspective, CSG and assignment
are two major processes for coordination that are typically
treated separately: CSG as a partitioning problem, and assignment as a matching problem. (Präntare and Heintz 2020)

Definition 1. The tuple hC1 , ..., Cm i is an ordered coalition structure over A if Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ for all i 6= j, and
S
m
i=1 Ci = A. For example, h{a1 , a3 }, ∅, {a2 , a4 }i is an ordered coalition structure over the agents {a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 }. We
omit the notion “over A” when it improves readability.
The only algorithm that has been developed for this problem is an optimal anytime branch-and-bound algorithm (denoted MP) by (Präntare and Heintz 2020) that uses a search
space representation based on multiset permutations of integer partitions to prune large portions of the search space.
Even though this algorithm performs well in practice for
limited input sizes, and greatly outperforms the industrygrade solver CPLEX, there is no proven guarantee that it can
find an optimum without evaluating all mn possible ordered
coalition structures. Moreover, this algorithm is impractical
for solving problems with more than just a few agents. Just
for preprocessing, it requires at least e.g., m2n = 10×230 ≈
1010 operations for n = 30 agents and m = 10 alternatives.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11317

