The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Image-to-Image Retrieval
by Learning Similarity between Scene Graphs
Sangwoong Yoon1∗ , Woo Young Kang2 , Sungwook Jeon3 , SeongEun Lee3 , Changjin Han3 ,
Jonghun Park3 , and Eun-Sol Kim2
1
Seoul National University Robotics Lab, 2 Kakao Brain, 3 Seoul National University Information Management Lab
swyoon@robotics.snu.ac.kr, edwin.kang@kakaobrain.com, {wookee3,ryuha96,changjin9653,jonghun}@snu.ac.kr,
eunsol.kim@kakaobrain.com
Abstract

As a scene graph compactly summarizes the high-level content of an image in a structured and symbolic manner, the
similarity between scene graphs of two images reflects the
relevance of their contents. Based on this idea, we propose a novel approach for image-to-image retrieval using
scene graph similarity measured by graph neural networks.
In our approach, graph neural networks are trained to predict
the proxy image relevance measure, computed from humanannotated captions using a pre-trained sentence similarity
model. We collect and publish the dataset for image relevance measured by human annotators to evaluate retrieval algorithms. The collected dataset shows that our method agrees
well with the human perception of image similarity than other
competitive baselines.

Figure 1: Image retrieval examples from ResNet and IRSGS.
ResNet retrieves images with superficial similarity, e.g.,
grayscale or vertical lines, while IRSGS successfully returns
images with correct context, such as playing tennis or skateboarding.

Introduction
Image-to-image retrieval, the task of finding similar images
to a query image from a database, is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision and is the core technology
in visual search engines. The application of image retrieval
systems has been most successful in problems where each
image has a clear representative object, such as landmark
detection and instance-based retrieval (Gordo et al. 2016;
Mohedano et al. 2016; Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2016),
or has explicit tag labels (Gong et al. 2014).
However, performing image retrieval with complex images that have multiple objects and various relationships between them remains challenging for two reasons. First, deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), on which most image retrieval methods rely heavily, tend to be overly sensitive
to low-level and local visual features (Zheng, Yang, and Tian
2017; Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Chen et al. 2018). As shown
in Figure 1, nearest-neighbor search on ResNet-152 penultimate layer feature space returns images that are superficially
similar but have completely different content. Second, there
is no publicly available labeled data to train and evaluate
the image retrieval system for complex images, partly because quantifying similarity between images with multiple
objects as label information is difficult. Furthermore, a similarity measure for such complex images is desired to reflect

semantics of images, i.e., the context and relationship of entities in images.
In this paper, we address these challenges and build an
image retrieval system capable of finding semantically similar images to a query from a complex scene image database.
First of all, we propose a novel image retrieval framework,
Image Retrieval with Scene Graph Similarity (IRSGS),
which retrieves images with a similar scene graph to the
scene graph of a query. A scene graph represents an image
as a set of objects, attributes, and relationships, summarizing the content of a complex image. Therefore, the scene
graph similarity can be an effective tool to measure semantic similarity between images. IRSGS utilizes a graph neural networks to compute the similarity between two scene
graphs, becoming more robust to confounding low-level features (Figure 1).
Also, we conduct a human experiment to collect human
decisions on image similarity. In the experiment, annotators
are given a query image along with two candidate images
and asked to select which candidate image is more similar to
the query than the other. With 29 annotators, we collect more
than 10,000 annotations over more than 1,700 image triplets.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Work done during an internship at Kakao Brain

10718

