The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HOT-VAE: Learning High-Order Label Correlation for Multi-Label
Classification via Attention-Based Variational Autoencoders
Wenting Zhao, 1 Shufeng Kong, 1 Junwen Bai, 1 Daniel Fink, 2 Carla Gomes 1
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA
2
Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA
wzhao@cs.cornell.edu, {sk2299, jb2467, daniel.fink}@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

impact biodiversity and to plan for the restoration and recovery of species communities in the face of environmental
change (D’Amen et al. 2017). This problem is represented
as joint species distribution modelling (JSDM), which predicts species occurrences given environmental features and
species interactions. There are two key challenges in JSDM.
First, species communities are often comprised of very large
numbers of individual species, presenting the challenge of
learning complex high-dimensional interactions. For example, bird communities are often comprised hundreds of individual species within a single region. To consider how all
subsets of all bird species interact is computationally intractable, thus being selective in how we model these interactions is a necessity. On one hand, accounting for more
interactions increases learning capacity but will be more
computationally demanding and could have a higher risk
of over-fitting. On the other hand, one can focus on less or
no interactions; however, many communities of species are
known to include complex interactions among large numbers of species, so having oversimplifying assumptions leads
to inaccurate predictions. The second challenge for modeling the joint distribution of many species is the fact that the
relationships between species change as important features
of the environment change over space and time. Thus, it is
critical to understand how environment changes like climate
change impact species interactions and the resulting structure of species communities (Evans et al. 2016).

Understanding how environmental characteristics affect biodiversity patterns, from individual species to communities of
species, is critical for mitigating effects of global change. A
central goal for conservation planning and monitoring is the
ability to accurately predict the occurrence of species communities and how these communities change over space and
time. This in turn leads to a challenging and long-standing
problem in the field of computer science - how to perform accurate multi-label classification with hundreds of labels? The
key challenge of this problem is its exponential-sized output
space with regards to the number of labels to be predicted.
Therefore, it is essential to facilitate the learning process by
exploiting correlations (or dependency) among labels. Previous methods mostly focus on modelling the correlation on
label pairs; however, complex relations between real-world
objects often go beyond second order. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for multi-label classification, Highorder Tie-in Variational Autoencoder (HOT-VAE), which performs adaptive high-order label correlation learning. We experimentally verify that our model outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art approaches on a bird distribution dataset on
both conventional F1 scores and a variety of ecological metrics. To show our method is general, we also perform empirical analysis on seven other public real-world datasets in
several application domains, and Hot-VAE exhibits superior
performance to previous methods.

Introduction

Our contributions: We propose High-order Tie-in Variational Autoencoder (HOT-VAE), an attentioned-based VAE
that leverages latent embedding learning and neural message passing to perform high-order label correlation learning
and produce accurate multi-label predictions. More specifically: (1) We introduce a two-branch VAE-based model
with a replaceable, domain-specific encoder (i.e., one can
choose an encoder that efficiently extracts feature information given an application domain) and a shared message
passing neural network (MPNN) decoder where label correlations are computed. (2) HOT-VAE is able to learn highorder label correlation using multiple-step message passing.
It also produces label correlation conditioned on features. In
other words, HOT-VAE can not only model the interactions
between many species simultaneously, it can also adapt the
correlation between species to changing environmental factors. (3) With a graph structure to reason about label corre-

The study of multi-label classification (MLC) is an active
research area and has been receiving increasing attention in
the past few decades; unlike traditional single-output learning, it is a task of predicting the presence and absence of
multiple entities simultaneously given a sample with a set of
features. It finds applications in a wide range of domains including image recognition, natural language processing, and
bioinformatics (Xu et al. 2020).
One important field that is in urgent need for a scalable
and accurate MLC approach is ecology. The ability to accurately predict which species assemble into communities
based on local environmental features is essential to understand how changes in the environment can be expected to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15016

