The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Branching Heuristics for Propositional Model Counting
Pashootan Vaezipoor,1* Gil Lederman,2* Yuhuai Wu,1,3 Chris Maddison,1,3
Roger B. Grosse,1,3 Sanjit A. Seshia,2 Fahiem Bacchus1
1

University of Toronto
2
UC Berkeley
3
Vector Institute
{pashootan, ywu, cmaddis, rgrosse, fbacchus}@cs.toronto.edu
{gilled, sseshia}@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract

Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007) and bounded-length probabilistic planning (Domshlak and Hoffmann 2006); however,
many applications remain out of reach of current solvers. For
example, in problems such as inference in Markov Chains,
which have a temporal structure, exact model counters are
still generally inferior to earlier methods such as Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs). In this paper we show that machine
learning methods can be used to greatly enhance the performance of exact #SAT solvers.

Propositional model counting, or #SAT, is the problem of
computing the number of satisfying assignments of a Boolean
formula. Many problems from different application areas, including many discrete probabilistic inference problems, can be
translated into model counting problems to be solved by #SAT
solvers. Exact #SAT solvers, however, are often not scalable
to industrial size instances. In this paper, we present Neuro#,
an approach for learning branching heuristics to improve the
performance of exact #SAT solvers on instances from a given
family of problems. We experimentally show that our method
reduces the step count on similarly distributed held-out instances and generalizes to much larger instances from the
same problem family. It is able to achieve these results on a
number of different problem families having very different
structures. In addition to step count improvements, Neuro#
can also achieve orders of magnitude wall-clock speedups
over the vanilla solver on larger instances in some problem
families, despite the runtime overhead of querying the model.

1

Introduction

Propositional model counting is the problem of counting the
number of satisfying solutions to a Boolean formula (Gomes,
Sabharwal, and Selman 2009). When the Boolean formula
is expressed in conjunctive normal form (CNF), this problem is known as the #SAT problem. #SAT is a #P-complete
problem, and by Toda’s theorem (Toda 1991) any problem
in the polynomial-time hierarchy (PH) can be solved by a
polynomial number of calls to a #SAT oracle. This means
that effective #SAT solvers, if they could be developed, have
the potential to help solve problems whose complexity lies
beyond NP, from a range of applications. The tremendous
practical successes achieved by encoding problems to SAT
and using modern SAT solvers (Marques-Silva 2018) demonstrate the potential of such an approach.
Modern exact #SAT solvers are based on the DPLL algorithm (Davis, Logemann, and Loveland 1962) and have been
successfully applied to solve certain problems, e.g., inference in Bayes Nets (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi 2003b; Li,
Poupart, and van Beek 2011; Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005b;
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In particular, we learn problem family specific branching
heuristics for the 2012 version of the DPLL-based #SAT
solver SharpSAT (Thurley 2006) which uses a state-of-theart search procedure. We cast the problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) in which the task is to select the best
literal to branch on next. We use a Graph Neural Network
(GNN) (Scarselli et al. 2009) to represent the particular component of the residual formula the solver is currently working
on. The model is trained end-to-end via Evolution Strategies
(ES), with the objective of minimizing the mean number of
branching decisions required to solve instances from a given
distribution of problems. In other words, given a training set
of instances drawn from a problem distribution, the aim is
to automatically tailor the solver’s branching decisions for
better performance on unseen problems of that distribution.
We found that our technique, which we call Neuro#, can
generalize not only to unseen problem instances of similar
size but also to much larger instances than those seen at
training time. Furthermore, despite Neuro#’s considerable
runtime overhead from querying the learnt model, on some
problem domains Neuro# can achieve orders-of-magnitude
improvements in the solver’s wall-clock runtime. This is quite
remarkable in the context of prior related work (Yolcu and
Póczos 2019; Selsam and Bjørner 2019; Balcan et al. 2018;
Gasse et al. 2019; Khalil et al. 2016; Hansknecht, Joormann,
and Stiller 2018; Lederman et al. 2020), where using ML
to improve combinatorial solvers has at best yielded modest
wall-clock time improvements (less than a factor of two),
and positions this line of research as a viable path towards
improving the practicality of exact model counters.1

1
Our code and the extended version of the paper (with the appendix) are available at: github.com/NeuroSharp.

12427

