The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust PDF Document Conversion
Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Nikolaos Livathinos, Cesar Berrospi, Maksym Lysak, Viktor Kuropiatnyk,
Ahmed Nassar, Andre Carvalho, Michele Dolfi, Christoph Auer, Kasper Dinkla, Peter Staar
IBM Research
Säumerstrasse 4
8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland
{nli, ceb, mly, vku, ahn, val, dol, cau, dkl, taa}@zurich.ibm.com

Introduction

Abstract

The Portable Document Format (PDF) was introduced in
1993 and has been widely adopted throughout the academic
and commercial world. In 2015, Adobe estimated (Ydens
2015) that there were 1.5 trillion PDF documents in circulation. That number has certainly risen since then.
At its core, the PDF format encapsulates a printing language. Practically, this means that a PDF document is a set
of consecutive printing instructions to place one or more
characters, lines and bitmap images in a certain position on
the page with a specific style. As a consequence, the structural context of the characters/lines within the document is
lost. Without visual interpretation of the page, it is very difficult to deduce whether a specific set of characters from a
printing command belongs to a title, abstract, table, etc. This
is particularly problematic when one wants to retrieve and
analyze the content of the document. Without knowledge of
the document structure, one can only perform a basic keyword search, which is very limiting. To extract content from
documents accurately, one needs to know the structure of the
document, which in turn requires robust and accurate conversion of PDF documents into a well-defined data layout
such as JSON or HTML. The latter remains very challenging still today.
These limitations of the PDF format have inspired many
researchers to build image segmentation algorithms that can
detect document components in a visual rendering of a page.
In particular, object detection methods based on deep neural
networks have been extensively used to find particular document components such as figures or tables (Siegel et al.
2018a; Zhong, Tang, and Jimeno Yepes 2019). The disadvantage of using image-based object detection methods is
that they often fail to predict sufficiently accurate regions required for high-quality structure recovery. Furthermore, they
are computationally expensive. This makes them impractical
for the task of robust document conversion at scale.
In this paper, we present a new method to support robust
PDF document conversion. The novelty of this method is
that we do not rely on image segmentation methods. Rather,
we apply neural network architectures originally designed
for natural language processing (NLP) tasks to the sequence
of printing commands in the PDF code. This work was inspired by recent advances in NLP. We investigated whether

The number of published PDF documents in both the academic and commercial world has increased exponentially in
recent decades. There is a growing need to make their rich
content discoverable to information retrieval tools. Achieving
high-quality semantic searches demands that a document’s
structural components such as title, section headers, paragraphs, (nested) lists, tables and figures (including their captions) are properly identified. Unfortunately, the PDF format
is known to not conserve such structural information because
it simply represents a document as a stream of low-level printing commands, in which one or more characters are placed in
a bounding box with a particular styling. In this paper, we
present a novel approach to document structure recovery in
PDF using recurrent neural networks to process the low-level
PDF data representation directly, instead of relying on a visual re-interpretation of the rendered PDF page, as has been
proposed in previous literature. We demonstrate how a sequence of PDF printing commands can be used as input into
a neural network and how the network can learn to classify
each printing command according to its structural function in
the page. This approach has three advantages: First, it can distinguish among more fine-grained labels (typically 10–20 labels as opposed to 1–5 with visual methods), which results in
a more accurate and detailed document structure resolution.
Second, it can take into account the text flow across pages
more naturally compared to visual methods because it can
concatenate the printing commands of sequential pages. Last,
our proposed method needs less memory and it is computationally less expensive than visual methods. This allows us
to deploy such models in production environments at a much
lower cost. Through extensive architectural search in combination with advanced feature engineering, we were able to
implement a model that yields a weighted average F1 score of
97% across 17 distinct structural labels. The best model we
achieved is currently served in production environments on
our Corpus Conversion Service (CCS), which was presented
at KDD18. This model enhances the capabilities of CCS significantly, as it eliminates the need for human annotated label
ground-truth for every unseen document layout. This proved
particularly useful when applied to a huge corpus of PDF articles related to COVID-19.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15137

