The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bayes DistNet - A Robust Neural Network for
Algorithm Runtime Distribution Predictions
Jake Tuero, Michael Buro
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{tuero, mburo}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Randomized algorithms are used in many state-of-theart solvers for constraint satisfaction problems (CSP) and
Boolean satisfiability (SAT) problems. For many of these
problems, there is no single solver which will dominate others. Having access to the underlying runtime distributions
(RTD) of these solvers can allow for better use of algorithm
selection, algorithm portfolios, and restart strategies. Previous state-of-the-art methods directly try to predict a fixed
parametric distribution that the input instance follows. In this
paper, we extend RTD prediction models into the Bayesian
setting for the first time. This new model achieves robust predictive performance in the low observation setting, as well as
handling censored observations. This technique also allows
for richer representations which cannot be achieved by the
classical models which restrict their output representations.
Our model outperforms the previous state-of-the-art model in
settings in which data is scarce, and can make use of censored
data such as lower bound time estimates, where that type of
data would otherwise be discarded. It can also quantify its
uncertainty in its predictions, allowing for algorithm portfolio models to make better informed decisions about which
algorithm to run on a particular instance.

models which are robust and can give accurate RTD predictions for unseen instances.
The current state-of-the-art RTD prediction models are
designed to give exact parametric distributions as output,
with the model predicting the particular distribution parameters (Eggensperger, Lindauer, and Hutter 2018). However,
these models make the assumption that the particular algorithms on the given instances follow a particular parametric
distribution. These models also tend to have their predictive
power hindered in the presence of a small number of observations per input instance or with censored examples (only
a lower bound for the runtime is known). The goal of our research is to have a robust model under these conditions, and
to try to lift some of the restrictions we put on the models.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first
give a summary of the two areas our research joins for
the first time: randomized algorithm runtime prediction and
Bayesian deep learning. We then show how our model extends existing methods into the Bayesian setting, and show
how effective our model is in several scenarios. Finally, we
give some insights into where we think the next research
steps are for extending our work.

Introduction

Background and Related Work
In this section, we give an overview of randomized algorithm runtime prediction and Bayesian learning in neural
networks.

Many of the algorithmic solvers for NP-complete problems,
such as CSP and SAT, rely on backtrack methods. These
solvers can have runtimes which vary substantially, depending on whether they make mistakes caused by sub-optimal
heuristics during the recursive backtrack calls. Adding randomization and restarts into the backtrack algorithms has
been shown to help alleviate some of the heavy-tail nature
that these runtimes exhibit, decreasing the algorithm’s runtime by many orders of magnitude in some cases (Harvey
1995; Gomes, Selman, and Kautz 1998).
If the underlying runtime distribution (RTD) is known
for a particular algorithm, then an optimal fixed cutoff-time
restart strategy can be formulated (Luby, Sinclair, and Zuckerman 1993). Knowing the underlying RTD can also lead to
efficient use of algorithm portfolios, which can dynamically
assign algorithms to input instances based on the predictive
RTD. These are just a few reasons why it’s important to have

Randomized Algorithm Runtime Prediction
Problems such as CSP and SAT are NP-complete, meaning
that there is currently no guarantee there is a polynomial
time solution technique. The dominant solver technique for
these types of problems is backtrack search, in which heuristics pick an unbound variable, assign a value to it, and the
search proceeds recursively. If an inconsistency is detected,
the algorithm backtracks and tries another assignment to that
variable.
A consequence of using backtrack-based solvers is that
early mistakes can cause long searches down branches of the
search tree which eventually need to be backtracked. This
leads to the so-called “heavy-tail” phenomenon, in which
the runtime of these algorithms exhibit tails which are not
exponentially bounded. Harvey (1995) was the first to show
that adding randomization and restarts into the backtracking

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12418

