The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fast Multi-view Discrete Clustering with Anchor Graphs
Qianyao Qiang, 1 Bin Zhang, 1 Fei Wang, 2 Feiping Nie 3∗
1

School of Software, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
3
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
qiangqianyao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, bzhang.xjtu@gmail.com, wfx@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, feipingnie@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Many efforts have been devoted to accelerate graph construction or eigen-decomposition, such as constructing anchor graph (Kang et al. 2020; Liu, He, and Chang 2010; Zhu,
Nie, and Li 2017; Zhang et al. 2020) and sparse graph (Spielman and Teng 2011; Chen et al. 2010), approximate eigendecomposition (Fowlkes et al. 2004). Anchors can be generated by random sampling or lightweight clustering methods such as k-means. Generally, anchors generated by kmeans are more representative than random anchors. However, it is time-consuming and may generate unbalanced clusters. The Balanced K-means based Hierarchical K-means
(BKHK) (Zhu, Nie, and Li 2017) hierarchically separates the
data into two balanced clusters with k-means and obtains anchors by calculating the center of the sub-clusters. It has been
successfully applied to accelerate the graph based methods
including hashing (Li, Hu, and Nie 2017), clustering (Zhu,
Nie, and Li 2017), dimensionality reduction (Nie, Zhu, and
Li 2017), semi-supervised learning (Zhang et al. 2020), etc.
In addition, it should be noted that in existing literatures on
graph-based multi-view clustering, solving the label matrix
in one step has not been well explored.
In this study, we propose a method termed Fast Multi-view
Discrete Clustering (FMDC) with anchor graphs to address
the aforementioned issues. We generate m (m  n) representative anchors more efficiently by replacing k-means in
BKHK with k-means++ (Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2006), and
separately construct anchor graph on each view to describe
the geometric structure. By computing an automatically integrated similarity matrix, we directly optimize the primal
spectral problem. The main contributions include:

Generally, the existing graph-based multi-view clustering models consists of two steps: (1) graph construction; (2) eigendecomposition on the graph Laplacian matrix to compute a
continuous cluster assignment matrix, followed by a postprocessing algorithm to get the discrete one. However, both
the graph construction and eigen-decomposition are timeconsuming, and the two-stage process may deviate from directly solving the primal problem. To this end, we propose Fast
Multi-view Discrete Clustering (FMDC) with anchor graphs,
focusing on directly solving the spectral clustering problem
with a small time cost. We efficiently generate representative anchors and construct anchor graphs on different views.
The discrete cluster assignment matrix is directly obtained by
performing clustering on the automatically aggregated graph.
FMDC has a linear computational complexity with respect to
the data scale, which is a significant improvement compared
to the quadratic one. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate its efficiency and effectiveness.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering is a fundamental technique in multiview data analysis. As an efficiency method for solving clustering problem, graph-based multi-view clustering has been
widely investigated and used in pattern recognition, data mining, natural language processing, etc.
Most of the existing graph-based multi-view clustering
models consists of two steps: (1) graph construction; (2)
eigen-decomposition on the graph Laplacian matrix to compute a continuous cluster assignment matrix, followed by a
post-processing algorithm such as k-means or spectral rotation to get the discrete one (Kang et al. 2020; Wang, Yang,
and Liu 2020; Zhou et al. 2019; Nie et al. 2016a). Despite
their attractive performance, there are still two drawbacks.
One is the expensive time cost. Usually, the time complexity
of traditional graph construction and eigen-decomposition
operation are O(n2 d) and O(n2 c), respectively, where n is
the data scale, d is the feature dimensionality and c is cluster
number. The other is that the two-stage process of obtaining the interpretable discrete cluster assignment matrix may
deviate from directly solving the primal problem.

• We propose FMDC, which generates anchors more efficiently, and directly calculates the discrete cluster assignment matrix.
• We automatically weigh different views to measure the diverse contributions, and compute a symmetric and doublestochastic aggregated similarity matrix.
• FMDC takes a linear computational complexity w.r.t. n.
It is a major improvement over the quadratic time.

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Comprehensive experiments are conducted on benchmark
datasets to verify the proposed model.
9360

