The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A New Bounding Scheme for Influence Diagrams
Radu Marinescu1 , Junkyu Lee2 , Rina Dechter2
1

IBM Research Europe
University of California Irvine
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com, junkyul@uci.edu, dechter@ics.uci.edu
2

Abstract
Influence diagrams provide a modeling and inference framework for sequential decision problems, representing the probabilistic knowledge by a Bayesian network and the preferences
of an agent by utility functions over the random variables
and decision variables. Computing the maximum expected
utility (MEU) and the optimizing policy is exponential in
the constrained induced width and therefore is notoriously
difficult for larger models. In this paper, we develop a new
bounding scheme for MEU that applies partitioning based
approximations on top of the decomposition scheme called
a multi-operator cluster DAG for influence diagrams that is
more sensitive to the underlying structure of the model than
the classical join-tree decomposition of influence diagrams.
Our bounding scheme utilizes a cost-shifting mechanism to
tighten the bound further. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed scheme on various hard benchmarks.

Introduction
Influence diagrams (IDs) (Howard and Matheson 1984) are
a powerful formalism for reasoning with sequential decision making problems under uncertainty. They involve both
chance or random variables, where the outcome is determined
randomly based on the values assigned to the other variables,
and decision variables, which the decision maker can chose
the value of, based on observations of some other variables.
Uncertainty is represented (like in Bayesian networks) by
a collection of conditional probability distributions, one for
each chance variable. The overall value of an outcome is represented as the sum of a collection of utility functions. Solving an ID is finding the maximum expected utility (MEU) and
the corresponding optimal policy for each decision, subject
to the history of observations and previous decisions.
Computing the MEU has long been recognized as one of
the most difficult inference task over graphical models. Therefore, a significant research effort has been dedicated over
the past years to developing efficient bounding schemes for
MEU. The most common approaches use either information
relaxation techniques that reorder the chance and decision
variables to form a simpler model that yields an upper bound
on the original MEU (Nilson and Holhe 2011) or reformulate
the MEU into a Marginal MAP (MMAP) query on a related
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12158

graphical model and apply standard approximation schemes
for MMAP (Liu and Ihler 2012). More recently, a class of
decomposition bounds has emerged as a powerful approximation scheme for MEU. These methods apply partitioning
schemes such as mini-buckets (Dechter and Rish 2003) or
weighted mini-buckets (Liu and Ihler 2011) to a join-tree
or join-graph decomposition of the ID and employ various
cost-shifting mechanisms to tighten the bounds further in
an anytime manner (Lee, Ihler, and Dechter 2018; Lee et al.
2019). They were developed within the framework of valuation algebras (Shenoy 1992; Maua, de Campos, and Zaffalon
2012; Moral 2018) that define combination and marginalization operators over pairs of probability and utility functions
called potentials (Jensen, Jensen, and Dittmer 1994).
Contribution: In this paper, we take the above bounding ideas and apply them on top of a more effective decomposition scheme called a multi-operator cluster DAG
(or MCDAG) decomposition for influence diagrams (Pralet,
Schiex, and Verfaillie 2006, 2009) instead of the traditional tree-decomposition (Jensen, Jensen, and Dittmer 1994).
MCDAGs were introduced as an alternative to the classical
Shenoy-Shafer architecture (Shenoy and Shafer 1990) for
influence diagrams in order to avoid the manipulation of
probability-utility potentials and to exploit further the underlying structure encoded by the functions of the model. More
specifically, given an influence diagram and its MCDAG decomposition we develop a mini-bucket approximation to the
messages passed along the MCDAG and show how to tighten
the generated bounds further using weighted elimination and
cost-shifting techniques. To the best of our knowledge this is
the first time that such partitioning-based approximations are
used together with MCDAG decompositions. Experimental
results on difficult benchmarks show that in many cases the
proposed approach outperforms the current best bounding
schemes for influence diagrams by a large margin in terms of
the quality of the bounds produced.

Background
Influence Diagrams
An influence diagram (ID) (Howard and Matheson 1984)
is defined by a tuple I = hX, D, P, Ui, where X =
{X1 , . . . , Xn } is a set of chance variables which specify the
uncertain decision environment and D = {D1 , . . . , Dm } is a

