The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal Relational Modeling with Self-Supervision for Action Segmentation
Dong Wang1 , Di Hu2,3∗ , Xingjian Li4 , Dejing Dou4
1

School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
4
Big Data Laboratory, Baidu Research
nwpuwangdong@gmail.com, dihu@ruc.edu.cn, {lixingjian, doudejing}@baidu.com
Abstract

understanding, which aims at temporally locating and recognizing human action segments (constituting by consecutive
frames with same action labels) in long untrimmed videos,
and is much more difficult than action recognition task. The
temporal relations between sequential human actions play an
important role in action segmentation, because the sequential human actions in daily life always constitute one meaningful event (e.g., making breakfast contains making salad,
toasting bread, drinking milk, and etc.).
The topic of action segmentation has been studied by
many researchers in the computer vision field. Earlier approaches (Rohrbach et al. 2012; Karaman, Seidenari, and
Del Bimbo 2014; Cheng et al. 2014) tried to improve the discriminability of the representations of single frame or video
clip and predicted the action label based on learned representations, ignoring the temporal relations between actions.
Segmental models (Pirsiavash and Ramanan 2014; Lea et al.
2016) and recurrent networks (Huang, Fei-Fei, and Niebles
2016; Singh et al. 2016) paid attention to local temporal
dependencies between consecutive actions in videos, and
have been demonstrated to have difficulty in modeling longrange temporal relations. Recently, GCNs (Huang, Sugano,
and Sato 2020) were introduced to improve action segmentation results via modeling temporal relations between precomputed action segments, while it still focused on the temporal relations among local consecutive action segments. In
fact, temporal relations in various timescales (i.e., short-term
and long-term timescales) are all of importance to infer action label of each frame. For example, when cooking, people
usually first turn on the rice cooker, then cut vegetables and
stir fry a few dishes, and at last turn on the rice cooker. There
are temporal relations occurring on different timescales, e.g.,
turn on/off rice cooker, cut different vegetables for one dish,
and cut and stir fry actions for one dish. Therefore, capturing and modeling temporal relations in various timescales
effectively are at the core of action segmentation and remain
difficult for existing methods.
In this work, we propose a Dilated Temporal Graph Reasoning Module (DTGRM) to capture and model the temporal relations and dependencies among actions in different
timescales. Further, to enhance temporal reasoning ability of
the proposed model, an auxiliary self-supervised task is introduced to identify the wrong-ordered frames in video and
predict the correct action labels for them. Specifically, we

Temporal relational modeling in video is essential for human action understanding, such as action recognition and action segmentation. Although Graph Convolution Networks
(GCNs) have shown promising advantages in relation reasoning on many tasks, it is still a challenge to apply graph convolution networks on long video sequences effectively. The
main reason is that large number of nodes (i.e., video frames)
makes GCNs hard to capture and model temporal relations in
videos. To tackle this problem, in this paper, we introduce an
effective GCN module, Dilated Temporal Graph Reasoning
Module (DTGRM), designed to model temporal relations and
dependencies between video frames at various time spans. In
particular, we capture and model temporal relations via constructing multi-level dilated temporal graphs where the nodes
represent frames from different moments in video. Moreover,
to enhance temporal reasoning ability of the proposed model,
an auxiliary self-supervised task is proposed to encourage the
dilated temporal graph reasoning module to find and correct
wrong temporal relations in videos. Our DTGRM model outperforms state-of-the-art action segmentation models on three
challenging datasets: 50Salads, Georgia Tech Egocentric Activities (GTEA), and the Breakfast dataset. The code is available at https://github.com/redwang/DTGRM.

Introduction
Action understanding and prediction are fundamental to accomplishing effective communication and interaction between human beings. And the ability to reasoning the temporal relations between actions over time is crucial for human
action understanding in daily life. Therefore, temporal relational reasoning in videos is of significant importance for action understanding algorithms, which is the key component
in many artificial intelligence systems, such as robot vision
(Krüger et al. 2007; Koppula and Saxena 2015), intelligent
surveillance (Danafar and Gheissari 2007), and autonomous
vehicles (Rasouli and Tsotsos 2019; Sadigh et al. 2016).
Video-based action segmentation (Fathi, Farhadi, and
Rehg 2011; Fathi and Rehg 2013; Kuehne, Gall, and Serre
2016; Lea et al. 2016, 2017) is the core task for human action
∗
Corresponding author. The research work is partially conducted when the first author was an intern at Baidu Research.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2729

