The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fake it Till You Make it: Self-Supervised Semantic Shifts for Monolingual Word
Embedding Tasks
Maurı́cio Gruppi,1 Pin-Yu Chen2 Sibel Adalı,1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA
2
IBM Research, NY, USA
gouvem@rpi.edu, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, adalis@rpi.edu
Abstract

As methods based on the distributional property of words
have been shown to be very effective in encoding semantic relationship between words (Hamilton, Leskovec, and
Jurafsky 2016b; Sagi, Kaufmann, and Clark 2009; Bamler and Mandt 2017; Kulkarni et al. 2015) or even biases
and stereotypes (Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan 2017), the task of identifying semantic
change between words using word embeddings, such as
Word2Vec or FastText (Mikolov et al. 2013; Bojanowski
et al. 2017) has gained a great deal of popularity. This task
is often a difficult one as it involves unsupervised methods (e.g. learning embeddings, alignment and/or mapping
of words). For example, in the recent SemEval-2020 competition (Schlechtweg et al. 2020), the highest scores were
at about 70% accuracy on a binary classification task to predict occurrence of semantic change across time periods in
several languages. The main challenge stems from the unsupervised nature of the problem, as training data is rare or
non-existing, and is highly dependent on the input corpora.
This impacts multiple aspects of the task. In particular, to
compare the embedding matrices A, B ∈ Rn×d of two separate corpora A and B, where n is the size of the common
vocabulary and d is the embedding dimension, one must first
align them to make them comparable, usually via an Orthogonal Procrustes (OP) method. The goal of OP is to learn an
orthogonal transform matrix Q (i.e., QT Q = Id , where Id is
the d-dimensional identity matrix), that most closely maps
A to B, namely, Q∗ = arg minQ:QT Q=Id kAQ − Bk. It has
been shown that this problem accepts a closed-form solution via Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (Schönemann
1966). The fact that Q is an orthogonal matrix makes it so
that AQ is only subject to unitary transformations such as reflection and rotation, preserving the inner product between
its word vectors. Words whose vectors are used in the OP
are called landmarks (or anchors), these are the words over
which we will enforce proximity in the alignment by minimizing the distance of its vectors.

The use of language is subject to variation over time as well
as across social groups and knowledge domains, leading to
differences even in the monolingual scenario. Such variation
in word usage is often called lexical semantic change (LSC).
The goal of LSC is to characterize and quantify language variations with respect to word meaning, to measure how distinct
two language sources are (that is, people or language models). Because there is hardly any data available for such a
task, most solutions involve unsupervised methods to align
two embeddings and predict semantic change with respect to
a distance measure. To that end, we propose a self-supervised
approach to model lexical semantic change by generating
training samples by introducing perturbations of word vectors
in the input corpora. We show that our method can be used for
the detection of semantic change with any alignment method.
Furthermore, it can be used to choose the landmark words to
use in alignment and can lead to substantial improvements
over the existing techniques for alignment. We illustrate the
utility of our techniques using experimental results on three
different datasets, involving words with the same or different meanings. Our methods not only provide significant improvements but also can lead to novel findings for the LSC
problem.

1

Introduction

Language use is deeply rooted in the social, cultural and historical context that shapes it. It has been shown that meaning of words change over time, being pushed by cultural
and societal transformations, a phenomenon named semantic change (Schmidt 1963). For example, the English word
awful was used in the sense of the words impressive or majestic before the year 1800, while, in modern English, it describes something objectionable. Language is also subject
to variation across different communities for many different
reasons (Schlechtweg et al. 2019). For example, the word
model can be used to refer to the design or version of a
product (as in model of a car), or it could be used to refer
to a mathematical model in a scientific paper.
In this paper, we develop a novel self-supervised semantic
shift (S4) method to detect words with different meaning in
two corpora from the same language (monolingual).

Any landmark choice incorporates an initial assumption
to the solution. An ideal solution to this problem would involve a set of landmark words that are semantically stable
(i.e. words that have the same sense) across the input corpora. In the context of diachronic embeddings, where the
embedding is learned from adjacent time slices of text, the
assumption is that words will change only slightly from time

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12893

