The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parallel Constraint Acquisition
Nadjib Lazaar
LIRMM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
lazaar@lirmm.fr

Abstract

2017). Shchekotykhin and Friedrich extended C ONACQ to
allow the user to provide arguments as constraints to speedup the convergence (Shchekotykhin and Friedrich 2009).
Bessiere et al. proposed Q UACQ (for Quick Acquisition),
an active learning system that is able to ask the user to classify partial queries (Bessiere et al. 2020, 2013). Q UACQ
iteratively computes membership queries. If the user says
yes, Q UACQ reduces the search space by discarding all constraints violated by the positive example. When the answer is
no, Q UACQ finds the scope of one of the violated constraints
of the target network in a number of queries logarithmic in
the size of the example. This key component of Q UACQ allows it to always converge on the target set of constraints in a
polynomial number of queries. However, even that good theoretical bound can be hard to put in practice. Generating a
complete example is NP-hard and the total number of examples to classify can be large. For instance, Q UACQ can take
more than 20 minutes to generate a complete example during the acquisition process of the Sudoku constraint network
and it requires the user to classify more than 9K examples.
In this paper, we introduce a first ever approach to combine CP modelling through constraint acquisition with parallelism. We present PACQ, a portfolio-based parallel constraint acquisition system. PACQ learns constraint network
by exchanging with several users in different acquisition sessions. Users have in mind the same target problem without
knowing how to model it as a constraint network. PACQ benefits from the main limitations of the sequential Q UACQ system: (i) large number of examples to classify by the user;
and (ii) significant waiting time between two queries. We
experimentally evaluate the benefit of using parallelism in
constraint acquisition on several problems. The results show
that the number of queries increases under an upper-bound
using PACQ and that PACQ dramatically improves the sequential version of Q UACQ in terms of queries asked per
user and in terms of CPU time needed to generate queries.

Constraint acquisition systems assist the non-expert user in
modelling her problem as a constraint network. Q UACQ is
a sequential constraint acquisition algorithm that generates
queries as (partial) examples to be classified as positive or
negative. The drawbacks are that the user may need to answer
a great number of such examples, within a significant waiting
time between two examples, to learn all the constraints. In
this paper, we propose PACQ, a portfolio-based parallel constraint acquisition system. The design of PACQ benefits from
having several users sharing the same target problem. Moreover, each user is involved in a particular acquisition session,
opened in parallel to improve the overall performance of the
whole system. We prove the correctness of PACQ and we give
an experimental evaluation that shows that our approach improves on Q UACQ.

Introduction
Constraint programming (CP) has made considerable
progress over the last forty years, becoming a powerful
paradigm for modelling and solving combinatorial problems. Several parallel algorithms have been proposed to
solve a problem as a constraint network and they are grouped
under categories: distributed CSPs; parallel propagation;
parallel search; portfolio algorithms; problem decomposition (Régin and Malapert 2018). However, modelling a problem as a constraint network still remains a challenging task
that requires some expertise in the field. Several constraint
acquisition systems have been introduced to support the uptake of constraint technology by non-experts. Freuder and
Wallace proposed the matchmaker agent (Freuder and Wallace 1998). This agent interacts with the user while solving
her problem. The user explains why she considers a proposed solution as a wrong one. Lallouet et al. proposed a
system based on inductive logic programming with the use
of the structure of the problem as a background knowledge
(Lallouet et al. 2010). Beldiceanu and Simonis proposed
M ODEL S EEKER, a system devoted to problems with regular structures and based on the global constraint catalog
(Beldiceanu and Simonis 2012). Bessiere et al. proposed
C ONACQ, which generates membership queries (i.e., complete examples) to be classified by the user (Bessiere et al.

Background
The constraint acquisition process can be seen as an interplay between the user and the learner. In our context, we
have N users (U1 to UN ) involved in N different acquisition sessions (A1 to AN ) with one user per session and
under a memory-shared model. The learner and the users
need to share some common knowledge to communicate.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3860

