The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Automated Engineering Assistant: Learning Parsers for Technical Drawings
Dries Van Daele,1 Nicholas Decleyre, 2 Herman Dubois, 2 Wannes Meert 1
1

2

KU Leuven, Dept. of Computer Science, Leuven, Belgium
Saint-Gobain Mobility | Engineered Components (Seals), Kontich, Belgium
dries.vandaele@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract

These databases are often underutilized because previous designs can only be searched for by title or by using
a limited set of textual annotations. Ideally, however, such a
database can also be used to: (1) given a technical drawing,
find other relevant drawings in a large database of previous
designs; and (2) given a partial description or drawing, find
designs that would complete the partial design. In this work
we present an approach that can extract the knowledge in a
technical drawing and thus improve the search capabilities
significantly to achieve the aforementioned tasks and assist
engineers during the design process.
In order to fully benefit from technical drawings, we need
to extract their tabular as well as their visual information,
and translate it to a representation that can be handled by automated systems. Furthermore, such a system should be able
to deal with both recent digital drawings and historical analog drawings. The latter is important because a great amount
of information is captured in legacy drawings. Ideally, extracting the information can be done using a parser, which is
a small computer program. The main challenge is that writing and maintaining such a parser is time-consuming and
costly. Furthermore, it is error prone since an expert has to
explain subtle rules to an analyst or a programmer. The approach we present here will learn such parsers directly from
expert annotations on the original drawing and allow its output to be used in automated tasks such as searching relevant
designs.
Providing these annotations is a trivial task for domain
experts. The number of drawings that require annotation is
mainly dependent on the number of variations or templates
that need to be recognized. Fortunately, since all technical
drawings within an organisation are expected to be (loosely)
based on a limited set of templates, the number of drawings
that need to be annotated is also limited.
We present a hybrid approach that utilizes both neural
methods and reasoning-based methods. This combination
is necessary to capture the full range of information available in a drawing and provided by experts. Neural methods (e.g., deep convolutional neural networks) are used because they are the state-of-the-art in image recognition algorithms. Despite successes in image recognition, however,
automatic analysis and processing of engineering drawings
is still far from being complete (Moreno-Garcı́a, Elyan, and
Jayne 2018). This is in part because neural methods require

Manufacturing companies rely on technical drawings to develop new designs or adapt designs to customer preferences.
The database of historical and novel technical drawings thus
represents the knowledge that is core to their operations. With
current methods, however, utilizing these drawings is mostly
a manual and time consuming effort. In this work, we present
a software tool that knows how to interpret various parts of
the drawing and can translate this information to allow for
automatic reasoning and machine learning on top of such a
large database of technical drawings. For example, to find erroneous designs, to learn about patterns present in successful designs, etc. To achieve this, we propose a method that
automatically learns a parser capable of interpreting technical drawings, using only limited expert interaction. The proposed method makes use of both neural methods and symbolic methods. Neural methods to interpret visual images
and recognize parts of two-dimensional drawings. Symbolic
methods to deal with the relational structure and understand
the data encapsulated in complex tables present in the technical drawing. Furthermore, the output can be used, for example, to build a similarity based search algorithm. We showcase one deployed tool that is used to help engineers find relevant, previous designs more easily as they can now query
the database using a partial design instead of through limited
and tedious keyword searches. A partial design can be a part
of the two-dimensional drawing, part of a table, part of the
contained textual information, or combinations thereof.

Introduction
Technical drawings are the main method in engineering to
visually communicate how a machine or component functions or is constructed. They are the result of a design process starting from a set of specifications that the final product
needs to comply with. This design process follows a number
of strict and soft rules (e.g., material choice as a function of
temperature). Figure 1 shows a typical example containing
both a 2D and 3D visualisation of the object, and a material
list in tabular form specifying parts and properties. These
drawings are laid out according to generally applied conventions, and engineering companies have a large database
of previous designs, potentially going back decades.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15195

