The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DDRel: A New Dataset for Interpersonal Relation Classification in Dyadic
Dialogues
Qi Jia, Hongru Huang, Kenny Q. Zhu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
Jia qi@sjtu.edu.cn, onedesire@sjtu.edu.cn, kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

‘

Interpersonal language style shifting in dialogues is an interesting and almost instinctive ability of human. Understanding interpersonal relationship from language content is also a
crucial step toward further understanding dialogues. Previous
work mainly focuses on relation extraction between named
entities in texts or within a single dialogue session. In this
paper, we propose the task of relation classification of interlocutors based on their dialogues. We crawled movie scripts
from IMSDb, and annotated the relation label for each session according to 13 pre-defined relationships. The annotated
dataset DDRel consists of 6,300 dyadic dialogue sessions between 694 pairs of speakers with 53,126 utterances in total.
We also construct session-level and pair-level relation classification tasks with widely-accepted baselines. The experimental results show that both tasks are challenging for existing models and the dataset will be useful for future research.

1

Strong Tone
Address Term

Keyword

Figure 1: A sample dialogue and parts that are reported as
informative by human testers.
ment (Ariga et al. 2007; Karam et al. 2014; Yin et al. 2008).
Besides, it can be also used for crime investigation, relieving
the burden of manual monitoring and improving the productivity of searching in large amount of dialogue data.
Relation classification of dialogue sessions is not an easy
task. Figure 1 shows a 5-turn dialogue example. We can see
that it’s challenging to fully contextualize such a short conversation without any prior knowledge, except one might infer that the two speakers are fellow soldiers in the military.
Facing such problems, human usually resort to their communication experiences and commonsense knowledge to make
sense of background stories and give inferences about the
speakers’ relationship. This shows that the inference of relationships from dialogues is possible but not straightforward
for statistical models.
Previous work mainly focuses on relation classification
between named entities. Sentence-level relation classification datasets, such as FewRel (Han et al. 2018) and
TACRED (Zhang et al. 2017), have been widely studied (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Gao et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019), targeting on figuring out the correct relation type
between entities within a given sentence. Recent research
sets sights on inter-sentence relations. DocRED (Yao et al.
2019) has been proposed as the largest document-level relation extraction dataset from plain text, where person (an entity type) only occupies 18.5% of the entities. DialogRE (Yu
et al. 2020) aims at predicting the relations between two arguments and MPDD (Chen, Huang, and Chen 2020) is a
Chinese dataset for predicting relations between the speaker
and listeners of each turn in a dialogue session. However,

Introduction

Interpersonal relationship is an implicit but important feature underlying all dialogues, shaping how language is used
and perceived during communication. People start to practice such style shifting in communication at very early stage
unconsciously. Study (Dunn 2000) finds that when children
listen to another person, their understanding of the counterpart depends on the nature of their relationship with the
speaker. Study (Grabam, Barbato, and Perse 1993) finds that
conversations between different partners are executed under
different interpersonal motives, and thus the dialogues differ
in topics and styles. Also, similar expressions may reflect
different emotions and attitudes in different relationships.
Analyzing the relationship based on dialogues between
interlocutors is well-motivated. First, it can provide dialogue systems with supplementary features for generating
more suitable responses for different relationships, which
helps in developing more intelligent role-playing chatbots.
Second, it is useful in recommendation systems if the system can figure out the relationship between users according to their privacy-insensitive chats. Third, an automatic
relationship classifier can help understand where the interpersonal stress/stimuli comes from in mental disorder treat* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13125

