The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Aggregating Binary Judgments Ranked by Accuracy
Daniel Halpern,1 Gregory Kehne,2 Dominik Peters,1
Ariel D. Procaccia,1 Nisarg Shah,3 Piotr Skowron4
1

Harvard University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 University of Toronto, 4 University of Warsaw
dhalpern@g.harvard.edu,gkehne@andrew.cmu.edu,dpeters@seas.harvard.edu,
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu,nisarg@cs.toronto.edu,p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

Abstract

applies to weather forecasts. Similarly, polls conducted concurrently may be ranked by their sample sizes. Sometimes,
experts may participate in a judgment contest (such as the
Good Judgment Project1 ), which may show their ranking by
accuracy on the leaderboard.
Motivated by such settings, we address the following
question in this work:

We revisit the fundamental problem of predicting a binary
ground truth based on independent binary judgments provided by experts. When the accuracy levels of the experts
are known, the problem can be solved easily through maximum likelihood estimation. We consider, however, a setting
in which we are given only a ranking of the experts by their
accuracy. Motivated by the worst-case approach to handle the
missing information, we consider three objective functions
and design efficient algorithms for optimizing them. In particular, the recently popular distortion objective leads to an
intuitive new rule. We show that our algorithms perform well
empirically using real and synthetic data in collaborative filtering and political prediction domains.

1

How should we aggregate n binary judgments ranked
by accuracy in order to predict a binary ground truth?
Note that the n binary judgments ordered by accuracy can
be represented as a bit-string of length n. Thus, we essentially study aggregation rules which take a bit-string as input
and output a bit. Due to the fundamental nature of this setting, the rules designed in this work may have applications
in other domains (see Section 6).

Introduction

Consider the task of predicting a binary ground truth G ∈
{0, 1} by aggregating independent binary judgments provided by n experts. This models a wide range of real-world
scenarios, where the judgments can be polls predicting the
outcome of an upcoming political or sports event, a user’s
reviews of previously watched movies, weather forecasts, or
juror opinions of a defendant’s guilt.
The judgment of expert i, denoted Xi , is assumed to
be a Bernoulli random variable, which coincides with the
ground truth with probability pi ; this probability is referred
to as the accuracy of the expert. If p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) is
known, then the classical maximum likelihood estimation
approach chooses the ground truth estimate that maximizes
the likelihood of inducing the vector of expert judgments
X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ), i.e., the value of y ∈ {0, 1} that maxQn
I[X =y]
imizes L[X; G = y, p] = i=1 pi i
· (1 − pi )I[Xi 6=y] ,
where I is the indicator variable.
However, sometimes we may not know the exact values of
p1 , . . . , pn ; instead, we may only know a ranking of the expert judgments by accuracy. This may be the case when there
is metadata available about the judgments that is known to
be correlated with accuracy, but the exact nature of the correlation is not known. For instance, if a pollster conducts
multiple polls over time, polls conducted closer to the date
of the event being predicted may be considered more accurate than the ones conducted earlier; the same reasoning

Our Contribution
Recall that the likelihood function L[X; G = y, p] depends
on p1 , . . . , pn , i.e., on the accuracy of the experts. However,
we are given only partial information about these values,
namely, their ordering. To address this missing information,
we take a worst-case viewpoint. Specifically, let P denote
the set of all p which are consistent with the given ordering;
we define the following three natural objectives that serve
as proxies for the likelihood induced by a given estimate
y ∈ {0, 1}, and design algorithms to compute the estimate
optimizing these objectives.
1. Distortion: supp∈P L[X; G = 1−y, p]/L[X; G = y, p].
Note that this is worst-case ratio of the likelihood of the
estimate not chosen (1 − y) to the likelihood of the estimate chosen (y). Our aim is to minimize this objective.
2. Optimistic likelihood: supp∈P L[X; G = y, p]. Maximizing this objective can be thought of as a natural extension of the maximum likelihood approach, where we
make an inference about p together with one about the
estimate y.
3. Pessimistic likelihood: inf p∈P L[X; G = y, p]. Maximizing this objective can be thought of as maximizing the
worst-case likelihood.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5456

https://goodjudgment.com/

