The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Commonsense Causal Reasoning
by Adversarial Training and Data Augmentation
Ieva Staliūnaitė, Philip John Gorinski, Ignacio Iacobacci
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London, United Kingdom
{ieva.staliunaite | philip.john.gorinski | ignacio.iacobacci}@huawei.com

Abstract

clauses. That is, the discourse connective “because” disambiguates the causal relation between the clauses more than
most other connectives (Asr and Demberg 2013).
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), the task of causal
inference is to determine the presence of a causal link without the cue of a discourse connective. Commonsense causal
reasoning is a complex task, which requires not only linguistic parsing and logical inference but also world knowledge
of causal links between events. For example, if a model was
to expertly determine which of the two alternatives is more
likely to be caused by the premise below, it would have to
access knowledge of the causal link between the ripening
and edibility of bananas.

Determining the plausibility of causal relations between
clauses is a commonsense reasoning task that requires complex inference ability. The general approach to this task is to
train a large pretrained language model on a specific dataset.
However, the available training data for the task is often
scarce, which leads to instability of model training or reliance
on the shallow features of the dataset. This paper presents
a number of techniques for making models more robust in
the domain of causal reasoning. Firstly, we perform adversarial training by generating perturbed inputs through synonym substitution. Secondly, based on a linguistic theory of
discourse connectives, we perform data augmentation using
a discourse parser for detecting causally linked clauses in
large text, and generating distractors with a generative language model. Both methods boost model performance on the
Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA) dataset, as well as
on a Balanced COPA dataset, which is a modified version of
the original data that has been developed to avoid superficial
cues, leading to a more challenging benchmark. We show a
statistically significant improvement in performance and robustness on both datasets, even with only a small number of
additionally generated data points.

Premise: The bananas ripened.
Alternative1: We squeezed them.
Alternative2: We ate them.
Question: Effect
Label: Alternative2
From Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon (2011)
The most commonly used benchmark task for evaluation of commonsense reasoning models is the the Choice of
Plausible Alternatives (Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon 2011,
COPA). In this task the goal is to determine which of the
two given alternatives is the true choice, i.e. which alternative is causally linked to a given premise, and which one
is a distractor. This is an easier task than determining the
precise coherence relation between two clauses. The task is
relatively easy for humans, as shown by the nearly perfect
annotator agreement for this task (Cohen’s kappa = 0.965).
However, the COPA dataset is very small (1000 items in total), and high model performance on it is not stable and often
relies on biases in the data (Kavumba et al. 2019). Consequently, Kavumba et al. (2019) introduce a Balanced COPA
dataset by manually adjusting items from COPA to remove
the superficial features, such as patterns of determiner use,
which are generally shown to be exploited by models for
solving the task. Data points are generated by mirroring each
example in a way that it captures a similar relation, yet with
the biasing feature appearing in the alternative which does
not manifest that feature in the original data. That way the
biasing feature appears in the true choice in one case and in
the distractor in the other case. For example, Kavumba et al.

Introduction
Within the discourse discipline in linguistic research, causal
relations are classified as contingency relations, which in
turn are a subset of coherence relations. Coherence relations are temporal, comparison, expansion and contingency relations between clauses, which can be explicitly
marked with certain discourse connectives (Asr and Demberg 2013). Examples of the expressions of the four types
of coherence relations include “A then/before/while B”, “A
even though/but/however B”, “A and/moreover/or B” and
“A because/therefore/if B”, respectively. In this work we are
specifically interested in the causal relations, which can be
split into backward (e.g. expressed as “A because B”) and
forward (e.g. expressed as “A therefore B”) ones, differing
with regard to whether A or B refers to the cause of the
event expressed by the other clause. It is interesting that
causal connectives such as “because” convey a lot of information needed for inferring the causal relation between
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13834

