The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

REM-Net: Recursive Erasure Memory Network
for Commonsense Evidence Refinement
Yinya Huang1 , Meng Fang2 , Xunlin Zhan1 , Qingxing Cao1 , Xiaodan Liang1 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Tencent AI Lab / Robotics X
yinya.huang@hotmail.com, mfang@tencent.com,
{zhanxlin, caoqx}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com
Abstract

Recent popular solution resorts to external supporting
facts from such knowledge bases as evidence, to enhance the
question with commonsense knowledge or the logic of reasoning (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lv et al. 2020;
Lin et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020). However, the quality of the
supporting facts is not guaranteed, as some of them are weak
in interpretability so that do not help the question answering. Specifically, current methods are mainly two-fold. The
first group of methods (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019;
Bosselut et al. 2019) pre-train language models on those external supporting facts (e.g., Wikipedia, ConceptNet) so that
the models could remember some of the common knowledge, which is empirically proven by Tandon et al. (2019)
and Trinh and Le (2018). The second group of methods (Lv
et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2019; Cao, Fang, and Tao 2019) incorporates the question with knowledge subgraphs or paths that
carry information such as relation among concepts or show
multi-hop reasoning process. The structured information is
typically encoded via graph models such as GCN (Kipf and
Welling 2016), and after which merged with the question
features. Generally, current methods all handle evidence by
brute force, without further selection or refinement according to the interpretability of the supporting facts. But as the
example shown in Figure 1, some of the supporting facts do
not interpret the question, regardless that they are semantically related. Thus, there is need for models that will further
our processing of the evidence.

When answering a question, people often draw upon their
rich world knowledge in addition to the particular context.
While recent works retrieve supporting facts/evidence from
commonsense knowledge bases to supply additional information to each question, there is still ample opportunity to
advance it on the quality of the evidence. It is crucial since
the quality of the evidence is the key to answering commonsense questions, and even determines the upper bound on the
QA systems’ performance. In this paper, we propose a recursive erasure memory network (REM-Net) to cope with the
quality improvement of evidence. To address this, REM-Net
is equipped with a module to refine the evidence by recursively erasing the low-quality evidence that does not explain
the question answering. Besides, instead of retrieving evidence from existing knowledge bases, REM-Net leverages a
pre-trained generative model to generate candidate evidence
customized for the question. We conduct experiments on two
commonsense question answering datasets, WIQA and CosmosQA. The results demonstrate the performance of REMNet and show that the refined evidence is explainable.

Introduction
Commonsense question answering (commonsense QA) is
recently an attractive field in that it requires systems to
understand the common sense information beyond words,
which are normal to human beings but nontrivial for machines. There are plenty of datasets that are proposed for
this purpose, for instance, CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al.
2019), CosmosQA (Huang et al. 2019), WIQA (Tandon
et al. 2019). Different from traditional machine reading comprehension (MRC) tasks such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.
2016) or NewsQA (Trischler et al. 2016) that the key information for answering the questions is directly given by the
context paragraph, solving commonsense questions requires
a more comprehensive understanding of both the context and
the relevant common knowledge, and further reasoning out
the hidden logic between them. There are varieties of knowledge bases that meet the need, including text corpora like
Wikipedia, and large-scale knowledge graphs (Speer, Chin,
and Havasi 2017; Mitchell et al. 2015; Sap et al. 2019).

In this paper, we introduce a new recursive erasure memory network (REM-Net) that further refines the candidate
supporting fact set. The REM-Net consists of three main
components: a query encoder, an evidence generator, and
a novel recursive erasure memory (REM) module. Specifically, the query encoder is a pre-trained encoder that encodes
the question. The evidence generator is a pre-trained generative model that produces candidate supporting facts based
on the question. Compared with those retrieved supporting
facts, the generated facts provides new question-specific information beyond the existing knowledge bases. The REM
module refines the candidate supporting fact set by recursively matching the supporting facts and the question in feature space to estimate each fact’s quality. This estimation
helps both updating the question feature and the supporting fact set. The question feature is updated by a residual
term, whereas the supporting fact set is updated by remov-

* Corresponding author: Xiaodan Liang.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6375

