The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DocParser: Hierarchical Document Structure Parsing from Renderings
Johannes Rausch,1 Octavio Martinez,1 Fabian Bissig,1
Ce Zhang,1 Stefan Feuerriegel2
2

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Department of Management, Technology, and Economics, ETH Zurich

johannes.rausch@inf.ethz.ch, octaviom@student.ethz.ch, fbissig@student.ethz.ch
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch, sfeuerriegel@ethz.ch

Abstract

In contrast, file formats such as XML or JSON naturally encode hierarchical document structures among textual entities. Hence, techniques are required in order to convert renderings into structured, textual document representations to
enable joint inference between text, layout, and other document structures.
Earlier attempts for structure parsing on documents focused on a subset of simpler tasks such as segmentation of
text regions (Antonacopoulos et al. 2009), locating tables
(Zanibbi, Blostein, and Cordy 2004; Embley et al. 2006), or
parsing them (Schreiber et al. 2018), but not parsing complete document structures. However, document structures
are required as a representation of many downstream tasks
in NLP. For instance, recent efforts in the NLP community
(Katti et al. 2018; Apostolova and Tomuro 2014; Liu et al.
2019) have shown that utilizing 2D document information,
e. g. character and word positions, can be an effective way
to improve upon standard NLP tasks such as information
extraction.
A holistic, principled approach for inferring the complete
hierarchical structure from documents is missing. On the one
hand, such a task is nontrivial due to the complexity of documents, particularly their deeply-nested structures. For instance, nested tables are fairly easy to recognize for human
readers, yet detecting them is known to impose computational hurdles (cf. Schreiber et al. 2018). On the other hand,
efficient learning is prevented as large-scale training sets are
lacking (cf. Arif and Shafait 2018; Schreiber et al. 2018).
Notably, prior datasets are limited to table structures (Gobel et al. 2013; Rice, Jenkins, and Nartker 1995) and not
the complete document structures. Needless to say, complex
structures also make the labeling process significantly more
costly (Wang, Phillips, and Haralick 2004). Therefore, an
effective implementation that makes only a scarce use of labeled data is demanded.
This work focuses on parsing the hierarchical document
structure from renderings. We develop an end-to-end system
for inferring the complete document structure (see Figure 1).
This includes all entities (e. g., text, bibliography regions,
figures, equations, headings, tables, and table cells), as well
as the hierarchical relations among them. We specifically
adapt to settings in practice that suffer from data scarcity.
For this purpose, we propose a novel learning framework for
scalable weak supervision. It is intentionally tailored to the

Translating renderings (e. g. PDFs, scans) into hierarchical
document structures is extensively demanded in the daily
routines of many real-world applications. However, a holistic, principled approach to inferring the complete hierarchical structure of documents is missing. As a remedy, we developed “DocParser”: an end-to-end system for parsing the
complete document structure – including all text elements,
nested figures, tables, and table cell structures. Our second
contribution is to provide a dataset for evaluating hierarchical document structure parsing. Our third contribution is to
propose a scalable learning framework for settings where
domain-specific data are scarce, which we address by a novel
approach to weak supervision that significantly improves the
document structure parsing performance. Our experiments
confirm the effectiveness of our proposed weak supervision:
Compared to the baseline without weak supervision, it improves the mean average precision for detecting document
entities by 39.1 % and improves the F1 score of classifying
hierarchical relations by 35.8 %.

1

Introduction

The structural and layout information in a document can
be a rich source of information that facilitates Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (e. g. information extraction).
Over the years, the NLP community has developed a range
of techniques to detect, understand, and take advantage of
document structures (Hurst and Nasukawa 2000; Chen, Tsai,
and Tsai 2000; Tengli, Yang, and Ma 2004; Luong, Nguyen,
and Kan 2012; Govindaraju, Zhang, and Ré 2013; Katti et al.
2018; Schäfer et al. 2011; Schäfer and Weitz 2012; Garncarek et al. 2020).
However, structural information in documents is becoming increasingly challenging to obtain — many file formats
that are prevalent today are being rendered without structural information. Prominent examples are PDF documents:
this file format benefits from portability and immutability,
yet it is flat in the sense that it stores all content as isolated
entities (e. g., combinations of characters and positions) and,
thus, hierarchical information is lacking. As such, the structure behind figures and especially tables is discarded and
thus no longer available to computerized analyses in NLP.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4328

