The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Accelerated Combinatorial Search for Outlier Detection
with Provable Bounds on Sub-Optimality
Guihong Wan, Haim Schweitzer

Abstract
outlier

Outliers negatively affect the accuracy of data analysis. In this
paper we are concerned with their influence on the accuracy
of Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Algorithms that attempt to detect outliers and remove them from the data prior
to applying PCA are sometimes called Robust PCA, or Robust Subspace Recovery algorithms. We propose a new algorithm for outlier detection that combines two ideas. The first
is “chunk recursive elimination” that was used effectively to
accelerate feature selection, and the second is combinatorial
search, in a setting similar to A*. Our main result is showing
how to combine these two ideas. One variant of our algorithm is guaranteed to compute an optimal solution according
to some natural criteria, but its running time makes it impractical for large datasets. Other variants are much faster and
come with provable bounds on sub-optimality. Experimental
results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

PCA

RPCA

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W. Campbell Road, Richardson, Texas 75080
Guihong.Wan@utdallas.edu, HSchweitzer@utdallas.edu

Figure 1: The direction of the dominant principal component computed from 9 points with one outlier. The direction
labeled PCA (green arrow) was computed from the entire
data (9 points). The direction labeled RPCA (blue arrow)
was computed from the 8 non-outliers.
There is a large number of studies on outlier detection
and removal specifically for computing robust PCA. The algorithms are sometimes called “Robust Principal Component Analysis” (RPCA), or, alternatively, “Robust Subspace
Recovery” (RSR). A recent review paper is (Lerman and
Maunu 2018b).
One way to solve the RPCA problem is to first filter outliers and then fit a subspace to the remaining data by using classical PCA. Many studies view the data as coming
from a fixed distribution, and attempt to detect outliers as
data points at the margins of the distribution (e.g., (Roberts
1999; Scheirer et al. 2011; Hubert and Engelen 2004; Xu,
Caramanis, and Sanghavi 2010; Zhang et al. 2015)). Another
common approach is to rank the data points based on some
criterion, and detect outliers as points with low scores. See,
e.g., (Chen and Lerman 2009; Soltanolkotabi, Candes et al.
2012; Rahmani and Atia 2017; You, Robinson, and Vidal
2017; Rahmani and Li 2019). For example, the “Cop” algorithm (Rahmani and Atia 2017) computes the scores from
the Gram matrix of the normalized data. The score for a
data point is the norm of the corresponding row in the Gram
matrix. The resulting algorithm runs very fast but requires
a large amount of memory. The “R-graph” algorithm (You,
Robinson, and Vidal 2017) measures the points based on the
self-expressiveness property. The scores are computed by
solving an elastic net minimization problem. The “Innovation” of each point is used to rank the points in (Rahmani and
Li 2019). The authors refer to the algorithm as “iSearch”.

Introduction

An important challenge in the analysis of data is the design
of a simple model that fits the data. In practical situations
this requires handling data outliers. Typically, the data model
can be made significantly more accurate if it is allowed to ignore a small fraction of the data items, considered to be outliers. See, e.g., (Aggarwal 2016; Hodge and Austin 2004).
The particular data model that we discuss in this paper is
the one produced by Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Consider for example the data shown in Figure 1, consisting
of 9 points. In this case, rank-1 PCA gives a bad model for
all 9 points, but a good model for the 8 non-outliers. Observe
the huge effect of a single outlier.
PCA is arguably the most widely used dimension reduction technique, with a variety of applications. See, e.g., (Jolliffe 2002; Burges 2010; Cabral et al. 2013; Vidal, Ma, and
Sastry 2016; Boutsidis, Woodruff, and Zhong 2016; Gray
2017). Recent algorithmic approaches that use randomization give algorithms that can easily handle large datasets
(e.g., (Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011; Halko et al.
2011; Musco and Musco 2015; Li et al. 2017)). However,
computing robust variants that ignore outliers is still a big
challenge.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12436

