The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

C-Watcher: A Framework for Early Detection of High-Risk Neighborhoods
Ahead of COVID-19 Outbreak
Congxi Xiao1,2∗ , Jingbo Zhou2†∗ , Jizhou Huang2 * , An Zhuo2 , Ji Liu2 , Haoyi Xiong2 , Dejing Dou2†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Baidu Inc., China
{v xiaocongxi, zhoujingbo, huangjizhou01, zhuoan, liuji04, xionghaoyi, doudejing}@baidu.com

Abstract

countries, the cost of such measures, including unemployment, economic crash, and social anxiety, makes it a tough
decision on behalf of administrators. A compromised solution is to place containment measures onto a subset of areas
in a city to stop or slow down the spread of COVID-19 while
minimizing the social and economic cost. To precisely distinguish the high-risk areas from the city, the spatial distribution of confirmed cases has been used as the key criterion for
the potential containment measures in a data-driven fashion.
While the spatial statistics of confirmed cases work, the
time consumption and the granularity of data acquisition
significantly lower the efficiency and effectiveness of such
methods. For example, the incubation period of COVID19 is around 5–6 days on average, but it could last as long
as 14 days. During such a period, a community or neighborhood would have been already invaded by a small number of asymptotic carriers who might not be with any clinical symptoms. When a small number of cases being confirmed, the community and its surrounding neighborhoods
may have fallen into COVID-19 for a long time. Furthermore, though the mobility of confirmed patients is usually
well restricted, the asymptomatic carriers with no symptoms
would still spread the virus to where he/she has gone. When
fine-grained mobility traces are not available, the administrators can only place containment measures to places in
coarse-grained.
To tackle the technical issues, in this paper, we propose
C(OVID)-Watcher, a novel framework to support early detection of high-risk residential neighborhoods for fighting
against the spread of COVID-19. Our intuition is to incorporate human mobility data, so as to (1) characterize the
socioeconomic and demographic status of every neighborhood (Borjas 2020; Huang et al. 2020b) based on “how residents move” (Renso et al. 2013) and (2) unfold the spatial
interactions (Jiang et al. 2020) and potential influences on
COVID-19 caused by the mobility of massive asymptotic
carriers. Specifically, C-Watcher includes a mobility datadriven machine learning model that screens every neighborhood in a target city and predicts the infection risks, prior to
the spread of COVID-19 from epicenters to the city.
In addition to the use of mobility-related features, we also
hope to generalize the evidence already witted in the epicenter for screening the risk of neighborhoods in the target city,
prior to or in the early stage of local outbreaks. To achieve

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has crushed daily
routines and is still rampaging through the world. Existing solution for nonpharmaceutical interventions usually needs to
timely and precisely select a subset of residential urban areas
for containment or even quarantine, where the spatial distribution of confirmed cases has been considered as a key criterion for the subset selection. While such containment measure has successfully stopped or slowed down the spread of
COVID-19 in some countries, it is criticized for being inefficient or ineffective, as the statistics of confirmed cases are
usually time-delayed and coarse-grained. To tackle the issues,
we propose C-Watcher, a novel data-driven framework that
aims at screening every neighborhood in a target city and predicting infection risks, prior to the spread of COVID-19 from
epicenters to the city. In terms of design, C-Watcher collects
large-scale long-term human mobility data from Baidu Maps,
then characterizes every residential neighborhood in the city
using a set of features based on urban mobility patterns. Furthermore, to transfer the firsthand knowledge (witted in epicenters) to the target city before local outbreaks, we adopt a
novel adversarial encoder framework to learn “city-invariant”
representations from the mobility-related features for precise
early detection of high-risk neighborhoods, even before any
confirmed cases known, in the target city. We carried out extensive experiments on C-Watcher using the real-data records
in the early stage of COVID-19 outbreaks, where the results
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of C-Watcher for
early detection of high-risk neighborhoods from a large number of cities.

1

Introduction

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which has been
officially announced as a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO), is perhaps the most serious public health
emergency over the past decades. The coronavirus continues
to spread around the globe, which challenges the governments and medical systems all over the world.
While metropolitan-wide lockdown has demonstrated its
effectiveness as a nonpharmaceutical intervention in several
* C. Xiao, J. Zhou and J. Huang contributed equally to the paper.

This work was done when C. Xiao was an intern at Baidu Inc.
†
J. Zhou and D. Dou are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4892

