The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cascade Size Distributions: Why They Matter and How to Compute Them
Efficiently
Rebekka Burkholz, 1 John Quackenbush 1, 2
1

Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115
2
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
rburkholz@hsph.harvard.edu, johnq@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract

the disease spreading. Another common optimization problem related to the ICM is influence maximization, i.e., the
maximization of the average cascade size by optimal selection of seeds (i.e., initial spreaders) (Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos 2003). These exemplary optimization problems have
in common that they require sampling from the probability
distribution of the cascade size or variational inference approaches. Yet, sampling is computationally costly or inaccurate. Variational inference usually relies on Belief Propagation (Lokhov, Mézard, and Zdeborová 2015; Lokhov 2016),
which estimates marginals in graphical models, i.e., the infection probability of each node in a network and their
average. Yet, it cannot capture the strong positive dependence between node activations that is due to mutual infections. For similar reasons, the average cascade size can be
a bad representation of the probability distribution, which
is often broad and multi-modal (Burkholz, Herrmann, and
Schweitzer 2018; Burkholz 2019), see also Fig. 4.
We propose an accurate and efficient alternative that is
based on message passing like Belief Propagation but follows different principles, which we term Subtree Distribution Propagation (SDP). Subtree Distribution Propagation
generalizes to discrete models with more than two states and
can capture many SIR-type spreading processes. In contrast
to Belief Propagation, we provide information on joint activations by computing the full probability distribution of the
final cascade size (instead of the average cascade size). In
addition, we obtain the infection probabilities conditional on
the cascade size (instead of the unconditional ones).
Up to our knowledge, conditional infection probabilities
have not been studied before but provide rich information
about the spreading behavior and susceptibility of nodes. 1)
They allow to identify nodes that are functionally similar
with respect to the cascade process. These similarities are
usually caused by network symmetries. In a biological setting, these can imply redundant pathways and are particularly relevant for deepening our understanding of diseases
like cancer (Weighill et al. 2021). 2) Hence, they define a
natural node embedding where the embedding space corresponds to the final cascade size distribution. Note that it
is common practice to compare node embeddings by using them to estimate the infection probabilities of nodes in
SIR-type spreading processes. As we show, these probabilities can also be used to define a node embedding directly.

Cascade models are central to understanding, predicting,
and controlling epidemic spreading and information propagation. Related optimization, including influence maximization, model parameter inference, or the development of vaccination strategies, relies heavily on sampling from a model.
This is either inefficient or inaccurate. As alternative, we
present an efficient message passing algorithm that computes
the probability distribution of the cascade size for the Independent Cascade Model on weighted directed networks and
generalizations. Our approach is exact on trees but can be applied to any network topology. It approximates locally treelike networks well, scales to large networks, and can lead to
surprisingly good performance on more dense networks, as
we also exemplify on real world data.

Introduction
The Independent Cascade Model (ICM) is a cornerstone in
the study of spreading processes on networks. It has been
proven useful in the source detection of epidemic outbreaks
(Leskovec et al. 2007; Farajtabar et al. 2015; Xu and Chen
2015; Zhu, Chen, and Ying 2017), classification of fake
news (Tschiatschek et al. 2018; Vosoughi, Roy, and Aral
2018), marketing (Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007;
Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2005), or identification of
causal miRNAs for cancer (Nalluri et al. 2017). It can be
mapped to the SIR (Susceptible Infected Recovered) model
(Kermack and McKendrick 1927), which together with its
variants has served during the COVID-19 pandemic to estimate associated risks in different scenarios (Chinazzi et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2020). Due to its simplicity, the model is
well suitable to estimate a spreading process in situations of
high uncertainty. It still provides mechanistic insights that
allow to predict changes in the spreading dynamics due to
different interventions to an ongoing cascade.
The main quantity of interest is the number of infected
people, which is also called the cascade size. Finding a feasible policy that minimizes the risk of large cascade sizes
poses a challenging optimization problem. It also requires to
estimate model parameters based on highly uncertain data.
Furthermore, the only information available is usually the
number of infected people, in particular, at early stages of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6840

