The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Convergence of Communication-Efficient Local SGD for
Federated Learning
Hongchang Gao1 , An Xu2 , Heng Huang2,3
1

2

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, PA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
hongchang.gao@temple.edu, an.xu@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu
Abstract

To optimize Eq. (1), a straightforward method is the parallel SGD (P-SGD) method where each worker sends the
local stochastic gradient to the central server and gets the
averaged gradient from the central server at each iteration.
This mechanism will lead to large communication overhead
at each iteration, especially when the model is large, such as
deep neural networks. To reduce the communication cost,
the commonly used optimization method in a FL system
is local SGD (Jiang and Agrawal 2018; Yu, Jin, and Yang
2019; Yu, Yang, and Zhu 2019; Wang and Joshi 2018; Haddadpour et al. 2019). Specifically, each worker updates the
model parameter for p (where p > 1) iterations locally by
using SGD and then sends the local parameter to the central
server and gets the averaged model parameter from the central server. In this way, the number of communication rounds
is reduced from O(T ) to O(T /p) (T is the number of iterations). In addition, (Yu, Yang, and Zhu 2019) shows that,
same as P-SGD,
local SGD enjoys the same convergence
√
rate O(1/ KT ) with a linear speedup regarding the number of workers for non-convex problems. Therefore, local
SGD is more efficient than the traditional P-SGD method,
and it has been applied to different applications.
Even though local SGD can decrease the communication
overhead by reducing the number of communication rounds,
yet it still has large communication cost in each communication round for large models. For instance, the ResNet152 (He et al. 2016) neural network for ImageNet is with
the size of about 240MB, which is a large burden to the
communication, especially for the FL system with limited
communication capacity. To allievate the communication issue caused by the large model, a common strategy is to
compress the gradient in each communication round, such
as sparsifying gradients (Strom 2015; Lin et al. 2017; Aji
and Heafield 2017) and quantizing gradients (Alistarh et al.
2017; Wen et al. 2017; Bernstein et al. 2018). In particular, gradient sparsification only sends the significant gradient elements, while gradient quantization is to quantize the
full-precision gradient to the low-bit one. Both of them can
significantly reduce the communication cost in each round.
In addition, to reduce the large variance caused by gradient compression, the error compensation technique is usually used (Seide et al. 2014; Stich, Cordonnier, and Jaggi
2018; Stich and Karimireddy 2019; Tang et al. 2019; Zheng,
Huang, and Kwok 2019). Previous studies (Tang et al. 2019;

Federated Learning (FL) has attracted increasing attention
in recent years. A leading training algorithm in FL is local
SGD, which updates the model parameter on each worker
and averages model parameters across different workers only
once in a while. Although it has fewer communication rounds
than the classical parallel SGD, local SGD still has large
communication overhead in each communication round for
large machine learning models, such as deep neural networks.
To address this issue, we propose a new communicationefficient distributed SGD method, which can significantly
reduce the communication cost by the error-compensated
double compression mechanism. Under the non-convex setting, our theoretical results show that our approach has better communication complexity than existing methods and enjoys the same linear speedup regarding the number of workers as the full-precision local SGD. Moreover, we propose
a communication-efficient distributed SGD with momentum,
which also has better communication complexity than existing methods and enjoys a linear speedup with respect to the
number of workers. At last, extensive experiments are conducted to verify the performance of our proposed methods.

Introduction
In recent years, Federated Learning (FL) has attracted more
and more attention due to data distributed across user devices that requires privacy and finite communication cost.
Specifically, in a FL system, there exist multiple workers and
a central server. Workers optimize the model with their local data, and the central server coordinates the corporation
between different workers. In particular, FL aims at solving
the following distributed optimization problem:
K

min f (x) =
x

1 X (k)
f (x) ,
K

(1)

k=1

where x ∈ Rd represents the model parameter, K is the
number of workers, and f (k) (x) = Eξ∼D(k) F (k) (x; ξ) is the
loss function on each worker with D(k) denoting the data
distribution on the k-th worker. In this paper, we focus on
the non-convex problem. In particular, f (k) (x) is assumed
as a smooth non-convex function.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7510

