The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evolutionary Approach for AutoAugment
Using the Thermodynamical Genetic Algorithm
Akira Terauchi, Naoki Mori
Osaka Prefecture University, 1-1 Gakuen-cho, Naka-ku, Sakai, Osaka, Japan
terauchi@ss.cs.osakafu-u.ac.jp, mori@cs.osakafu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

search methods for augmentation policies of datasets, and
has produced state-of-the-art results in various image classification tasks. For example, AutoAugment (Cubuk et al.
2019) was employed to search for an augmentation policy
for datasets as a discrete problem using the reinforcement
learning (RL) method for the search controller. AutoAugment treats the accuracy of the validation set after learning as
a reward. Although AutoAugment achieves higher accuracy
than the conventional naive image classification method, the
calculation cost is considerably higher in that the method requires thousands of GPU hours and is not realistic to reproduce. In addition, the difference between the search space
and application space remains problematic when using a reduced dataset. A policy obtained using a reduced dataset
may not fit the original dataset. Population Based Augmentation (PBA) (Ho et al. 2019) accelerates learning using Population Based Training method (Jaderberg et al. 2017) and
significantly reduces the computational cost. Fast AutoAugment (Lim et al. 2019) also drastically reduces the computational cost by dividing the dataset, training the child model
in parallel, and searching for the augmentation policy without additional model learning. RandAugment (Cubuk et al.
2020) removes the separation of the search and training
phases by limiting the hyperparameters to the number and
constant magnitude of operations. These methods significantly improve the accuracy of the image classification task
(Devries and Taylor 2017; Yamada et al. 2019) using conventional naive methods, and solve the problem of computational cost, which is a major disadvantage of AutoAugment.
However, these methods continue to be problematic in that
the variety of augmentation transformations obtained by the
search phase is not considered, and the search may be dominated by one dominant transformation. In addition, because
RandAugment does not include a search phase and samples
transformations randomly from the operation set, the design
of the operation set cannot be automated and requires human
coordination according to the domain and task.

Data augmentation is one of the most effective ways to stabilize learning by improving the generalization of machinelearning models. In recent years, automatic data augmentation methods, such as AutoAugment or Fast AutoAugment
have been attracting attention; and these methods improved
the results of image classification and object detection tasks.
However, several problems remain. Most notably, a larger
training dataset requires higher computational costs. When
searching with a small dataset in an attempt to determine the
data augmentation approach, the true data space and sampling data space do not fully correspond with each other,
thereby causing the generalization performance to deteriorate. Moreover, in the existing automatic augmentation methods, the search phase is often dominated by an exceptional
sub-policy, which results in a loss of diversity of transformations. In this study, we solved these problems by introducing evolutionary computation to previous methods. As
mentioned earlier, maintaining diversity of transformations
is essential. Therefore, we adopted the thermodynamical genetic algorithm (TDGA), which can control the population
diversity with a specific genetic operator, known as the thermodynamical selection rule. To confirm the effectiveness of
the proposed method, computational experiments were conducted using two benchmark datasets, CIFAR-10 and SVHN,
as examples. The experimental results show that the proposed
method can obtain various useful augmentation sub-policies
for the problems while reducing the computational cost.

Introduction
Data augmentation methods have long been used to generate additional data and improve the robustness of many
computer vision tasks (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019). An
appropriate data augmentation method can be used to obtain a more comprehensive set of data points and effectively
reduce the distance between the training and validation, as
well as the test sets. However, selecting a data augmentation
method that efficiently matches the data with tasks requires
a high degree of specialized knowledge. It is time consuming and often requires a thorough understanding of the data
domains.
The development of automated machine learning (AutoML) in recent years has focused the attention on automatic

The application of evolutionary computation (EC) to the
search controller is expected to optimize the combinatorial problem in AutoAugment. When applying EC to target
problems, controlling the diversity of genotypes in the population is essential. However, no research of automatic policy
search that considers the diversity of EC directly has been
proposed.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9851

