The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Partial-Label and Structure-constrained Deep Coupled Factorization Network
Yan Zhang,1 Zhao Zhang, 1,2 Yang Wang, 2 Zheng Zhang,3 Li Zhang, 1 Shuicheng Yan, 4
Meng Wang 2
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology & Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
YITU Technology
{zhangyan0712suda, cszzhang, yeungwangresearch, darrenzz219, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com,
zhangliml@suda.edu.cn,shuicheng.yan@yitu-inc.com

Abstract

can be reconstructed by a linear combination over them, and
the other one corresponds to the new representation.

In this paper, we technically propose an enriched prior guided
framework, called Dual-constrained Deep Semi-Supervised
Coupled Factorization Network (DS2 CF-Net), for discovering hierarchical coupled data representation. To extract hidden deep features, DS2 CF-Net is formulated as a partial-label
and geometrical structure-constrained framework. Specifically, DS2 CF-Net designs a deep factorization architecture
using multilayers of linear transformations, which can coupled update both the basis vectors and new representations in
each layer. To enable learned deep representations and coefficients to be discriminative, we also consider enriching the
supervised prior by joint deep coefficients-based label prediction and then incorporate the enriched prior information
as additional label and structure constraints. The label constraint can enable the intra-class samples to have same coordinate in feature space, and the structure constraint forces
the coefficients in each layer to be block-diagonal so that the
enriched prior using the self-expressive label propagation are
more accurate. Our network also integrates the adaptive dualgraph learning to retain the local structures of both data and
feature manifolds in each layer. Extensive experiments on image datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of DS2 CF-Net for
representation learning and clustering.

Note that CF offers an obvious advantage over NMF, i.e.,
it can be kernelized easily, but they both cannot encode the
local geometry of features and also fail to use any label information even if available. To retain the local information,
some graph regularized methods have been proposed, e.g.,
Graph-Regularized CF with Local Coordinate (LGCF) (Li
et al. 2017a), Graph Regularized NMF (GNMF) (Cai et al.
2011a), Graph-Regularized LCF (GRLCF) (Ye et al. 2017),
Locally Consistent CF (LCCF) (Cai et al. 2011b), Dual
Regularization NMF (DNMF) (Shang et al. 2012) and Dualgraph regularized CF (GCF) (Ye et al. 2014). Note that these
methods usually use the graph Laplacian to smooth the representation and encode the geometrical information of data
space. Different from GNMF and LCCF, both DNMF and
GCF can not only preserve the geometrical structures of data
manifold but also the feature manifold using the dual-graph
regularization (Shang et al. 2012; Ye et al. 2014). Although
these algorithms have obtained en-couraging clustering abilities, they still suffer from certain shortcomings: 1) High
sensitivity and tricky optimal determination of the number
k of nearest neighbors (Roweis et al. 2000); 2) Separating
the graph construction from the factorization process by two
independent steps cannot ensure the pre-encoded weights
to be optimal for subsequent data representation; 3) They
cannot use the label information to improve the representation and clustering tasks due to unsupervised nature, similarly as NMF and CF. For the discriminative MF to use
label information, some semi-supervised algorithms were
proposed, e.g., Constrained Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (CNMF) (Liu et al. 2012), Semi-supervised GNMF
(SemiGNMF) (Cai et al. 2011a) and Constrained Concept
Factorization (CCF) (Liu et al. 2014). Although CNMF,
SemiGNMF and CCF can use label information clearly, they
fail to fully utilize unlabeled data, as they do not consider
learning an explicit label indicator matrix and predicting
the labels of unlabeled data, and mapping them into respective subspaces in feature space as well. In addition, CNMF,
SemiGNMF and CCF also cannot self-express data in a recovered clean space. Although preserving local information
or incorporating supervised prior can enhance NMF and CF,

Introduction
Learning compact representation of high-dimensional data
is one of core topics in artificial intelligence research. To
learn effective representations, Matrix Factorization (MF) is
one of widely-used methods (Zhang et al. 2019b; Zhang
et al. 2019c; Ma et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020). Classical
MF methods include Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
(Golub et al. 1970), Vector Quantization (VQ) (Gray 1984),
Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Lee 1999) and
Concept Factorization (CF) (Wei et al. 2004), etc. NMF and
CF use the nonnegative constraints on factorization matrices
to learn parts-based representations that are distinguishing
for subsequent high-level tasks. Specifically, they decompose the data matrix into two/three factors, where one factor
is basis vectors capturing high-level features so each sample
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10948

