The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HopRetriever: Retrieve Hops over Wikipedia to Answer Complex Questions
Shaobo Li,1∗ Xiaoguang Li,2 Lifeng Shang,2 Xin Jiang,2
Qun Liu,2 Chengjie Sun,1 Zhenzhou Ji,1 Bingquan Liu1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
shli@insun.hit.edu.cn, {lixiaoguang11, shang.lifeng, Jiang.Xin, qun.liu}@huawei.com,
{sunchengjie, jizhenzhou, liubq}@hit.edu.cn
Question 1: The director of the romantic comedy "Big Stone Gap"

Abstract

is based in what New York city?

jump

Collecting supporting evidence from large corpora of text
(e.g., Wikipedia) is of great challenge for open-domain Question Answering (QA). Especially, for multi-hop open-domain
QA, scattered evidence pieces are required to be gathered together to support the answer extraction. In this paper, we propose a new retrieval target, hop, to collect the hidden reasoning evidence from Wikipedia for complex question answering. Specifically, the hop in this paper is defined as the
combination of a hyperlink and the corresponding outbound
link document. The hyperlink is encoded as the mention embedding which models the structured knowledge of how the
outbound link entity is mentioned in the textual context, and
the corresponding outbound link document is encoded as the
document embedding representing the unstructured knowledge within it. Accordingly, we build HopRetriever which
retrieves hops over Wikipedia to answer complex questions.
Experiments on the HotpotQA dataset demonstrate that HopRetriever outperforms previously published evidence retrieval methods by large margins. Moreover, our approach
also yields quantifiable interpretations of the evidence collection process.

1

Big Stone Gap (film)

Adriana Trigiani

Big Stone Gap a 2014
American drama
romantic comedy film
is directed by
Adriana Trigiani ...

Adriana Trigiani is an
Italian American film
director , based in
Greenwich Village,
New York City ...

Implicit
Relation:
director of

Question2: Ellie Goulding worked with what other writers on her
songs in the album Delirium?

jump

Delirium (album)

On My Mind

Delirium is third studio
album by English
singer and songwriter
Ellie Goulding ...
spawned three songs:
"On My Mind",
"Army" and
"Something in the
Way You Move".

"On My Mind" is a
song by English singer
Ellie Goulding ... It
was written by
Goulding, Max
Martin, Sav-an
Kotecha and Ilya
Salmanz-adeh.

Implicit
Relation:
song of

Figure 1: Two examples showing that both structured relation and unstructured fact are needed for complex question
answering.

Introduction

Multi-hop QA (Yang et al. 2018) is the Question Answering
(QA) task that requires reasoning over multiple supporting
documents to extract the final answer. For the open-domain
setting, a key part of Multi-hop QA is to retrieve an evidence
path from the whole knowledge source (e.g., Wikipedia).
Most of the recent works view multi-hop evidence collection
as an iterative document retrieval problem (Asai et al. 2020;
Feldman and El-Yaniv 2019; Das et al. 2019a), which can
be decomposed to several single-step document retrieval. In
contrast, some others (Dhingra et al. 2020; Ding et al. 2019)
focus on mentioned entities and try to traverse textual data
like a virtual structured Knowledge Base (KB). These two
methods leverage two different kinds of knowledge for evidence collection respectively: (i) informative but unstructured facts inside the introductory documents of entities. (ii)

the structured and implicit relations between entities themselves1 .
Two examples in Figure 1 show that both of the above
knowledge is needed for complex question answering. We
consider the problem of based on what evidence can one
jump to the second document for further retrieval. For
question 1, the structured relation “directed by” implied
by “...directed by Adriana Trigiani” in the first document matches the relation “director of” in the question,
hence providing sufficient and convincing evidence that one
can hop to the introductory document of Adriana Trigiani
for further retrieval, even without pre-reading it. However,
things become complicated for question 2, for three entities
share the same relation “song of”: On My Mind, Army, and

∗
This work was done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

In this paper, we view the entity relation as structured knowledge is because it directly connects two entities and can be applied
to build a structured entity graph.

13279

