The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DramaQA: Character-Centered Video Story Understanding with Hierarchical QA
Seongho Choi,1 Kyoung-Woon On,1 Yu-Jung Heo,1
Ahjeong Seo,1 Youwon Jang,1 Minsu Lee,1 Byoung-Tak Zhang1,2
1

Seoul National University
2
AI Institute (AIIS)
{shchoi,kwon,yjheo,ajseo,ywjang,mslee,btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Since drama closesly describes our everyday life, the contents of drama also help to learn realistic models and patterns of humans’ behaviors and conversations. However, the
causal and temporal relationships between events in drama
are usually complex and often implicit (Riedl 2016). Moreover, the multimodal characteristics of the video make the
problem trickier. Therefore, video story understanding has
been considered as a challenging machine learning task.
One way to enable a machine to understand a video
story is to train the machine to answer questions about
the video story (Schank and Abelson 2013; Mueller 2004).
Recently, several video question answering (Video QA)
datasets (Tapaswi et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2017; Mun et al.
2017; Jang et al. 2017; Lei et al. 2018) have been released
publicly. These datasets encourage inspiring works in this
domain, but they do not give sufficiently careful consideration of some important aspects of video story understanding. Video QA datasets can be used not only for developing
video story understanding models but also for evaluating the
degree of intelligence of the models. Therefore, QAs should
be collected considering difficulty levels of the questions to
evaluate the degree of story understanding intelligence (Collis 1975). However, the collected QAs in the previous studies are highly-biased and lack of variance in the levels of
question difficulty. Furthermore, while focalizing on characters within a story is important to form local story coherence (Riedl and Young 2010; Grosz, Weinstein, and Joshi
1995), previous works did not provide any consistent annotations for characters to model this coherence.
In this work, we propose a new Video QA task, DramaQA, for a more comprehensive understanding of the
video story. 1) We focus on the understanding with hierarchical QAs used as a hierarchical evaluation metric based on
the cognitive-developmental stages of human intelligence.
We define the level of understanding in conjunction with
Piaget’s theory (Collis 1975) and collect QAs accordingly.
In accordance with (Heo et al. 2019), we collect questions
along with one of four hierarchical difficulty levels, based
on two criteria; memory capacity (MC) and logical complexity (LC). With these hierarchical QAs, we offer a more sophisticated evaluation metric to measure understanding levels of Video QA models. 2) We focus on the story with
character-centered video annotations. To learn charactercentered video representations, the DramaQA provides rich

Despite recent progress on computer vision and natural language processing, developing a machine that can understand
video story is still hard to achieve due to the intrinsic difficulty of video story. Moreover, researches on how to evaluate
the degree of video understanding based on human cognitive
process have not progressed as yet. In this paper, we propose a
novel video question answering (Video QA) task, DramaQA,
for a comprehensive understanding of the video story. The
DramaQA focuses on two perspectives: 1) Hierarchical QAs
as an evaluation metric based on the cognitive developmental
stages of human intelligence. 2) Character-centered video annotations to model local coherence of the story. Our dataset
is built upon the TV drama “Another Miss Oh”1 and it contains 17,983 QA pairs from 23,928 various length video clips,
with each QA pair belonging to one of four difficulty levels.
We provide 217,308 annotated images with rich charactercentered annotations, including visual bounding boxes, behaviors and emotions of main characters, and coreference resolved scripts. Additionally, we suggest Multi-level Context
Matching model which hierarchically understands charactercentered representations of video to answer questions. We release our dataset and model publicly for research purposes2 ,
and we expect our work to provide a new perspective on video
story understanding research.

Introduction
Stories have existed for a long time with the history of
mankind, and always fascinated humans with enriching multimodal effects from novels to cartoons, plays, and films.
The story understanding ability is a crucial part of human
intelligence that sets humans apart from others (Szilas 1999;
Winston 2011).
To take a step towards human-level AI, drama, typically
in the form of video, is considered as proper mediums because it is one of the best ways to covey a story. Also,
the components of drama including image shots, dialogues,
sound effects, and textual information can be used to build
artificial ability to see, listen, talk, and respond like humans.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We have received an official permission to use these episodes
for research purposes from the content provider.
2
https://dramaqa.snu.ac.kr

1166

