The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Shuffling Recurrent Neural Networks
Michael Rotman and Lior Wolf
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
rotmanmi@post.tau.ac.il, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract

In this work, we propose an alternative RNN framework.
Instead of using a learned set of parameters to determine
the transition between subsequent hidden states, our method
uses a parameter-free shift mechanism, in order to distinguish
between inputs fed at different times. This shift mechanism
forms an orthogonal matrix operation, and is, therefore, not
prone to the gradient explosion or to its vanishing. Furthermore, the various time steps are treated in a uniform manner,
leading to an efficient and perhaps more balanced solution.
This allows us, for example, to solve problems with much
larger sequence lengths than reported in the literature.
Our experiments show that our Shuffling Recurrent Neural
Network (SRNN) is indeed able to tackle long-term memorization tasks successfully, and shows competitive results, in
comparison to the current state of the art of multiple tasks.
SRNN is elegant, easy to implement, efficient, and insensitive
to its hyperparameters.

We propose a novel recurrent neural network model, where the
hidden state ht is obtained by permuting the vector elements
of the previous hidden state ht−1 and adding the output of a
learned function β (xt ) of the input xt at time t. In our model,
the prediction is given by a second learned function, which is
applied to the hidden state s (ht ). The method is easy to implement, extremely efficient, and does not suffer from vanishing
nor exploding gradients. In an extensive set of experiments,
the method shows competitive results, in comparison to the
leading literature baselines. We share our implementation at
https://github.com/rotmanmi/SRNN.

Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) architectures have been
successful in solving sequential or time dependent problems.
Such methods maintain a latent representation, commonly
referred to as the “hidden state”, and apply the same learned
functions repeatedly to the input at each time step, as well as
to the current hidden state.
A well-known challenge with RNNs is that of exploding
or vanishing gradients. The various methods devised in order
to solve this problem can be roughly divided into two groups.
The first group utilizes a gating mechanism to stabilize the
gradient flow between subsequent hidden states (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997; Cho et al. 2014), whereas the second
group focuses on preserving the norm of the hidden states
by employing constraints on the family of matrices used as
the network’s parameters (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016;
Henaff, Szlam, and LeCun 2016).
An alternative view of the problem of exploding and vanishing gradients considers it as the symptom of a deeper issue
and not as the root cause. Current RNN architectures perform
a matrix multiplication operation, with learned weights, over
previously seen hidden states during each time step. Therefore, inputs appearing in different times are processed using
different powers of the weight matrices (with interleaving
non-linearities): the first input of a sequence of length T is
processed by the same learned sub-network T times, whereas
the last input at time T is processed only once. This creates
an inherent gap in the way that each time step influences the
network weights during training.

Background and Related Work
RNNs have been the architecture of choice, when solving
sequential tasks. The most basic structure, which we refer
to as the vanilla RNN, updates at each time a hidden state
vector ht using an input xt ,
ht = σ (W1 ht−1 + W2 xt ) ≡ σ(zt ) ,

(1)

where σ is a non-linear activation function, such as tanh or
T
ReLU. Given a sequence of length T , {xt }t=1 , computing
∂L
the gradients of a loss function, L, w.r.t to W1 , ∂W
, requires
1
T

backpropagation throughout all the hidden states {ht }t=1 ,
T
T
X
X
∂L
∂L ∂ht
∂L 0
=
=
σ (zt )ht−1 ,
∂W1
∂h
∂W
∂h
t
1
t
t=1
t=1

(2)

PT
Qt0 ∂hi+1
∂L
∂L ∂ht0
t0
where ∂h
= t0 =t+1 ∂h
and ∂h
i=t ∂hi =
∂ht =
t
t0 ∂ht
Qt0
0
i=t σ (zi )W1 . Depending on the maximal eigenvalue of
∂L
W1 , the repeated multiplication by W1 in ∂h
may lead to
t
∂L
exponential growth or decay in ∂W1 when T  1.
Many of the successful RNN methods utilize a gating
mechanism, where the hidden state ht can be either suppressed or scaled, depending on a function of the previous
hidden state and the input. Among these solutions, there
is the seminal Long-Short Term Memory network (LSTM)

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9428

