The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Multiple Kernel Clustering
Jiyuan Liu, 1 Xinwang Liu, 1 * Siwei Wang, 1 Sihang Zhou, 2 Yuexiang Yang 1
1

2

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
{liujiyuan13, xinwangliu, wangsiwei13}@nudt.edu.cn, sihangjoe@gmail.com, yyx@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

two processes are jointly optimized, as shown in Fig. 1(a)
and 1(b). In this group of methods, low rank optimization
techniques are widely adopted. For instance, Zhou et al. find
rows and columns of kernel will be both contaminated when
a sample is corrupted with noise, and employ L2,1 norm
regularization to capture such row-wise and column-wise
noises [Zhou et al. 2015]. Following multiple kernel learning (MKL) framework [Kloft, Rückert, and Bartlett 2010;
Kloft et al. 2011], a large number of algorithms assume that
the consensus kernel is a weighted combination of the prespecified kernels [Huang, Chuang, and Chen 2012; Kloft
et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2020a; Peng et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2020c]. Among them, various regularization terms, such as
local kernel alignment [Gönen and Margolin 2014], matrixinduced regularization [Liu et al. 2016] and optimal neighborhood kernel [Liu et al. 2017], are proposed to refine the
kernel weights. In addition, some multi-view spectral clustering methods firstly construct graphs from kernels, and
then adopt graph-based techniques to learn the cluster assignments with the by-product unified graph [Kang et al.
2018; Zhan et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020].
Late-fusion algorithms firstly obtain multiple partitions from
each kernel independently with basic kernel clustering algorithms [Liu et al. 2020b]. Then, the final clustering assignments are constructed based on them, as shown in Fig.
1(c). Long et al. introduce the concept of mapping functions
to make spaces of each view comparable, hence an optimal clustering assignment can be made from multiple results
[Long, Yu, and Zhang 2008]. Wang et al. build the base partitions by performing kernel k-means on pre-specified kernels, then maximize the alignment between consensus partition and the weighted combination of base partitions [Wang
et al. 2019].

Current multiple kernel clustering algorithms compute a partition with the consensus kernel or graph learned from the
pre-specified ones, while the emerging late fusion methods
firstly construct multiple partitions from each kernel separately, and then obtain a consensus one with them. However, both of them directly distill the clustering information
from kernels or graphs to partition matrices, where the sudden dimension drop would result in loss of advantageous details for clustering. In this paper, we provide a brief insight
of the aforementioned issue and propose a hierarchical approach to perform clustering while preserving advantageous
details maximumly. Specifically, we gradually group samples
into fewer clusters, together with generating a sequence of intermediary matrices of descending sizes. The consensus partition with is simultaneously learned and conversely guides
the construction of intermediary matrices. Nevertheless, this
cyclic process is modeled into an unified objective and an alternative algorithm is designed to solve it. In addition, the
proposed method is validated and compared with other representative multiple kernel clustering algorithms on benchmark datasets, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance by
a large margin.

Introduction
Although kernel clustering algorithms, such as kernel kmeans, kernel spectral clustering, etc., have already achieved
satisfying performance in various applications, how to
choose the right kernel mapping and corresponding parameters is still a tricky problem. More lethal is their incapability
of dealing with rapidly increasing multi-view data. Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) methods address these problems by generating multiple kernels with a set of parameterized mapping functions corresponding to each data view,
and then exploring the complementary information to categorize samples into clusters. According to the time when
clustering details are utilized, they can be roughly separated
into two categories, i.e. early-fusion and late-fusion methods.
Early-fusion approaches directly learn a consensus kernel or graph from multiple ones, afterwards generate the final partition [Ren et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2020]. Mostly, the

Although early-fusion and late-fusion MKC methods
achieve satisfying performances, both of them try to encode
the clustering information from kernels or graphs with size
Rn×n to partition matrices with size Rn×k , where n and k
are the number of samples and clusters, respectively. To see
this point in depth, we conduct a brief illustration on CCV
benchmark in Fig. 2. It can be clearly observed that a large
volume of details beneficial to clustering would be lost in
this sudden drop of dimension. A brief insight is also provided at the beginning of section 3. In order to balance the
partition information distilling and preserving, we propose a

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8671

