The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Power of Literal Equivalence in Model Counting*
Yong Lai,1, 2 Kuldeep S. Meel,2 Roland H. C. Yap2
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

tensions of the DPLL framework via smarter enumeration
of partial solutions (Birnbaum and Lozinskii 1999). Subsequently, Bayardo and Pehoushek (2000) introduced the notion of component caching to capture the observation that
if a formula ϕ can be partitioned into a subset of clauses,
called components, {C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn }, such that each of the
components is defined over a mutually exclusive set of variables, then the solutions of the ϕ is simply the product of
the solutions of the individual components Ci . Bayardo and
Pehsouhek (2000) observed that components reappear in different parts of the search space, and therefore, one can rely
on the caching of components to achieve efficiency. Since
the early 2000s, three major approaches to the design of
scalable model counters have emerged: (1) search-based, (2)
compilation-based, and (3) variable elimination-based methods.
The search-based techniques predominately focus on the
combination of component caching with Conflict Driven
clause learning, an idea that was pioneered by Sang et
al (2004; 2005), in their model counter Cachet. Subsequently, Thurley (2006) proposed improved component encoding schemes along with enhanced decision heuristics in
his model counter, sharpSAT. Recently, Sharma et al. (2019)
in their counter Ganak further improved upon sharpSAT via
probabilistic caching, improved decision heuristics aided by
the utilization of independent support.
The compilation-based techniques rely on the paradigm
of knowledge compilation, which focuses on the compilation of models represented in an input language to a target
language such that the resulting target language supports the
desired range of queries such as model counting efficiently.
A target language of interest is deterministic Decomposable
Negation Normal Form (d-DNNF), which supports model
counting in polynomial time (in the compiled size). In practice, binary decision is an important property to impose determinism in the design of a compiler (see e.g., D4 (Lagniez
and Marquis 2017)), and the resulting subset of d-DNNF
is called Decision-DNNF (Oztok and Darwiche 2014). The
state of the art model counters based on knowledge compilation focus on compilation to Decision-DNNF and then
compute the model count.
Recently, variable elimination-based techniques have
been proposed that seek to combine the techniques of Bouquet’s method and bucket elimination with compact repre-

The past two decades have seen the significant improvements of the scalability of practical model counters, which
have been influential in many applications from artificial intelligence to formal verification. While most of exact counters fall into two categories, search-based and compilationbased, Huang and Darwiche’s remarkable observation ties
these two categories: the trace of a search-based exact model
counter corresponds to a Decision-DNNF formula. Taking
advantage of literal equivalences, this paper designs an efficient model counting technique such that its trace is a generalization of Decision-DNNF. We first propose a generalization of Decision-DNNF, called CCDD, to capture literal
equivalences, then show that CCDD supports model counting in linear time, and finally design a model counter, called
ExactMC, whose trace corresponds to CCDD. We perform
an extensive experimental evaluation over a comprehensive
set of benchmarks and conduct performance comparison of
ExactMC vis-a-vis the state of the art counters, c2d, Dsharp,
miniC2D, D4, ADDMC, and Ganak. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates ExactMC can solve 885 instances while
the prior state of the art solved only 843 instances, representing a significant improvement of 42 instances.

1

Introduction

Given a propositional formula ϕ, the problem of model
counting (#SAT), seeks to compute the number of satisfying assignments of ϕ. Model counting is a fundamental
problem with a wide variety of applications ranging from
probabilistic inference (Roth 1996; Chavira and Darwiche
2008), neural network verification (Baluta et al. 2019), network reliability (Duenas-Osorio et al. 2017), computational
biology, and the like. Given the fundamental nature of the
problem, there has been a sustained investigation from theoreticians and practitioners alike over the past three decades.
Valiant (1979) showed that the problem of model counting
is #P-complete, which was subsequently followed by Toda’s
seminal work showing that PH ⊆ P #P (Toda 1989).
From the practitioner’s perspective, the earliest approaches to propositional model counting focused on ex* The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3851

