The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Set Functions that are Sparse in Non-Orthogonal Fourier Bases
Chris Wendler, Andisheh Amrollahi, Bastian Seifert, Andreas Krause, Markus Püschel
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
wendlerc@ethz.ch, amrollaa@ethz.ch, baseifert@ethz.ch, krausea@ethz.ch, pueschel@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Many applications of machine learning on discrete domains,
such as learning preference functions in recommender systems
or auctions, can be reduced to estimating a set function that is
sparse in the Fourier domain. In this work, we present a new
family of algorithms for learning Fourier-sparse set functions.
They require at most nk − k log2 k + k queries (set function
evaluations), under mild conditions on the Fourier coefficients,
where n is the size of the ground set and k the number of
non-zero Fourier coefficients. In contrast to other work that
focused on the orthogonal Walsh-Hadamard transform (WHT),
our novel algorithms operate with recently introduced nonorthogonal Fourier transforms that offer different notions of
Fourier-sparsity. These naturally arise when modeling, e.g.,
sets of items forming substitutes and complements. We demonstrate effectiveness on several real-world applications.

Introduction
Numerous problems in machine learning on discrete domains
involve learning set functions, i.e., functions s : 2N → R
that map subsets of some ground set N to the real numbers.
In recommender systems, for example, such set functions
express diversity among sets of articles and their relevance
w.r.t. a given need (Sharma, Harper, and Karypis 2019; Balog,
Radlinski, and Arakelyan 2019); in sensor placement tasks,
they express the informativeness of sets of sensors (Krause,
Singh, and Guestrin 2008); in combinatorial auctions, they
express valuations for sets of items (Brero, Lubin, and Seuken
2019). A key challenge is to estimate s from a small number
of observed evaluations. Without structural assumptions an
exponentially large (in n = |N |) number of queries is needed.
Thus, a key question is which families of set functions can
be efficiently learnt, while capturing important applications.
One key property is sparsity in the Fourier domain (Stobbe
and Krause 2012; Amrollahi et al. 2019).
The Fourier transform for set functions is classically
known as the orthogonal Walsh-Hadamard transform (WHT)
(De Wolf 2008; Li and Ramchandran 2015; Cheraghchi and
Indyk 2017). Using the WHT, it is possible to learn functions
with at most k non-zero Fourier coefficients with O(nk) evaluations (Amrollahi et al. 2019). In this paper, we consider an
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

alternative family of non-orthogonal Fourier transforms, recently introduced in the context of discrete signal processing
on set functions (DSSP) (Püschel 2018; Püschel and Wendler
2020). In particular, we present the first efficient algorithms
which (under mild assumptions on the Fourier coefficients),
efficiently learn k-Fourier-sparse set functions requiring at
most (n + 1)k − k log2 k evaluations. In contrast, naively
computing the Fourier transform requires 2n evaluations and
n2n−1 operations (Püschel and Wendler 2020).
Importantly, sparsity in the WHT domain does not imply
sparsity in the alternative Fourier domains we consider, or
vice versa. Thus, we significantly expand the class of set
functions that can be efficiently learnt. One natural example of set functions, which are sparse in one of the nonorthogonal transforms, but not for the WHT, are certain preference functions considered by Djolonga, Tschiatschek, and
Krause (2016) in the context of recommender systems and
auctions. In recommender systems, each item may cover the
set of needs that it satisfies for a customer. If needs are covered by several items at once, or items depend on each other
to provide value there are substitutability or complementarity
effects between the respective items, which are precisely captured by the new Fourier transforms (Püschel and Wendler
2020). Hence, a natural way to learn such set functions is to
compute their respective sparse Fourier transforms.
Contributions. In this paper we develop, analyze, and
evaluate novel algorithms for computing the sparse Fourier
transform under various notions of Fourier basis:
1. We are the first to introduce an efficient algorithm to compute the sparse Fourier transform for the recent notions
of non-orthogonal Fourier basis for set functions (Püschel
and Wendler 2020). In contrast to the naive fast Fourier
transform algorithm that requires 2n queries and n2n−1
operations, our sparse Fourier transform requires at most
nk − k log2 k + k = O(nk − k log k) queries and O(nk 2 )
operations to compute the k non-zero coefficients of a
Fourier-sparse set function. The algorithm works in all
cases up to a null set of pathological set functions.
2. We then further extend our algorithm to handle an even
larger class of Fourier-sparse set functions with O(n2 k −
nk log k) queries and O(n2 k + k 2 n) operations using filtering techniques.
3. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms in three

10283

