The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Compressing Deep Convolutional Neural Networks by Stacking Low-dimensional
Binary Convolution Filters
Weichao Lan, Liang Lan
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
{cswclan, lanliang}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

on edge devices (e.g., mobile phones) and performing local on-device model inference has gained growing interests
recently (Zhang et al. 2018; Howard et al. 2017). However,
the huge memory cost of deep CNN model poses a great
challenge when deploying it on resource-constrained edge
devices. For example, the VGG-16 network (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014), which is one of the famous deep CNN
models, performs very well in both image classification and
object detection tasks. But this VGG-16 network requires
more than 500MB memory and over 15 billions floating
number operations (FLOPs) to classify a single input image
(Cheng et al. 2018).
To reduce the memory and computation cost of deep CNN
models, several model compression methods have been proposed in recent years. These methods can be generally categorized into five major types: (1) parameter pruning and
sharing (Han et al. 2015; Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Ullrich, Meeds, and Welling 2017): pruning redundant, noninformative weights in pre-trained CNN models; (2) lowrank approximation (Denton et al. 2014; Jaderberg, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman 2014): finding appropriate low-rank approximation for convolution layers; (3) knowledge distillation
(Ba and Caruana 2014; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Buciluǎ, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006): approximating deep neural networks with shallow models; (4) compact
convolution filters (Howard et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018):
using carefully designed structural convolution filters; and
(5) model quantization (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Gupta
et al. 2015): quantizating the model parameters and therefore reducing the number of bits to represent each weight.
Among these existing studies, model quantization is one
of the most popular ways for deep CNN model compression. It is widely used in commercial model deployments
and has several advantages compared with other methods
(Krishnamoorthi 2018): (1) broadly applicable across different network architectures and hardwares; (2) smaller model
footprint; (3) faster computation and (4) powerful efficiency.
Binary neural networks is the extreme case in model
quantization where each weight can only be 1 or −1 and
therefore can be stored using a single bit. In the research
direction of binary neural networks, the pioneering work BinaryConnect (BC) proposed by (Courbariaux, Bengio, and
David 2015) is the first successful method that incorporates learning binary model weights in the training pro-

Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been successfully applied to many real-life problems. However, the
huge memory cost of deep CNN models poses a great challenge of deploying them on memory-constrained devices
(e.g., mobile phones). One popular way to reduce the memory cost of deep CNN model is to train binary CNN where the
weights in convolution filters are either 1 or −1 and therefore
each weight can be efficiently stored using a single bit. However, the compression ratio of existing binary CNN models
is upper bounded by ∼ 32. To address this limitation, we
propose a novel method to compress deep CNN model by
stacking low-dimensional binary convolution filters. Our proposed method approximates a standard convolution filter by
selecting and stacking filters from a set of low-dimensional
binary convolution filters. This set of low-dimensional binary convolution filters is shared across all filters for a given
convolution layer. Therefore, our method will achieve much
larger compression ratio than binary CNN models. In order
to train our proposed model, we have theoretically shown
that our proposed model is equivalent to select and stack
intermediate feature maps generated by low-dimensional binary filters. Therefore, our proposed model can be efficiently
trained using the split-transform-merge strategy. We also provide detailed analysis of the memory and computation cost
of our model in model inference. We compared the proposed method with other five popular model compression
techniques on two benchmark datasets. Our experimental results have demonstrated that our proposed method achieves
much higher compression ratio than existing methods while
maintains comparable accuracy.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) have produced powerful models that achieve high accuracy on a wide variety of real-life tasks. These deep CNN
models typically consist of a large number of convolution
layers involving many parameters. They require large memory to store the model parameters and intensive computation
for model inference. Due to concerns on privacy, security
and latency caused by performing deep CNN model inference remotely in the cloud, deploying deep CNN models
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8235

