The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable and Explainable 1-Bit Matrix Completion via Graph Signal Learning
Chao Chen1 , Dongsheng Li3,4 , Junchi Yan1,2∗ , Hanchi Huang1 , Xiaokang Yang1
1
2

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China
{chao.chen, yanjunchi, qq20001224m, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, dongshengli@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

decent performances in practice although the learned models can be biased (Kiryo et al. 2017). However, treating all
unlabeled examples as negative examples will exhibit high
computational overhead because all N × M examples in M
should be considered in training (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky
2008; Mackey, Jordan, and Talwalkar 2011; Lee et al. 2013;
Chen et al. 2015), which is prohibitive for many applications
with large-scale matrices, e.g., recommendation on millions
of songs (Bertin-Mahieux et al. 2011). The other issue of
existing 1-bit matrix completion methods is the lack of explainability (Abdollahi and Nasraoui 2016; Zhang and Chen
2018; Chen et al. 2021), either due to the blackbox nature of
neural networks (Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015; Lian et al.
2018; Liang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018) or to the broken connection between the past actions and the future prediction due to the introduction of latent variables or other
transformations (Cao et al. 2007; Rendle et al. 2009; Rendle
2010; Chen et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2018).
To this end, in this paper we propose a scalable and explainable 1-bit matrix completion algorithm, namely spectral graph matrix completion (SGMC), in which the underlying matrix M is recovered by performing parallel signal
processing on hypergraphs to improve the system scalability. The signals learned from the hypergraphs can be used
to explain the models. To better illustrate the idea, let us
consider the problem of top-N recommendation, in which
we model a user’s historical records as a signal ru in a prespecified item-item hypergraph G where the value ru (i) at
the ith vertex represents whether the uth user likes the ith
item. Then, we can pose the problem as recovering the underlying clean graph signal mu from a noisy signal ru that
facilitates in flexible signal processing techniques such as
graph Fourier transform and vertex-frequency analysis (Shuman et al. 2013; Shuman, Ricaud, and Vandergheynst 2016).
Motivation. The graph signal processing perspective to 1bit matrix completion has been rarely studied yet appealing
for several reasons. First, we are no longer limited to the geometrical proximity on the graph vertex domain, but are able
to identify and exploit the structure in the graph frequency
domain for potential performance improvement. Second, it
enables us to take advantage of the well-developed vertexfrequency analysis to provide the explanations behind the
predictions at both micro-level and macro-level.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

One-bit matrix completion is an important class of positiveunlabeled (PU) learning problems where the observations
consist of only positive examples, e.g., in top-N recommender
systems. For the first time, we show that 1-bit matrix completion can be formulated as the problem of recovering clean
graph signals from noise-corrupted signals in hypergraphs.
This makes it possible to enjoy recent advances in graph signal learning. Then, we propose the spectral graph matrix completion (SGMC) method, which can recover the underlying
matrix in distributed systems by filtering the noisy data in the
graph frequency domain. Meanwhile, it can provide microand macro-level explanations by following vertex-frequency
analysis. To tackle the computational and memory issue of
performing graph signal operations on large graphs, we construct a scalable Nyström algorithm which can efficiently
compute orthonormal eigenvectors. Furthermore, we also develop polynomial and sparse frequency filters to remedy the
accuracy loss caused by the approximations. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithms on top-N recommendation
tasks, and the results on three large-scale real-world datasets
show that SGMC can outperform state-of-the-art top-N recommendation algorithms in accuracy while only requiring a
small fraction of training time compared to the baselines.

Introduction
This paper considers the problem of recovering a 0-1 matrix
M ∈ {0, 1}N ×M only from positive and unlabeled data,
which is also referred to as 1-bit matrix completion (Cai
and Zhou 2013; Davenport et al. 2014; Hsieh, Natarajan,
and Dhillon 2015). We assume that the positive samples are
randomly drawn from {(i, u)|Mi,u = 1} with probability
p(Mi,u = 1), and more precisely, we observe a subset Ω
used for training in the presence of class-conditional random
label noise which flips a 1 to 0 with probability ρ. Therefore,
the unlabeled data is a mixture of unobserved positive examples and true negative examples, which raises challenges for
formulating the underlying optimization problems.
Recent works (Jahrer and Töscher 2012; Park et al. 2015;
He et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Wu, Hsieh, and Sharpnack
2017, 2018) have showed that treating all unlabeled examples as negative examples in supervised learning can obtain
∗

Corresponding author is Junchi Yan.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7011

