The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hypothesis Disparity Regularized Mutual Information Maximization
Qicheng Lao, 1 2 3 Xiang Jiang, 3 Mohammad Havaei 3
1

West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
MILA, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
3
Imagia,∗ Montreal, Canada
qicheng.lao@gmail.com, xiang.jiang@imagia.com, mohammad@imagia.com

Abstract

need to access the source data while transferring knowledge
to the target domain, and is favored by both theoretical analysis (Kuzborskij and Orabona 2013; Ben-David and Urner
2013; Perrot and Habrard 2015; Kuzborskij and Orabona
2017) and many empirical applications (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and
Perona 2006; Yang, Yan, and Hauptmann 2007; Orabona et al.
2009; Jie, Tommasi, and Caputo 2011; Tommasi, Orabona,
and Caputo 2013; Du et al. 2017; Fernandes and Cardoso
2019). However, HTL has been mostly explored in the supervised learning setting where the target labels are available
except the work in (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020).
In this paper, we further tackle the problem of unsupervised hypothesis transfer (Figure 1 (d)) under the umbrella
of MI maximization, as an effort to bridge the gap between
HTL (Figure 1 (b)) and UDA (Figure 1 (c)). In contrast to
the prevalent approaches for HTL and UDA that tend to use
a single hypothesis failing to uncover different modes of the
model distribution, we propose to transfer knowledge from a
set of source hypotheses learned from the source domain to a
corresponding set of target hypotheses by means of MI maximization on the unlabeled target data. The employment of
multiple hypotheses is especially relevant to domain adaptation with out-of-distribution examples, and has a pronounced
impact on the uncertainty calibration as well as the final adaptation or transfer performance, as has been demonstrated in
previous work such as deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan,
Pritzel, and Blundell 2017).
Furthermore, we highlight the crucial limitation of multiple
independent MI maximization where different target hypotheses can be optimized in an unconstrained manner due to the
lack of supervision, resulting in undesirable disagreements
on the target label predictions as well as instability during
the optimization process. To overcome such limitations and
better take advantage of the relationship among different
hypotheses, we propose a hypothesis disparity (HD) regularization to align the target hypotheses in a way such that the
uncertainty manifested through different source hypotheses
is taken into account while the undesirable disagreements
are marginalized out. The HD regularization also shares the
similar idea in unsupervised discriminative clustering with
regularized information maximization, where a complexity
penalty term is shown to be indispensable (Krause, Perona,
and Gomes 2010). We term the proposed multiple hypotheses
MI maximization with HD regularization as Hypothesis Dis-

We propose a hypothesis disparity regularized mutual information maximization (HDMI) approach to tackle unsupervised
hypothesis transfer—as an effort towards unifying hypothesis
transfer learning (HTL) and unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA)—where the knowledge from a source domain is transferred solely through hypotheses and adapted to the target
domain in an unsupervised manner. In contrast to the prevalent
HTL and UDA approaches that typically use a single hypothesis, HDMI employs multiple hypotheses to leverage the underlying distributions of the source and target hypotheses. To better utilize the crucial relationship among different hypotheses—
as opposed to unconstrained optimization of each hypothesis
independently—while adapting to the unlabeled target domain
through mutual information maximization, HDMI incorporates a hypothesis disparity regularization that coordinates the
target hypotheses jointly learn better target representations
while preserving more transferable source knowledge with
better-calibrated prediction uncertainty. HDMI achieves stateof-the-art adaptation performance on benchmark datasets for
UDA in the context of HTL, without the need to access the
source data during the adaptation.

Introduction
Mutual information (MI) maximization has been shown as
a promising approach in unsupervised learning, as manifested in discriminative clustering (Bridle, Heading, and
MacKay 1992; Krause, Perona, and Gomes 2010) and unsupervised representation learning (Hu et al. 2017; Hjelm et al.
2018; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019; Oord, Li, and Vinyals
2018). Recently, it has also been applied to unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA), achieving new state-of-the-art performance even in the more restricted context of hypothesis
transfer learning (HTL 1 ) where the transfer of the knowledge
from a source domain to a target domain is achieved solely
through hypotheses (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020). Hypothesis
transfer has the notable privacy-preserving property that respects the privacy of the source domain by eliminating the
∗

A US provisional patent application has been filed for protecting at least one part of the innovation disclosed in this article. This
work was done at Imagia, funded through MEDTEQ grant 10-30
IA Multicentriq.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
HTL was first introduced in (Kuzborskij and Orabona 2013).

8243

