The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SnapMix: Semantically Proportional Mixing for Augmenting Fine-grained Data
Shaoli Huang,1 Xinchao Wang, 2 Dacheng Tao 1
1

The University of Sydney
Stevens Institute of Technology
shaoli.huang@sydney.edu.au, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu , dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract

fine-grained object recognition, discriminative information
mainly lies in some small regions of images. Mixing labels
based on mixture pixel-based statistics such as area size,
therefore, tends to introduce severe label noise in this task.
In the example of Fig. 1, CutMix cuts out a small region
covering critical information about the label, in this case a
red shoulder and yellow wing bar of the red-winged blackbird. The remaining part of the image, as a result, are left
with only much less informative image evidences, yet still
take up a high coefficient due to its large area size. This indicates that mixing labels based on area proportion is not
able to effectively reflect intrinsic semantic composition of
the combined image, thereby deteriorating the data augmentation effectiveness and confusing the model training.
In this paper, we propose a novel Semantically Proportional Mixing (SnapMix) strategy to address this issue. SnapMix exploits a class activation map (CAM) (Zhou
et al. 2016) to estimate the label composition of the mixedimages. Specifically, by normalizing the CAM of each image to sum to 1, we first obtain its Semantic Percent Map
(SPM) to quantify the relatedness percentage between each
pixel and the label, and then compute the semantic ratio of
any image region by summing values in the corresponding
area of the SPM. For an image composed of multiple areas
from multiple images, we can estimate its semantic composition through the semantic ratios corresponding to these
regions. Compared to methods based on statistics of mixture pixels, our label mixing strategy incorporates neural activations as prior knowledge to ensure the semantic correspondence between the synthetic images and the generated
supervision signals.
Moreover, existing techniques rely on symmetrically
blending image regions, meaning that the selected areas to
be mixed are restricted to be complementary, and hence
limit the diversity of augmented data. By contrast, the proposed approach enables asymmetric cut-and-paste operations, allowing us to incorporate various factors such as deformation and scale into the data augmentation to boost the
data diversity. The current label-mixing strategies are designed based on the complementary principle. Thus they are
not suitable for the asymmetric operation that selects noncomplementary regions to mix.
To validate the proposed approach, we adopt various network architectures (Resnet-18,34,50,101 (He et al. 2016)) as

Data mixing augmentation has proved effective in training
deep models. Recent methods mix labels mainly based on the
mixture proportion of image pixels. As the main discriminative information of a fine-grained image usually resides in
subtle regions, methods along this line are prone to heavy label noise in fine-grained recognition. We propose in this paper
a novel scheme, termed as Semantically Proportional Mixing
(SnapMix), which exploits class activation map (CAM) to
lessen the label noise in augmenting fine-grained data. SnapMix generates the target label for a mixed image by estimating its intrinsic semantic composition, and allows for asymmetric mixing operations and ensures semantic correspondence between synthetic images and target labels. Experiments show that our method consistently outperforms existing mixed-based approaches on various datasets and under
different network depths. Furthermore, by incorporating the
mid-level features, the proposed SnapMix achieves top-level
performance, demonstrating its potential to serve as a solid
baseline for fine-grained recognition.

Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of deep neural networks (He
et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; Ma
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020), its overfitting problem persists, particularly in encountering limited training data. Data
Augmentation methods can alleviate this by effectively exploiting existing data. Among them, mixing-based methods (Tokozume, Ushiku, and Harada 2018; Inoue 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; Yun et al. 2019) have recently gained
increasing attention. These approaches generate new data
by blending images and fusing their labels according to
the statistics of mixed pixels. For instance, Mixup (Zhang
et al. 2018) combines images linearly and mix their targets using the same combination coefficients. CutMix (Yun
et al. 2019), on the other hand, cuts out one image area,
pastes it on another image, and mix their labels according
to the area proportion. By extending the training distribution, mixing-based techniques reduce memorizing data and
improve model generalization.
However, their superiority decreases with the increasing risk of label noise in augmenting fine-grained data. In
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1628

