The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Binaural Audio-Visual Localization
Xinyi Wu,1 Zhenyao Wu,1 Lili Ju,2,∗ Song Wang1,∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, USA
2
Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, USA
{xinyiw, zhenyao}@email.sc.edu, ju@math.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
Localizing sound sources in a visual scene has many important applications and quite a few traditional or learning-based
methods have been proposed for this task. Humans have the
ability to roughly localize sound sources within or beyond
the range of the vision using their binaural system. However
most existing methods use monaural audio, instead of binaural audio, as a modality to help the localization. In addition, prior works usually localize sound sources in the form
of object-level bounding boxes in images or videos and evaluate the localization accuracy by examining the overlap between the ground-truth and predicted bounding boxes. This
is too rough since a real sound source is often only a part of
an object. In this paper, we propose a deep learning method
for pixel-level sound source localization by leveraging both
binaural recordings and the corresponding videos. Specifically, we design a novel Binaural Audio-Visual Network
(BAVNet), which concurrently extracts and integrates features from binaural recordings and videos. We also propose a
point-annotation strategy to construct pixel-level ground truth
for network training and performance evaluation. Experimental results on Fair-Play and YT-Music datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method and show that binaural audio can greatly improve the performance of localizing
the sound sources, especially when the quality of the visual
information is limited.

Figure 1: Binaural audio-visual localization task. Given the
binaural recordings and the corresponding visual scene, our
method localizes the sound sources in pixel level and outputs
a localization map. Note that the pixel-level localization only
identifies the part of the object that is making the sound.

Audio-visual localization is a well-established task,
which aims at localizing sound sources in visual scenes by
integrating both visual and audio information. Most of the
existing methods (Senocak et al. 2018; Arandjelovic and
Zisserman 2018; Owens and Efros 2018; Zhao et al. 2018;
Hu, Nie, and Li 2019) integrate only monaural audio, which
is a mixture of sounds in a scene, to help localize sound
sources. The localization results are promising due to the
assistance of sound information. However, our perception of
monaural audio often cannot provide location information
or even a rough direction without the help of visual information. In contrast, using binaural recordings to localize sound
sources is more reasonable and appeals more to common
sense. Binaural audio-visual localization would also benefit
a few other applications, such as robot navigation and action
recognition. Another practically useful application is that
it can help police officers to accurately locate the gunman
in the shooting, where the binaural audio can be achieved
by simply adding two microphones on the two sides of the
surveillance cameras, respectively. It is worth mentioning
that the importance of binaural recordings should be especially emphasized when the quality of visual information is
low or the videos are recorded at night or in foggy days.
In addition, to get a quantitative analysis for the localization results, many prior methods such as Senocak et al.
(2018), Hu, Nie, and Li (2019) and Zhao et al. (2018) manually annotate the sound objects using bounding boxes and
then calculate the accuracy by examining the overlap, e.g.,

Introduction
Humans are able to extract a wealth of useful information
through eyes and ears and then integrate and interpret them
to further understand the surroundings. Imagine the scene
that two persons in front of you are singing a song together
but actually one of them is a lip-syncher. Can you locate the
sound source to identify the real singer with only your eyes?
What about with only your ears? It is generally quite difficult
to reach such a goal under both situations. On the one hand,
it is not hard for a human to pretend to do something to trick
others’ eyes. On the other hand, although ears seem more
difficult to be fooled than eyes, the sound can’t give us accurate location except rough direction information. However,
by using eyes and ears together we could localize accurately
sound sources in many situations.
∗

Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2961

