The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Simple or Complex? Learning to Predict Readability of Bengali Texts
Susmoy Chakraborty1 * , Mir Tafseer Nayeem1 * , Wasi Uddin Ahmad2
1

Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology
2
University of California, Los Angeles
susmoyaust36@gmail.com, mir.nayeem@alumni.uleth.ca, wasiahmad@ucla.edu

Scores

Abstract
Determining the readability of a text is the first step to its simplification. In this paper, we present a readability analysis tool
capable of analyzing text written in the Bengali language to
provide in-depth information on its readability and complexity.
Despite being the 7th most spoken language in the world with
230 million native speakers, Bengali suffers from a lack of
fundamental resources for natural language processing. Readability related research of the Bengali language so far can be
considered to be narrow and sometimes faulty due to the lack
of resources. Therefore, we correctly adopt document-level
readability formulas traditionally used for U.S. based education system to the Bengali language with a proper age-to-age
comparison. Due to the unavailability of large-scale humanannotated corpora, we further divide the document-level task
into sentence-level and experiment with neural architectures,
which will serve as a baseline for the future works of Bengali readability prediction. During the process, we present
several human-annotated corpora and dictionaries such as a
document-level dataset comprising 618 documents with 12
different grade levels, a large-scale sentence-level dataset comprising more than 96K sentences with simple and complex
labels, a consonant conjunct count algorithm and a corpus of
341 words to validate the effectiveness of the algorithm, a list
of 3,396 easy words, and an updated pronunciation dictionary
with more than 67K words. These resources can be useful for
several other tasks of this low-resource language.1

Readability
Formulas
Input Document

Readers Grade Levels

90 - 100

5th Grade

80 - 90

6th Grade

70 - 80

7th Grade

60 - 70

8th to 9th Grade

50 - 60

10th to 12th Grade

30 - 50

College

0 - 30

College Graduate

Figure 1: Readability prediction task.

Introduction
The term “Readability” measures how much energy the
reader will have to expend in order to understand a writing
at optimal speed and find interesting. Readability measuring
formulas, such as Automated Readability Index (ARI) (Senter and Smith 1967), Flesch Reading Ease (Flesch 1948), and
Dale–Chall Formula (Dale and Chall 1948; Chall and Dale
1995) calculate a score that estimates the grade level or years
of education of a reader based on the U.S. education system,
which is illustrated in Figure 1. These formulas are still used
in many widely known commercial readability measuring
* Equal contribution. Listed by alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We make our code & dataset publicly available at https://github.
com/tafseer-nayeem/BengaliReadability for reproduciblity.

12621

tools such as Grammarly2 and Readable.3 This measurement
plays a significant role in many places, such as education,
health care, and government (Grigonyte et al. 2014; Rets et al.
2020; Meng et al. 2020). Government organizations use it
to ensure that the official texts meet a minimum readability
requirement. For instance, the Department of Insurance at
Texas has a requirement that all insurance policy documents
have a Flesch Reading Ease (Flesch 1948) score of 40 or
higher, which translates to the reading level of a first-year
undergraduate student based on the U.S. education system.4
A legal document which is hard to read can lead someone to
sign a contract without understanding what they are agreeing
to. Another common usage area is the healthcare sector to
ensure the proper readability of the care and treatment documents (Grigonyte et al. 2014). Better readability will attract
visitors or readers of different websites or blogs, whereas
poor readability may decrease the number of readers (Meng
et al. 2020). Readability measures are also often used to
assess the financial documents such as annual reports of a
company’s economic performance so that the information
is more transparent to the reader (Loughran and McDonald
2

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/readability-scores/
https://readable.com/
4
https://www.tdi.texas.gov/pubs/pc/pccpfaq.html
3

