The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing Parameter-Free Frank Wolfe with an Extra Subproblem
Bingcong Li,1 Lingda Wang,2 Georgios B. Giannakis,1 Zhizhen Zhao2
1

University of Minnesota - Twin Cities
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{lixx5599, georgios}@umn.edu, {lingdaw2, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

An alternative to GD for solving (1) is the Frank
Wolfe (FW) algorithm (Frank and Wolfe 1956; Jaggi 2013;
Lacoste-Julien and Jaggi 2015), also known as the ‘conditional gradient’ method. FW circumvents the projection in
GD by solving a subproblem with a linear loss per iteration.
For a structural X , such as the constraint sets mentioned earlier, it is possible to solve the subproblem either in closed
form or through low-complexity numerical methods (Jaggi
2013; Garber and Hazan 2015), which saves computational
cost relative to projection. In addition to matrix completion
and image reconstruction, FW has been appreciated in several applications including structural SVM (Lacoste-Julien
et al. 2013), video colocation (Joulin, Tang, and Fei-Fei
2014), optimal transport (Luise et al. 2019), and submodular optimization (Mokhtari, Hassani, and Karbasi 2018), to
name a few.
Although FW has well documented merits, it exhibits
slower convergence when compared to NAG. Specifically,
FW satisfies f (xk ) − f (x∗ ) = O( k1 ), where the subscript k
is iteration index. This convergence slowdown is confirmed
by the lower bound, which indicates that the number of FW
∗
subproblems to solve
 in order to ensure f (xk ) − f (x ) ≤ ,
1
is no less than O  (Lan 2013; Jaggi 2013). Thus, FW is a
lower-bound-matching algorithm, in general. However, improved FW variants are possible either in empirical performance, or, in speedup rates for certain subclasses of problems. Next, we deal with these improved rates paying attention to whether implementation requires knowing parameters such as the smoothness constant or the diameter of X .
Parameter-dependent FW with faster rates. This class
of algorithms utilizes parameters that are obtained for different instances of f and X . Depending on the needed parameters, these algorithms are further classified into: i) line search
based FW; ii) shorter step size aided FW; and iii) conditional
gradient sliding (CGS). Line search based FW relies on f (x)
evaluations, which renders inefficiency when acquisition of
function values is costly. The vanilla FW with line search
converges with rate O( k1 ) on general problems (Jaggi 2013).
Jointly leveraging line search and ‘away steps,’ variants of
FW converge linearly for strongly convex problems when
X is a polytope (Guélat and Marcotte 1986; Lacoste-Julien
and Jaggi 2015); see also (Pedregosa et al. 2018; Braun et al.
2018). To improve the memory efficiency of away steps, a
variant is further developed in (Garber and Meshi 2016).

Aiming at convex optimization under structural constraints,
this work introduces and analyzes a variant of the Frank
Wolfe (FW) algorithm termed ExtraFW. The distinct feature of ExtraFW is the pair of gradients leveraged per iteration, thanks to which the decision variable is updated in a
prediction-correction (PC) format. Relying on no problem dependent parameters in the step sizes, the convergence rate of
ExtraFW for general convex problems is shown to be O( k1 ),
which is optimal in the sense of matching the lower bound on
the number of solved FW subproblems.
However, the merit

of ExtraFW is its faster rate O k12 on a class of machine
learning problems. Compared with other parameter-free FW
variants that have faster rates on the same problems, ExtraFW
has improved rates and fine-grained analysis thanks to its PC
update. Numerical tests on binary classification with different
sparsity-promoting constraints demonstrate that the empirical performance of ExtraFW is significantly better than FW,
and even faster than Nesterov’s accelerated gradient on certain datasets. For matrix completion, ExtraFW enjoys smaller
optimality gap, and lower rank than FW.

1

Introduction

The present work deals with efficient algorithms for solving
the optimization problem
min f (x)

x∈X

(1)

where f is a smooth convex function, while the constraint set
X ⊂ Rd is assumed to be convex and compact, and d is the
dimension of the variable x. Throughout we denote by x∗ ∈
X a minimizer of (1). For many machine learning and signal processing problems, the constraint set X can be structural but it is difficult or expensive to project onto. Examples
include matrix completion in recommender systems (Freund, Grigas, and Mazumder 2017) and image reconstruction
(Harchaoui, Juditsky, and Nemirovski 2015), whose constraint sets are nuclear norm ball and total-variation norm
ball, respectively. The applicability of projected gradient descent (GD) (Nesterov 2004) and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) (Allen-Zhu and Orecchia 2014; Nesterov 2015)
is thus limited by the computational barriers of projection,
especially as d grows large.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8324

