The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MANGO: A Mask Attention Guided One-Stage Scene Text Spotter
Liang Qiao1∗ , Ying Chen2∗ , Zhanzhan Cheng3,1† , Yunlu Xu1 , Yi Niu1 , Shiliang Pu1‡ , Fei Wu3
1

Hikvision Research Institute, China
2
Tongji University, China
3
Zhejiang University, China
{qiaoliang6, chengzhanzhan, xuyunlu, niuyi, pushiliang}@hikvision.com, 1833019@tongji.edu.cn, wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently end-to-end scene text spotting has become a popular research topic due to its advantages of global optimization
and high maintainability in real applications. Most methods
attempt to develop various region of interest (RoI) operations
to concatenate the detection part and the sequence recognition part into a two-stage text spotting framework. However,
in such framework, the recognition part is highly sensitive to
the detected results (e.g., the compactness of text contours).
To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a novel
Mask AttentioN Guided One-stage text spotting framework
named MANGO, in which character sequences can be directly recognized without RoI operation. Concretely, a positionaware mask attention module is developed to generate attention weights on each text instance and its characters. It allows different text instances in an image to be allocated on
different feature map channels which are further grouped as
a batch of instance features. Finally, a lightweight sequence
decoder is applied to generate the character sequences. It is
worth noting that MANGO inherently adapts to arbitraryshaped text spotting and can be trained end-to-end with only
coarse position information (e.g., rectangular bounding box)
and text annotations. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves competitive and even new state-ofthe-art performance on both regular and irregular text spotting
benchmarks, i.e., ICDAR 2013, ICDAR 2015, Total-Text, and
SCUT-CTW1500.

Figure 1: Illustration of the traditional two-stage text spotting process and the proposed MANGO. Sub-figure (a)
shows the two-stage text spotting strategy by using RoI operations to connect the detection and recognition parts. Subfigure (b) is the proposed one-stage text spotting approach,
which can directly output the final character sequences.

et al. 2012; Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Neumann and Matas 2015; i Bigorda and Karatzas 2017). While
such text spotting model brings many considerable problems, such as (1) errors will be accumulated among the multiple
individual tasks, (2) it is costly to maintain multiple separate models, and (3) the model is hard to adapt to various
applications.
Therefore, many works (Li, Wang, and Shen 2017; Bartz,
Yang, and Meinel 2018; He et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018;
Liao et al. 2019) are proposed to optimize the text spotting process in an end-to-end manner. These methods usually use various Region of Interest (RoI) operations to bridge
the text detection and recognition parts in a differentiable
way, which form the two-stage framework. Roughly speaking, the early end-to-end methods (Li, Wang, and Shen 2017;
Busta, Neumann, and Matas 2017; Liu et al. 2018; He et al.
2018) used the axis-aligned rectangular RoIs as the connecting modules. These methods are limited to cope with irregular (e.g., perspective, or curved) text instances since such
kind of RoIs might bring interferences from background or
other texts. To solve this problem, the later methods (Feng
et al. 2019; Qiao et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020a; Qin et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020) designed some shape-adaptive RoI
mechanisms to extract the irregular text instances and recti-

Introduction
Scene text spotting has attracted much attention due to its
various practical applications such as key entities recognition in invoice/receipt understanding, product name identification in the e-commerce system, and license plate recognition in the intelligent transportation system. Traditional
scene text spotting systems are usually in three steps: localizing text regions, cropping text regions from the original
image, and recognizing them as character sequences (Wang
∗
Authors contribute equally. Chen did this work during an internship in Hikvision Research Institute.
†
This work is completed under the supervision of Zhanzhan
Cheng (contact email: chengzhanzhan@hikvision.com).
‡
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2467

