The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Aspect-Level Sentiment-Controllable Review Generation
with Mutual Learning Framework
Huimin Chen,12 Yankai Lin,3 Fanchao Qi,2 Jinyi Hu,2 Peng Li,3 Jie Zhou,3 Maosong Sun2 *
1

School of Journalism and Communication, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
huimchen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Business ID : ****JPtaOCg
User ID : ****Xswzoqg
Rating :

Review generation, aiming to automatically generate review
text according to the given information, is proposed to assist in the unappealing review writing. However, most of existing methods only consider the overall sentiments of reviews and cannot achieve aspect-level sentiment control. Even
though some previous studies attempt to generate aspect-level
sentiment-controllable reviews, they usually require largescale human annotations which are unavailable in the real
world. To address this issue, we propose a mutual learning
framework to take advantage of unlabeled data to assist the
aspect-level sentiment-controllable review generation. The
framework consists of a generator and a classifier which utilize
confidence mechanism and reconstruction reward to enhance
each other. Experimental results show our model can achieve
aspect-sentiment control accuracy up to 88% without losing
generation quality.

Review text:
Spacious area and tasty. Environment Service was quick but
we also went at a time when almost nobody was there. Service
Price of pizza was slightly abovePrice
terrible. Food

But drinks weak and

Overall, this place was decent but nothing

special. Overall
Positive

Neutral

Negative

Figure 1: A review with diverse sentiments towards different
aspects of a restaurant.

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet, more and more
websites providing online review service appear (e.g., Amazon, Yelp and TripAdvisor). Online reviews can not only help
customers with their purchase decisions, but also contribute
to the online platforms for better product recommendations
(McAuley and Leskovec 2013). Unfortunately, most of the
customers only give a rating (Chen and Xie 2008) rather than
write a paragraph of review text, since it is not so pleasant to
write down opinions for most people. To assist the procedure
of review writing and make it more efficient and user-friendly,
Lipton, Vikram, and McAuley (2015) first propose the task
of review generation, which aims to automatically generate a
review when given the customer’s overall sentiment (rating)
towards a product as input.
In recent years, various review generation models have
been proposed (Lipton, Vikram, and McAuley 2015; Tang
et al. 2016; Dong et al. 2017; Li and Tuzhilin 2019). These
models usually regard review generation as a text generation
task conditioned on the information about user, product, and
* Corresponding author: M.Sun(sms@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12639

overall sentiment. Nevertheless, review writing in real-world
applications is much more complicated. Users usually have
different sentiments towards various aspects of a product,
and therefore their reviews will cover multiple aspects of the
product. For example, as shown in Figure 1, a user who gives
a neutral overall rating can express positive sentiments to the
environment and service, while writing negative comment
towards the food. Moreover, reviews covering aspect-level
information are more helpful when serving as references
for customers’ purchase decisions. Consequently, it is of
considerable importance to generate aspect-level sentimentcontrollable reviews.
Zang and Wan (2017) first introduce the aspect-sentiment
information to perform aspect-level sentiment-controllable
review generation. They adopt a supervised method requiring a large amount of training instances with sentence-level
aspect-sentiment annotations. However, very few reviews
have sentence-level aspect-sentiment labels, and it is also
labor-intensive and time-consuming to annotate these information for all reviews.
To tackle this issue, we propose a semi-supervised
aspect-level sentiment-controllable review generation method
(ASRG), which can take advantage of large-scale unlabeled
data to achieve aspect-level sentiment control in review
genenration with a few labeled data. We propose a mutual

