The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Causal Inference by Increasing Model Expressiveness
David D. Jensen
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
140 Governors Drive
Amherst, Massachusetts 01003-9264
jensen@cs.umass.edu
Abstract

inferences about the effects of explicit changes to the process that generated the training data. These changes, often
termed interventions, alter the data generating process in
ways that can be accurately represented as edits to a valid
causal model. That is, valid causal models allow explicit representation of interventions and enable accurate inferences
about the effects of those interventions.
Despite the prevailing non-causal focus of machine learning, a broad array of methods has been developed both
inside and outside of AI that facilitate causal inference
from both experimental and observational data. One class of
methods—often labeled the potential outcomes framework
(POF)—has largely been developed within statistics and the
social sciences and typically focuses on estimating the average effect of a possible cause on a possible effect (Rubin
2005; Imbens and Rubin 2015). Another class of methods—
sometimes referred to as structural causal models (SCMs)—
has largely been developed within AI and typically focuses
on reasoning about the causal dependencies among a set
of variables and supports a diverse set of inferences (Pearl
2009; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000). A rich body
of work has developed around these and other paradigms,
including technical contributions from fields such as philosophy of science, psychology, epidemiology, sociology, and
economics.
Over the past several decades, researchers in causal inference have developed a range of innovations, including methods for deriving observable statistical consequences from
classes of causal models (e.g., d-separation), a variety of designs and design elements (e.g., instrumental variable designs (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996), regression discontinuity designs (Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw 2001)),
practical estimation methods (e.g., G-computation, propensity score matching (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), doubly robust methods (Bang and Robins 2005)), algorithms
for learning model structure (e.g., PC, FCI (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000), GES (Chickering 2002), MMHC
(Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006), and many others),
and methods for inferring identifiability and adjustment sets
based on partially specified models (e.g., (Pearl 2009)).
Despite these innovations, accurate causal inference remains extremely challenging. Most causal inferences require
overcoming inherent challenges such as non-random treatment assignment, latent confounding, and endogenous se-

The ability to learn and reason with causal knowledge is a
key aspect of intelligent behavior. In contrast to mere statistical association, knowledge of causation enables reasoning about the effects of actions. Causal reasoning is vital for
autonomous agents and for a range of applications in science, medicine, business, and government. However, current
methods for causal inference are hobbled because they use
relatively inexpressive models. Surprisingly, current causal
models eschew nearly every major representational innovation common in a range of other fields both inside and outside of computer science, including representation of objects,
relationships, time, space, and hierarchy. Even more surprisingly, a range of recent research provides strong evidence that
more expressive representations make possible causal inferences that are otherwise impossible and remove key biases
that would otherwise afflict more naive inferences. New research on causal inference should target increases in expressiveness to improve accuracy and effectiveness.

Introduction
Learning and reasoning about the effects of actions—often
referred to as causal inference—is a central activity of intelligent agents. Causal inference is used in AI to enable learning and reasoning of intelligent agents in applications such
as robotics, planning, and game playing. Causal inference
is a fundamental tool of essentially all sciences, particularly
those that focus on devising effective interventions, such as
medicine, public health, sociology, and economics. It is also
a direct subject of study in psychology, cognitive science,
statistics, and philosophy. Indeed, it is difficult to think of
a field of human endeavor in which causal inference is not
central.
Given its importance, it is surprising how starkly the goals
of causal inference diverge from the majority of work in machine learning. Typical work in machine learning constructs
models of statistical associations. Such models allow accurate inferences about unobserved variables (e.g., a class label) given that new data instances are drawn from the same
distribution as the instances in the training data. In contrast,
causal inference aims to learn a model that allows accurate
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15053

