The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Variational Fair Clustering
Imtiaz Masud Ziko1 , Jing Yuan2 , Eric Granger1 and Ismail Ben Ayed1
1

ÉTS Montreal, Canada
Xidian University, China
imtiaz-masud.ziko.1@etsmtl.ca
2

Abstract

of embedding fairness constraints that encourage clusters to
have balanced demographic groups pertaining to some sensitive attributes (e.g., sex, gender, race, etc.), so as to counteract
any form of data-inherent bias.
Assume that we are given N data points to be assigned to
a set of K clusters, and let Sk ∈ {0, 1}N denotes a binary
indicator vector whose components take value 1 when the
point is within cluster k, and 0 otherwise. Also suppose that
the data contains J different demographic groups, with Vj ∈
{0, 1}N denoting a binary indicator vector of demographic
group j. The authors of (Chierichetti et al. 2017; Kleindessner
et al. 2019) suggested to evaluate fairness in terms of clusterbalance measures, which take the following form:

We propose a general variational framework of fair clustering,
which integrates an original Kullback-Leibler (KL) fairness
term with a large class of clustering objectives, including prototype or graph based. Fundamentally different from the existing
combinatorial and spectral solutions, our variational multiterm approach enables to control the trade-off levels between
the fairness and clustering objectives. We derive a general
tight upper bound based on a concave-convex decomposition
of our fairness term, its Lipschitz-gradient property and the
Pinsker’s inequality. Our tight upper bound can be jointly optimized with various clustering objectives, while yielding a
scalable solution, with convergence guarantee. Interestingly,
at each iteration, it performs an independent update for each
assignment variable. Therefore, it can be easily distributed for
large-scale datasets. This scalability is important as it enables
to explore different trade-off levels between the fairness and
clustering objectives. Unlike spectral relaxation, our formulation does not require computing its eigenvalue decomposition.
We report comprehensive evaluations and comparisons with
state-of-the-art methods over various fair clustering benchmarks, which show that our variational formulation can yield
highly competitive solutions in terms of fairness and clustering
objectives.

Vjt Sk
∈ [0, 1]
t
j6=j Vj 0 Sk

balance(Sk ) = min0

Introduction
Machine learning models are impacting our daily life, for instance, in marketing, finance, education, and even in sentencing recommendations (Kleinberg et al. 2017). However, these
models may exhibit biases towards specific demographic
groups due to, for instance, the biases that exist within the
data. For example, a higher level of face recognition accuracy may be found with white males (Buolamwini and Gebru
2018). These biases have recently triggered substantial interest in designing fair algorithms for the supervised learning
setting (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Zafar et al. 2017;
Donini et al. 2018). Also, very recently, the community has
started to investigate fairness constraints in unsupervised
learning (Chierichetti et al. 2017; Kleindessner et al. 2019;
Backurs et al. 2019; Samadi et al. 2018; Celis et al. 2018).
Specifically, Chierichetti et al. (Chierichetti et al. 2017) pioneered the concept of fair clustering. The problem consists
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11202

(1)

The higher this measure, the fairer the cluster. The overall
clustering balance is defined by the minimum of Eq. (1) over
k. This notion of fairness in clusters has recently given rise
to a new line of research that was introduced, mostly, for
prototype-based clustering, e.g., K-center, K- medians and Kmeans (Chierichetti et al. 2017; Backurs et al. 2019; Schmidt,
Schwiegelshohn, and Sohler 2018; Bera et al. 2019). Also,
very recently, fairness has been investigated in the context
of spectral graph clustering (Kleindessner et al. 2019). The
general problem raises several interesting questions. How
to embed fairness in popular clustering objectives? Can we
control the trade-off between some “acceptable” fairness
level (or tolerance) and the quality of the clustering objective?
What is the cost of fairness with respect to the clustering
objective and computational complexity?
Chierichetti et al. (Chierichetti et al. 2017) investigated
combinatorial approximation algorithms for maximizing the
the fairness measures in Eq. (1), for K-center and K- medians
clustering, and for binary demographic groups (J = 2). They
compute fairlets, which are groups of points that are fair, and
can not be split further into more subsets that are also fair.
Then, they consider each fairlet as a data point, and cluster
them with approximate K-center or K- medians algorithms.
Unfortunately, as reported in the experiments in (Chierichetti
et al. 2017), obtaining fair solutions with these fairlets-based
algorithms comes at the price of a substantial increase in the
clustering objectives. Also, the cost for finding fairlets with
perfect matching is quadratic w.r.t the number of data points,

