The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Selfish Creation of Social Networks
Davide Bilò1 , Tobias Friedrich 2 , Pascal Lenzner 2 , Stefanie Lowski 3 , Anna Melnichenko2
1

Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Sassari, Italy
2
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany
davide.bilo@uniss.it, tobias.friedrich@hpi.de, pascal.lenzner@hpi.de, lowski@math.hu-berlin.de, anna.melnichenko@hpi.de

Abstract

Extensive research, e.g. (Albert, Jeong, and Barabási
1999; Barabási and Albert 1999; Broder et al. 2000; Kleinberg 2000; Leskovec, Kleinberg, and Faloutsos 2005; Newman, Barabasi, and Watts 2011; Barabási 2016), on real
world networks from many different domains like communication networks, social networks, metabolic networks, etc.
has revealed the astonishing fact that most of these realworld networks share the following basic properties:
• Small-world property: The diameter and average distances are at most logarithmic in number of nodes.
• Clustering: Two nodes with a common neighbor have a
high probability of being neighbors, i.e., there is an abundance of triangles and small cliques.
• Power-law degree distribution: The probability that a
node has degree k is proportional to k −β , for 2 ≤ β ≤ 3.
That is, the degree distribution follows a power-law. Such
networks are also called scale-free networks.
The phenomenon that real world networks from different domains are very similar begs a scientific explanation, i.e., formal models that generate networks with the above properties
from very simple rules.
Many such models have been proposed, most prominently the preferential attachment model (Barabási and Albert 1999), Chung-Lu random graphs (Chung and Lu 2002),
hyperbolic random graphs (Krioukov et al. 2010; Friedrich
and Krohmer 2015) and geometric inhomogeneous random
graphs (Bringmann, Keusch, and Lengler 2019). However,
all these models describe a purely random process which
eventually outputs a network having realistic properties. In
contrast, many real-world networks evolved over time by an
interaction of rational agents. For example, in (online) social networks (Jackson 2010) the selfish agents correspond
to people or firms that choose carefully with whom to maintain a connection. Thus, a model with higher explanatory
power should consider rational selfish agents which use and
modify the network to their advantage (Papadimitriou 2001).
In game-theoretic models for network formation, selfish
agents correspond to nodes in a network. Each agent strategically selects other agents to form a link. The union of all
chosen links then determines the edge-set of the created network (Jackson and Wolinsky 1996). The individual goal of
each agent is modeled via a cost function, which typically
consists of costs for creating links and of a service cost

Understanding real-world networks has been a core research
endeavor throughout the last two decades. Network Creation Games are a promising approach for this from a gametheoretic perspective. In these games, selfish agents corresponding to nodes in a network strategically decide which
links to form to optimize their centrality. Many versions have
been introduced and analyzed, but none of them fits to modeling the evolution of social networks. In real-world social
networks, connections are often established by recommendations from common acquaintances or by a chain of such recommendations. Thus establishing and maintaining a contact
with a friend of a friend is easier than connecting to complete
strangers. This explains the high clustering, i.e., the abundance of triangles, in real-world social networks.
We propose and analyze a network creation model inspired
by real-world social networks. Edges are formed in our model
via bilateral consent of both endpoints and the cost for establishing and maintaining an edge is proportional to the distance of the endpoints before establishing the connection. We
provide results for generic cost functions, which essentially
only must be convex functions in the distance of the endpoints
without the respective edge. For this broad class of cost functions, we provide many structural properties of equilibrium
networks and prove (almost) tight bounds on the diameter,
the Price of Anarchy and the Price of Stability. Moreover,
as a proof-of-concept we show via experiments that the created equilibrium networks of our model indeed closely mimics real-world social networks. We observe degree distributions that seem to follow a power-law, high clustering, and
low diameters. This can be seen as a promising first step towards game-theoretic network creation models that predict
networks featuring all core real-world properties.

Introduction
Complex networks from the Internet to various (online) social networks have a huge impact on our lives and it is thus
an important research challenge to understand these networks and the forces that shape them. The emergence of the
Internet has kindled the interdisciplinary field of Network
Science (Barabási 2016), which is devoted to analyzing and
understanding real-world networks.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5185

