The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Increasing Iterate Averaging for Solving Saddle-Point Problems
Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer, Donald Goldfarb
Columbia University, Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
gao.yuan@columbia.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu, goldfarb@columbia.edu

Abstract

and have been proven efficient in practice. For example, Chambolle and Pock (2011) gives an algorithm for
solving saddle-point problems involving bilinear and separable, nonsmooth terms and demonstrate its effectiveness in image denoising. Kroer, Farina, and Sandholm
(2018) uses the Excessive Gap Technique (EGT) (Nesterov
2005), with a specific distance-generating function, to solve
saddle-point formulation of zero-sum extensive-form games
(EFG). Given the general convex-concave structure without strong convexity and smoothness assumptions, these algorithms
ergodic
 Ponly guarantee
 convergence rate, that is,
PT
T
1
t 1
t
sad T t=1 x , T t=1 y = O(1/T ). Meanwhile, nu-

Many problems in machine learning and game theory can
be formulated as saddle-point problems, for which various
first-order methods have been developed and proven efficient
in practice. Under the general convex-concave assumption,
most first-order methods only guarantee an ergodic convergence rate, that is, the uniform averages of the iterates converge at a O(1/T ) rate in terms of the saddle-point residual. However, numerically, the iterates themselves can often
converge much faster than the uniform averages. This observation motivates increasing averaging schemes that put more
weight on later iterates, in contrast to the usual uniform averaging. We show that such increasing averaging schemes,
applied to various first-order methods, are able to preserve
the O(1/T ) convergence rate with no additional assumptions
or computational overhead. Extensive numerical experiments
on zero-sum game solving, market equilibrium computation
and image denoising demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed schemes. In particular, the increasing averages consistently outperform the uniform averages in all test problems
by orders of magnitude. When solving matrix and extensiveform games, increasing averages consistently outperform the
last iterates as well. For matrix games, a first-order method
equipped with increasing averaging outperforms the highly
competitive CFR+ algorithm.

merically, (xt , y t ) (the “last iterates”) often converge much
more rapidly (see, e.g., (Chambolle and Pock 2016, §7.2.2)).
This observation motivates new averaging schemes that put
more weight on later iterates rather than uniformly across all
of them. Let (xt , y t ), t = 1, 2, . . . denote the iterates generated by a first-order method (more specifically, the iterates
used in forming the convergent uniform averages; for certain
algorithms, they are not necessarily denoted as (xt , y t ); see,
e.g., Theorem 2). Let wt be positive, nondecreasing weights.
We consider averages of the form
T
T
1 X
1 X
wt xt , ȳ T =
wt y t ,
(2)
x̄T =
ST t=1
ST t=1
PT
2
where ST =
t=1 wt . For example, wt = 1, t, t , and
3
t give uniform, linear, quadratic and cubic averages, respectively. We refer to such choices of positive, nondecreasing wt as increasing iterate averaging schemes (IIAS) and
x̄T , ȳ T as increasing averages. In fact, in solving extensiveform games, the highly successful CFR+ algorithm uses a
form of linear averaging (Tammelin et al. 2015). Similar averaging techniques have also been used in other scenarios,
such as algorithms for solving large-scale sequential games
that achieve superhuman performance in poker (Bowling
et al. 2015; Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm
2018), and efficient large-scale GAN training (Yazici et al.
2018). On the theory side, (Golowich et al. 2020) shows
that, for unconstrained smooth saddle-point problems, the
last iterates of Extragradient, a primal-dual FOM, converges
slower than the averages in a strict sense. Through
√ a unified analysis, (Davis and Yin 2016) shows O(1/ T ) ergordic and last-iterate convergence rates of general splitting

Introduction
Consider saddle point problems (SPP) of the form
min max L(x, y)
x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where L is a general convex-concave function and X, Y are
Euclidean spaces. For any (x, y) ∈ X×Y, denote its saddlepoint residual (SPR) as
sad (x, y) = max
L(x, y 0 ) − min
L(x0 , y).
0
0
y ∈Y

x ∈X

Many problems in machine learning (Juditsky, Nemirovski
et al. 2011; Chambolle and Pock 2016), image processing (Chambolle and Pock 2011, 2016) and game theory
(Koller, Megiddo, and Von Stengel 1996; Kroer et al.
2018) can be formulated as (1). Many primal-dual firstorder methods (FOMs) are suitable for these problems
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7537

