The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Knowledge Graph Alignment
Yuchen Yan, Lihui Liu, Yikun Ban, Baoyu Jing, Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
{yucheny5, lihuil2, yikunb5, baoyuj, htong}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Knowledge graph (KG for short) alignment aims at building
a complete KG by linking the shared entities across complementary KGs. Existing approaches assume that KGs are static,
despite the fact that almost every KG evolves over time. In
this paper, we introduce the task of dynamic knowledge graph
alignment, the main challenge of which is how to efficiently
update entity embeddings for the evolving graph topology.
Our key insight is to view the parameter matrix of GCN as
a feature transformation operator and decouple the transformation process from the aggregation process. Based on that,
we first propose a novel base algorithm (D I NGA L-B) with
topology-invariant mask gate and highway gate, which consistently outperforms 14 existing knowledge graph alignment
methods in the static setting. More importantly, it naturally
leads to two effective and efficient algorithms to align dynamic
knowledge graph, including (1) D I NGA L-O which leverages
previous parameter matrices to update the embeddings of affected entities; and (2) D I NGA L-U which resorts to newly
obtained anchor links to fine-tune parameter matrices. Compared with their static counterpart (D I NGA L-B), D I NGA L-U
and D I NGA L-O are 10× and 100× faster respectively, with
little alignment accuracy loss.

Figure 1: Knowledge graph alignment.

Earlier approaches for knowledge graph alignment date
back to symbolic based methods (Suchanek, Abiteboul, and
Senellart 2011), where manually built features or rules are
the keys to align entities (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek
2014). As knowledge graph embedding becomes popular
(Bordes et al. 2013), many embedding based knowledge
graph alignment methods are proposed (Sun, Hu, and Li
2017; Chen et al. 2016, 2018). With the advent of Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016)
and Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017), more recent works (Wang et al. 2018; Cao
et al. 2019a; Wu et al. 2019a; Sun et al. 2019) often rely
on GCN or GNN to capture the heterogeneity of KGs. The
state-of-the-art performance of embedding based knowledge
graph alignment methods can be credited to their ability to
take advantage of various features in the KGs, such as node
attribute (Sun, Hu, and Li 2017), relation information (Wu
et al. 2019a) and rule inference (Cao et al. 2019a).
Most, if not all, existing knowledge graph alignment
approaches assume that the input knowledge graphs are
static, despite the fact that almost every knowledge
graph evolves over time. For example, (Donald Trump,
homeLocated, White House) along with many other
relevant triples were added into YAGO in 2017.
Simply retraining the alignment model from scratch is computationally costly, and might even be infeasible for real-time
applications such as knowledge based question-answering
system (Savenkov and Agichtein 2016).
In this paper, we first formally introduce the problem of
dynamic knowledge graph alignment, and then we tackle this
problem based on GCN. In the dynamic setting, a major hurdle lies in the difficulty of updating the embeddings, which
is in turn rooted in the coupling between the graph topology,

Introduction
Knowledge graph (KG) is an integral component in a multitude of applications, ranging from dialogue systems (Xu,
Bao, and Zhang 2020), question-answering (Yu et al. 2017) to
search engine optimization (Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017).
A variety of KGs have been constructed in recent years, such
as YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016) and DBpedia (Lehmann et al.
2015).
Data in KGs is organized in the standard (head,
relation, tail) triplet form. Different KGs usually
collect different aspects of the knowledge, and they are complementary to each other (Wang et al. 2018). As illustrated in
Figure 1, one KG (green) records the information of Barack
Obama from the political aspect, whereas the other (blue) is
mainly about his personal relations. However, the two KGs
cannot be easily merged together due to the discrepancy of
entity mentions, e.g., Obama v.s. Barack Obama. The task of
linking the entities sharing the same identity across KGs is
referred to as the knowledge graph alignment.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4564

