The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Using Hindsight to Anchor Past Knowledge in Continual Learning
Arslan Chaudhry1, * , Albert Gordo2 , Puneet Dokania1 , Philip Torr1 , David Lopez-Paz2
1

University of Oxford,
2
Facebook AI

Abstract

ing models, where all parameters are updated after observing
each example.
Continual learning has received increasing attention from
the scientific community during the last decade. The state of
the art algorithms for continual learning fall into three categories. First, regularization-based approaches reduce forgetting by restricting the updates in model parameters that
were important for previous tasks (Kirkpatrick et al. 2016;
Rebuffi, Kolesnikov, and Lampert 2017; Aljundi et al. 2018;
Chaudhry et al. 2018; Nguyen et al. 2018). However, when
the number of tasks are large, the regularization of past tasks
becomes obsolete, leading to the representation drift (Titsias
et al. 2019). Second, modular approaches (Rusu et al. 2016;
Lee et al. 2017) add new modules to the learner as new tasks
are learned. While modular architectures overcome forgetting by design, the memory complexity of these approaches
scales with the number of tasks. Third, the memory-based
methods (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Hayes, Cahill, and
Kanan 2018; Isele and Cosgun 2018; Riemer et al. 2019;
Chaudhry et al. 2019a) store a few examples from past tasks
in an “episodic memory”, to be revisited when training for
a new task. Contrary to modular approaches, memory-based
methods add a very small memory overhead for each new
task. Memory-based methods are the reigning state-of-theart, but their performance remains a far cry from a simple
oracle accessing all the data at once, hence turning the continual learning experience back into a normal supervised
learning task. Despite intense research efforts, such gap in
performance renders the problem of continual learning an
open research question.

In continual learning, the learner faces a stream of data whose
distribution changes over time. Modern neural networks are
known to suffer under this setting, as they quickly forget previously acquired knowledge. To address such catastrophic
forgetting, many continual learning methods implement different types of experience replay, re-learning on past data
stored in a small buffer known as episodic memory. In this
work, we complement experience replay with a new objective that we call “anchoring”, where the learner uses bilevel
optimization to update its knowledge on the current task,
while keeping intact predictions on some anchor points of
past tasks. These anchor points are learned using gradientbased optimization to maximize forgetting, which is approximated by fine-tuning the currently trained model on the
episodic memory of past tasks. Experiments on several supervised learning benchmarks for continual learning demonstrate that our approach improves the standard experience replay in terms of both accuracy and forgetting metrics and for
various sizes of episodic memory.

Introduction
We study the problem of continual learning, where a machine learning model experiences a sequence of tasks. Each
of these tasks is presented as a stream of input-output pairs,
where each pair is drawn identically and independently (iid)
from the corresponding task probability distribution. Since
the length of the learning experience is not specified a priori,
the learner can only assume a single pass over the data and,
due to space constraints, store nothing but a few examples
in a small episodic memory. At all times during the lifetime
of the model, predictions on examples from any task may
be requested. Addressing continual learning is an important research problem, since it would enable the community
to move past the assumption of “identically and independently distributed data”, and allow a better deployment of
machine learning in-the-wild. However, continual learning
presents one major challenge, catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). That is, as the learner experiences
new tasks, it quickly forgets previously acquired knowledge.
This is a hindrance especially for state-of-the-art deep learn-

Contribution We propose Hindsight Anchor Learning
(HAL), a continual learning approach to improve the performance of memory-based continual learning algorithms.
HAL leverages bilevel optimization to regularize the training objective with one representational point per class per
task, called anchors. These anchors are constructed via gradient ascent in the image space, by maximizing one approximation to the forgetting loss for the current task throughout the entire continual learning experience. We estimate the
amount of forgetting that the learner would suffer on these
anchors if it were to be trained on future tasks in hindsight:
that is, by measuring forgetting on a temporary predictor that
has been fine-tuned on the episodic memory of past tasks.

* Correspondence to arslan.chaudhry@eng.ox.ac.uk.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6993

