The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

5F Knowledge Graph Embeddings with Projective Transformations
Mojtaba Nayyeri1,2 , Sahar Vahdati2 , Can Aykul1 , Jens Lehmann1,3
1

Smart Data Analytics Group, University of Bonn, Germany
Nature-Inspired Machine Intelligence-InfAI, Dresden, Germany
3
Fraunhofer IAIS, Dresden, Germany
{nayyei,aykul,jens.lehmann}@cs.uni-bonn.de, vahdati@infai.org, jens.lehmann@iais.fraunhofer.de
2

Abstract

type – often translation or rotation. This limits their ability in
embedding KGs with complexities in subgraphs, especially
when multiple structures exist in a neighborhood. An example of this situation is the presence of a path structure for a
group of nodes close to a loop structure of another group in
a KG (illustrated in Figure 1). The upper part of the figure
shows examples of four different subgraphs containing combinations of path structures (a group of nodes connected via
a relation) and loop structures (a group of nodes forming a
loop via a relation). The lower part of the figure shows an
exemplary visualisation of the embeddings of the entities
depicted in the upper part of the figure. Let us focus on the
left most example in the figure, i.e. the path to loop subgraph.
In this example subgraph, a relation r1 (e.g. hypernym) forms
a path structure, a relation r3 (e.g. similar_to) forms a loop
structure and nodes in both structures are connected via a
relation r2 . A loop in the graph presentation can be preserved
as a circle in a vector space, and a path as a line. Existing
KGE models, such as TransE, RotatE, ComplEx and QuatE
partially capture those structures in the embedding space.
The lower part of the figure shows the possible embeddings
of the given subgraphs preserved by the existing models.
Let the nodes in the path be h1 , . . . , h6 , the nodes in the
loop be t1 , . . . , t6 and (hi , r2 , ti ), i = 1, . . . , 6, be the triples
connecting those structures. When we consider the TransE
model specifically, the embeddings of the tails t1 , . . . , t6 cannot be transferred to the shape of a circle in the embedding
space. This is because the following equations need to (approximately) hold according to the TransE score functions:
t1 +r3 ≈ t2 , t2 +r3 ≈ t3 , . . . , t6 +r3 ≈ t1 . However, this
results in r3 = 0. Therefore, t1 = t2 = . . . = t6 i.e. all entities are embedded into the same point in the embedding space
rather than a circle (with positive radius). Similar derivations
apply to more recent and complex models. Those limitations
are due to the limited set of transformations supported by
those models, which do not go beyond translation, rotation
and homothethy operations. Therefore, they cannot map line
structures to circle structures and vice versa.

Performing link prediction using knowledge graph embedding
models has become a popular approach for knowledge graph
completion. Such models employ a transformation function
that maps nodes via edges into a vector space in order to measure the likelihood of the links. While mapping the individual
nodes, the structure of subgraphs is also transformed. Most
of the embedding models designed in Euclidean geometry
usually support a single transformation type – often translation or rotation, which is suitable for learning on graphs
with small differences in neighboring subgraphs. However,
multi-relational knowledge graphs often include multiple subgraph structures in a neighborhood (e.g. combinations of path
and loop structures), which current embedding models do
not capture well. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel
KGE model (5F E) in projective geometry, which supports
multiple simultaneous transformations – specifically inversion,
reflection, translation, rotation, and homothety. The model
has several favorable theoretical properties and subsumes the
existing approaches. It outperforms them on most widely used
link prediction benchmarks.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) with their graph-based knowledge
representation in the form of (head,relation,tail) triples, have
become a leading technology of recent years in AI-based
tasks including question answering, data integration, and recommender systems (Ji et al. 2020). However, KGs are incomplete and the performance of any algorithm consuming them
is affected by this problem. Knowledge graph embeddings
(KGEs) are a prominent approach used for KG completion by
predicting missing links. Every KGE model uses a transformation function to map entities (nodes) of the graph through
relations in a vector space to score the plausibility of triples
via a score function. The performance of KGE models heavily relies on the design of their score function that in turn
defines the type of transformation they support. Such transformations distinguish the extent to which a model is able to
learn complex motifs and patterns formed by combinations
of the nodes and edges.
Most of the existing KGEs have been designed in Euclidean geometry and usually support a single transformation

This type of limitation stems from the underlying geometry. While major existing models cover at most two transformation types, we propose a model based on projective
geometry that provides a uniform way for simultaneously
representing five transformation types namely translation, rotation, homothety, inversion, and reflection. The combination

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9064

