The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hand-Model-Aware Sign Language Recognition
Hezhen Hu,1 Wengang Zhou, 1, 2 Houqiang Li 1, 2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
alexhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

t+1

Abstract
Hand gestures play a dominant role in the expression of
sign language. Current deep-learning based video sign language recognition (SLR) methods usually follow a datadriven paradigm under the supervision of the category label.
However, those methods suffer limited interpretability and
may encounter the overfitting issue due to limited sign data
sources. In this paper, we introduce the hand prior and propose a new hand-model-aware framework for isolated SLR
with the modeling hand as the intermediate representation.
We first transform the cropped hand sequence into the latent
semantic feature. Then the hand model introduces the hand
prior and provides a mapping from the semantic feature to
the compact hand pose representation. Finally, the inference
module enhances the spatio-temporal pose representation and
performs the final recognition. Due to the lack of annotation on the hand pose under current sign language datasets,
we further guide its learning by utilizing multiple weaklysupervised losses to constrain its spatial and temporal consistency. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we perform extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets, including NMFs-CSL, SLR500, MSASL and WLASL. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance on all four popular benchmarks with
a notable margin.

t+2

t+T

Full
Frame

…

Hand

…

Mesh

…

3D
Joint

…

Prediction
Inference

0.01
Walnut
Appreciate 0.82
…
0.07
Air

Figure 1: Illustration on the challenge of the hand gestures
in sign language recognition and our idea with the modeling
hand as the intermediate representation.

hibiting highly articulated joints and similar appearance with
…
fewer local characteristic features, when compared with the
body or face. During the sign, it usually encounters the
motion blur and self-occlusion among joints with complex
backgrounds. Early works adopt hand-crafted features to describe hand gestures (Starner, Weaver, and Pentland 1998;
Buehler, Zisserman, and Everingham 2009). Recently, many
works have leveraged the advance of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (Huang et al. 2019; Albanie et al.
2020; Koller et al. 2018; Cui, Liu, and Zhang 2019; Zhou
et al. 2020). It is worth mentioning that some methods
highlight the importance of hands by utilizing the cropped
hands as the extra stream and achieve a notable performance
gain (Camgoz et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018; Koller et al.
2020). These deep-learning based methods work in a datadriven paradigm and learn feature representations adaptively
under the supervision of the video-level category label.
However, direct data-driven SLR methods suffer limited interpretability for the learned hand feature and may
overfit under limited training data. The limited sign data
sources are partially attributed to the fact that there is a
strong requirement for expert knowledge during the manual annotation. Consequently, compared with current action recognition datasets (Goyal et al. 2017; Carreira and
Zisserman 2017), sign language datasets, e.g., WLASL (Li
et al. 2020b), MSASL (Joze and Koller 2019) and NMFs-

Introduction
Sign language, as a natural language of the deaf community,
has a unique linguistic characteristic. It conveys semantic
meaning via hands, including hand motions, shape, orientation, etc., together with non-manual features, including facial expressions. To facilitate the communication between
the deaf and the hearing people, automatic sign language
recognition (SLR) has been widely studied and attracted increasing attention. It aims at mapping the sign video into the
text word or sentence, which corresponds to two subtasks,
i.e., isolated SLR and continuous SLR. Isolated SLR is a
kind of fine-grained classification task and focuses on the
recognition at the word level, while continuous SLR tries to
recognize the signs in their presenting order. In this work,
we focus on the former task, i.e., isolated SLR.
The hand acts as a dominant role in sign language. As
shown in Figure 1, it occupies a relatively small area, exCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1558

