The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scaling-Up Robust Gradient Descent Techniques
Matthew J. Holland
Osaka University
matthew-h@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

W}, or more precisely, the distribution of this error. Since
we never know much about the underlying data-generating
process, typically all we can assume is that P belongs to
some class P of probability measures on Z, and typical
guarantees are given in the form of

Abstract
We study a scalable alternative to robust gradient descent
(RGD) techniques that can be used when losses and/or gradients can be heavy-tailed, though this will be unknown to
the learner. The core technique is simple: instead of trying to
robustly aggregate gradients at each step, which is costly and
leads to sub-optimal dimension dependence in risk bounds,
we choose a candidate which does not diverge too far from
the majority of cheap stochastic sub-processes run over partitioned data. This lets us retain the formal strength of RGD
methods at a fraction of the cost.

n ) − RP∗ > ε (n, δ, P, W)} ≤ δ,
P {RP (w

∀ P ∈ P.

Flipping the inequalities around, this says that the algorithm
generating w
n enjoys ε-good performance with (1 − δ)-high
conﬁdence over the draw of the sample, where the error level
depends on the sample size n, the desired conﬁdence level
δ, the underlying data distribution P, and any constraints encoded in W, not to mention the nature of loss L. Ideally, we
would like formal guarantees to align as closely as possible with performance observed in the real world by machine
learning practitioners. With this in mind, the following properties are important to consider.
1. Transparency: can we actually compute the output w
n
that we study in theory?
2. Strength: what form do bounds on ε(n, δ, P, W) take?
How rich is the class P?
3. Scalability: how do computational costs scale with the
above-mentioned factors?
Balancing these three points is critical to developing guarantees for algorithms that will actually be used in practice.
If strong assumptions are made on the data distribution (i.e.,
P is a “small” class), then most of the data any practitioner
runs into will fall out of scope. If the error bound grows
too quickly with 1/δ or shrinks too slowly with n, then either the guarantees are vacuous, or the procedure is truly
sub-optimal. If the procedure outputting w
n cannot be implemented, then we run into a gap between what we code,
and what we study formally.

Introduction
Obtaining “strong contracts” for the performance of machine learning algorithms is difﬁcult.1 Classical tasks in
computer science, such as sorting integers or simple matrix operations, come with lucid worst-case guarantees. With
enough resources, the job can be done correctly and completely. In machine learning, since we only have access to
highly impoverished information regarding the phenomena
or goal of interest, inevitably the learning task is uncertain, and any meaningful performance guarantee can only
be stated with some degree of conﬁdence, typically over the
random draw of the data used for training. This uncertainty
is reﬂected in the standard formulation of machine learning
tasks as “risk minimization” problems (Vapnik 1982; Haussler 1992). Here we consider risk minimization over some
set of candidates W ⊆ Rd , where the risk of w is deﬁned as
the expected loss to be incurred by w, namely

.
.
RP (w) = EP L(w; Z) =
L(w; z) P(dz),
w ∈ W.
Z

Here we have a loss function L : W ×Z → R+ , and random
data Z ∼ P takes values in a set Z. At most, any learning
algorithm will have access to n data points sampled from
P, denoted Z1 , . . . , Zn . Write (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) → w
n to denote the output of an arbitrary learning algorithm. The usual
starting point for analyzing algorithm performance is the esn )−RP∗ , where RP∗ ..= inf{RP (w) : w ∈
timation error RP (w

Our problem setting In this work, we consider the setup
of potentially heavy-tailed data, specialized to the case of
strongly convex loss functions; in related work (Holland
2021), we consider a completely different approach when
we do not have strong convexity. More concretely, all the
learner can know is that for some m < ∞,


m
(1)
P ⊆ P : sup EP |L(w; Z)| < ∞ ,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This notion was described lucidly in a keynote lecture by L.
Bottou (Bottou 2015).

w∈W

7694

