The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Game Embedding
Xiaobin Hong1∗ , Tong Zhang1∗ , Zhen Cui1† ,
Yuge Huang2 , Pengcheng Shen2 , Shaoxin Li2 , Jian Yang1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{xbhong, tong.zhang, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn, {yugehuang, quantshen, darwinli}@tencent.com, csjyang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

effective representation of nodes by using graph topological structures or other characteristics (e.g., node attributes).
Nowadays, graph embedding has become a crucial graph
analysis technology in multiple practical applications, including user recommendation system (Silva et al. 2010), social
network analysis (Orsini, Baracchi, and Frasconi 2018), face
recognition (Cheng et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2017) and protein
function prediction (Borgwardt et al. 2007).
Various graph embedding methods have been proposed in
previous literatures, including supervised methods(Kipf and
Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018; Zhuang and Ma 2018)
and unsupervised methods(Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016; Veličković et al. 2019).
The unsupervised methods attempt to learn the embeddings
of nodes so that topological structure of graph is preserved
as much as possible in the embedding space. As the learning process is task-independent, the embedding features can
well favor many downstream tasks, e.g., often used as input for the supervision learning case. Recently, graph convolution network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) arouses
researchers’ enthusiasm for graph embedding especially in
the semi-supervised case. Although considerable progress
has been achieved in both unsupervised and semi-supervised
cases, there still lacks an efficient mechanism to mine potential cues on those unlabelled nodes or fully unlabelled graph.
Most methods aim to preserve the connection relationship of
edges during the embedding process. But the discriminability
of node embeddings is as important as structure preservation
in many popular pattern classification tasks.
Inspired by the spirit of game learning (Roughgarden
2010), in this work, we propose a novel graph embedding
framework named graph game embedding to learn more discriminative embeddings as well as encode graph structures.
Each node is treated as one game player, and one edge correlates the interaction of two players during game learning.
Thus node embedding learning is converted to the selection/searching process of player strategies. To optimize node
embedding, we construct a utility function to measure the
benefit-loss of nodes. This utility function is designed to
satisfy the Nash Equilibriums condition, which well guides
graph evolution to good convergence with a theoretical guarantee. Further, we introduce the collaboration and competition modes to increase the discriminant learning ability. In
view of different interaction manners, we propose two spe-

Graph embedding aims to encode nodes/edges into lowdimensional continuous features, and has become a crucial
tool for graph analysis including graph/node classification,
link prediction, etc. In this paper we propose a novel graph
learning framework, named graph game embedding, to learn
discriminative node representation as well as encode graph
structures. Inspired by the spirit of game learning, node embedding is converted to the selection/searching process of
player strategies, where each node corresponds to one player
and each edge corresponds to the interaction of two players.
Then, a utility function, which theoretically satisfies the Nash
Equilibrium, is defined to measure the benefit/loss of players
during graph evolution. Furthermore, a collaboration and competition mechanism is introduced to increase the discriminant
learning ability. Under this graph game embedding framework,
considering different interaction manners of nodes, we propose two specific models, named paired game embedding for
paired nodes and group game embedding for group interaction. Comparing with existing graph embedding methods, our
algorithm possesses two advantages: (1) the designed utility
function ensures the stable graph evolution with theoretical
convergence and Nash Equilibrium satisfaction; (2) the introduced collaboration and competition mechanism endows
the graph game embedding framework with discriminative
feature leaning ability by guiding each node to learn an optimal strategy distinguished from others. We test the proposed
method on three public datasets about citation networks, and
the experimental results verify the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
In recent years, graph has drawn increasing attention due to
its potential applications to ubiquitous irregular data such as
protein data (Fout et al. 2017; Borgwardt et al. 2007) and
social network (Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018; Silva et al.
2010; Orsini, Baracchi, and Frasconi 2018; Wang, Cui, and
Zhu 2016; Yu et al. 2018). A graph is composed of a set of
nodes and a set of edges. The nodes often represent entities
in real world while the edges indicate connection relationship
between node pairs. In many graph-related tasks, graph embedding is one of most fundamental topics. It aims to learn
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7711

