The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Nutri-bullets: Summarizing Health Studies by Composing Segments
Darsh J Shah,1 Lili Yu,2 Tao Lei,2 Regina Barzilay1
1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT
2
ASAPP, Inc.
darsh@csail.mit.edu, liliyu@asapp.com, tao@asapp.com, regina@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce Nutri-bullets, a multi-document summarization
task for health and nutrition. First, we present two datasets
of food and health summaries from multiple scientific studies. Furthermore, we propose a novel extract-compose model
to solve the problem in the regime of limited parallel data.
We explicitly select key spans from several abstracts using a
policy network, followed by composing the selected spans to
present a summary via a task specific language model. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, our approach leads to more
faithful, relevant and diverse summarization – properties imperative to this application. For instance, on the BreastCancer
dataset our approach gets a more than 50% improvement on
relevance and faithfulness.1

1

Figure 1: Our model’s extract-compose summary describing
impacts of whole grains on cancer. Segments from multiple
scientific studies are composed to present the output.

Introduction

Multi-document summarization is essential in domains like
health and nutrition, where new studies are continuously reported (see Figure 1). Websites like Healthline.com2
are critical in making food and nutrition summaries available to web users and subscribers. Such summaries provide
a collective view of information – a crucial property, especially when the consumption of such knowledge leads to
health related decisions. In the current environment, it is critical to provide users with the the latest health related findings. Unfortunately, summarization is time consuming and
requires domain experts.
Through the introduction of Nutri-bullets, a multidocument summarization task, we aim to automate this
summarization and expand the availability and coverage of
health and nutrition information.
Recently, summarization has been predominantly solved
by training sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models (Rush,
Chopra, and Weston 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017; Hoang et al.
2019; Lewis et al. 2019). In the multi-document setting, popular seq2seq methods either concatenate all input documents
as a single source or consider a hierarchical setting (Liu et al.
2018). While such methods generate fluent text, in our case,
they fail to produce content faithful to the inputs (examples

Figure 2: Examples of unfaithful summaries generated by
seq2seq models trained on the HealthLine dataset. Such fictitious texts (red) can be extremely misleading for readers.
shown in Figure 2). Two factors make Nutri-bullets particularly challenging for seq2seq models: (i) The concatenation
of health documents constitutes long sequences with key information being scattered making composing a good summary extremely difficult; and (ii) While a vast number of scientific abstracts are available in libraries such as Pubmed3 ,
a very limited number of summaries, ranging from several
hundreds to a few thousands, are available to train a summarization system.
In this paper, we present a novel and practical approach
which learns to extract and compose knowledge pieces from
scientific abstracts into a summary. We side-step the scarcity
of parallel data by focusing on knowledge-extraction from
scientific abstracts, made possible by modules trained on
such crowd-sourced annotations. Furthermore, our model
learns to select a subset of knowledge pieces well-suited for
a summary, from a large pool. The selection is performed
through a multi-step framework, guided by reinforcement
learning and distant supervision from limited available par-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code and data is submitted and will be made publicly
available on acceptance.
2
https://healthline.com

3

13780

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

