The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Permutation Guided Node Representations for Link Prediction
Indradyumna Roy, Abir De, Soumen Chakrabarti
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{indraroy15, abir, soumen}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

based on the network structure and domain knowledge (Katz
1997; Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007; Backstrom and
Leskovec 2011). However, such feature engineering often demands significant domain expertise. The second approach learns low dimensional node embeddings which
serve as node features in LP tasks. Such embedding models include Node2Vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016), DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), etc., and various
graph neural networks (GNN), e.g., GCN (Kipf and Welling
2016a), GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017),
GAT (Veličković et al. 2017), etc.
Limited expressive power of GNNs. While deep graph representations have shown significant potential in capturing
complex relationships between nodes and their neighborhoods, they lack representational power useful for LP. A key
reason for this weakness is the use of symmetric aggregates
over a node u’s neighbors, driven by the desideratum that the
representation of u should be invariant to a permutation of its
neighbor nodes (Zaheer et al. 2017; Ravanbakhsh, Schneider, and Poczos 2016; Qi et al. 2017). Such networks have
recently been established as low-pass filters (Wu et al. 2019;
NT and Maehara 2019), which attenuate high frequency signals. This prevents LP methods based on such node representations from reaching their full potential. Although recent efforts (Lee et al. 2019; Bloem-Reddy and Teh 2019;
Shi, Oliva, and Niethammer 2020; Stelzner, Kersting, and
Kosiorek 2020; Skianis et al. 2020; Zhang and Chen 2018)
on modeling inter-item dependencies have substantially improved the expressiveness of set representations in applications like image and text processing, they offer only modest improvement for LP, as we shall see in our experiments.
Among these approaches, SEAL (Zhang and Chen 2018)
improves upon GNN performance but does not readily lend
itself to efficient top-K predictions via LSH.
Limitations of sequence driven embeddings. We could arrange the neighbors of u in some arbitrary canonical order, and combine their features sequentially using, say, a
recurrent neural network (RNN). This would capture feature correlations between neighbors. But now, the representation of u will become sensitive to the order in which neighbors are presented to the RNN. In our experiments, we see
loss degradation when neighbors are shuffled. We seek to resolve this central dilemma. An obvious attempted fix would
be to present many permutations (as Monte Carlo samples)

After observing a snapshot of a social network, a link prediction (LP) algorithm identifies node pairs between which
new edges will likely materialize in future. Most LP algorithms estimate a score for currently non-neighboring node
pairs, and rank them by this score. Recent LP systems compute this score by comparing dense, low dimensional vector
representations of nodes. Graph neural networks (GNNs), in
particular graph convolutional networks (GCNs), are popular examples. For two nodes to be meaningfully compared,
their embeddings should be indifferent to reordering of their
neighbors. GNNs typically use simple, symmetric set aggregators to ensure this property, but this design decision has
been shown to produce representations with limited expressive power. Sequence encoders are more expressive, but are
permutation sensitive by design. Recent efforts to overcome
this dilemma turn out to be unsatisfactory for LP tasks. In
response, we propose P ERM G NN, which aggregates neighbor features using a recurrent, order-sensitive aggregator and
directly minimizes an LP loss while it is ‘attacked’ by adversarial generator of neighbor permutations. P ERM G NN has
superior expressive power compared to earlier GNNs. Next,
we devise an optimization framework to map P ERM G NN’s
node embeddings to a suitable locality-sensitive hash, which
speeds up reporting the top-K most likely edges for the LP
task. Our experiments on diverse datasets show that P ERM G NN outperforms several state-of-the-art link predictors, and
can predict the most likely edges fast.

1

Introduction

In the link prediction (LP) task, we are given a snapshot of
a social network, and asked to predict future links that are
most likely to emerge between nodes. LP has a wide variety of applications, e.g., recommending friends in Facebook,
followers in Twitter, products in Amazon, or connections on
LinkedIn. An LP algorithm typically considers current nonedges as potential edges, and ranks them by decreasing likelihoods of becoming edges in future.

1.1

Prior Work and Their Limitations

LP methods abound in the literature, and predominantly
follow two approaches. The first approach relies strongly
on hand-engineering node features and edge likelihoods
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9445

