The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Memory and Computation-Efficient Kernel SVM via Binary Embedding and
Ternary Model Coefficients
Zijian Lei, Liang Lan
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
cszjlei@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, lanliang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

the memory and computation costs of kernel SVM in the past
decade. The basic idea of these methods is to explicitly construct the nonlinear feature mapping z = Φ(x) : Rd → Rp
such that z>
i zj ≈ k(xi , xj ) and then apply a linear SVM on
z. To obtain good classification accuracy, the dimensionality
of nonlinear feature mapping z needs to be large. On the other
hand, due to concerns on security, privacy, and latency caused
by performing model inference remotely in the cloud, directly
performing model inference on edge devices (e.g., Internet
of Things (IoT) devices) has gained increasing research interests recently (Kumar, Goyal, and Varma 2017; Kusupati et al.
2018). Even though those kernel approximation methods can
significantly reduce the memory and computation costs of
exact kernel SVM, their memory and computation costs are
still too large for on-device deployment. For example, the
Random Fourier Features (RFF), which is a very popular
kernel approximation method for large scale data, requires
∼ d × p × 32 bits for nonlinear feature transformation, p × 32
bits for nonlinear feature representation, and p × c × 32 bits
(c is the number of classes) for classification model to predict
the label of a single input data sample. The memory cost
of RFF can easily exceed several hundred megabytes (MB),
which could be prohibitive for on-device model deployment.

Kernel approximation is widely used to scale up kernel SVM
training and prediction. However, the memory and computation costs of kernel approximation models are still too high
if we want to deploy them on memory-limited devices such
as mobile phones, smartwatches, and IoT devices. To address
this challenge, we propose a novel memory and computationefficient kernel SVM model by using binary embedding and
ternary model coefficients. First, we propose an efficient way
to generate compact binary embedding of the data, preserving
the kernel similarity. Second, we propose a simple but effective
algorithm to learn a linear classification model with ternary coefficients that can support different types of loss function and
regularizer. Our algorithm can achieve better generalization
accuracy than existing works on learning ternary coefficients
since we allow coefficient to be −1, 0, or 1 during the training
stage, and coefficient 0 can be removed during model inference for binary classification. Moreover, we provide a detailed
analysis of the convergence of our algorithm and the inference
complexity of our model. The analysis shows that the convergence to a local optimum is guaranteed, and the inference
complexity of our model is much lower than other competing
methods. Our experimental results on five large real-world
datasets have demonstrated that our proposed method can
build accurate nonlinear SVM models with memory costs less
than 30KB.

Recently, binary embedding methods (Yu et al. 2017;
Needell, Saab, and Woolf 2018) have been widely used for reducing memory cost for data retrieval and classification tasks.
The nice property of binary embedding is that each feature
value can be efficiently stored using a single bit. Therefore,
binary embedding can reduce the memory cost by 32 times
compared with storing full precision embedding. The common way for binary embedding is to apply sign(·) function to
the famous Johnson-Lindenstrauss embedding: random projection embedding justified by the Johnson-Lindenstrauss
Lemma (Johnson, Lindenstrauss, and Schechtman 1986).
It obtains the binary embedding by z = sign(Rx) where
R ∈ Rd×p is a random Gaussian matrix (Needell, Saab, and
Woolf 2018; Ravi 2019) or its variants (Yu et al. 2017; Gong
et al. 2012; Shen et al. 2017) and sign(·) is the element-wise
sign function. However, most of them focus on data retrieval,
and our interest is on-device nonlinear classification. The
memory cost of the full-precision dense matrix R is high for
on-device model deployment. Besides, even though sign(Rx)
provides a nonlinear mapping because of the sign(·) function,
the theoretical analysis on binary mapping sign(Rx) can

Introduction
Kernel Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a powerful nonlinear classification model that has been successfully used
in many real-world applications. Different from linear SVM,
kernel SVM uses kernel function to capture the nonlinear concept.
P The prediction function of kernel SVM is
f (x) = xi αi k(xi , x) where xi s are support vectors and
k(xi , xj ) is a predefined kernel function to compute the kernel similarity between two data samples. Kernel SVM needs
to maintain all support vectors explicitly for model inference.
Therefore, the memory and computation costs of kernel SVM
inference are usually huge, considering that the number of
support vectors increases linearly with training data size on
noisy data. Many kernel approximation methods (Rahimi and
Recht 2008; Le, Sarlós, and Smola 2013; Lan et al. 2019;
Hsieh, Si, and Dhillon 2014) have been proposed to reduce
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8316

