The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-View Representation Learning with Manifold Smoothness
Shu Li, Wei Wang ∗ , Wen-Tao Li, Pan Chen
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{lis, wangw, liwt, chenp}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

multiple views are generated from a latent subspace, and the
goal is to recover the representation in the latent subspace
(Yin, Huang, and Gao 2020; Wang et al. 2015; Zhen et al.
2019; Li et al. 2019a), e.g., Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936) projects different views onto one
common space by maximizing the correlation between pairwise views. In this way, subspace learning is also part of the
multi-view representation learning.
Multi-view representation learning aims to learn a good
representation that extracts heterogeneous useful information from each view for developing prediction models (Li, Yang, and Zhang 2018). In the past decades, there
have been many methods developed to deal with multiview representation problem. However, most existing methods focus on the unsupervised setting. For example, Kernel CCA (KCCA) (Akaho 2006) extends CCA to learn
nonlinear projections, and Deep CCA (DCCA) (Andrew
et al. 2013) is a parametric model that can scale to large
datasets. Deep Canonically Correlated AutoEncoders (DCCAE) (Wang et al. 2015) consider the reconstruction error
and correlation of two views simultaneously to achieve better performance. In general, purely unsupervised representation learning methods could not utilize information in labeled data, and thus may not be sufficiently discriminative
in downstream tasks such as classification or clustering. To
tackle this, Noroozi et al. (Noroozi et al. 2018) recently proposed the first deep semi-supervised representation learning
model Multi-view Discriminative Neural Network (MDNN)
for multi-view problem, which could be viewed as a combination of Deep Linear Discriminant Analysis (DLDA) (Dorfer, Kelz, and Widmer 2016) and DCCA (Andrew et al.
2013). However, MDNN did not incorporate the manifold
information to maintain the smoothness over the data. How
to capture the manifold structure is an important topic in
semi-supervised learning and multi-view learning (Belkin,
Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Sindhwani and Rosenberg
2008; Wang and Zhou 2010; Zhou et al. 2003; Zhu 2005;
Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003).
In this paper, we present a framework for semi-supervised
multi-view representation learning and propose our Multiview Discriminative Graph Attention Network (MvDGAT),
which considers the empirical risk and view consistency in
the objective function and embeds the manifold smoothness information with graph attention network to learn the

Multi-view representation learning attempts to learn a representation from multiple views and most existing methods
are unsupervised. However, representation learned only from
unlabeled data may not be discriminative enough for further applications (e.g., clustering and classification). For this
reason, semi-supervised methods which could use unlabeled
data along with the labeled data for multi-view representation
learning need to be developed. Manifold information plays
an important role in semi-supervised learning, but it has not
been considered for multi-view representation learning. In
this paper, we introduce the manifold smoothness into multiview representation learning and propose MvDGAT which
learns the representation and the intrinsic manifold simultaneously with graph attention network. Experiments conducted on real-world datasets reveal that our MvDGAT can
achieve better performance than state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Multi-view data are ubiquitous in real-world applications,
such as the text content and hyperlink in webpage classification (Du et al. 2013; Jing et al. 2017); the local patterns,
the local shape descriptors, and the spatial-temporal contexts
in object re-identification (Zhao et al. 2018; Zhou, Liu, and
Shao 2018). The data from different views usually provide
complementary information, and utilizing the information
from multiple views together can improve the performance.
To deal with multi-view data, a baseline approach is
simply concatenating the multiple views into one feature vector and adopting traditional single-view learning
paradigms (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013). However, this intrinsically goes against the nature of the distinct views and
often leads to little improvement over single-view learning. Therefore, many multi-view learning methods are developed to achieve better performance (Blum and Mitchell
1998; Hotelling 1936; Sindhwani, Niyogi, and Belkin 2005).
Generally, these multi-view learning methods can be categorized into three groups (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013): 1)
co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998), 2) multiple kernel
learning (Lanckriet et al. 2004) and 3) subspace learning (Hotelling 1936). Subspace learning assumes that the
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8447

