The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proposal-Free Video Grounding with Contextual Pyramid Network
Kun Li, Dan Guo∗ , Meng Wang∗
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data (HFUT), Ministry of Education
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology (HFUT)
School of Artificial Intelligence
Intelligent Interconnected Systems Laboratory of Anhui Province (Hefei University of Technology)
kunli.hfut@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn, eric.mengwang@gmail.com
Query: He sits up there for a few.

Abstract
The challenge of video grounding - localizing activities in an
untrimmed video via a natural language query - is to tackle
the semantics of vision and language consistently along the
temporal dimension. Most existing proposal-based methods
are trapped by computational cost with extensive candidate proposals. In this paper, we propose a novel proposalfree framework named Contextual Pyramid Network (CPNet) to investigate multi-scale temporal correlation in the
video. Specifically, we propose a pyramid network to extract
2D contextual correlation maps at different temporal scales
(T ∗ T , T2 ∗ T2 , T4 ∗ T4 ), where the 2D correlation map (past →
current & current ← future) is designed to model all the relations of any two moments in the video. In other words, CPNet
progressively replenishes the temporal contexts and refines
the location of queried activity by enlarging the temporal receptive fields. Finally, we implement a temporal self-attentive
regression (i.e., proposal-free regression) to predict the activity boundary from the above hierarchical context-aware 2D
correlation maps. Extensive experiments on ActivityNet Captions, Charades-STA, and TACoS datasets demonstrate that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Localized segment: sits up there for a few

go down the slide
8.7s

3.3s

(a) An example of the Video Grounding task
T_ T_
4 *4

mapping

T_ T_
2 *2

mapping

past → current

0

T

mapping

T*T
T
current ← future

2D Correlation Matrix

(b) An illustration of Contextual Pyramid Network

Figure 1: Illustration of an example for Video Grounding.
There are two actions (red and green regions) in the video;
which one is to be queried? To address this issue, we focus
on the fine-grained temporal correlation. We employ a contextual pyramid network to learn 2D temporal correlation,
inspecting different temporal scales to refine the predicted
location. In the 2D correlation matrices, we investigate two
cases of temporal clues: “past → current & current ← future”.

Introduction
Video understanding has attracted increasing attention in the
past few years; many challenges still exist in various videobased tasks, such as video classification (Wang et al. 2016)
and temporal activity detection (Buch et al. 2017a). However, these action related tasks are restricted to a collection
of pre-defined action classes. In real applications, people always give a query and require the model to localize the correct video segment corresponding to the query’s core textual
semantics. Therefore, the task of video grounding was (Gao
et al. 2017; Anne Hendricks et al. 2017) proposed. There is a
semantic gap between vision and language. Video grounding
is a fundamental task in the field of vision-language understanding (e.g., other tasks - video captioning (Zhang et al.
2020c), video question answering (Kim et al. 2020)), which
has recently rapidly developed (Zhang et al. 2019a; Mun
et al. 2020).
In the early works, video grounding was performed in
an “propose-and-rank” manner, which first generated ex-

tensive video segment proposals, then calculated the confidence scores of these proposals with heuristic tactics, finally ranked them to select the appropriate candidate. Using
this manner, (Gao et al. 2017; Anne Hendricks et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018b,a; Ge et al. 2019) retrieved the entire video
with various sliding windows to cover activity instances,
calculated boundary regression and realized clip-sentence
alignment. Nevertheless, the sliding window with a fixedlength setting is insufficient to generate rich proposals with
high IoU (Intersection over Union). Meanwhile, the sliding
strategy neglects the boundary sensitiveness. Besides, without sliding windows, (Buch et al. 2017b) densely generated
multi-scale proposals with several times [1, k] of interval
segment sampling at each time step. (Chen et al. 2018; Yuan
et al. 2019; Wang, Ma, and Jiang 2020; Chen and Jiang
2019) introduced the cross-entropy regression to assign each
proposal with a confidence score. (Zhang et al. 2020a) gen-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1902

