The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Noise Estimation Using Density Estimation
for Self-Supervised Multimodal Learning
Elad Amrani1,2 , Rami Ben-Ari1 , Daniel Rotman1 , Alex Bronstein2
1

IBM Research AI
2
Technion

Abstract

supervised machine learning and has become the key development bottleneck. Recently, to combat costs and effort of
annotation, self-supervised machine learning (Zhang, Isola,
and Efros 2016; Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Pathak et al. 2016;
Misra, Zitnick, and Hebert 2016; Wei et al. 2018; Vondrick,
Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Srivastava, Mansimov, and
Salakhudinov 2015) presents new ways to better utilize the
abundant unlabeled data on the web. However, most selfsupervised systems aim to learn from a single data modality,
which limits their applicability.
In contrast to the above, (Miech et al. 2019, 2020; Amrani
et al. 2019; Moriya et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019b,a) recently
showed that unlabeled instructional videos could be used
as training data for a self-supervised multimodal learning
system due to the high correlation between the spoken word
and the ongoing visuals. Unfortunately, such systems are
forced to deal with high noise levels and thus yield suboptimal results as we show in this paper.
In this paper, we propose a novel noise robust multimodal
representation learning building block for self-supervised
learning. We utilize the inherent correlation between different
modalities for efficient multimodal learning in the presence
of extreme levels of noise. Specifically, we show that noise
estimation can be reduced to a density estimation problem.
We define a multimodal similarity function and show that
based on this function, noise is correlated with sparsity and
vice versa.
Ultimately, we integrate our proposed building block into
an embedding model and learn superior joint video-text representations that achieve comparable state-of-the-art performance on five datasets: MSRVTT (Xu et al. 2016), LSMDC
(Rohrbach et al. 2015), MSVD (Chen and Dolan 2011),
MSRVTT-QA (Xu et al. 2017) and MSVD-QA (Xu et al.
2017); for two different tasks: Video Question Answering
and Text to Video Retrieval. Additionally, we provide a theoretical probabilistic error bound substantiating our empirical
results and analyze failure cases.
Contributions. The key contributions of this paper are
four fold:
1. We show that the problem of noise estimation for multimodal data can be efficiently reduced to a multimodal
density estimation task.
2. We propose a novel building block for noise-robust multimodal representation learning and demonstrate its integra-

One of the key factors of enabling machine learning models
to comprehend and solve real-world tasks is to leverage multimodal data. Unfortunately, annotation of multimodal data
is challenging and expensive. Recently, self-supervised multimodal methods that combine vision and language were proposed to learn multimodal representations without annotation.
However, these methods often choose to ignore the presence of
high levels of noise and thus yield sub-optimal results. In this
work, we show that the problem of noise estimation for multimodal data can be reduced to a multimodal density estimation
task. Using multimodal density estimation, we propose a noise
estimation building block for multimodal representation learning that is based strictly on the inherent correlation between
different modalities. We demonstrate how our noise estimation can be broadly integrated and achieves comparable results
to state-of-the-art performance on five different benchmark
datasets for two challenging multimodal tasks: Video Question Answering and Text-To-Video Retrieval. Furthermore,
we provide a theoretical probabilistic error bound substantiating our empirical results and analyze failure cases. Code:
https://github.com/elad-amrani/ssml.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning is a well established methodology for
tackling complex and challenging artificial intelligence tasks
such as Visual Question Answering (Antol et al. 2015; Jang
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2017; Fan et al. 2019)
and Text-to-Video Retrieval (Liu et al. 2019; Mithun et al.
2018; Yu, Kim, and Kim 2018; Miech, Laptev, and Sivic
2018; Song and Soleymani 2019). The motivation for gleaning information from multiple correlated data sources comes
from how we as humans perceive the world and learn from experience. Using the correlation between speech and vision, a
person is able to recognize objects by their names while learning the visual characteristics. Additionally, concepts can be
learned separately and a combination can be comprehended
automatically, e.g., ‘running’ and ‘beach’ vs. ‘running on the
beach’.
Manual annotation of large-scale datasets and specifically
multimodal datasets is challenging and expensive. This difficulty results in a shortage which limits the progress of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6644

