The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Lipschitz Regularization of Convolutional Layers
using Toeplitz Matrix Theory
Alexandre Araujo, Benjamin Negrevergne, Yann Chevaleyre, Jamal Atif
PSL, Université Paris-Dauphine,
CNRS, LAMSADE, MILES Team, Paris, France
alexandre.araujo@dauphine.eu

Abstract

(2000) used to approximate the maximum singular value of a
linear function. Although generic and accurate, this technique
is also computationally expensive, which impedes its usage
in large training settings.
In this paper we introduce a new upper-bound on the
largest singular value of convolution layers that is both tight
and easy to compute. Instead of using the power method to
iteratively approximate this value, we rely on Toeplitz matrix
theory and its links with Fourier analysis. Our work is based
on the result (Gray et al. 2006) that an upper-bound on the
singular value of Toeplitz matrices can be computed from
the inverse Fourier transform of the characteristic sequence
of these matrices. We first extend this result to doubly-block
Toeplitz matrices (i.e., block Toeplitz matrices where each
block is Toeplitz) and then to convolutional operators, which
can be represented as stacked sequences of doubly-block
Toeplitz matrices. From our analysis immediately follows
an algorithm for bounding the Lipschitz constant of a convolutional layer, and by extension the Lipschitz constant of
the whole network. We theoretically study the approximation
of this algorithm and show experimentally that it is more
efficient and accurate than competing approaches.
Finally, we illustrate our approach on adversarial robustness. Recent work has shown that empirical methods such as
adversarial training (AT) offer poor generalization (Schmidt
et al. 2018), and can be improved by applying Lipschitz regularization (Farnia, Zhang, and Tse 2019). To illustrate the
benefit of our new method, we train a large, state-of-the-art
Wide ResNet architecture with Lipschitz regularization and
show that it offers a significant improvement over adversarial training alone, and over other methods for Lipschitz
regularization. In summary, we make the three following
contributions:

This paper tackles the problem of Lipschitz regularization of
Convolutional Neural Networks. Lipschitz regularity is now
established as a key property of modern deep learning with
implications in training stability, generalization, robustness
against adversarial examples, etc. However, computing the
exact value of the Lipschitz constant of a neural network is
known to be NP-hard. Recent attempts from the literature introduce upper-bounds to approximate this constant that are
either efficient but loose or accurate but computationally expensive. In this work, by leveraging the theory of Toeplitz
matrices, we introduce a new upper-bound for convolutional
layers that is both tight and easy to compute. Based on this
result we devise an algorithm to train Lipschitz regularized
Convolutional Neural Networks.

Introduction
The last few years have witnessed a growing interest in Lipschitz regularization of neural networks, with the aim of
improving their generalization (Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017), their robustness to adversarial attacks (Tsuzuku,
Sato, and Sugiyama 2018; Farnia, Zhang, and Tse 2019), or
their generation abilities (e.g for GANs: Miyato et al. 2018;
Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Unfortunately computing the exact Lipschitz constant of a neural network is
NP-hard (Virmaux and Scaman 2018) and in practice, existing techniques such as Virmaux and Scaman (2018); Fazlyab
et al. (2019) or Latorre, Rolland, and Cevher (2020) are
difficult to implement for neural networks with more than
one or two layers, which hinders their use in deep learning
applications.
To overcome this difficulty, most of the work has focused
on computing the Lipschitz constant of individual layers instead. The product of the Lipschitz constant of each layer is
an upper-bound for the Lipschitz constant of the entire network, and it can be used as a surrogate to perform Lipschitz
regularization. Since most common activation functions (such
as ReLU) have a Lipschitz constant equal to one, the main
bottleneck is to compute the Lipschitz constant of the underlying linear application which is equal to its maximal singular
value. The work in this line of research mainly relies on the
celebrated iterative algorithm by Golub and Van der Vorst

1. We devise an upper-bound on the singular values of the operator matrix of convolutional layers by leveraging Toeplitz
matrix theory and its links with Fourier analysis.
2. We propose an efficient algorithm to compute this upperbound which enables its use in the context of Convolutional
Neural Networks.
3. We use our method to regularize the Lipschitz constant of
neural networks for adversarial robustness and show that
it offers a significant improvement over AT alone.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6661

