The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cross-Oilfield Reservoir Classification via Multi-Scale Sensor Knowledge Transfer
Zhi Li1 * , Zhefeng Wang2 , Zhicheng Wei2 , Xiangguang Zhou3 , Yijun Wang2 ,
Baoxing Huai2 , Qi Liu1† , Nicholas Jing Yuan2 , Renbin Gong3 , Enhong Chen1
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Data Science & School of Computer
Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Huawei Cloud & AI, 3 Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration & Development, PetroChina
zhili03@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{wangzhefeng, weizhicheng1, wangyijun13, huaibaoxing, nicholas.yuan}@huawei.com,
{qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, {zhouxg69, gongrb}@petrochina.com.cn

Abstract
Reservoir classification is an essential step for the exploration
and production process in the oil and gas industry. An appropriate automatic reservoir classification will not only reduce
the manual workloads of experts, but also help petroleum
companies to make optimal decisions efficiently, which in
turn will dramatically reduce the costs. Existing methods
mainly focused on generating reservoir classification in a single geological block but failed to work well on a new oilfield block. Indeed, how to transfer the subsurface characteristics and make accurate reservoir classification across the
geological oilfields is a very important but challenging problem. To that end, in this paper, we present a focused study
on the cross-oilfield reservoir classification task. Specifically,
we first propose a Multi-scale Sensor Extraction (MSE) module to extract the multi-scale feature representations of geological characteristics from multivariate well logs. Furthermore, we design an encoder-decoder module, i.e., Specific
Feature Learning (SFL), to take advantage of specific information of both oilfields. Then, we develop a KnowledgeAttentive Transfer (KAT) module to learn the feature-invariant
representation and transfer the geological knowledge from a
source oilfield to a target oilfield. Finally, we evaluate our
approaches by conducting extensive experiments with realworld industrial datasets. The experimental results clearly
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approaches to
transfer the geological knowledge and generate the crossoilfield reservoir classifications.

~
~
~

~
Well Logging

Reservoir

Reservoir

Dividing

Classification

Results

Figure 1: Workflow of the oil exploration process.
rules, such as shale baseline (Klusman 1980), experts can
easily divide the reservoirs. Then, experts will analyze the
well logs to identify the location and quantity of the hydrocarbon and determine the type of formation (e.g. oil, gas or
water). This process is so-called the reservoir classification.
Finally, based on the classification results of reservoirs, the
engineers will make further drilling and production plan. In
fact, in real industrial activities, the production of about 40%
of shale wells underperform expectations (Scollard 2014)
because of inaccurate reservoir classifications and inappropriate understanding of the subsurface. To that end, how to
learn the subsurface characteristics and make accurate reservoir classification are the major concerning issues in both
industry and academia.
Traditionally, researchers mainly use the reservoir modeling to explore the subsurface (Tong et al. 2017) or expert systems to assist the reservoir classification process (Einstein,
Edwards et al. 1990). However, these methods largely rely
on the experts’ experiences and manual processes which are
costly in time and money. Recently, thanks to the tremendous success of machine learning and data mining, automated methods have been emerging as promising tools to enhance the oil and gas exploration process (Holdaway 2014;
Mohaghegh et al. 2011). Unfortunately, existing researches
mostly apply supervised learning methods to generate the
reservoir classification from well logs in a specific geological block. That makes it difficult for these methods to work
well in a newly discovered oil field due to different geologi-

Introduction
Reservoir classification, which aims at identifying hydrocarbon reservoir under subsurface, is one of the most essential steps for the exploration and development process
in the oil and gas industry. Figure 1 demonstrates a sample workflow from logging the well to making the reservoir
classifications. Specifically, engineers will first use various
sensors during well logging to obtain a continuous record of
the geological properties of the formation. Next, with simple
* This work was accomplished when Zhi working as an intern

in Huawei Cloud & AI.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4215

