The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Shape-based Feature Engineering for Solar Flare Prediction
Varad Deshmukh1 , Thomas Berger2 , James Meiss3 , and Elizabeth Bradley1,4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO 80309
2
Space Weather Technology Research and Education Center, Boulder CO 80309
3
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder CO 80309
4
The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe NM 87501
{varad.deshmukh, thomas.berger, james.meiss, elizabeth.bradley}@colorado.edu
Abstract

priority.
Strategies for flare forecasting rest on the fact that the
complexity of the magnetic field in an AR is known to be relevant to solar-flare occurrence. Figure 1 shows three observations at different times of the line-of-sight (LOS) magnetic
field—called a magnetogram—observed from the sunspot
AR 12673 as it evolved from a simple configuration as seen
in panel (a) to more complex configurations seen in panels
(b) and (c). The white and dark regions represent the LOS
magnetic field exiting and entering the Sun’s surface (termed
positive and negative polarity, respectively). This particular
AR produced a powerful flare within 24 hours of the complex mixed-polarity state observed in panel (b).
It is no surprise that these kinds of magnetic field observations have played a central role in machine learningbased forecasting models for solar flares. Typically, this has
involved the use of features that solar-physics experts consider to be revelant to solar flaring, such as the magnetic field
or electric current strength, current helicity, magnetic shear,
and the like.1 Recently, there has been a push to use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to automatically learn latent features that are statistically correlated to the occurence
of a solar flare. In this work, we take a wholly different
approach, defining a novel feature set based purely on the
shapes of the structures in the magnetogram. We formally
quantify the complexity of an active region by using computational geometry and computational topology techniques
on the radial component of the photospheric magnetic field,
focusing specifically on the proximity and interaction of the
polarities, as well as the components and holes in sub-level
thresholded versions of the magnetogram image. Following
a brief review of ML-based flare forecasting work and a description of the data, we present the results of a comparative
study about the efficacy of these features in a multi-layer
perceptron model.
In operational space weather forecasting offices, human
forecasters currently use the McIntosh (McIntosh 1990) or
Hale (Hale et al. 1919) classification systems to categorize
active regions into various classes; they then determine the
statistical 24-hour flaring probability derived from histor-

Solar flares are caused by magnetic eruptions in active regions (ARs) on the surface of the sun. These events can have
significant impacts on human activity, many of which can
be mitigated with enough advance warning from good forecasts. To date, machine learning-based flare-prediction methods have employed physics-based attributes of the AR images as features; more recently, there has been some work that
uses features deduced automatically by deep learning methods (such as convolutional neural networks). We describe a
suite of novel shape-based features extracted from magnetogram images of the Sun using the tools of computational
topology and computational geometry. We evaluate these features in the context of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) neural network and compare their performance against the traditional physics-based attributes. We show that these abstract
shape-based features outperform the features chosen by the
human experts, and that a combination of the two feature sets
improves the forecasting capability even further.

Introduction
Solar flares are caused by rearrangement of magnetic field
lines in active regions (ARs) on the surface of the Sun. These
bright flashes arise from the collision of accelerated charged
particles with the lower solar atmosphere. The coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) that can accompany these events can have
a significant impact on a range of human activity: damaging spacecraft, creating radiation hazards for astronauts, interfering with GPS, and causing power grid failures, among
other things. Lloyd’s has estimated that a power outage from
an event associated with a powerful solar flare could produce
an economic cost of 0.6 to 2.6 trillion dollars (Maynard,
Smith, and Gonzalez 2013). Many of these losses could be
mitigated with enough advance accurate warning of impending solar flares and the accompanying CMEs through actions
such as switching to higher frequency radio for over-thehorizon communications with international airline flights,
preparing satellites in orbit for safe-mode operations, and
bringing additional generation capacity online to balance
power grids against possible geomagnetically induced current disturbances. Since we currently lack these accurate advanced warnings, research into how to create them is a high

1

Please refer to Table 1 of Deshmukh et al. (2020) for a complete list and to Bobra et al. (2014) for details about the associated
calculations.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15293

