The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RNA Secondary Structure Representation Network for RNA-proteins Binding
Prediction
Ziyi Liu,1 Fulin Luo,2 * Bo Du1†
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer
Science, and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping, and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, China
ziyiliu@whu.edu.cn, luoflyn@163.com, dubo@whu.edu.cn
Abstract

such as neurodegenerative disorders, cancers and cardiovascular diseases(Musunuru 2003; Lukong et al. 2008).
RBPs also have a great influence on the viral RNA transcription and replication. The outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a disease caused by a novel
coronavirus. The coronavirus(CoV) N proteins inside the
coronavirus construct helical ribonucleoproteins during the
packaging of the viral RNA genome, regulating viral RNA
synthesis in replication/transcription, and modulating infected cell metabolism(Nelson, Stohlman, and Tahara 2000;
Stohlman et al. 1988; Cong et al. 2020). Therefore, the study
of RBPs benefits to the understanding of gene regulation and
the treatment of some genetic diseases and infectious diseases.
To investigate how the RBPs affect the RNA processing,
the RNA substrates that each RBP interacts with have been
analyzed(Ule et al. 2003). The binding sites of these RNA
substrates are highly related to the function of RBPs. Both
RNA sequences and RNA structures determine the RBPs
binding intensities (Buckanovich and Darnell 1997; Hackermüller et al. 2005). The RNA sequences reflect the base
distribution information and the RNA structures reflect the
topological information. In previous works, the RNA sequences are widely used to get the RNA binding prediction(Zhang et al. 2016; Kazan et al. 2010a). However, the
missing of RNA structures won’t guarantee the model to
get the optimal prediction. For example, hairpin loop containing “UGGC” has been shown to bind Vts1p-SAM with
high affinity(Aviv et al. 2006). Thus, the topological information extracted by RNA structures also contributes to the
RNA binding prediction.
To analyze the binding of RNA, biologist uses the RBPs
to obtain the binding information of RNA by biological experiments. However, the experimental way is very time- and
material- consuming. To reduce the cost, high-throughput
technologies have been widely used in genome-wise study
of RNA-protein interactions, such as the cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled with high- throughput sequencing (CLIP-seq)(Anders et al. 2011; Ferre, Colantoni, and
Helmer-Citterich 2015) and RNAcompete(Ray et al. 2013).
These high-throughput technologies provide a considerable
amount of available data, which make it possible for traditional machine learning and deep learning methods to train
an accurate model for binding prediction.

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play a significant part in several biological processes in the living cell, such as gene regulation and mRNA localization. Several deep learning methods, especially the model based on convolutional neural network (CNN), have been used to predict the binding sites.
However, previous methods fail to represent RNA secondary
structure features. The traditional deep learning methods generally transform the RNA secondary structure to a regular
matrix that cannot reveal the topological structure information of RNA. To effectively extract the structure features of
RNA, we propose an RNA secondary structure representation
network (RNASSR-Net) based on graph convolutional neural
network (GCN) and convolution neural network (CNN) for
RBP binding prediction. RNASSR-Net constructs the graph
model derived from the RNA secondary structure to learn the
topological properties of RNA. Then, it obtains the spatial importance of each base in RNA with CNN to guide the representation of the RNA secondary structure. Finally, RNASSRNet combines the structure and sequence features to predict
the binding sites. Experimental results demonstrate the proposed method outperforms a few state-of-the-art methods on
the benchmark datasets and gets a higher improvement on the
small-size data. Besides, the proposed RNASSR-Net is also
used to detect the accurate motifs compared with the experimentally verified motifs, which reveals the binding region location and RNA structure interpretation for some biological
guidance in the future.

Introduction
RNAs and proteins are important components in life, which
are involved in biochemical reaction in living cells(Ule and
Rinn 2014). RNA-binding proteins are the proteins that
binds to the RNAs to regulate the gene expression and control RNA processes and translation within the cells(Van Nostrand et al. 2016). The gene regulation comprises a huge
number of co- and post-transcriptional gene expression in
living organisms, including polyadenylation, RNA splicing, modification, capping, localization, translation and
turnover(Ray et al. 2013). The dysfunctions of certain RNAbinding proteins (RBPs) may cause some serious diseases,
* Corresponding author.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

362

