The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Content Masked Loss: Human-Like Brush Stroke Planning in a Reinforcement
Learning Painting Agent
Peter Schaldenbrand1 , Jean Oh2
1

Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
pschalde@andrew.cmu.edu, jeanoh@nrec.ri.cmu.edu

Abstract

The goal of Stroke Based Rendering (SBR) is to find
methods to reproduce a target image using visual elements,
such as paint brush strokes. Many SBR methods (Hertzmann
2003) were deterministic algorithms which placed strokes
onto a canvas that would minimize the loss between the
next canvas and the target image. Modern SBR methods
(Ganin et al. 2018; Huang, Heng, and Zhou 2019; Nakano
2019; Xie, Hachiya, and Sugiyama 2012) use Reinforcement Learning models to generate the stroke sequences. All
of these RL methods use an adversarial or L2 loss in their
reward functions which are designed to minimize the difference between the canvas and the target image. These loss
functions are oblivious to abstract content of the image and
the stroke sequence can follow any method that the model
finds on its way to minimizing the loss.
With existing SBR RL, it is often not clear what the models are painting until the last set of brush strokes are performed as seen in Figure 3. In this way, the SBR RL models
are similar to printers and deterministic SBR models. In generative art such as GANs (Elgammal et al. 2017), only the
final output image is used for evaluating models. In machine
painting, however, the whole performance needs to be evaluated in addition to the final canvas. In this paper, we view
painting as a plan that is a sequence of actions (or brush
strokes) towards an end output. In this context, the proposed
idea is to improve the quality of a painting plan according
to human-like painting techniques where a subject of the
painting becomes incrementally more recognizable as brush
strokes are added.
One approach for guiding a RL painting model to paint

The objective of most Reinforcement Learning painting
agents is to minimize the loss between a target image and
the paint canvas. Human painter artistry emphasizes important features of the target image rather than simply reproducing it. Using adversarial or L2 losses in the RL painting models, although its final output is generally a work of
finesse, produces a stroke sequence that is vastly different
from that which a human would produce since the model
does not have knowledge about the abstract features in the
target image. In order to increase the human-like planning of
the model without the use of expensive human data, we introduce a new loss function for use with the model’s reward
function: Content Masked Loss. In the context of robot painting, Content Masked Loss employs an object detection model
to extract features which are used to assign higher weight to
regions of the canvas that a human would find important for
recognizing content. The results, based on 332 human evaluators, show that the digital paintings produced by our Content
Masked model show detectable subject matter earlier in the
stroke sequence than existing methods without compromising on the quality of the final painting. Our code is available
at https://github.com/pschaldenbrand/ContentMaskedLoss.

Introduction
While there are numerous differences between the methods
used by a skilled human painter and a machine printer, the
end products may look similar. As is the case with photorealistic portraits, a human painter hopes to recreate a target
image as closely as possible with paint. A printer, though not
using paint and a brush, would have a similar objective, however, would go about it in a completely different fashion. A
printer may use a simple heuristic to render the image such
as starting from the top left and working left-to-right and
top-top-bottom, but a human painter would likely take an
abstract approach. As a painter paints using the commonly
used “blocking in” (Scott 2017) technique, you can recognize the subject of the painting early in the painting process,
and the fidelity of the rendering improves with time. In this
way, painting can be considered an anytime algorithm: If
the painting process is interrupted at any point, a valid solution should be available, but the solution becomes better the
longer the process executes for.

Figure 1: Our model was trained using a clipped L1 loss with
Content Masking in its reward function, while the baseline
used adversarial loss.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

505

