The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How Linguistically Fair Are Multilingual Pre-Trained Language Models?
Monojit Choudhury, Amit Deshpande
Microsoft Research Lab India
{monojitc, amitdesh}@microsoft.com

Abstract

gual BERT (mBERT) (Devlin et al. 2019), XLM-RoBERTa
(XLM-R) (Conneau et al. 2020), Massively Multilingual
Translation Encoder (MMTE) (Arivazhagan et al. 2019) and
Unicoder (Liang et al. 2020), have received significant attention from the NLP researchers. Their surprisingly well
crosslingual zero-shot transfer capabilities (Pires, Schlinger,
and Garrette 2019; Wu and Dredze 2020) have revolutionized our approach to multilingual NLP, and offer a promise
of sophisticated and efficient NLP systems for all languages
regardless of the availability of labeled data. This is because
once a MultiLM is pre-trained on unlabeled corpora of a
large number (typically 100+) of languages, task-specific
labeled data for fine-tuning is required only for one language, called the pivot (usually a high-resource language
such as English). The fine-tuned model works across all the
languages that the MultiLM was pre-trained on, albeit with
varying degrees of success.
This crosslingual zero-shot setting also creates the following interesting and important dilemma which researchers
and engineers working in this field are often faced with.
Imagine that a researcher has come up with two MultiLMs,
A and B. She decides to test her models on a standard benchmark, say XNLI (Conneau et al. 2018), which has training
data for Natural Language Inferencing task in English and
test data for 15 languages including English. She observes
that A performs better than B on 10 languages, B performs
better than A on 3 languages, and on the remaining two, the
models perform equally well. Should she declare that model
A is better than B because it outperforms the latter on most
of the languages in XNLI? Or should she declare the one
with higher average accuracy as the winner? Or should it be
some other statistic, say the median or geometric mean of
the performances, according to which the models should be
compared?
We will refer to this dilemma as the Multilingual Model
Selection Problem or MMSP for short. The problem is not
only philosophically interesting, but also has great practical
significance for two reasons. First, before our researcher can
resolve the dilemma, she has to decide what does “better”
mean in the case of MultiLMs. Intuitively, average performance over the set of tested languages appears to be a sensible choice, and has been adopted by several researchers (e.g.,
Liang et al. (2020); Aharoni, Johnson, and Firat (2019)).
However, the average performance on a limited set of tasks

Massively multilingual pre-trained language models, such as
mBERT and XLM-RoBERTa, have received significant attention in the recent NLP literature for their excellent capability towards crosslingual zero-shot transfer of NLP tasks. This
is especially promising because a large number of languages
have no or very little labeled data for supervised learning.
Moreover, a substantially improved performance on low resource languages without any significant degradation of accuracy for high resource languages lead us to believe that these
models will help attain a fairer distribution of language technologies despite the prevalent unfair and extremely skewed
distribution of resources across the world’s languages.
Nevertheless, these models, and the experimental approaches
adopted by the researchers to arrive at those, have been criticised by some for lacking a nuanced and thorough comparison of benefits across languages and tasks. A related and important question that has received little attention is how to
choose from a set of models, when no single model significantly outperforms the others on all tasks and languages. As
we discuss in this paper, this is often the case, and the choices
are usually made without a clear articulation of reasons or
underlying fairness assumptions. In this work, we scrutinize
the choices made in previous work, and propose a few different strategies for fair and efficient model selection based
on the principles of fairness in economics and social choice
theory. In particular, we emphasize Rawlsian fairness, which
provides an appropriate framework for making fair (with respect to languages, or tasks, or both) choices while selecting
multilingual pre-trained language models for a practical or
scientific set-up.

1

Introduction

NLP technologies require large amount of labeled and/or unlabeled data for training. The distribution of resources across
languages, on the other hand, is extremely skewed (Joshi
et al. 2020; Bender 2011), because data annotation is an expensive and effort-intensive affair. This digital divide is further widened by modern technologies, especially the deep
learning approaches to NLP, which require even more data
that all but a handful of the world’s languages possess.
Since their introduction in 2019, massively Multilingual
pre-trained language models (MultiLMs), such as MultilinCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12710

