The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Finding and Certifying (Near-)Optimal Strategies
in Black-Box Extensive-Form Games
Brian Hu Zhang,1 Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Strategic Machine, Inc.
3
Strategy Robot, Inc.
4
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{bhzhang, sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

setting (Vinyals et al. 2019; Berner et al. 2019), those methods lack the low-exploitability guarantees of game-theoretic
techniques, even with infinite samples and computation. Furthermore, the standard method of evaluating exploitability of
a strategy—computing the equilibrium gap of the strategy—
is to compute a best response for each player. This, however,
assumes the whole game to be known exactly.
Recently, Zhang and Sandholm (2020) defined a notion of
certificate for imperfect-information extensive-form games
that can address these problems.1 A certificate enables verification of the exploitability of a given strategy without exploring the whole game tree. However, that work has a few
limitations that reduce its practical applicability. First, they
assume a black-box model that allows sampling or expanding arbitrary nodes in the game tree. Yet most simulators
only allow the players to start from the root of the game,
and chance nodes in the simulator affect the path of play,
so exploration by jumping around in the game tree is not
supported. Second, their algorithm requires an exact game
solver, for example, a linear program (LP) solver, to be invoked repeatedly as a subroutine. This reduces the ability of
the algorithm to scale to cases in which LP is impractical
due to run time or memory considerations.
In this paper, we address both of these concerns. We give
algorithms that create certificates in extensive-form games in
a simple black-box model, with either an exact game solver
or a regret minimizer as a subroutine. p
We show that our algorithms achieve convergence rate O( log(T )/T ) (hiding
game-dependent constants). This matches, up to a logarithmic factor, the convergence rate of regret minimizers such as
counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al.
2007; Brown and Sandholm 2019a) or its stochastic variant, Monte Carlo CFR (MCCFR) (Lanctot et al. 2009; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2020)—while also providing verifiable equilibrium gap guarantees unlike those prior techniques suitable for the black-box setting. In particular, we
are also able to compute ex-post exploitability bounds without knowing the exact game or iterating through all its sequences. In contrast, previous techniques would need to rely

Often—for example in war games, strategy video games,
and financial simulations—the game is given to us only as
a black-box simulator in which we can play it. In these settings, since the game may have unknown nature action distributions (from which we can only obtain samples) and/or be
too large to expand fully, it can be difficult to compute strategies with guarantees on exploitability. Recent work (Zhang
and Sandholm 2020) resulted in a notion of certificate for
extensive-form games that allows exploitability guarantees
while not expanding the full game tree. However, that work
assumed that the black box could sample or expand arbitrary
nodes of the game tree at any time, and that a series of exact
game solves (via, for example, linear programming) can be
conducted to compute the certificate. Each of those two assumptions severely restricts the practical applicability of that
method. In this work, we relax both of the assumptions. We
show that high-probability certificates can be obtained with a
black box that can do nothing more than play through games,
using only a regret minimizer as a subroutine. As a bonus,
we
√
obtain an equilibrium-finding algorithm with Õ(1/ T ) convergence rate in the extensive-form game setting that does not
rely on a sampling strategy with lower-bounded reach probabilities (which MCCFR assumes). We demonstrate experimentally that, in the black-box setting, our methods are able
to provide nontrivial exploitability guarantees while expanding only a small fraction of the game tree.

1

Introduction

Computational equilibrium finding has led to many recent
breakthroughs in AI in games such as poker (Bowling
et al. 2015; Brown and Sandholm 2017; Moravčı́k et al.
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2019b) where the game is fully
known. However, in many applications, the game is not
fully known; instead, it is given only via a simulator that
permits an algorithm to play through the game repeatedly
(e.g., Wellman 2006; Lanctot et al. 2017; Tuyls et al. 2018;
Areyan Viqueira, Cousins, and Greenwald 2020). The algorithm may never know the game exactly. While deep reinforcement learning has yielded strong practical results in this

1
Gatti and Restelli (2011) explore the problem in extensiveform games of perfect information with infinite strategy spaces.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5779

