The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computing Ex Ante Coordinated Team-Maxmin Equilibria in Zero-Sum
Multiplayer Extensive-Form Games
Youzhi Zhang, Bo An, Jakub Černý
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{yzhang137, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, cerny@disroot.org

Abstract

games with specific structures (e.g., polymatrix games (Cai
and Daskalakis 2011)), or there are no theoretical guarantees
at all (e.g., the algorithm in Brown and Sandholm (2019)).
Finding and playing NEs in multiplayer games is difficult
due to the following two reasons. First, computing NEs is
PPAD-complete even for three-player zero-sum games (Chen
and Deng 2005). And second, NEs are neither unique nor
exchangeable in multiplayer games, which makes it almost
impossible for the players who choose their strategies independently to form an NE together. The research on multiplayer games hence focuses on alternative solution concepts
with more favorable properties.
Team-Maxmin Equilibrium with Coordination device
(TMECor, TMEsCor as a plural) (Celli and Gatti 2018; Farina et al. 2018) is a solution concept that models a situation
when a team of players shares the same utility function and
coordinates ex ante against an adversary. That is, the team
members are allowed to discuss and agree on tactics before
the game starts, but they cannot communicate during the
game. Celli and Gatti (2018) show that ex ante coordination
can be modelled using a coordination device, assuming that
the adversary does not observe any signal from the device.
The team members agree on a planned strategy (e.g., a mixed
strategy) in the planning phase, and then, just before the game
starts, the coordination device randomly picks a pure joint
strategy (from the planned strategy) for the team members to
act upon. A TMECor is an NE between the team (i.e., each
team member has no incentive to deviate) and the adversary
in a zero-sum multiplayer extensive-form game, and it has
the properties of NEs in zero-sum two-player games (e.g.,
exchangeability). The study of TMECor is motivated by its
ability to capture many real-world scenarios. For example,
in multiplayer poker games, a team may play against an adversary player, but they cannot communicate and discuss
their strategy during the game due to the rules. In Bridge,
when the game reaches the phase of the play of the hand, two
defenders who form a team play against the declarer. Or in
security games in which several different groups (e.g., NGOs,
the Madagascar National Parks, local police, and community
volunteers) aim to protect forests from illegal logging (McCarthy et al. 2016), TMECor models the groups’ inability to
communicate while they try to interdict the escaping loggers.
TMECor has better properties than NE in multiplayer
games; however, computing it is still difficult—it was shown

Computational game theory has many applications in the modern world in both adversarial situations and the optimization
of social good. While there exist many algorithms for computing solutions in two-player interactions, finding optimal
strategies in multiplayer interactions efficiently remains an
open challenge. This paper focuses on computing the multiplayer Team-Maxmin Equilibrium with Coordination device (TMECor) in zero-sum extensive-form games. TMECor
models scenarios when a team of players coordinates ex ante
against an adversary. Such situations can be found in card
games (e.g., in Bridge and Poker), when a team works together to beat a target player but communication is prohibited;
and also in real world, e.g., in forest-protection operations,
when coordinated groups have limited contact during interdicting illegal loggers. The existing algorithms struggle to find a
TMECor efficiently because of their high computational costs.
To compute a TMECor in larger games, we make the following key contributions: (1) we propose a hybrid-form strategy
representation for the team, which preserves the set of equilibria; (2) we introduce a column-generation algorithm with
a guaranteed finite-time convergence in the infinite strategy
space based on a novel best-response oracle; (3) we develop
an associated-representation technique for the exact representation of the multilinear terms in the best-response oracle; and
(4) we experimentally show that our algorithm is several orders of magnitude faster than prior state-of-the-art algorithms
in large games.

1

Introduction

One of the most important problems in artificial intelligence
is to design algorithms for agents who make complex decisions in interactive environments (Russell and Norvig 2016).
So far, researchers made significant progress mostly in noncooperative two-player games, focusing on finding a Nash
Equilibrium (NE) (Nash 1951; von Stengel 1996; Zinkevich et al. 2008) or a Stackelberg equilibrium (Conitzer and
Sandholm 2006). These results paved the way for many applications, such as in security games that have high social
impact (Sinha et al. 2018) or poker algorithms that defeated
top human professionals (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and
Sandholm 2018). However, the research in multiplayer games
remains limited. Theoretical results were achieved only for
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5813

