The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stability and Generalization of Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent
Tao Sun1 , Dongsheng Li1∗ , and Bao Wang2
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China.
2
Scientific Computing & Imaging Institute, University of Utah, USA.
nudtsuntao@163.com, dsli@nudt.edu.cn, wangbaonj@gmail.com

Abstract

SGD has already been widely used in parallel and distributed settings (Agarwal and Duchi 2011; Dekel et al.
2012; Recht et al. 2011), e.g., the decentralized SGD (DSGD) (Ram, Nedić, and Veeravalli 2010b; Lan, Lee, and
Zhou 2020; Srivastava and Nedic 2011; Lian et al. 2017). DSGD is implemented without a centralized parameter server, and all nodes are connected through an undirected graph.
Compared to the centralized SGD, the decentralized one requires much less communication with the busiest node (Lian
et al. 2017), accelerating the whole computational system.
From the theoretical viewpoint, although there exist plenty of convergence analysis of D-SGD (Sirb and Ye 2016;
Lan, Lee, and Zhou 2020; Lian et al. 2017, 2018), the stability and generalization analysis of D-SGD remains rare.

The stability and generalization of stochastic gradient-based
methods provide valuable insights into understanding the algorithmic performance of machine learning models. As the
main workhorse for deep learning, stochastic gradient descent has received a considerable amount of studies. Nevertheless, the community paid little attention to its decentralized variants. In this paper, we provide a novel formulation
of the decentralized stochastic gradient descent. Leveraging
this formulation together with (non)convex optimization theory, we establish the first stability and generalization guarantees for the decentralized stochastic gradient descent. Our
theoretical results are built on top of a few common and mild
assumptions and reveal that the decentralization deteriorates
the stability of SGD for the first time. We verify our theoretical findings by using a variety of decentralized settings and
benchmark machine learning models.

Contributions
In this paper, we establish the first theoretical result on the
stability and generalization of the D-SGD. We elaborate on
our contributions below.

Introduction
The great success of deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015) gives impetus to the development of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951) and its
variants (Nemirovski et al. 2009; Duchi, Hazan, and Singer
2011; Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2012; Kingma and Ba
2014; Wang et al. 2020). Although the convergence results of SGD are abundant, the effects caused by the training
data is absent. To this end, the generalization error (Hardt,
Recht, and Singer 2016; Lin, Camoriano, and Rosasco 2016;
Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002; Bottou and Bousquet 2008)
is developed as an alternative method to analyze SGD. The
generalization bound reveals the performance of stochastic
algorithms and characterizes how the training data and stochastic algorithm jointly affect the target machine learning
model. To mathematically describe generalization, Hardt,
Recht, and Singer (2016); Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002);
Elisseeff, Evgeniou, and Pontil (2005) introduce the algorithmic stability for SGD, which mainly depends on the
landscape of the underlying loss function, to study the generalization bound of SGD. The stability theory of SGD has
been further developed (Charles and Papailiopoulos 2018;
Kuzborskij and Lampert 2018; Lei and Ying 2020).

1. Stability of D-SGD: We provide the uniform stability of
D-SGD in the general convex, strongly convex, and nonconvex cases. Our theory shows that besides the learning
rate, data size, and iteration number, the stability and generalization of D-SGD are also dependent on the connected
graph structure. To the best of our knowledge, our result
is the first theoretical stability guarantee for D-SGD. In
the general convex setting, we also present the stability of
D-SGD in terms of the ergodic average instead of the last
iteration for the excess generalization analysis.
2. Computational errors for D-SGD with convexity and projection: We consider more general schemes of D-SGD,
that is, D-SGD with projection. In the previous work
(Ram, Nedić, and Veeravalli 2010b), to get the convergence rate, the authors need to make additional assumptions on the graph ([Assumptions 2 and 3, (Ram, Nedić,
and Veeravalli 2010b)]). In this paper, we remove these
assumptions, and we present the computational errors of
D-SGD with projections in the strongly convex setting.
3. Generalization bounds for D-SGD with convexity: We derive (excess) generalization bounds for convex D-SGD.
The excess generalization is controlled by the computational error and the generalization bound, which can be
directly obtained from the stability.

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9756

