The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Why Adversarial Interaction Creates Non-Homogeneous Patterns: A
Pseudo-Reaction-Diffusion Model for Turing Instability
Litu Rout
Space Applications Centre
Indian Space Research Organisation
lr@sac.isro.gov.in

Abstract

been reported in copious literature that supervised learning
with adversarial regularization performs better than sole supervision (Ledig et al. 2017; Rout 2020; Wang et al. 2018;
Wang and Gupta 2016; Karacan et al. 2016; Sarmad, Lee,
and Kim 2019). In all these prior works, one may notice several crucial properties of adversarial interaction. It is worth
emphasizing that adversarial learning owes its benefits to the
continuously evolving loss function which otherwise is extremely difficult to model. Motivated by these findings, we
uncover another interesting property of adversarial training.
We observe that adversarial interaction helps break the spatial symmetry and homogeneity to create non-homogeneous
patterns in weight space.
The reason for studying these phenomena is multi-fold.
The fact that adversarial interaction exhibits Turing-like patterns creates a dire need to investigate its connections to
nature. In particular, these patterns often emerge in real
world systems, such as butterfly wings, zebra, giraffe and
leopard (Turing 1952; Meinhardt 1982; Rauch and Millonas
2004; Nakamasu et al. 2009; Kondo and Miura 2010). Interestingly, adversarial training captures some intricacies of
this complex biological process that create evolutionary patterns in neural networks. Furthermore, it is important to understand neural synchronization in human brain to design
better architectures (Budzynski et al. 2009). This paper is
intended to shed light on some of these aspects.
It is widely believed that fully connected networks already
capture certain important properties of deep learning (Saxe,
McClelland, and Ganguli 2014; Li and Liang 2018). While
one may wish to extend these analyses to more complex networks, it may not allow a comprehensive study of various
fundamental aspects in the nascent state of understanding.
Besides, the complexity involved in studying the ReactionDiffusion (RD) dynamics of a large neural network is enormous. For this reason, we study two layer neural networks
and focus more on the theory of Turing-like patterns.
While dynamical systems governed by different equations
exhibit different patterns, it is crucial to study the dynamics
through reaction and diffusion terms that laid the foundation
of pattern formation (Turing 1952). Our key observation:

Long after Turing’s seminal Reaction-Diffusion (RD) model,
the elegance of his fundamental equations alleviated much of
the skepticism surrounding pattern formation. Though Turing
model is a simplification and an idealization, it is one of the
best-known theoretical models to explain patterns as a reminiscent of those observed in nature. Over the years, concerted
efforts have been made to align theoretical models to explain
patterns in real systems. The apparent difficulty in identifying
the specific dynamics of the RD system makes the problem
particularly challenging. Interestingly, we observe Turinglike patterns in a system of neurons with adversarial interaction. In this study, we establish the involvement of Turing
instability to create such patterns. By theoretical and empirical studies, we present a pseudo-reaction-diffusion model to
explain the mechanism that may underlie these phenomena.
While supervised learning attains homogeneous equilibrium,
this paper suggests that the introduction of an adversary helps
break this homogeneity to create non-homogeneous patterns
at equilibrium. Further, we prove that randomly initialized
gradient descent with over-parameterization can converge exponentially fast to an -stationary point even under adversarial interaction. In addition, different from sole supervision,
we show that the solutions obtained under adversarial interaction are not limited to a tiny subspace around initialization.

Introduction
In this paper, we intend to demystify an interesting phenomenon: adversarial interaction between generator and discriminator creates non-homogeneous equilibrium by inducing Turing instability in a Pseudo-Reaction-Diffusion (PRD)
model. This is in contrast to supervised learning where the
identical model achieves homogeneous equilibrium while
maintaining spatial symmetry over iterations.
Recent success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017) has led to exciting applications in a wide variety of tasks (Luc et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017; Ledig et al.
2017; Engin, Genç, and Kemal Ekenel 2018; Rout et al.
2020). In adversarial learning paradigm, it is often required
that a particular sample is generated subject to a conditional
input. Typically, conditional GANs are employed to meet
these demands (Mirza and Osindero 2014). Further, it has

A system in which a generator and a discriminator
adversarially interact with each other exhibits Turing-like
patterns in the hidden layer and top layer of a two layer
generator network with ReLU activation.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9436

