The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Heuristic Evaluation Function for Hand Strength Estimation in Gin
Rummy
Aqib Ahmed, Joshua Leppo, Michal Lesniewski, Riken Patel, Jonathan Perez, Jeremy J. Blum
The Pennsylvania State University, Harrisburg
{aja6082, jzl6309, mkl5384, rkp8, jrp5717, jjb24}@psu.edu
Abstract

actions within an information set, where the weights are
based on the likelihood that a node would be reached by an
opponent’s strategy (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000).
A constraint for nodes within an information set is that
they have the same set of available actions. For a discard
decision in Gin Rummy, this constraint creates a challenge.
The discard decision requires the selection of 1 of 11 cards.
Given the more than 60 billion 11-card hands, the explosion
in the number of information sets limits the ability to directly develop a CFR strategy for this decision point.
This paper introduces an approach to a Gin Rummy bot
that uses CFR-based approach for knocking decisions, a
heuristic approach to drawing decisions, and a hand strength
estimation model for discarding decisions. The model is
used to select a discard that attempts to maximize the current
player’s chances of winning. The approach incorporates not
only the effect of discards on the player’s cards, but also an
estimate of the effect on the opponent’s hand given the
knowledge that the player has of the opponent’s hand and
the current game state. The resulting discard approach is
computationally inexpensive, requiring the look ahead of
just one turn in the game. Studies of parameterization show
that the model’s design choices are sound. In addition, the
model is not extremely sensitive to the choice of parameter
values. Instead, there is a range of values that work well.

This paper describes a fast hand strength estimation model
for the game of Gin Rummy. The algorithm is computationally inexpensive, and it incorporates not only cards in the
player’s hand but also cards known to be in the opponent’s
hand, cards in the discard pile, and the current game stage.
This algorithm is used in conjunction with counterfactual regret (CFR) minimization to develop a gin rummy bot. CFR
strategies were developed for the knocking strategies. The
hand strength estimation algorithm was used to select a discard that balances the goals of maximizing the utility of the
player’s hand and minimizing the likelihood that a card will
be useful to the opponent. A study of the parameterization of
this estimation algorithm demonstrates the soundness of approach as well as good performance under a wide range of
parameter values.

Introduction
In games of perfect information, players have full
knowledge of the game state. Examples of these games include checkers, chess, and go. Game theoretic approaches,
like alpha-beta pruning, can explore the game tree to find
the best outcomes for a player (Samuel 1959). The size of
the game tree is often the constraining factor for solving
these types of games.
In games of imperfect information, players may have only
partial information about the current game state. Examples
of these types of games include poker and gin rummy, in
which, for example, the cards in an opponent’s hand may be
unknown to the player. In these games, nodes in possible
game trees are grouped into sets, called information sets,
which contain nodes that are indistinguishable to the player
due to the partial information available to them (LeytonBrown and Shoham 2008). Players then play a common
strategy for all nodes within an information set. For example, counterfactual regret (CFR) minimization finds an equilibrium strategy by minimizing a weighted regret of selected

Background
Gin Rummy
Gin Rummy is a part of the Rummy family of card games in
which, generally speaking, there is a drawing and discarding
action involved in making sets of similar cards, called
melds. While the origins of Rummy are unclear, speculation
of its origins includes the Chinese games Mah-Jong and Kun
P’ai, and the Mexican game of Conquian (Parlett 2002).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15465

