The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mean-Variance Policy Iteration for Risk-Averse Reinforcement Learning
Shangtong Zhang,1 Bo Liu, 2 Shimon Whiteson 1
1

University of Oxford
Auburn University
shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk, bo.liu@auburn.edu, shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

applications. Risk-neutral RL methods have enjoyed stable
off-policy learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992; Maei 2011;
Fujimoto, van Hoof, and Meger 2018; Haarnoja et al. 2018),
while state-of-the-art risk-averse RL methods, e.g., Xie et al.
(2018); Bisi et al. (2020), still require on-policy samples.
Risk-neutral RL methods have exploited deep neural network function approximators and distributed training (Mnih
et al. 2016; Espeholt et al. 2018), while tabular and linear
methods still dominate the experiments of risk-averse RL literature (Tamar, Di Castro, and Mannor 2012; Prashanth and
Ghavamzadeh 2013; Xie et al. 2018; Chow et al. 2018). Such
a big gap between risk-averse RL and risk-neutral RL gives
rise to a natural question: can we design a meta algorithm
that can easily leverage recent advances in risk-neutral RL
for risk-averse RL? In this paper, we give an affirmative answer via the mean-variance policy iteration (MVPI) framework.
Although many risk measures have been used in riskaverse RL, in this paper, we mainly focus on variance (Sobel 1982; Mannor and Tsitsiklis 2011; Tamar, Di Castro, and
Mannor 2012; Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh 2013; Xie et al.
2018) given its advantages in interpretability and computation (Markowitz and Todd 2000; Li and Ng 2000). Such an
RL paradigm is usually referred to as mean-variance RL,
and previous mean-variance RL methods usually consider
the variance of the total reward random variable (Tamar,
Di Castro, and Mannor 2012; Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh
2013; Xie et al. 2018). Recently, Bisi et al. (2020) propose a
reward-volatility risk measure that considers the variance of
a per-step reward random variable. Bisi et al. (2020) show
that the variance of the per-step reward can better capture
the short-term risk than the variance of the total reward and
usually leads to smoother trajectories.
In complicated environments with function approximation, pursuing the exact policy that minimizes the variance of
the total reward is usually intractable. In practice, all we can
hope is to lower the variance of the total reward to a certain
level. As the variance of the per-step reward bounds the variance of the total reward from above (Bisi et al. 2020), in this
paper, we propose to optimize the variance of the per-step
reward as a proxy for optimizing the variance of the total
reward. Though the policy minimizing the variance of the
per-step reward does not necessarily minimize the variance
of the total reward, in this paper, we show, via MVPI, that

We present a mean-variance policy iteration (MVPI) framework for risk-averse control in a discounted infinite horizon MDP optimizing the variance of a per-step reward random variable. MVPI enjoys great flexibility in that any policy evaluation method and risk-neutral control method can
be dropped in for risk-averse control off the shelf, in both
on- and off-policy settings. This flexibility reduces the gap
between risk-neutral control and risk-averse control and is
achieved by working on a novel augmented MDP directly. We
propose risk-averse TD3 as an example instantiating MVPI,
which outperforms vanilla TD3 and many previous riskaverse control methods in challenging Mujoco robot simulation tasks under a risk-aware performance metric. This riskaverse TD3 is the first to introduce deterministic policies and
off-policy learning into risk-averse reinforcement learning,
both of which are key to the performance boost we show in
Mujoco domains.

Introduction
One fundamental task in reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton
and Barto 2018) is control, in which we seek a policy that
maximizes certain performance metrics. In risk-neutral RL,
the performance metric is usually the expectation of some
random variable, for example, the expected total (discounted
or undiscounted) reward (Puterman 2014; Sutton and Barto
2018). We, however, sometimes want to minimize certain
risk measures of that random variable while maximizing its
expectation. For example, a portfolio manager usually wants
to reduce the risk of a portfolio while maximizing its return.
Risk-averse RL is a framework for studying such problems.
Although many real-world applications can potentially
benefit from risk-averse RL, e.g., pricing (Wang 2000),
healthcare (Parker 2009), portfolio management (Lai et al.
2011), autonomous driving (Maurer et al. 2016), and
robotics (Majumdar and Pavone 2020), the development of
risk-averse RL largely falls behind risk-neutral RL. Riskneutral RL methods have enjoyed superhuman performance
in many domains, e.g., Go (Silver et al. 2016), protein design (Senior, Jumper, and Hassabis 2018), and StarCraft II
(Vinyals et al. 2019), while no human-level performance
has been reported for risk-averse RL methods in real-world
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10905

