The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disentangled Representation Learning in Heterogeneous Information Network
for Large-scale Android Malware Detection in the COVID-19 Era and Beyond
Shifu Hou1 , Yujie Fan1 , Mingxuan Ju1 , Yanfang Ye1 * ,
Wenqiang Wan2 , Kui Wang2 , Yinming Mei2 , Qi Xiong2 , Fudong Shao2
1

Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, OH, USA
2
Tencent Security Lab, Tencent, Guangdong, China
{sxh1055, yxf370, mxj255, yanfang.ye}@case.edu, {johnnywan, flashwang, yinmingmei, keonxiong}@tencent.com
Abstract

also attackers to disseminate malware (malicious software)
that deliberately fulfills the harmful intent to mobile device
users (e.g., stealing user credentials, pushing unwanted apps
[Ye et al. 2017]). Driven by considerable profits, there has
been explosive growth of Android malware - e.g., it’s reported that there were over 1.89 million new Android malware which infected more than 38 million smart phones in
the first half of 20191 . More specifically, utilizing both fear
and financial incentives, cyber attackers are using COVID19 or coronavirus as a lure all over the spectrum of sophistication to spread malware to gain profits from the global
health crisis (e.g., CovidLock is an Android ransomware
that portrays itself as a coronavirus tracker); according to
a recent report2 , the pandemic has sparked 72% ransomware
growth. To combat the exponential growth of sophisticated
Android malware, it points to an imminent need for innovative detection techniques to protect legitimate users against
the attacks in the COVID-19 era and beyond.
The most significant line to protect users against Android
malware attacks is mobile security products (e.g., Norton
and Tencent Mobile Security). However, in the never-ending
arms race, attackers always devise new tactics to evade their
detection. For example, as shown in Figure 1.(a), to bypass the content-based detection, a malicious banking trojan (i.e., App-2) could adopt repackaging techniques making its codes highly similar as a legitimate app that is developed to provide COVID-19 updates (i.e., App-1). To combat
with our adversaries, instead of merely using content-based
features for the detection, higher-level semantics and social
relations among apps within the ecosystem could provide
complementary knowledge: as shown in Figure 1.(b).right,
if a developer always repackages various apps to produce
customized malware, then the legitimacy of apps generated
by this developer is questionable (e.g., App-4 could possibly
be malicious); as illustrated in Figure 1.(c).right, if a mobile device user is an online game user, then it may be easier
to get infected by online game trojans (i.e., app co-existence
may help determine whether a given one is malicious or not).
How to comprehensively leverage these information to build
an intelligent system that is able to understand the milieu of
given apps for the detection of malicious ones?

In the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, many social activities have moved online; society’s overwhelming reliance
on the complex cyberspace makes its security more important
than ever. In this paper, we propose and develop an intelligent
system named Dr.HIN to protect users against the evolving
Android malware attacks in the COVID-19 era and beyond. In
Dr.HIN, besides app content, we propose to consider higherlevel semantics and social relations among apps, developers
and mobile devices to comprehensively depict Android apps;
and then we introduce a structured heterogeneous information network (HIN) to model the complex relations and exploit meta-path guided strategy to learn node (i.e., app) representations from HIN. As the representations of malware could
be highly entangled with benign apps in the complex ecosystem of development, it poses a new challenge of learning the
latent explanatory factors hidden in the HIN embeddings to
detect the evolving malware. To address this challenge, we
propose to integrate domain priors generated from different
views (i.e., app content, app authorship, app installation) to
devise an adversarial disentangler to separate the distinct, informative factors of variations hidden in the HIN embeddings
for large-scale Android malware detection. This is the first
attempt of disentangled representation learning in HIN data.
Promising experimental results based on real sample collections from security industry demonstrate the performance of
Dr.HIN in evolving Android malware detection, by comparison with baselines and popular mobile security products.

Introduction
The deadly outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
posed grand challenges to human society. In the fight against
the global pandemic, many social activities have moved online. As mobile devices connected to the Internet have become increasingly ubiquitous, society’s overwhelming reliance on the complex yet increasingly connected devices
makes their security more important than ever. Android, as
an open source and customizable operating system (OS) for
mobile devices, is currently dominating the market. However, due to its large market share and open source ecosystem of development, Android attracts not only developers
for producing legitimate Android applications (apps), but
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

7754

https://m.qq.com/security lab/news detail 517.html
https://www.skyboxsecurity.com/trends-report/

