The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explainable Models with Consistent Interpretations
Vipin Pillai, Hamed Pirsiavash
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{vp7, hpirsiav}@umbc.edu

Abstract

Recent works (Adebayo et al. 2018; Subramanya, Pillai,
and Pirsiavash 2019) have shown that the result of most
current model interpretation methods is not consistent with
our prior knowledge about understanding of an image, and
hence are difficult to trust. We believe this inconsistency
may have at least two sources: (1) the interpretation method
does not produce correct interpretation, (2) the model is not
making the decision as we want (e.g., it has learned some unwanted bias from the training data). For instance, in training
an image classifier for “fish” category, if a person is holding
the fish in most training examples for “fish” category, then
the model may decide to use features of the person’s hand to
detect the fish. This is an example of association bias in the
training data. However, it is unwanted since we know that
such biases may not exist in some final test images (Singh
et al. 2020).
There is a large community developing better interpretation algorithms to solve the first point above, so in this
work, we assume the interpretation method is given and try
to focus on resolving the second point above. Specifically,
we train deep models such that under a “given” interpretation method, the network produces a reasonable interpretation that is consistent. This means the model should only use
the information that we believe is relevant to the model’s final decision. We would like to emphasize that we are not
improving the interpretation algorithm as many other works
do. Instead, we are learning a more trustworthy model under
a given interpretation method.
If we knew the ground truth interpretation for a decision,
this goal can be achieved by simply supervising the interpretation output (Ross, Hughes, and Doshi-Velez 2017). However, we do not always have access to the ground truth interpretation. There are some works that assume the interpretation mask should be close to the object’s segmentation mask (Li et al. 2019) and use the segmentation mask in
the supervision. However, we believe that such a hard constraint might not always be necessary as the network can
make decisions by relying solely on the most discriminative parts of an object instead of the whole object area. For
example, the model can use only the head of a dog instead
of its whole body to reason about dog classification. Moreover, such methods require the segmentation mask during
training, which is generally expensive. To mitigate this lack
of ground truth masks, we adopt ideas from self-supervised

Given the widespread deployment of black box deep neural
networks in computer vision applications, the interpretability
aspect of these black box systems has recently gained traction. Various methods have been proposed to explain the results of such deep neural networks. However, some recent
works have shown that such explanation methods are biased
and do not produce consistent interpretations. Hence, rather
than introducing a novel explanation method, we learn models that are encouraged to be interpretable given an explanation method. We use Grad-CAM as the explanation algorithm and encourage the network to learn consistent interpretations along with maximizing the log-likelihood of the correct class. We show that our method outperforms the baseline
on the pointing game evaluation on ImageNet and MS-COCO
datasets respectively. We also introduce new evaluation metrics that penalize the saliency map if it lies outside the ground
truth bounding box or segmentation mask, and show that our
method outperforms the baseline on these metrics as well.
Moreover, our model trained with interpretation consistency
generalizes to other explanation algorithms on all the evaluation metrics. The code and models are publicly available.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great results in various applications including computer vision. In many applications, particularly in safety critical systems, it is very important to
understand the underlying decision making process of the
model (Alexandrov 2017; Vellido 2019). For instance, when
a self-driving car makes a wrong decision resulting in an
accident, we want to be able to investigate what part of
the input influenced this decision. As another example, in
medical applications, it is not easy to utilize the results of
deep learning models without knowing the underlying reasoning process in a human interpretable way (Caruana et al.
2015). Hence, building network interpretation methods have
become an active research area. Most such methods focus
on using a heatmap to describe the interpretation: Given a
model, an input image, and a decision, e.g., an output category in classification setting, the interpretation method generates a heatmap in the size of the input image that has larger
values on the regions of the image that has influenced the
model to make the given decision.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2431

