The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PSSM-Distil: Protein Secondary Structure Prediction (PSSP) on Low-Quality
PSSM by Knowledge Distillation with Contrastive Learning
∗

Qin Wang1,† , Boyuan Wang 1,2,† , Zhenlei Xu 2 , Jiaxiang Wu 2 , Peilin Zhao 2 , Zhen Li 1 , Sheng
Wang 2 , Junzhou Huang 2 , Shuguang Cui 1
1

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong(Shenzhen), 2 Tencent AI Lab
{qinwang1@link., boyuanwang@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn, shengwwang@tencent.com

Abstract
Protein secondary structure prediction (PSSP) is an essential task in computational biology. To achieve the accurate
PSSP, the general and vital feature engineering is to use multiple sequence alignment (MSA) for Position-Specific Scoring
Matrix (PSSM) extraction. However, when only low-quality
PSSM can be obtained due to poor sequence homology, previous PSSP accuracy (merely around 65%) is far from practical usage for subsequent tasks. In this paper, we propose
a novel PSSM-Distil framework for PSSP on low-quality
PSSM, which not only enhances the PSSM feature at a lower
level but also aligns the feature distribution at a higher level.
In practice, the PSSM-Distil first exploits the proteins with
high-quality PSSM to achieve a teacher network for PSSP
in a full-supervised way. Under the guidance of the teacher
network, the low-quality PSSM and corresponding student
network with low discriminating capacity are effectively resolved by feature enhancement through EnhanceNet and distribution alignment through knowledge distillation with contrastive learning. Further, our PSSM-Distil supports the input
from a pre-trained protein sequence language BERT model to
provide auxiliary information, which is designed to address
the extremely low-quality PSSM cases, i.e., no homologous
sequence. Extensive experiments demonstrate the proposed
PSSM-Distil outperforms state-of-the-art models on PSSP by
6% on average and nearly 8% in extremely low-quality cases
on public benchmarks, BC40 and CB513.

MSA
PSSM-Distil
High-quality
PSSM

Low-quality
PSSM
Enhanced
PSSM

PSSM

MG R V T S G T MR F G V T F R E V

MG R V T S G T MR F G V T F R E V
MG R V T S G T MR F G V T F R E V

Coil
Coil

Betasheet
Sheet
Beta

Coil
Coil

Beta Sheet

Beta sheet

Coil

PSSP
Alpha
Helix
Alpha helix
High-quality
PSSP

Alpha Helix
Alpha helix

Enhanced PSSP

Low-quality
PSSP

Figure 1: Proposed PSSM-Distil for protein secondary structure prediciton (PSSP) on low-quality PSSM. PSSM-Distil
uses a teacher-student network to conduct the knowledge
distillation (KD) and contrastive learning (CL) from highquality PSSM, thus leading to the final improved PSSP.

magnetic resonance (NMR) and the expensive equipment requirement for cryo-EM, computer-assisted protein structure
prediction attracts broad attention due to its convenience and
superior performance. For ab initio tertiary structure prediction, protein property, such as protein secondary structure,
provides crucial information as it represents the local patterns of protein structure. Therefore, enhancing the accuracy
of protein secondary structure prediction (PSSP) is fundamental for subsequent protein structure prediction.
PSSP is to classify every amino acid on a protein sequence
with a secondary structure label (coil, alpha helix, beta-sheet
for 3-state secondary structure) indicating the local structure, which is very similar to sequence labeling in natural
language processing (NLP). Existing methods usually use
the homologs searched from the protein database, which
is called multiple sequence alignment (MSA), to generate
the Positional-Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) for protein
sequence. Various sophisticated deep learning models (Li
and Yu 2016; Wang et al. 2016; Zhou and Troyanskaya
2014) achieved satisfactory PSSP performance (around 85%
Q3 accuracy) when taking high-quality PSSM along with
one-hot amino acid sequence as evolutionary information.

Introduction
Protein structure analysis, especially protein tertiary (3D)
structure, plays a critical role for practical protein applications, such as the understanding of the protein functions and
the design of drugs (Noble, Endicott, and Johnson 2004).
Currently, there are three mainstream methods for protein
tertiary structure (3D) prediction, i.e., X-ray crystallography
and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Wuthrich 1989),
cryo-EM based methods (Wang et al. 2015) and computeraided ab initio prediction (Mandell and Kortemme 2009).
Given the extremely time-consuming drawback of X-ray
crystallography, the sequence length limitation of nuclear
∗
Corresponding author. † Equal first authorship.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work is done when Boyuan Wang works as intern at Tencent AI Lab

617

