The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal ROI Align for Video Object Recognition
Tao Gong 1,2∗ , Kai Chen 3 , Xinjiang Wang 3 , Qi Chu 1,2† , Feng Zhu 3 ,
Dahua Lin 4 , Nenghai Yu 1,2 , Huamin Feng 5
1
School of Cyberspace Security, University of Science and Technology of China
Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
SenseTime Research
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute
gt950513@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenkai@sensetime.com, wangxinjiang@sensetime.com, qchu@ustc.edu.cn,
zhufeng@sensetime.com, dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ynh@ustc.edu.cn, oliver feng@yeah.net
Abstract
However, ROI Align only utilizes current frame feature map
to extract features for current frame proposals, this leads to
Video object detection is challenging in the presence of apthe extracted ROI features lacking the temporal information
pearance deterioration in certain video frames. Therefore, it is
of the same object instance in a video. One simple and oba natural choice to aggregate temporal information from othvious way to utilize the temporal information is taking other
er frames of the same video into the current frame. However,
frames feature maps to perform ROI Align for current frame
ROI Align, as one of the most core procedures of video detectors, still remains extracting features from a single-frame
proposals. But the precise location of the current frame profeature map for proposals, making the extracted ROI features
posals in other frame feature maps is unknown, making the
lack temporal information from videos. In this work, considsimple method infeasible.
2

ering the features of the same object instance are highly similar among frames in a video, a novel Temporal ROI Align
operator is proposed to extract features from other frames
feature maps for current frame proposals by utilizing feature
similarity. The proposed Temporal ROI Align operator can
extract temporal information from the entire video for proposals. We integrate it into single-frame video detectors and
other state-of-the-art video detectors, and conduct quantitative experiments to demonstrate that the proposed Temporal
ROI Align operator can consistently and significantly boost
the performance. Besides, the proposed Temporal ROI Align
can also be applied into video instance segmentation.

In fact, there are already many previous works (Zhu et al.
2017a; Wu et al. 2019; Xiao and Jae Lee 2018; Liu and Zhu
2018; Chen et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2019a) attempting to
exploit temporal information in videos. Some works try to
utilize image level information from nearby frames to help
detection. For example, FGFA (Zhu et al. 2017a), MANet
(Wang et al. 2018a) utilize optical flow (Dosovitskiy et al.
2015), and STSN (Bertasius, Torresani, and Shi 2018) applies deformable convolutions (Dai et al. 2017) for image
feature calibration. PS ROI Pooling (Dai et al. 2016) is used
to pool features for proposals from the calibrated image feature map in these methods. The extracted PS ROI features
contain temporal information from nearby frames. However,
these methods can only utilize nearby frames within one second (usually at most 30 frames). Performance will degrade
with longer time interval, making it hard to leverage information from frames that are far apart in time. Other works attempt to utilize proposal level information from longer
video length. SELSA (Wu et al. 2019) and (Shvets et al.
2019) aggregate the high-level proposal features (fully connection layer features of proposals) with each other in order to make every proposal features in current frame contain
the high-level proposal features from other frames. However, the ROI features are still extracted from a single image.

Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks have brought
great progress in object detection of still images (Ren et al.
2015; Lin et al. 2017; Cai and Vasconcelos 2018; Tian et al.
2019; Duan et al. 2019). Most state-of-the-art single image object detectors usually adopt the region-based detection paradigm (Ren et al. 2015; Cai and Vasconcelos 2018).
When directly applying these detectors for video object detection (VID), the detection accuracy suffers from deteriorated object appearances in videos, such as motion blur,
video defocus and object occlusions. Despite these challenges, video contains temporal information about the same
object instance (e.g., its appearance in different poses, and
from different viewpoints). Therefore, the key challenge is
how to effectively exploit such temporal information for the
same object instance in a video.
As shown in Fig. 1 (a), region-based detectors usually
adopt ROI Align (He et al. 2017) to extract ROI features.

In this paper, a novel operator, named as Temporal ROI
Align, is proposed to exploit the temporal information for
the same object instance in a video. As shown in Fig. 1 (b),
we define a target frame as a frame where final prediction
is done at the moment. The target frame is allowed to have
multiple support frames, which are used for strengthening
the features of the target frame. Considering the features of
the same object instance are highly similar among frames in
a video, the proposed operator implicitly extracts the most

∗

Work done during an internship at SenseTime.
Qi Chu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1442

