The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CIA-SSD: Confident IoU-Aware Single-Stage Object Detector From Point Cloud
Wu Zheng, Weiliang Tang, Sijin Chen, Li Jiang, Chi-Wing Fu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
{wuzheng, lijiang, cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {tangwl123, chensjvin}@foxmail.com

Abstract
Existing single-stage detectors for locating objects in point
clouds often treat object localization and category classification as separate tasks, so the localization accuracy and classification confidence may not well align. To address this issue, we present a new single-stage detector named the Confident IoU-Aware Single-Stage object Detector (CIA-SSD).
First, we design the lightweight Spatial-Semantic Feature Aggregation module to adaptively fuse high-level abstract semantic features and low-level spatial features for accurate
predictions of bounding boxes and classification confidence.
Also, the predicted confidence is further rectified with our
designed IoU-aware confidence rectification module to make
the confidence more consistent with the localization accuracy. Based on the rectified confidence, we further formulate
the Distance-variant IoU-weighted NMS to obtain smoother
regressions and avoid redundant predictions. We experiment
CIA-SSD on 3D car detection in the KITTI test set and show
that it attains top performance in terms of the official ranking
metric (moderate AP 80.28%) and above 32 FPS inference
speed, outperforming all prior single-stage detectors. The
code is available at https://github.com/Vegeta2020/CIA-SSD.

Figure 1: Our CIA-SSD attains top performance (official
rank: moderate AP 80.28%) and real-time speed (30.76 ms)
on 3D car detection in KITTI test set (Geiger et al. 2013),
compared with the state-of-the-art single-stage detectors.

Introduction

the IoUs between the regressed bounding boxes and groundtruth boxes in the second stage to refine the confidence predictions. Compared with hard-category labels, the soft IoU
labels are usually more consistent with the localization qualities, thus leading to more accurate confidence predictions.
Compared with two-stage detectors, single-stage detectors cannot train features extracted from their predicted
bounding boxes with a second-stage network. Also, their
features are learned mostly based on the pre-defined anchors
or classified positive points, so the resulting IoU predictions
may not be as accurate as those in the two-stage networks.
Hence, general single-stage detectors cannot effectively rectify confidence predictions like the two-stage ones.
To resolve this issue, SASSD (He et al. 2020), a very recent single-stage detector, exploits an interpolation approach
to obtain the region proposal features for confidence rectification. Their approach is, however, very complex with the
interpolation operation. In this work, we design a new confidence rectification module embedded in our Confident IoUAware Single-Stage object Detector (CIA-SSD) to address
the issue more elegantly. Our key idea is based on the finding

To detect objects in autonomous driving, point clouds are
often adopted to offer robust information. In general, there
are two classes of methods to detect objects in point clouds:
single-stage and two-stage. Though two-stage detectors usually attain higher average precisions benefited from an extra
refinement stage, single-stage detectors are typically more
efficient due to their simpler network structures. Also, the
detection precisions of recent single-stage detectors (He
et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020; Shi and Rajkumar 2020) gradually approach that of the state-of-the-art two-stage detectors.
The advantages of time efficiency and competitive precision
motivate us to focus this work on single-stage detectors.
Existing 3D object detectors often treat object localization
and category classification as separate tasks, so the localization accuracy and classification confidence may not align
well (Jiang et al. 2018). Hence, two-stage detectors (Yang
et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020a) extract features from the region
proposals generated by the first-stage backbone and predict
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3555

