The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Provably Secure Federated Learning against Malicious Clients
Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
{xiaoyu.cao, jinyuan.jia, neil.gong}@duke.edu

Abstract

the current global model to the clients; 2) the clients update
their local models based on the global model and their local
training data, and send the model updates to the server; and
3) the server aggregates the model updates and uses them
to update the global model. The learnt global model is then
used to predict labels of testing examples.
However, such single-global-model paradigm is vulnerable to security attacks. In particular, an attacker can inject
fake clients to federated learning or compromise existing
clients, where we call the fake/compromised clients malicious clients. Such malicious clients can corrupt the global
model via carefully tampering their local training data or
model updates sent to the server. As a result, the corrupted
global model has a low accuracy for the normal testing examples (Fang et al. 2020; Xie, Koyejo, and Gupta 2019) or
certain attacker-chosen testing examples (Bagdasaryan et al.
2020; Bhagoji et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2020). For instance,
when learning an image classifier, the malicious clients can
re-label the cars with certain strips as birds in their local
training data and scale up their model updates sent to the
server, such that the learnt global model incorrectly predicts
a car with the strips as bird (Bagdasaryan et al. 2020).
Various Byzantine-robust federated learning methods
have been proposed to defend against malicious clients.
(Blanchard et al. 2017; Chen, Su, and Xu 2017; Mhamdi,
Guerraoui, and Rouault 2018; Yin et al. 2018, 2019; Chen
et al. 2018; Alistarh, Allen-Zhu, and Li 2018). The main
idea of these methods is to mitigate the impact of statistical outliers among the clients’ model updates. They can
bound the difference between the global model parameters
learnt without malicious clients and the global model parameters learnt when some clients become malicious. However, these methods cannot provably guarantee that the label
predicted by the global model for a testing example is not
affected by malicious clients. Indeed, studies showed that
malicious clients can still substantially degrade the testing
accuracy of a global model learnt by a Byzantine-robust
method via carefully tampering their model updates sent
to the server (Bhagoji et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2020; Xie,
Koyejo, and Gupta 2019).
In this work, we propose ensemble federated learning,
the first federated learning method that is provably secure
against malicious clients. Specifically, given n clients, we
define a subsample as a set of k clients sampled from the n

Federated learning enables clients to collaboratively learn a
shared global model without sharing their local training data
with a cloud server. However, malicious clients can corrupt
the global model to predict incorrect labels for testing examples. Existing defenses against malicious clients leverage
Byzantine-robust federated learning methods. However, these
methods cannot provably guarantee that the predicted label
for a testing example is not affected by malicious clients.
We bridge this gap via ensemble federated learning. In particular, given any base federated learning algorithm, we use
the algorithm to learn multiple global models, each of which
is learnt using a randomly selected subset of clients. When
predicting the label of a testing example, we take majority
vote among the global models. We show that our ensemble federated learning with any base federated learning algorithm is provably secure against malicious clients. Specifically, the label predicted by our ensemble global model for a
testing example is provably not affected by a bounded number of malicious clients. Moreover, we show that our derived
bound is tight. We evaluate our method on MNIST and Human Activity Recognition datasets. For instance, our method
can achieve a certified accuracy of 88% on MNIST when 20
out of 1,000 clients are malicious.

Introduction
Federated learning (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; McMahan et al.
2017) is an emerging machine learning paradigm, which enables many clients (e.g., smartphones, IoT devices, and organizations) to collaboratively learn a model without sharing their local training data with a cloud server. Due to its
promise for protecting privacy of the clients’ local training
data and the emerging privacy regulations such as General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), federated learning has
been deployed by industry. For instance, Google has deployed federated learning for next-word prediction on Android Gboard. Existing federated learning methods mainly
follow a single-global-model paradigm. Specifically, a cloud
server maintains a global model and each client maintains a
local model. The global model is trained via multiple iterations of communications between the clients and server. In
each iteration, three steps are performed: 1) the server sends
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6885

