The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explaining A Black-box By Using
A Deep Variational Information Bottleneck Approach
Seojin Bang1 * , Pengtao Xie2,3 , Heewook Lee4 , Wei Wu1 , Eric Xing1,2
1

Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA
2
Petuum Inc., PA, USA
3
University of California San Diego, CA, USA
4
Arizona State University, AZ, USA
Abstract

as much information as possible from its input to its output
through a compressed representation called the information
bottleneck. Then, the information bottleneck will maximally
compress the mutual information (MI) with an input while
preserving as much as possible MI with the output. Recently,
it has been shown that the principle also applies to deep neural networks and each layer of a deep neural network can
work as an information bottleneck (Tishby and Zaslavsky
2015; Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017). Using this idea of information bottleneck principle, we define a brief but comprehensive explanation as maximally informative about the
black-box decision while compressive about a given input.
In this paper, we introduce the variational information
bottleneck for interpretation (VIBI), a system-agnostic information bottleneck model that provides a brief but comprehensive explanation for every single decision made by a
black-box model. VIBI is composed of two parts: explainer
and approximator, each of which is modeled by a deep neural network. The explainer returns a probability whether a
chunk of features such as a word, phrase, sentence or a group
of pixels will be selected as an explanation or not for each
instance, and an approximator mimics behaviour of a blackbox model. Using the information bottleneck principle, we
learn an explainer that favors brief explanations while enforcing that the explanations alone suffice for accurate approximations to a black-box model.
Our main contribution is to provide a convincing application of the information bottleneck principle that systematically defines and generates a ‘good’ explanation. Based
on this principle, we develop VIBI that favors a brief but
comprehensive explanation. In order to make the objective
function of VIBI tractable, we derive a variational approximation to the objective. The beneficial characteristics of our
method are as follows. 1) System-agnostic: VIBI is learned
in a post-hoc manner. A model making black-box predictions, denoted by black-box (decision) system or black-box
model, is learned or given as a separate process of learning VIBI. VIBI then learns the explanations by only using input and output of the black-box system. Because of
this, VIBI can explain any types of black-box decision systems (i.g., agnostic to black-box systems that should be explained), hence there is no trade-off between task accuracy
of a black-box system and interpretability of an explainer.
2) Cognitive chunk: Cognitive chunk is defined as a group

Interpretable machine learning has gained much attention recently. Briefness and comprehensiveness are necessary in order to provide a large amount of information concisely when
explaining a black-box decision system. However, existing
interpretable machine learning methods fail to consider briefness and comprehensiveness simultaneously, leading to redundant explanations. We propose the variational information bottleneck for interpretation, VIBI, a system-agnostic interpretable method that provides a brief but comprehensive
explanation. VIBI adopts an information theoretic principle,
information bottleneck principle, as a criterion for finding
such explanations. For each instance, VIBI selects key features that are maximally compressed about an input (briefness), and informative about a decision made by a black-box
system on that input (comprehensive). We evaluate VIBI on
three datasets and compare with state-of-the-art interpretable
machine learning methods in terms of both interpretability
and fidelity evaluated by human and quantitative metrics.

Introduction
Interpretability is crucial in building and deploying blackbox decision systems such as deep learning models. Interpretation of a black-box system helps decide whether or not
to follow its decisions, or understand the logic behind the
system. In recent years, the extensive use of deep learning
black-box systems has given rise to interpretable machine
learning approaches (Lipton 2016; Doshi-Velez and Kim
2017), which aim to explain how black-box systems work or
why they reach certain decisions. In order to provide sufficient information while avoiding redundancy when explaining a black-box decision, we need to consider both briefness
and comprehensiveness. However, existing approaches lack
in-depth consideration for and fail to find both brief but comprehensive explanation.
In order to obtain brief but comprehensive explanation, we adopt the information bottleneck principle (Tishby,
Pereira, and Bialek 2000). This principle provides an appealing information theoretic perspective for learning supervised
models by defining what we mean by a ‘good’ representation. The principle says that the optimal model transmits
* seojinb@cs.cmu.edu; Part of this work was done while SB
was at Petuum Inc.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11396

