The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robustness of Accuracy Metric and its Inspirations in Learning with Noisy Labels
Pengfei Chen,1 Junjie Ye,2∗ Guangyong Chen,3∗ Jingwei Zhao,2 Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
VIVO AI Lab
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{pfchen, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {junjie.ye, jingwei.zhao}@vivo.com, gy.chen@siat.ac.cn

In fact, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) can achieve 100%
training accuracy on finite samples (Zhang et al. 2017) but not
the noisy distribution. Theorem 1 shows that for any classifier,
the maximized accuracy on noisy distribution is 1 − ε, and
we obtain an optimal classifier if the maximum is attained,
where ε is the noise rate. The definition of robustness used in
Theorem 1 is consistent with existing works on robust loss
functions. On the one hand, such robustness is not sufficient
to guarantee ‘good’ generalization performance when trained
with finite noisy samples because by sampling, we are not
directly optimizing the classifier w.r.t. a distribution. On the
other hand, we can still show inspirations of Theorem 1 by
analyzing the gaps between training/validation accuracy on
finite samples and the accuracy on noisy distribution.

Abstract
For multi-class classification under class-conditional label
noise, we prove that the accuracy metric itself can be robust.
We concretize this finding’s inspiration in two essential aspects: training and validation, with which we address critical
issues in learning with noisy labels. For training, we show
that maximizing training accuracy on sufficiently many noisy
samples yields an approximately optimal classifier. For validation, we prove that a noisy validation set is reliable, addressing the critical demand of model selection in scenarios like
hyperparameter-tuning and early stopping. Previously, model
selection using noisy validation samples has not been theoretically justified. We verify our theoretical results and additional
claims with extensive experiments. We show characterizations
of models trained with noisy labels, motivated by our theoretical results, and verify the utility of a noisy validation set by
showing the impressive performance of a framework termed
noisy best teacher and student (NTS). Our code is released1 .

1

Introduction

In real-world classification tasks, annotation methods such
as crowdsourcing systems (Yan et al. 2014) and online
queries (Schroff, Criminisi, and Zisserman 2010) inevitably
introduce noisy labels. In learning with noisy labels, many
works study the robustness, providing theoretical guarantees
for some robust loss functions (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry
2017; Zhang and Sabuncu 2018; Charoenphakdee, Lee, and
Sugiyama 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020): a classifier
minimizing the loss on noisy distribution is guaranteed to
minimize the loss on clean distribution. These works commonly assume that the label noise is conditional on the true
class, i.e., the class-conditional noise (Natarajan et al. 2013).
In this paper, we first prove that the accuracy metric itself
is robust for common diagonally-dominant class-conditional
noise, i.e., a classifier maximizing its accuracy on the noisy
distribution is guaranteed to maximize the accuracy on clean
distribution. It seems counterintuitive since we previously
believe maximizing accuracy on noise results in overfitting.
∗
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/chenpf1025/RobustnessAccuracy

11451

For training, even if without any robust loss functions
or advanced training strategies, we can obtain an approximately optimal classifier by maximizing training accuracy
on sufficiently many noisy samples. This claim is justified by
Theorem 1 and an additional Theorem 2, which presents
a counterpart of the generalization bound derived from
Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension (Vapnik 1999; AbuMostafa, Magdon-Ismail, and Lin 2012). For validation, the
accuracy on hold-out noisy samples is an unbiased estimator
of the accuracy on noisy distribution. Therefore, a noisy validation set is reliable. Together with Theorem 1, the validation
bound presented in Theorem 3 formally justifies the utility
of a noisy validation set. Some previous works (Zhang and
Sabuncu 2018; Nguyen et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2019, 2020) empirically use a noisy validation set to tune hyperparameters,
while our contribution is the theoretical justification.
In experiments, we focus on verifying our theoretical results and additional claims. We verify characterizations of
models derived from Theorem 1&2, including a dummy classifier given few samples, predicting exactly the noise transition process given more samples, and approaching a global
optimal classifier with sufficiently many noisy samples. To
show the utility of a noisy validation, we present a framework
termed Noisy best Teacher and Student (NTS), which selects
a teacher with the highest accuracy on a noisy validation
set and retrains a student. It improves many baselines on
CIFAR-10/100 with synthetic noise and Clothing1M (Xiao
et al. 2015) with real-world noise.

