The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CloudLSTM: A Recurrent Neural Model for
Spatiotemporal Point-cloud Stream Forecasting
Chaoyun Zhang,1 * Marco Fiore,2 Iain Murray,3 Paul Patras3
1

Tencent Lightspeed & Quantum Studios
2
IMDEA Networks Institute
3
The University of Edinburgh
vyokkyzhang@tencent.com, marco.fiore@imdea.org, i.murray@ed.ac.uk, paul.patras@ed.ac.uk
Forecasting over grids

Abstract
This paper introduces CloudLSTM, a new branch of recurrent
neural models tailored to forecasting over data streams generated by geospatial point-cloud sources. We design a Dynamic
Point-cloud Convolution (DConv) operator as the core component of CloudLSTMs, which performs convolution directly
over point-clouds and extracts local spatial features from sets
of neighboring points that surround different elements of the
input. This operator maintains the permutation invariance of
sequence-to-sequence learning frameworks, while representing neighboring correlations at each time step – an important aspect in spatiotemporal predictive learning. The DConv
operator resolves the grid-structural data requirements of existing spatiotemporal forecasting models and can be easily
plugged into traditional LSTM architectures with sequenceto-sequence learning and attention mechanisms. We apply our
proposed architecture to two representative, practical use cases
that involve point-cloud streams, i.e., mobile service traffic
forecasting and air quality indicator forecasting. Our results,
obtained with real-world datasets collected in diverse scenarios for each use case, show that CloudLSTM delivers accurate
long-term predictions, outperforming a variety of competitor
neural network models.

...

...

Forecasting over point clouds by grid transformation

...
t-M+1

...
t

t+1

t+J

Forecasting over point clouds

...

...

Figure 1: Different approaches to geospatial data stream
forecasting: predicting over inputs that are inherently gridstructured, e.g., video frames using ConvLSTM (top); mapping of point-clouds to grids, e.g., mobile network traffic
collected at different base stations, to enable forecasting using existing neural models (middle); forecasting directly over
point-cloud streams using historical information (as above,
but w/o pre-processing), as proposed in this paper (bottom).

Introduction
Point-cloud stream forecasting aims at predicting the future
values and/or locations of data streams generated by a geospatial point-cloud S, given sequences of historical observations
(Shi and Yeung 2018). Example data sources include mobile network base stations that serve the traffic generated
by ubiquitous mobile services at city scale (Zhang, Patras,
and Haddadi 2019), sensors that monitor the air quality of
a target region (Cheng et al. 2018), or moving crowds that
produce individual trajectories. Unlike traditional spatiotemporal forecasting on grid-structural data, like precipitation
nowcasting (Shi et al. 2015) or video frame prediction (Wang
et al. 2018), point-cloud stream forecasting needs to operate
on geometrically scattered sets of points, which are irregular
and unordered, and encapsulate complex spatial correlations.
While vanilla Long Short-term Memories (LSTMs) have
modest abilities to exploit spatial features (Shi et al. 2015),
* This work was conducted while the author was with The University of Edinburgh.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10851

convolution-based recurrent neural network (RNN) models,
such as ConvLSTM (Shi et al. 2015) and PredRNN++ (Wang
et al. 2018), are limited to grid-structural data inputs, and
thus inappropriate to handle scattered point-clouds.
Learning the spatiotemporal features that are relevant to
the forecasting task, from the location information embedded
in such irregular data sources, is in fact challenging. Existing approaches that tackle the point-cloud stream forecasting
problem can be categorized into two classes, both bearing
significant shortcomings: (i) methods that transform pointclouds into data structures amenable to processing with mature solutions, such as the grids exemplified in Figure1; and
(ii) models that ignore the exact locations of each data source
and inherent spatial correlations (Liang et al. 2018). The
transformations required by the former not only add data preprocessing overhead, but also introduce spatial displacements
that distort relevant correlations among points (Zhang, Fiore,
and Patras 2019). The latter are largely location-invariant,
while recent literature suggests spatial correlations should be

