The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Large Norms of CNN Layers Do Not Hurt Adversarial Robustness
Youwei Liang1 , Dong Huang1,2 *
1

College of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
liangyouwei1@gmail.com, huangdonghere@gmail.com

Abstract

regularize the norms of individual CNN layers. For example,
Cisse et al. (2017) proposed Parseval Network where the `2
norms of linear and convolutional layers are constrained to
be orthogonal. However, from Table 1 in their paper, we can
see Parseval Network only slightly improves adversarial robustness in most cases and even reduces robustness in some
cases. Anil, Lucas, and Grosse (2019) combined GroupSort,
which is a gradient norm preserving activation function, with
norm-constrained weight matrices regularization to enforce
Lipschitzness in fully-connected networks while maintaining
the expressive power of the models. Li et al. (2019) further
extended GroupSort to CNNs by proposing Block Convolution Orthogonal Parameterization (BCOP), which restricts
the linear transformation matrix of a convolutional kernel to
be orthogonal and thus its `2 norm is bounded by 1. Again,
we find that the improvement of adversarial robustness is typically small while the standard accuracy drops considerably.
For example, we use the state-of-the-art adversarial “Auto
Attack” (Croce and Hein 2020) to test the checkpoint from
the authors1 and find that, the robust accuracy of their best
model on CIFAR-10 is 8.4% (under standard `∞ attack with
 = 8/255), which is much smaller than the state of the art
( 59.5%2 ) such as the methods of (Carmon et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2019; Pang et al. 2020), while the standard accuracy
drops to 72.2%. Besides, since GroupSort and BCOP have
virtually changed the forward computation and/or architecture of the network, it is unclear whether their improvement
in adversarial robustness is due to regularization of norms or
the change in computation/architecture. These issues raise
concerns over the effectiveness of regularization of norms.
The approaches of regularization of norms are motivated
by the idea that reducing norms of individual layers can reduce global Lipschitz constant and reducing global Lipschitz
constant can ensure smaller local Lipschitz constants and
thus improve robustness. In this paper, we carefully investigate the connections and distinctions between the norms of
layers, local Lipschitz constants, and global Lipschitz constants. And our findings, both theoretically and empirically,
do not support the prevailing idea that large norms are bad
for adversarial robustness.
Our contribution in this paper is summarized as follows.

Since the Lipschitz properties of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are widely considered to be related to adversarial robustness, we theoretically characterize the `1 norm and
`∞ norm of 2D multi-channel convolutional layers and provide efficient methods to compute the exact `1 norm and `∞
norm. Based on our theorem, we propose a novel regularization method termed norm decay, which can effectively reduce
the norms of convolutional layers and fully-connected layers.
Experiments show that norm-regularization methods, including norm decay, weight decay, and singular value clipping, can
improve generalization of CNNs. However, they can slightly
hurt adversarial robustness. Observing this unexpected phenomenon, we compute the norms of layers in the CNNs trained
with three different adversarial training frameworks and surprisingly find that adversarially robust CNNs have comparable
or even larger layer norms than their non-adversarially robust
counterparts. Furthermore, we prove that under a mild assumption, adversarially robust classifiers can be achieved using neural networks, and an adversarially robust neural network can
have an arbitrarily large Lipschitz constant. For this reason, enforcing small norms on CNN layers may be neither necessary
nor effective in achieving adversarial robustness. The code is
available at https://github.com/youweiliang/norm robustness.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have enjoyed great
success in computer vision (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton
2015; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). However,
many have found that CNNs are vulnerable to adversarial
attack (Akhtar and Mian 2018; Eykholt et al. 2018; Huang
et al. 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017). For example, changing one
pixel in an image may change the prediction of a CNN (Su,
Vargas, and Sakurai 2019). Many researchers link the vulnerability of CNNs to their Lipschitz properties and the common belief is that CNNs with small Lipschitz constants are
more robust against adversarial attack (Szegedy et al. 2014;
Cisse et al. 2017; Bietti et al. 2019; Anil, Lucas, and Grosse
2019; Virmaux and Scaman 2018; Fazlyab et al. 2019). Since
computing the Lipschitz constants of CNNs is intractable
(Virmaux and Scaman 2018), existing approaches seek to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

8565

https://github.com/ColinQiyangLi/LConvNet
https://github.com/fra31/auto-attack

