The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Protecting the Protected Group: Circumventing Harmful Fairness
Omer Ben-Porat1 , Fedor Sandomirskiy2,3 , Moshe Tennenholtz2
1

Tel-Aviv University
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
3
Higher School of Economics, St. Petersburg, Russia
omerbenporat@mail.tau.ac.il, fedor.sandomirskiy@gmail.com, moshet@ie.technion.ac.il
2

Abstract

constraints is to improve the welfare of the disadvantaged
group (the originally-discriminated one). A natural approach
by which the regulator can achieve this goal is by assuming a
utility function and requiring the bank’s classifier to equalize
the protected groups’ welfare. The two most popular fairness constraints, Demographic Parity (Agarwal et al. 2018;
Dwork et al. 2012) and Equal Opportunity (Hardt et al. 2016)
(henceforth DP and EO, respectively) are special cases of this
approach for particular utility functions. For instance, DP is
recovered by assuming that every agent gets a utility of one
when receiving the loan, and zero otherwise.
The possibility that fairness may harm the well-being of
those it is designed to protect, i.e., that it can harm the disadvantaged group’s welfare, seems counter-intuitive. However,
it is well known both theoretically and empirically that the
most intuitive fairness constraint of Unawareness (which
forbids using the sensitive attribute in classification) can be
harmful (Corbett-Davies and Goel 2018; Dwork et al. 2018;
Ustun, Liu, and Parkes 2019; Doleac and Hansen 2016). For
example, Doleac and Hansen (2016) show that the “ban the
box” policy, adopted by the United States and preventing
employers from seeing applicants’ criminal background, decreased the welfare of discriminated minorities (the chances
of getting a job). Additionally, Liu et al. (2018) discovered
that DP and EO are not free of the same flaw if we consider
long-term consequences. They show that fairness constraints
may force the bank to give loans to those members of the disadvantaged group who, otherwise, would not have received
the loans due to the high probability of default. Therefore,
such unqualified borrowers are likely to have problems with
paying back the loan. This increased default ratio would
harm the disadvantaged group’s average credit score, thereby
harming its welfare in the long run.

The recent literature on fair Machine Learning manifests that
the choice of fairness constraints must be driven by the utilities
of the population. However, virtually all previous work makes
the unrealistic assumption that the exact underlying utilities
of the population (representing private tastes of individuals)
are known to the regulator that imposes the fairness constraint.
In this paper we initiate the discussion of the mismatch, the
unavoidable difference between the underlying utilities of
the population and the utilities assumed by the regulator. We
demonstrate that the mismatch can make the disadvantaged
protected group worse off after imposing the fairness constraint and provide tools to design fairness constraints that
help the disadvantaged group despite the mismatch.

1

Introduction

At first glance, algorithms may seem free of human biases
such as sexism or racism. However, in many situations, they
are not: the automated recruiting tool used by Amazon was
favoring men (Doleac and Hansen 2016); judges in the US
use the COMPAS algorithm to estimate the probability that
the defendant will re-offend while this algorithm was accused
of being biased against black people (Larson et al. 2016). See
O’Neill (2016) for many more examples. These challenges
call for imposing fairness constraints on algorithm design
and, in particular, on machine-learned classifiers, which are
the subjects of this paper. As a running example, consider a
bank that gives loans to potential borrowers and is regulated
by a policy-maker. The bank learns a decision rule (namely, a
classifier) from historical data to decide for whom to approve
or decline the loan to maximize its revenue that is increasing
with the number of repaid loans. As repeatedly observed
in the past, the resulting classifier may be biased against a
protected group (e.g., ethnic minority). Hence, the regulator
may wish to impose a fairness constraint on the bank.
Bias is deemed unjust. Beyond that, it affects the welfare
of protected groups, as borrowers have preferences towards
the different outcomes of the classification, captured by utility functions.1 Consequently, the goal of imposing fairness

1.1

Our Contribution

In this paper, we uncover another mechanism underlying
harmful fairness even in static settings:
Imposing a fairness constraint can make the disadvantaged group worse off if the fairness constraint and the
utilities of the population mismatch.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use the term utility for the well-being of a single individual

and welfare for the aggregated well-being of groups of individuals.

5176

