The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforcement Learning of Sequential Price Mechanisms*
Gianluca Brero, Alon Eden, Matthias Gerstgrasser, David Parkes, Duncan Rheingans-Yoo
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
gbrero, aloneden, matthias, parkes@g.harvard.edu, d.rheingansyoo@gmail.com

Abstract

to consider her future (truthful) actions to understand that a
mechanism is obviously strategyproof.
Despite being simple to use, designing optimal sequential price mechanisms can be a hard task, even when targeting common objectives, such as maximum welfare or maximum revenue. For example, in unit-demand settings with
multiple items, the problem of computing prices that maximize expected revenue given discrete prior distributions on
buyer values is NP-hard (Chen et al. 2014). More recently,
Agrawal, Sethuraman, and Zhang (2020) showed a similar
result for the problem of determining an optimal order in
which agents will be visited when selling a single item using posted price mechanisms.

We introduce the use of reinforcement learning for indirect
mechanisms, working with the existing class of sequential
price mechanisms, which generalizes both serial dictatorship
and posted price mechanisms and essentially characterizes
all strongly obviously strategyproof mechanisms. Learning
an optimal mechanism within this class forms a partiallyobservable Markov decision process. We provide rigorous
conditions for when this class of mechanisms is more powerful than simpler static mechanisms, for sufficiency or insufficiency of observation statistics for learning, and for the
necessity of complex (deep) policies. We show that our approach can learn optimal or near-optimal mechanisms in several experimental settings.

Our Contribution. In this paper, we introduce the first
use of reinforcement learning (RL) for the design of indirect mechanisms, applying RL to the design of optimal sequential price mechanisms (SPMs), and demonstrate its effectiveness across a wide range of settings with different
economic features. We generally focus on mechanisms that
optimize expected welfare. However, the framework is completely flexible, allowing for different objectives, and in addition to welfare, we illustrate its use for max-min fairness
and revenue.
The problem of learning an optimal SPM is formulated as
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
In this POMDP, the environment (i.e., the state, transitions,
and rewards) models the economic setting, and the policy,
which observes purchases and selects the next agent and
prices based on those observations, encodes the mechanism
rules. Solving for an optimal policy is equivalent to solving the mechanism design problem. For the SPM class, we
can directly simulate agent behavior as part of the environment since there is a dominant-strategy equilibrium. We give
requirements on the statistic of the history of observations
needed to support an optimal policy and show that this statistic can be succinctly represented in the number of items and
agents. We also show that non-linear policies based on these
statistics may be necessary to increase welfare. Accordingly,
we use deep-RL algorithms to learn mechanisms.
The theoretical results provide rigorous conditions for
when SPMs are more powerful than simpler static mechanisms, providing a new understanding of this class of mechanisms. We show that for all but the simplest settings, adjust-

Introduction
Over the last fifty years, a large body of research in microeconomics has introduced many different mechanisms for resource allocation. Despite the wide variety of available options, “simple” mechanisms such as posted price and serial
dictatorship are often preferred for practical applications,
including housing allocation (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez
1998), online procurement (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and
Singer 2012), or allocation of medical appointments (Klaus
and Nichifor 2019).
There has also been considerable interest in formalizing
different notions of simplicity. Li (2017) identifies mechanisms that are particularly simple from a strategic perspective, introducing the concept of obviously strategyproof
mechanisms. These are mechanisms in which it is obvious
that an agent cannot profit by trying to game the system, as
even the worst possible final outcome from behaving truthfully is at least as good as the best possible outcome from
any other strategy. More recently, Pycia and Troyan (2019)
introduce the still stronger concept of strongly obviously
strategyproof (SOSP) mechanisms, and show that this class
is essentially equivalent to the sequential price mechanisms,
where agents are visited in turn and offered a choice from
a menu (which may or may not include transfers). SOSP
mechanisms are ones in which an agent is not even required
* Author order is alphabetical. Full version available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01180.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5219

