The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Light-Weight Translation Models from Deep Transformer
Bei Li1∗ , Ziyang Wang1∗ , Hui Liu1∗ , Quan Du1,2 ,
Tong Xiao1,2† , Chunliang Zhang1,2 , Jingbo Zhu1,2
1

NLP Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
{libei neu,duquanneu}@outlook.com, {wangziyang,huiliu}@stumail.neu.edu.cn,
{xiaotong,zhangcl,zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn
Abstract

Recently, deep models have shown tremendous improvements
in neural machine translation (NMT). However, systems of
this kind are computationally expensive and memory intensive. In this paper, we take a natural step towards learning
strong but light-weight NMT systems. We proposed a novel
group-permutation based knowledge distillation approach to
compressing the deep Transformer model into a shallow model.
The experimental results on several benchmarks validate the
effectiveness of our method. Our compressed model is 8 times
shallower than the deep model, with almost no loss in BLEU.
To further enhance the teacher model, we present a Skipping
Sub-Layer method to randomly omit sub-layers to introduce
perturbation into training, which achieves a BLEU score of
30.63 on English-German newstest2014. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/libeineu/GPKD.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) has advanced significantly
in recent years (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). In particular, the Transformer model has become popular for its
well-designed architecture and the ability to capture the dependency among positions over the entire sequence (Vaswani
et al. 2017). Early systems of this kind stack 4-8 layers on
both the encoder and decoder sides (Wu et al. 2016; Gehring
et al. 2017), and the improvement often comes from the use
of wider networks (a.k.a., Transformer-Big). More recently,
researchers try to explore deeper models for Transformer.
Encouraging results appeared in architecture improvements
by creating direct pass from the low-level encoder layers to
the decoder (Bapna et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Wei et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2019), and proper initialization strategies (Zhang, Titov, and Sennrich 2019; Xu et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2020).
Despite promising improvements, problems still remain in
deep NMT. Deep Transformer stacked by dozens of encoder
layers always have a large number of parameters, which are
computationally expensive and memory intensive. For example, a 48-layer Transformer is 3× larger than a 6-layer system
and 1.5× slower for inference. It is difficult to deploy such
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

models on resource-restricted devices, such as mobile phones.
Therefore, it is crucial to compress such heavy systems into
light-weight ones while keeping their performance.
Knowledge distillation is a promising method to address
the issue. Although several studies (Sun et al. 2019; Jiao
et al. 2020) have attempted to compress the 12-layer BERT
model through knowledge distillation, effectively compressing extremely deep Transformer NMT systems is still an open
question in the MT community. In addition, these methods
leverage sophisticated layer-wise distillation loss functions
to minimize the distance between the teacher and the student models, which requires huge memory consumption and
enormous training cost.
In this paper, we investigate simple and efficient compression strategies for deep Transformer. We propose a
novel Transformer compression approach (named as grouppermutation based knowledge distillation method (G PKD))
to transfer the knowledge from an extremely deep teacher
model into a shallower student model. We disturb the computation order among each layer group during the teacher
training phase, which is easy to implement and memory
friendly. Moreover, to further enhance the performance of the
teacher network, we introduce a vertical “dropout” (named
as skipping sub-layer method) into training by randomly
omitting sub-layers to prevent co-adaptations of the overparameterized teacher network. Although similar technique
has been discussed in Fan, Grave, and Joulin (2020)’s work,
we believe that the finding here is complementary to theirs.
Both G PKD and regularization training methods can be well
incorporated into the teacher training process, which is essential for obtaining a strong but light-weight student model.
We ran experiments on the WMT16 English-German,
NIST OpenMT12 Chinese-English and WMT19 ChineseEnglish translation tasks. The G PKD method compressed a
48-layer Transformer into a 6-layer system with almost no
loss in BLEU. It outperformed the baseline with the same
depth by +2.46 BLEU points. Through skipping sub-layer
method, the teacher network achieved a BLEU score of 30.63
BLEU on the newstest2014 English-German task, and the student obtains additional improvements of 0.50 BLEU points.

Compression of Deep Transformer

†

In this section, we first introduce the formulation of knowledge distillation (K D), then present the group-permutation
13217

