The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Student-Teacher Architecture for Dialog Domain Adaptation under the
Meta-Learning Setting
Kun Qian,1 Wei Wei, 2 Zhou Yu 1
1

University of California, Davis
2
Google Inc.
kunqian@ucdavis.edu, wewei@google.com, joyu@ucdavis.edu
Abstract

and Yu (2019) showed the model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) is promising
for extracting domain-specific features during adaptation,
which therefore helps the dialog model adapt to the new
domain. However, all methods above focus on generating a
decent initialized model before adaptation and ignore improving the model’s adaptive efficiency in the adaptation
process. To improve the adaptation process and utilize the
adaptation data more efficiently, we propose a domain adaptive dialog model based on a meta-learning method and a
teacher-student architecture.
During the adaptation step, when the dialog model generates a sequence of tokens as a response, we normally average
the loss of all the tokens as the total loss of the entire response. However, different tokens have different importance
with respect to different contexts in different domains. For
example, in the sentence “what food type do you like?” from
the restaurant domain, the tokens “food type” are more related to this domain compared with other tokens in this sentence. Therefore, we should pay more attention to this token
during adaptation. If the model fails to generate this token,
it should receive more penalty, i.e. larger loss. Therefore,
the focus of our work is utilizing the meta-teacher model to
learn each token’s weight concerning different contexts for
more effective adaptation.
In this paper, we present a Domain Adaptive task-oriented
dialog model with Student-Teacher architecture (DAST).
We employ the state-of-the-art end-to-end dialog model
DAMD (Zhang, Ou, and Yu 2019) as the student model
and adopt a transformer-based model as the teacher model.
The final objective function combines the sequence of token
losses generated from the student model and the corresponding weights from the meta-teacher model. We train these two
models adversarially under a model-agnostic meta-learning
setting, MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017). When we
adapt the student model to a new domain, we update its parameters with the weighted loss, and fix the parameters of
the meta-teacher model during this step. We evaluate the
DAST on two multi-domain task-oriented dialog datasets,
MultiWOZ (Budzianowski et al. 2018) and Schema-Guided
Dialog (Rastogi et al. 2019). Experimental results show that
our model is effective in extracting domain-specific features
and achieves a better domain adaptation performance. We
will release the code base upon acceptance.

Numerous new dialog domains are being created every day
while collecting data for these domains is extremely costly
since it involves human interactions. Therefore, it is essential to develop algorithms that can adapt to different domains
efficiently when building data-driven dialog models. Most
recent research on domain adaption focuses on giving the
model a better initialization, rather than optimizing the adaptation process. We propose an efficient domain adaptive taskoriented dialog system model, which incorporates a metateacher model to emphasize the different impacts between
generated tokens with respect to the context. We first train our
base dialog model and meta-teacher model adversarially in
a meta-learning setting on rich-resource domains. The metateacher learns to quantify the importance of tokens under different contexts across different domains. During adaptation,
the meta-teacher guides the dialog model to focus on important tokens in order to achieve better adaptation efficiency.
We evaluate our model on two multi-domain datasets, MultiWOZ and Google Schema-Guided Dialogue, and achieve
state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Intelligent personal assistants, such as Amazon’s Alexa,
have become popular for handling certain simple tasks, such
as booking a restaurant, querying bus schedules, and ordering a taxi. Often each of these tasks requires a separate taskoriented dialog system to train. Various new domains, such
as booking a haircut, a spa, etc., are added every day, so
training a dialog system needs thousands of dialogs to leverage the power of deep learning. However, the data collection
of these tasks is expensive, as humans must be involved.
Therefore, building a task-oriented dialog model that can
easily adapt to a new domain with limited data is essential
for extending the usability of data-driven dialog systems.
Various methods have been proposed to tackle domain
adaptation. One method is to learn a domain-agnostic embedding space, which represents the semantic meaning of
dialog sentences that helps the dialog generation model generalize to new domains (Zhao and Eskenazi 2018). Another
approach is to take advantage of large pre-trained models, like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). Meta-learning methods can be applied for domain adaptation as well. Qian
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13692

