The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A DA H ESSIAN: An Adaptive Second Order Optimizer for Machine Learning
Zhewei Yao1∗ , Amir Gholami1∗ , Sheng Shen1 , Mustafa Mustafa2 , Kurt Keutzer1 , Michael
Mahoney1
1
University of California, Berkeley
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
{zheweiy, amirgh, sheng.s, keutzer, mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu, mmustafa@lbl.gov
2

Abstract
Incorporating second-order curvature information into machine learning optimization algorithms can be subtle, and
doing so naı̈vely can lead to high per-iteration costs associated
with forming the Hessian and performing the associated linear
system solve. To address this, we introduce A DA H ESSIAN, a
new stochastic optimization algorithm. A DA H ESSIAN directly
incorporates approximate curvature information from the loss
function, and it includes several novel performance-improving
features, including: (i) a fast Hutchinson based method to approximate the curvature matrix with low computational overhead; (ii) a spatial averaging to reduce the variance of the second derivative; and (iii) a root-mean-square exponential moving average to smooth out variations of the second-derivative
across different iterations. We perform extensive tests on NLP,
CV, and recommendation system tasks, and A DA H ESSIAN
achieves state-of-the-art results. In particular, we find that
A DA H ESSIAN: (i) outperforms AdamW for transformers by
0.13/0.33 BLEU score on IWSLT14/WMT14, 2.7/1.0 PPL
on PTB/Wikitext-103; (ii) outperforms AdamW for SqueezeBert by 0.41 points on GLUE; (iii) achieves 1.45%/5.55%
higher accuracy on ResNet32/ResNet18 on Cifar10/ImageNet
as compared to Adam; and (iv) achieves 0.032% better score
than Adagrad for DLRM on the Criteo Ad Kaggle dataset. The
cost per iteration of A DA H ESSIAN is comparable to first-order
methods, and A DA H ESSIAN exhibits improved robustness
towards variations in hyperparameter values. The code for
A DA H ESSIAN is open-sourced and publicly-available (Yao
and Gholami 2020).

Introduction
The high-dimensional and non-convex nature of many machine learning tasks has rendered many classical optimization
methods inefficient for training and/or evaluating Neural Network (NN) models. As such, first order methods, in particular
variants of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), have become
the main workhorse for training NN models. However, they
are by no means an ideal solution. For example, there are often many ad-hoc rules that need to be followed very precisely
in order to converge (hopefully) to a point with good generalization properties. This includes heuristics for the choice of
the many hyperparameters, e.g., learning rate, decay schedule,
∗

Equal Contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10665

momentum parameters, number of warmup iterations, etc.
Even the choice of the first order optimizer has become an
ad-hoc rule, which can significantly affect the performance.
For example, SGD (Robbins and Monro 1951) with
momentum is typically used in Computer Vision (CV);
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015) is used for training transformer
models for Natural Language Processing (NLP); and Adagrad (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) is used for Recommendation Systems (RecSys). It is far from obvious a priori
which variant (if any) is appropriate for a new problem domain, and using the wrong SGD variant can lead to significant performance degradation. Importantly, this may not be
immediately apparent if one only considers certain popular
learning tasks, such as ResNet50 (He et al. 2016) training on
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). The reason is that, for these
tasks, years of industrial scale (namely, brute force) hyperparameter tuning, and years of building systems to exploit first
derivative (but not second derivative or other) information,
has led to what may be termed ideal-SGD behaviour. Such a
brute force approach is computationally and financially not
possible for many large scale learning problems—certainly
it is not possible to do routinely. It points to a failure of our
theoretical understanding, and it has made it challenging to
train and apply NN models reliably and more generally.
Many of these issues arise since first order methods only
use gradient information and do not (reliably1 ) consider the
curvature properties of the loss landscape. Second order methods, on the other hand, are specifically designed to capture
and exploit curvature properties by using both gradient and
Hessian information. They have many favorable properties,
including resiliency to ill-conditioned loss landscapes, invariance to parameter scaling, and robustness to hyperparameter
tuning.2 The main idea underlying second order methods
involves preconditioning the gradient vector before using it
for weight update. For example, the loss could be very flat
in one dimension and very sharp in another. As a result, the
(larger/smaller) step size taken by the optimizer should be
different for these (flatter/sharper) dimensions. Second or1

Some people view Adam and Adagrad as quasi-Newton methods, i.e., in between first order and second order methods, but the
connection is quite indirect, and others justify them differently.
2
For NNs, ill-conditioning is described in terms of observed
properties, such as “exploding” and “vanishing” gradients, rather
than problem-specific structural properties like condition numbers.

