The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving the Performance-Compatibility Tradeoff
with Personalized Objective Functions
Jonathan Martinez,1 Kobi Gal,1,2 Ece Kamar,3 Levi H. S. Lelis4,5
1

Ben-Gurion University
University of Edinburgh
3
Microsoft Research
4
University of Alberta
5
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
martijon@post.bgu.ac.il, kobig@bgu.ac.il, eckamar@microsoft.com, levi.lelis@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

and is able to update its prediction models. While updating
the system’s model can improve its performance, it can also
change the way the system makes predictions in a way that
does not agree with the user’s expectations, based on past interactions with the system. Thus while the update improves
the overall system performance, it may exhibit a poor compatibility with the user’s expectations (Bansal et al. 2019b),
possibly causing the user to lose trust in the system and ignore its recommendations. Or worse still, to follow wrong
recommendations that the model prior to the update used to
get right.
As an example, imagine a doctor that is being assisted by
an AI-system that predicts whether skin moles are cancerous or not. Suppose that the system’s average accuracy is
currently 70% overall, and that the doctor’s specialty is face
skin moles. Next, the system receives an update which increases its average accuracy to 90% overall but decreases it
to 60% for face skin moles. As a consequence of this poorly
compatible update, the doctor may notice the drop in accuracy regarding this specific region of data and start mistrusting the predictions of the system, therefore missing out on
the benefits of being assisted by the AI-system. Or worse
still, the doctor may not notice this drop and therefore continue trusting the system’s predictions that happen to be less
accurate in this section of the data after the update.
Another example is an Intelligent Tutoring System that is
sequencing math problems to students. The system predicts
the student’s performance on math problems with high accuracy. After an incompatible update, the system accuracy
may increase overall but decrease when predicting student
performance on Geometry questions, and as a result the system may ask the student redundant Geometry questions.
Bansal et al. (2019b) suggested a method for adjusting
the compatibility of the model following an update to an AIsystem where the loss function is modified to incur an additional penalty for newly introduced mistakes, i.e., mistakes
that the system’s updated version makes that the pre-update
version didn’t make. They show that a tradeoff exists between the compatibility and the performance of the updated
model: The more it is forced to be compatible, the less accurate it will be.

AI-systems that model and interact with their users can update their models over time to reflect new information and
changes in the environment. Although these updates may improve the overall performance of the AI-system, they may actually hurt the performance with respect to individual users.
Prior work has studied the tradeoff between improving the
system’s performance following an update and the compatibility of the updated system with prior user experience. The
more the model is forced to be compatible with a prior version, the higher loss in performance it will incur. This paper
challenges this assumption by showing that by personalizing
the loss function to specific users, it is possible to increase
the prediction performance of the AI-system while sacrificing less compatibility for these users. Our approach updates
the sample weights to reflect their contribution to the compatibility of the model for a particular user following the update. We construct a portfolio of different models that vary in
how they personalize the loss function for a user. We select
the best model to use for a target user based on a validation
set. We apply this approach to three supervised learning tasks
commonly used in the human-computer decision-making literature. We show that using our approach leads to significant
improvements in the performance-compatibility tradeoff over
the non-personalized approach of Bansal et al., achieving up
to 300% improvement for certain users. We present several
use cases that illustrate the difference between the personalized and non-personalized approach for two of our domains.

Introduction
Advancements in AI and ML have led to advice provisioning systems that derive insights and make predictions from
large amounts of data. For example, expert diagnostic systems in healthcare predict patients’ health condition by analyzing lifestyle, physical health records and social activities, and make suggestions to doctors about possible treatments (Sahoo et al. 2019). As the user interacts with the system, two processes occur. First, the user develops a mental
model of the system’s capabilities based on the quality of
the recommendations. Second, the system collects more data
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5967

