The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Safe Search for Stackelberg Equilibria in Extensive-Form Games
Chun Kai Ling 1∗ , Noam Brown 2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Facebook AI Research
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu, noambrown@fb.com

Abstract

ahead of time and always play according to that offline solution. In contrast, search additionally leverages online computation to improve the strategy for the specific situations
that come up during play. Search has been a key component
for AI in single-agent settings (Lin 1965; Hart, Nilsson, and
Raphael 1968), perfect-information games (Tesauro 1995;
Campbell, Hoane Jr, and Hsu 2002; Silver et al. 2016, 2018),
and zero-sum imperfect-information games (Moravčı́k et al.
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017b, 2019). In order to apply search to two-player zero-sum imperfect-information
games in a way that would not do worse than simply playing an offline strategy, safe search techniques were developed (Burch, Johanson, and Bowling 2014; Moravcik et al.
2016; Brown and Sandholm 2017a). Safe search begins with
a blueprint strategy that is computed offline. The search algorithm then adds extra constraints to ensure that its solution
is no worse than the blueprint (that is, that it approximates
an equilibrium at least as closely as the blueprint). However,
safe search algorithms have so far only been developed for
two-player zero-sum games.
In this paper, we extend safe search to SSE computation
in general-sum games. We begin with a blueprint strategy
for the leader, which is typically some solution (computed
offline) of a simpler abstraction of the original game. The
leader follows the blueprint strategy for the initial stages
of the game, but upon reaching particular subgames of the
game tree, computes a refinement of the blueprint strategy
online, which is then adopted for the rest of the game.
We show that with search, one can approximate SSEs in
games much larger than purely offline methods. We also
show that our search operation is itself solving a smaller
SSE, thus making our method complementary to other methods based on strategy generation. We evaluate our method on
a two-stage matrix game, the classic game of Goofspiel, and
a larger, general-sum variant of Leduc hold’em. We demonstrate that in large games our search algorithm outperforms
offline methods while requiring significantly less computation, and that this improvement increases with the size of
the game. Our implementation is publicly available online:
https://github.com/lingchunkai/SafeSearchSSE.

Stackelberg equilibrium is a solution concept in two-player
games where the leader has commitment rights over the follower. In recent years, it has become a cornerstone of many
security applications, including airport patrolling and wildlife
poaching prevention. Even though many of these settings
are sequential in nature, existing techniques pre-compute
the entire solution ahead of time. In this paper, we present
a theoretically sound and empirically effective way to apply search, which leverages extra online computation to improve a solution, to the computation of Stackelberg equilibria in general-sum games. Instead of the leader attempting
to solve the full game upfront, an approximate “blueprint”
solution is first computed offline and is then improved online for the particular subgames encountered in actual play.
We prove that our search technique is guaranteed to perform
no worse than the pre-computed blueprint strategy, and empirically demonstrate that it enables approximately solving
significantly larger games compared to purely offline methods. We also show that our search operation may be cast as
a smaller Stackelberg problem, making our method complementary to existing algorithms based on strategy generation.

1

Introduction

Strong Stackelberg equilibria (SSE) have found many uses
in security domains, such as wildlife poaching protection
(Fang et al. 2017) and airport patrols (Pita et al. 2008). Many
of these settings, particularly those involving patrolling, are
sequential by nature and are best represented as extensiveform games (EFGs). Finding a SSE in general EFGs is
provably intractable (Letchford and Conitzer 2010). Existing methods convert the problem into a normal-form game
and apply column or constraint generation techniques to
handle the exponential blowup in the size of the normalform game (Jain, Kiekintveld, and Tambe 2011). More recent methods cast the problem as a mixed integer linear program (MILP) (Bosansky and Cermak 2015). Current stateof-the-art methods build upon this by heuristically generating strategies, and thus avoid considering all possible strategies (Černỳ, Bošanskỳ, and Kiekintveld 2018).
All existing approaches for computing SSE are entirely
offline. That is, they compute a solution for the entire game

2

∗

Part of this work was conducted at Facebook AI Research.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Background and Related Work

As is standard in game theory, we assume that the strategies of all players, including the algorithms used to compute
5541

