The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hybrid-order Stochastic Block Model
Xunxun Wu,1 Chang-Dong Wang, 1,2,3 * Pengfei Jiao 4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Computational Science, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Center of Biosafety Research and Strategy, Law school of Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
xunxunwu99@outlook.com, changdongwang@hotmail.com, pjiao@tju.edu.cn
Abstract

Chakraborty et al. 2014). The common higher-order structures are small subgraphs in networks, also known as network motifs, which are crucial for understanding the fundamental structures and regulating the behavior of complex
networks (Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016). In order
to capture the building blocks of the network, some community detection methods based on higher-order structure
have been proposed in recent years (Arenas et al. 2008;
Benson, Gleich, and Leskovec 2016; Tsourakakis, Pachocki,
and Mitzenmacher 2017; Yin et al. 2017; Huang, Wang, and
Chao 2018, 2019a,b). The basic idea of these higher-order
methods is as follows: The first step is to construct a motif network by using motifs. If two nodes have involved in
at least one common motif, there is a higher-order connection between them; otherwise, there is no higher-order connection. Then, lower-order methods are used on the motif
adjacency matrix for community detection. However, this
kind of approaches focuses on the motif network and ignores
the the original lower-order topological structure of complex
network. In the process of constructing motif network, some
connected components and isolated nodes may be generated,
which leads to the fragmentation issue of the motif network.
At the same time, the construction principle of the motif network may cause two nodes connected in the original network not to be connected in the motif network, and making
the nodes that might originally be in the same community
belong to different communities, which violates the lowerorder topological structure of the network, and causes the
deviation of community detection results. Although a community detection method based on edge enhancement has
proposed (Li et al. 2019a), the addition of edges may also
break the original topological structure.

Community detection is a research hotspot in machine learning and data mining. However, most of the existing community detection methods only rely on the lower-order connectivity patterns, while ignoring the higher-order connectivity
patterns, and unable to capture the building blocks of the
complex network. In recent years, some community detection
methods based on higher-order structures have been developed, but they mainly focus on the motif network composed
of higher-order structures, which violate the original lowerorder topological structure and are affected by the fragmentation issue, resulting in the deviation of community detection
results. Therefore, there is still a lack of community detection
methods that can effectively utilize higher-order connectivity patterns and lower-order connectivity patterns. To overcome the above limitations, this paper proposes the Hybridorder Stochastic Block Model (HSBM) from the perspective of the generative model. Based on the classical stochastic block model, the generation of lower-order structure and
higher-order structure of the network is modeled uniformly,
and the original topological properties of the network are
maintained while using higher-order connectivity patterns. At
the same time, a heuristic algorithm for community detection
is proposed to optimize the objective function. Extensive experiments on six real-world datasets show that the proposed
method outperforms the existing approaches.

Introduction
Community detection is a research hotspot in network analysis that aims to divide the network into substructures with
tight internal connections and sparse external connections,
and plays an important role in various fields such as human
social interaction, economy and trade, biological information, transportation and electricity.
Many community detection methods have been proposed (He et al. 2016; Blondel et al. 2008; He et al. 2017;
Jin et al. 2018; Ganji, Bailey, and Stuckey 2018; Jin et al.
2019), but most of them only rely on the lower-order structure at the level of individual nodes and edges, and ignore
the higher-order structure in the network (Shi and Malik
2000; Newman 2006; Frey and Dueck 2007; Schaeffer 2007;

To make effective use of higher-order structure and lowerorder structure for community detection, a Hybrid-order
Stochastic Block Model (HSBM) is proposed. This method
solves the problem of hybrid-order community detection
from the perspective of the generative model. Based on the
classical stochastic block model, the generation of lowerorder structure and higher-order structure of the network
is modeled uniformly. It is able to reveal the generation
mechanism of the network from the perspective of community structure, and maintain the topological structure, higherorder structure, and statistical characteristics of the network.
At the same time, a heuristic algorithm is proposed to op-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4470

