The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Targeted Negative Campaigning: Complexity and Approximations
Avishai Zagoury,1 Orgad Keller,2 Avinatan Hassidim,1, 2 Noam Hazon 3
1

Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel
2
Google Research
3
Department of Computer Science, Ariel University, Israel
avishaizag@gmail.com, orgad@google.com, avinatanh@gmail.com, noamh@ariel.ac.il

Abstract

hurt to remind them of what scoundrels your opponents are
and to smear these men at every opportunity [...]”
Haselmayer (2019) argues about some of the advantages
of negativity in campaigns: first, it may convince voters to
refrain from voting for an opponent even if it will not make
them support the candidate favored by the campaign manager; second, it relies on the concept of ‘negativity bias’
from cognitive psychology: that people tend to give more
weight to negative information; and third, the perceived
‘newsworthiness’ of negative facts or stories among journalists tends to be higher, and thus attracts more attention
from media outlets. Haselmayer also shows that research
about the potential effect of negative campaigning has become widespread as well. Starting as an occasional topic in
the 1990s, research on negative campaigning by political scientists has increased substantially in recent years.
In recent years, targeted advertising has emerged (Johnson 2013). That is, many platforms allow the advertisers to
deliver a user-specific content, based on the user-specific
traits, interests or preferences. It has been shown that targeted advertising is an efficient and effective manner of communication, in which the advertiser benefits from a more
efficient campaign and a better use of its advertising budget (Iyer, Soberman, and Villas-Boas 2005). Combining targeted advertising with negative campaigning can thus be a
very useful approach (Wong 2020). Even though the effectiveness of targeted negative campaigning was demonstrated
in practice, to the best of our knowledge, it has not been studied from a computational perspective.
In this work, we study targeted negative campaigning
from a computational perspective by modeling it as a unique
variant of B RIBERY. In our variant, a campaign manager
can direct funds for targeting specific demographics (or—
in B RIBERY jargon—pay voters) in order to demote any
opponent. Our model—termed TNC (for targeted negative
campaign) is constructed in such a way to ensure consistency with the properties and effectiveness of targeted negative campaigning in practice: roughly, it makes demotions
cheap while effectively making promotions expensive. We
contrast this with S HIFT B RIBERY (Elkind, Faliszewski, and
Slinko 2009) where only promotions of the preferred candidate are allowed. We also prove that our model cannot be
framed within the S WAP B RIBERY framework (of the same
paper). While we consider both constructive and destructive

Given the ubiquity of negative campaigning in recent political elections, we find it important to study its properties from
a computational perspective. To this end, we present a model
where elections can be manipulated by convincing voters to
demote specific non-favored candidates, and study its properties in the classic setting of scoring rules.
When the goal is constructive (making a preferred candidate
win), we prove that finding such a demotion strategy is easy
for Plurality and Veto, while generally hard for t-approval
and Borda. We also provide a t-factor approximation for tapproval for every fixed t, and a 3-factor approximation algorithm for Borda. Interestingly enough—following recent
trends in political science that show that the effectiveness
of negative campaigning depends on the type of candidate
and demographic—when assigning varying prices to different possible demotion operations, we are able to provide inapproximability results.
When the goal is destructive (making the leading opponent
lose), we show that the problem is easy for a broad class of
scoring rules.

Introduction
Recent years have seen negative campaigning becoming
ubiquitous in elections (Mattes and Redlawsk 2014). For instance, according to studies by the Wesleyan Media Project
(WMP)—which monitors the content and volume of political advertising in the United States (Franklin Fowler
and Ridout 2014)—in the U.S. Congress elections of 2010,
2012, and 2014, more than 50% of ads were negative in
nature—even when not including contrast ads which compare a favoured candidate to his or her opponent. In the 2012
U.S. presidential election—according to an analysis by The
Washington Post (Andrews, Keating, and Yourish 2012)—
one candidate’s campaign had spent 91% of its $492 million
budget on negative ads, and the other candidate’s campaign
had spent 85% of its $404 million budget on negative ads.
Negative campaigning is not a novel approach and its importance traces back to antiquity; in a 64 BC letter by Quintus Tullius Cicero (Cicero 2012), to his brother Marcus, running for the consul of Rome, he writes: “It also wouldn’t
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5768

