The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Symbolic Music Generation with Transformer-GANs
∗

∗

Aashiq Muhamed1 , Liang Li1 , Xingjian Shi1 , Suri Yaddanapudi1 , Wayne Chi1 ,
Dylan Jackson1 , Rahul Suresh1 , Zachary C. Lipton2 , Alexander J. Smola1
1
Amazon Web Services
Carnegie Mellon University
{muhaaash, mzliang, xjshi, yaddas, waynchi, jacdylan, surerahu}@amazon.com
zlipton@cmu.edu, alex@smola.org
2

Abstract

Bull 2020). A popular application is the generation of symbolic music, a task that presents unique challenges not found
in text generation due to polyphony and rhythm. At the same
time, generating symbolic music can be simpler than audio
generation due to the higher level of abstraction. Many language models from the NLP literature have been applied and
extended to music generation. Since we build on this line of
work, we use the terms sequence models and language models interchangeably throughout, depending on the context in
which a model is mentioned.
Neural models for music sequences convert a digital representation of a musical score into a time-ordered sequence
of discrete tokens. Language models are then trained on the
event sequences with the objective of maximizing the likelihood of the data. Music can then be generated by sampling
or beam-decoding from this model. Recent advancements in
Natural Language Processing (NLP), especially the attention mechanism and the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al. 2017), have helped advance state of the art in symbolic
music generation (Huang et al. 2018; Payne 2019; Donahue
et al. 2019). Music Transformer (Huang et al. 2018) and
MuseNet (Payne 2019) use relative attention and sparse kernels (Child et al. 2019) respectively to remember long-term
structure in the composition. More recent works in music
generation (Donahue et al. 2019; Huang and Yang 2020;
Wu, Wang, and Lei 2020) adopt the TransformerXL architecture (Dai et al. 2019) which uses recurrent memory to
attend beyond a fixed context.
Despite recent improvements, these approaches exhibit
crucial failure modes which we argue arise from the training
objective; Music Transformer (Huang et al. 2018) occasionally forgets to switch off notes and loses coherence beyond a
few target lengths as stated by the authors. Sometimes it produces highly repetitive songs, sections that are almost empty,
and discordant jumps between contrasting phrases and motifs. Consequently, music generated by such models can be
distinguished from real music by a simple classifier. This
suggests that a distribution distance, such as the discriminative objective of a GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) should
improve the fidelity of the generative model.
Unfortunately, incorporating GAN losses for discrete sequences can be difficult. Computing the derivative of the
samples through the discrete sampling process is challenging. As such, many models (de Masson d’Autume et al.

Autoregressive models using Transformers have emerged as
the dominant approach for music generation with the goal
of synthesizing minute-long compositions that exhibit largescale musical structure. These models are commonly trained
by minimizing the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the observed sequence in an autoregressive manner. Unfortunately,
the quality of samples from these models tends to degrade
significantly for long sequences, a phenomenon attributed to
exposure bias. Fortunately, we are able to detect these failures with classifiers trained to distinguish between real and
sampled sequences, an observation that motivates our exploration of adversarial losses to complement the NLL objective.
We use a pre-trained Span-BERT model for the discriminator
of the GAN, which in our experiments helped with training
stability. We use the Gumbel-Softmax trick to obtain a differentiable approximation of the sampling process. This makes
discrete sequences amenable to optimization in GANs. In addition, we break the sequences into smaller chunks to ensure
that we stay within a given memory budget. We demonstrate
via human evaluations and a new discriminative metric that
the music generated by our approach outperforms a baseline
trained with likelihood maximization, the state-of-the-art Music Transformer, and other GANs used for sequence generation. 57% of people prefer music generated via our approach
while 43% prefer Music Transformer.

Introduction
At present, neural sequence models are generally trained to
maximize the likelihood of the observed sequences. This ensures statistical consistency but it can lead to undesirable
artifacts when generating long sequences. While these artifacts are difficult to suppress with maximum likelihood
training alone, they are easily detected by most sequence
classifiers. We take advantage of this fact, incorporating an
adversarial loss derived from GANs. To illustrate its benefits, we demonstrate improvements in the context of symbolic music generation.
Generative modeling as a field has progressed significantly in recent years, particularly with respect to creative
applications such as art and music (Briot, Hadjeres, and Pachet 2017; Carnovalini and Rodà 2020; Anantrasirichai and
∗

Equal contribution, corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

408

