The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Shape-Pose Ambiguity in
Learning 3D Reconstruction from Images
Yunjie Wu,1 Zhengxing Sun,1 Youcheng Song,1 Yunhan Sun,1 YiJie Zhong,1 Jinlong Shi2
1
2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, P R China
Department of Computer, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhengjiang, P R China
szx@nju.edu.cn

,QSXW,PDJH

Abstract

5HFRQVWUXFWHG5HVXOW
RULJLQDOYLHZ

Learning single-image 3D reconstruction with only 2D images supervision is a promising research topic. The main
challenge in image-supervised 3D reconstruction is the
shape-pose ambiguity, which means a 2D supervision can be
explained by an erroneous 3D shape from an erroneous pose.
It will introduce high uncertainty and mislead the learning
process. Existed works rely on multi-view images or poseaware annotations to resolve the ambiguity. In this paper, we
propose to resolve the ambiguity without extra pose-aware labels or annotations. Our training data is single-view images
from the same object category. To overcome the shape-pose
ambiguity, we introduce a pose-independent GAN to learn the
category-speciﬁc shape manifold from the image collections.
With the learned shape space, we resolve the shape-pose ambiguity in original images by training a pseudo pose regressor.
Finally, we learn a reconstruction network with both the common re-projection loss and a pose-independent discrimination
loss, making the results plausible from all views. Through
experiments on synthetic and real image datasets, we demonstrate that our method can perform comparably to existing
methods while not requiring any extra pose-aware annotations, making it more applicable and adaptable.

RWKHUYLHZV

D %DVHOLQH ZLWK YLHZSRLQWDQQRWDWLRQ

E %DVHOLQH ZR YLHZSRLQWDQQRWDWLRQ

F 2XUPHWKRG ZR YLHZSRLQWDQQRWDWLRQ

Figure 1: An example of shape-pose ambiguity. The three
models are all trained with the same single-view image
dataset. The two baselines are trained with the re-projection
loss. (a) With the viewpoint annotations, the ambiguity is
eliminated, and the model can learn meaningful reconstruction. (b) Without viewpoint annotations, the result looks
plausible from the original viewpoint, but not correct from
other viewpoints. (c) Our method can learn a correct 3D reconstruction without any viewpoint annotations.

Introduction
Recovering 3D shape from a single image is a classical illposed problem in computer vision, requiring the prior of 3D
shapes. Different from common 3D-supervised reconstruction methods (Choy et al. 2016; Fan, Su, and Guibas 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Mescheder et al. 2019), it becomes popular to learn an image-supervised 3D reconstruction recently.
The core idea in image-supervised reconstruction is the reprojection, which requires the model to predict a shape that
looks like the input image.
Many works use multiple views per object for training (Yan et al. 2016; Insafutdinov and Dosovitskiy 2018;
Kato, Ushiku, and Harada 2018; Liu et al. 2019). However,
learning to reconstruct with only single-view image collections remains challenging. The main challenge is the shapepose ambiguity, which means an erroneous shape and pose
can produce a 2D observation that closely matches the input

image. This ambiguity can easily be eliminated with multiview images because it is unlikely for an incorrect shape to
match the multiple views at the same time. However, the
ambiguity becomes difﬁcult to resolve when we only have a
single-view image for each object.
Affected by the shape-pose ambiguity, we can not achieve
meaningful reconstructions with the re-projection loss because the loss is pose-relevant and suffers from the ambiguity. An example is shown in Fig 1: if we provide the
model with viewpoint annotations, then the pose is precise
(the viewpoint and the pose are equivalent concepts in this
work), and the ambiguity is eliminated. The model can learn

c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2978

