The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Do Response Selection Models Really Know What’s Next?
Utterance Manipulation Strategies For Multi-turn Response Selection
Taesun Whang1 * , Dongyub Lee2 * , Dongsuk Oh3 , Chanhee Lee3 ,
Kijong Han4 , Dong-hun Lee4 , and Saebyeok Lee1,3†
1

Wisenut Inc.
Kakao Corp.
3
Korea University
4
Kakao Enterprise Corp.
{taesunwhang, saebyeok}@wisenut.co.kr, jude.lee@kakaocorp.com
{inow3555, chanhee0222}@korea.ac.kr, {mat.h, hubert.std}@kakaoenterprise.com
2

[Dialog Context]

Abstract

Speaker 1

Hello, is there anything I can help you with?

In this paper, we study the task of selecting the optimal response given a user and system utterance history in retrievalbased multi-turn dialog systems. Recently, pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT, RoBERTa, and ELECTRA)
showed significant improvements in various natural language
processing tasks. This and similar response selection tasks can
also be solved using such language models by formulating the
tasks as dialog–response binary classification tasks. Although
existing works using this approach successfully obtained stateof-the-art results, we observe that language models trained
in this manner tend to make predictions based on the relatedness of history and candidates, ignoring the sequential nature
of multi-turn dialog systems. This suggests that the response
selection task alone is insufficient for learning temporal dependencies between utterances. To this end, we propose utterance manipulation strategies (UMS) to address this problem.
Specifically, UMS consist of several strategies (i.e., insertion,
deletion, and search), which aid the response selection model
towards maintaining dialog coherence. Further, UMS are selfsupervised methods that do not require additional annotation
and thus can be easily incorporated into existing approaches.
Extensive evaluation across multiple languages and models
shows that UMS are highly effective in teaching dialog consistency, which leads to models pushing the state-of-the-art with
significant margins on multiple public benchmark datasets.

Speaker 2

Hi, I want to get some suggestions about next semester's course selections.
Great, what is your major?
I'm interested in computer engineering.
What level of programming are you capable of?
I have some programming experience in C++ and Matlab after taking …

…
That works. Are there any suggestions of advanced classes using Python?
Nice try of it.
Next term, I will learn Python, there are other topics that I like also.

[Response Candidates]
I'd recommend that your take EECS280 and EECS203 as soon
as you can. They are important for your computer science major.

(a) Ground Truth (BERT score : 0.813)
That works. Are there any suggestions of advanced classes using Python?

(b) Adversarial Example (BERT score : 0.993)

Figure 1: Example of multi-turn response selection. BERTbased model tends to calculate the matching score of a dialog–
response pair depending on the semantic relatedness of the
dialog and the response ((a) < (b)). More details are in Discussion section.

Introduction
In recent years, building intelligent conversational agents
has gained considerable attention in the field of natural language processing (NLP). Among widely used dialog systems,
retrieval-based dialog systems (Lowe et al. 2015; Wu et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2018) are implemented in a variety of
industries because they provide accurate, informative, and
promising responses. In this study, we focus on multi-turn
response selection in retrieval-based dialog systems. This is
a task of predicting the most likely response under a given
dialog history from a set of candidates.
* These authors equally contributed to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14041

Existing works (Wu et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Tao et al.
2019a; Yuan et al. 2019) have studied utterance–response
matching based on attention mechanisms including selfattention (Vaswani et al. 2017). Most recently, as pre-trained
language models (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), RoBERTa
(Liu et al. 2019), and ELECTRA (Clark et al. 2020)) have
achieved substantial performance improvements in diverse
NLP tasks, multi-turn response selection also has been resolved using such language models (Whang et al. 2020; Lu
et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2020; Humeau et al. 2020).
However, we tackle three crucial problems in applying
language models to response selection. 1) Domain adaptation
based on an additional training on a target corpus is extremely
time-consuming and computationally costly. 2) Formulating
response selection as a dialog–response binary classification
task is insufficient to represent intra- and inter-utterance inter-

