The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Context-Guided BERT for Targeted Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Zhengxuan Wu 1 , Desmond C. Ong 2, 3
1

Symbolic Systems Program, Stanford University
Department of Information Systems and Analytics, National University of Singapore
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore
wuzhengx@stanford.edu, dco@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

of an upscale neighborhood (for potential renters or homebuyers) may praise the safety but express incredulity at the
price. Identifying the different aspects (e.g., price, safety)
embedded within a given text, and their associated sentiment, has been formalized as a task called Aspect-Based
Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) (Pontiki et al. 2016; Poria et al.
2016). Targeted ABSA (TABSA) is a more general version
of ABSA, when there are multiple targets in a review, each
with their associated aspects. For example, given a review
of neighborhoods: “LOC1 area is more expensive but has a
better selection of amenities than in LOC2” (where LOC1
and LOC2 are specially masked tokens), we note that the
sentiment depends on the specific target (LOC1 or LOC2)
and their aspect. The sentiment towards the price of LOC1
may be negative—and may be more important to a priceconscious student—but positive in terms of convenience,
while the sentiment towards LOC2’s aspects are reversed.
Research using neural models for (T)ABSA has mainly
focused on using deep neural networks such as RNNs or
attention-gated networks to generate context-dependent sentence embeddings (Saeidi et al. 2016; Tang, Qin, and Liu
2016; Wang et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Ma, Peng, and
Cambria 2018; Liu, Cohn, and Baldwin 2018). Recently,
with the advent of powerful self-attention models like the
Transformer and BERT, Sun, Huang, and Qiu (2019) and
Li et al. (2019) both applied pretrained BERT models to
(T)ABSA, and showed promising performance improvements. However, these approaches simply used a pretrained
BERT model as a blackbox: either via using BERT as an embedding layer or appending the aspect to the input sentence.
We propose to improve the BERT model architecture
to be context-aware. A context-aware model (Yang et al.
2019) should distribute its attention weights appropriately
under different contexts—in (T)ABSA, this means specific
targets and aspects. Additionally, by incorporating context
into the calculation of attention weights, we aim to enrich the learnt hidden representations of the models. Specifically, we propose two methods to integrate context into
the BERT architecture: (1) a Context-Guided BERT (CGBERT) model adapted from a recent context-aware selfattention network (Yang et al. 2019), which we apply to
(T)ABSA; and (2) a novel Quasi-Attention Context-Guided
BERT (QACG-BERT) model that learns quasi-attention
weights—that could be negative—in a compositional man-

Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) and Targeted
ABSA (TABSA) allow finer-grained inferences about sentiment to be drawn from the same text, depending on context. For example, a given text can have different targets (e.g.,
neighborhoods) and different aspects (e.g., price or safety),
with different sentiment associated with each target-aspect
pair. In this paper, we investigate whether adding context
to self-attention models improves performance on (T)ABSA.
We propose two variants of Context-Guided BERT (CGBERT) that learn to distribute attention under different contexts. We first adapt a context-aware Transformer to produce a
CG-BERT that uses context-guided softmax-attention. Next,
we propose an improved Quasi-Attention CG-BERT model
that learns a compositional attention that supports subtractive attention. We train both models with pretrained BERT on
two (T)ABSA datasets: SentiHood and SemEval-2014 (Task
4). Both models achieve new state-of-the-art results with our
QACG-BERT model having the best performance. Furthermore, we provide analyses of the impact of context in the
our proposed models. Our work provides more evidence for
the utility of adding context-dependencies to pretrained selfattention-based language models for context-based natural
language tasks.

Introduction
People are living more of their lives online, both on social
media and on e-commerce platforms, and this trend was exacerbated by the recent need for social distancing during the
Covid-19 pandemic. Because people are using online review
platforms like Yelp and delivery platforms more frequently,
understanding the types of emotional content generated on
such platforms could yield business insights or provide personalized recommendations (Kang, Yoo, and Han 2012).
To this end, Sentiment Analysis techniques have been applied to understand the emotional content generated on microblogs (Kouloumpis, Wilson, and Moore 2011; Severyn
and Moschitti 2015), online reviews (e.g., movie and restaurant reviews) (Socher et al. 2013; Kiritchenko et al. 2014),
narratives (Wu et al. 2019; Ong et al. 2019) and other online
social media (Lwin et al. 2020).
However, user-generated reviews contain more complex
information than just a single overall sentiment. A review
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14094

