The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Trembling-Hand Perfection and Correlation in Sequential Games
Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it, nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract

game where the correlation device plays first by randomly
selecting a profile of actions according to the public distribution; then, the original game is played with each player being
informed only of the action selected for her. CEs are computationally appealing since they can be implemented in a
decentralized way by letting players play independently according to no-regret procedures (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000).
Computing CEs in sequential (i.e., extensive-form) games
with imperfect information has received considerable attention in the last years (Celli et al. 2019; Farina, Bianchi, and
Sandholm 2020). In this context, various CE definitions are
possible, depending on the ways recommendations are revealed to the players. The one that has emerged as the most
suitable for sequential games is the extensive-form correlated equilibrium (EFCE) of Von Stengel and Forges (2008).
The key feature of EFCE is that recommendations are revealed to the players only when they reach a decision point
where the action is to be played, and, if one player defects
from a recommendation, then she stops receiving them in
the future. Von Stengel and Forges (2008) show that EFCEs
can be characterized by a polynomially-sized linear program (LP) in two-player games without chance. In the same
restricted setting, Farina et al. (2019a) show how to find an
EFCE by solving a bilinear saddle-point problem, which can
be exploited to derive an efficient no-regret algorithm (Farina et al. 2019b). In general n-player games, Huang and
von Stengel (2008) prove that an EFCE can be computed
in polynomial time by means of an ellipsoid against hope
(EAH) algorithm similar to that introduced by Papadimitriou
and Roughgarden (2008) for CEs in compactly represented
games (see also (Gordon, Greenwald, and Marks 2008) for
another algorithm). Instead, finding a payoff-maximizing
EFCE is NP-hard (Von Stengel and Forges 2008). Very recently, Celli et al. (2020) provide an efficient no-regret procedure for EFCE in n-player games.
One of the crucial weaknesses of standard equilibrium notions, such as NE, in sequential games is that they may prescribe to play sub-optimally off the equilibrium path, i.e.,
at those information sets never reached when playing equilibrium strategies. One way to amend this issue is tremblinghand perfection (Selten 1975), whose rationale is to let players reasoning about the possibility that they may make mistakes in the future, playing sub-optimal actions with small,
vanishing probabilities (a.k.a. trembles). This idea leads to

We initiate the study of trembling-hand perfection in sequential (i.e., extensive-form) games with correlation. We introduce the extensive-form perfect correlated equilibrium (EFPCE) as a refinement of the classical extensive-form correlated equilibrium (EFCE) that amends its weaknesses off the
equilibrium path. This is achieved by accounting for the possibility that players may make mistakes while following recommendations independently at each information set of the
game. After providing an axiomatic definition of EFPCE, we
show that one always exists since any perfect (Nash) equilibrium constitutes an EFPCE, and that it is a refinement of
EFCE, as any EFPCE is also an EFCE. Then, we prove that,
surprisingly, computing an EFPCE is not harder than finding an EFCE, since the problem can be solved in polynomial time for general n-player extensive-form games (also
with chance). This is achieved by formulating the problem
as that of finding a limit solution (as  → 0) to a suitably
defined trembling LP parametrized by , featuring exponentially many variables and polynomially many constraints. To
this end, we show how a recently developed polynomial-time
algorithm for trembling LPs can be adapted to deal with problems having an exponential number of variables. This calls
for the solution of a sequence of (non-trembling) LPs with
exponentially many variables and polynomially many constraints, which is possible in polynomial time by applying an
ellipsoid against hope approach.

Introduction
Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash 1951) computation in 2-player
zero-sum games has been the flagship challenge in artificial intelligence for several years (see, e.g., landmark results
in poker (Brown and Sandholm 2018, 2019)). Recently, increasing attention has been devoted to multi-player games,
where equilibria based on correlation are now mainstream.
Correlation in games is customarily modeled through a
trusted external mediator that privately recommends actions
to the players. The mediator acts as a correlation device
that draws action recommendations according to a publicly
known distribution. The seminal notion of correlated equilibrium (CE) introduced by Aumann (1974) requires that no
player has an incentive to deviate from a recommendation.
This is encoded by NE conditions applied to an extended
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5566

