The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Comprehension and Knowledge
Pavel Naumov,1 Kevin Ros2
1

2

King’s College
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
pgn2@cornell.edu, kjros2@illinois.edu

Abstract

the American air traffic controller (Helmreich 1994); others
agree (Orasanu, Fischer, and Davison 1997).
In a low power distance culture “I guess so” is an informal way to confirm that the aircraft has enough fuel while,
perhaps, communicating the crew’s unhappiness to make another loop in the air. In a high power distance culture, such as
Colombia, it would be too disrespectful to express the same
idea with “I guess so”. Instead, in such cultures, “I guess so”
is a mitigated expression of a concern, a respectful way to
warn about an imminent danger. The United States, where
this sentence could be interpreted either way1 , falls in the
middle of power distance scale (Hofstede 2001, p.87).
Note that this ambiguity disappears if the controller has
additional knowledge about the cultural background of the
crew. As the example shows, knowledge might play a key
role in comprehension. In this paper we propose a logic that
describes the interplay between knowledge and comprehension.
The rest of this paper in structured as follows. First, we
define a model of our logical system and relate this model to
the above example. Then, we define the syntax and the formal semantics of our system, give one more example, and
review the related literature. Next, we show that the two
modalities of our logical system, knowledge and comprehension, can not be expressed through each other and list
the axioms of our logical system. In the two sections that
follow, we prove soundness and sketch the proof of completeness of our system. The full proof of completeness as
well as a discussion of how our definition of comprehension
can be adapted to settings where meanings and states have
probabilities are in the full version of this paper (Naumov
and Ros 2020).

The ability of an agent to comprehend a sentence is tightly
connected to the agent’s prior experiences and background
knowledge. The paper suggests to interpret comprehension
as a modality and proposes a complete bimodal logical system that describes an interplay between comprehension and
knowledge modalities.

Introduction
Natural language understanding is a well-developed area of
Artificial Intelligence concerned with machine comprehension of human writing and speech. It has applications in machine translation, intelligent virtual assistant design, newsgathering, voice-activation, and sentiment analysis. Most of
the current approaches to natural language understanding
are based on machine learning techniques. In this paper we
propose a logic-based framework for defining and reasoning
about comprehension.
Comprehension often requires elimination of the ambiguity present in natural language. This often can be done by
taking into account the background knowledge. As an example, consider the following dialog that took place on January
25, 1990 near John F. Kennedy International Airport in New
York:
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER : Avianca

052 heavy I’m
gonna bring you about fifteen miles north east and then
turn you back onto the approach is that fine with you
and your fuel
FIRST OFFICER : I guess so thank you very much

About 8 minutes after this conversation, Avianca flight 052
ran out of fuel and crashed. Out of 158 persons aboard,
73 died (NTSB 1991, p.v). In its report, National Transportation Safety Board lists “the lack of standardized understandable terminology” as a contributing factor to the
crash (NTSB 1991, p.v). While analysing the crash, Helmreich points out that Colombia and the United States score
very differently on such cultural dimensions as power distance, individualism-collectivism, and uncertainty avoidance. He argues that these cultural factors contributed to
the lack of understanding between the Colombian crew and

Epistemic Model with Meanings
We define knowledge and comprehension in the context of a
given epistemic model with meanings.
1
When American air traffic controllers were asked by the investigators what words they would respond immediately when a flight
crew communicates a low fuel emergency, they replied “MAYDAY”, “PAN, PAN, PAN”, and “Emergency” (NTSB 1991, p.63).
Avianca 052 communication transcripts show that the word “Emergency” was used in the communication between the pilot and the
first officer, but not with the air traffic controller (NTSB 1991,
p.10).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11622

