The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stable Adversarial Learning under Distributional Shifts
Jiashuo Liu1 , Zheyan Shen1 , Peng Cui1 , Linjun Zhou1 , Kun Kuang2 , Bo Li1 , Yishi Lin3
1

Tsinghua University
Zhejiang University
3
Tencent
liujiashuo77@gmail.com, shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhoulj16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
kunkuang@zju.edu.cn, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn, yishilin14@gmail.com
2

Abstract

and Szegedy 2014; Papernot et al. 2016; Madry et al. 2017;
Ye and Zhu 2018). Adversarial attack is performed independently on each data point within a L2 or L∞ norm
ball around itself. In distributionally robust learning, on the
other hand, the uncertainty set is characterized on a distributional level(Sinha, Namkoong, and Duchi 2018; Esfahani
and Kuhn 2018; Duchi and Namkoong 2018). A joint perturbation, typically measured by Wasserstein distance or f divergence, is applied to the entire distribution entailed by
training data. These methods can provide robustness guarantees under distributional shifts when testing distribution is
captured in the uncertainty set. However, in real scenarios, to
contain the true distribution, the uncertainty set is often overwhelmingly large, which is also referred to as the over pessimism or the low confidence problem(Frogner et al. 2019;
Sagawa et al. 2019). Specifically, with an overwhelmingly
large set, the learner optimizes for implausible worst-case
scenarios, resulting in meaningless results (e.g. the classifier assigns equal probability to all classes). Such a problem greatly hurts the generalization ability of robust learning
methods in practice.

Machine learning algorithms with empirical risk minimization are vulnerable under distributional shifts due to the
greedy adoption of all the correlations found in training data.
Recently, there are robust learning methods aiming at this
problem by minimizing the worst-case risk over an uncertainty set. However, they equally treat all covariates to form
the decision sets regardless of the stability of their correlations with the target, resulting in the overwhelmingly large set
and low confidence of the learner. In this paper, we propose
Stable Adversarial Learning (SAL) algorithm that leverages
heterogeneous data sources to construct a more practical uncertainty set and conduct differentiated robustness optimization, where covariates are differentiated according to the stability of their correlations with the target. We theoretically
show that our method is tractable for stochastic gradientbased optimization and provide the performance guarantees
for our method. Empirical studies on both simulation and real
datasets validate the effectiveness of our method in terms of
uniformly good performance across unknown distributional
shifts.

Introduction

The essential problem of the above methods lies in the
construction of the uncertainty set. To address the over pessimism of the learning algorithm, one should form a more
practical uncertainty set which is likely to contain the potential distributional shifts in the future. More specifically,
in real applications we observe that different covariates may
be perturbed in a non-uniform way, which should be considered in building a practical uncertainty set. Taking the
problem of waterbirds and landbirds classification as an example(Wah et al. 2011). There exist two types of covariates
where the stable covariates (e.g. representing the bird itself)
preserve immutable correlations with the target across different environments, while those unstable ones (e.g. representing the background) are likely to change. Therefore, for
the example above, the construction of the uncertainty set
should mainly focus on the perturbation of those unstable
covariates (e.g. background) to generate more practical and
meaningful samples. Following such intuition, there are several work(Bhattad et al. 2019; Vaishnavi et al. 2019) based
on the adversarial attack which focus on perturbing the color
or background of images to improve the adversarial robustness. However, these methods mainly follow a step by step
routine where the segmentation is conducted first to sepa-

Traditional machine learning algorithms which optimize the
average loss often suffer from the poor generalization performance under distributional shifts induced by latent heterogeneity, unobserved confounders or selection biases in training data(Daume and Marcu 2006; Torralba and Efros 2011;
Kuang et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2019). However, in high-stake
applications such as medical diagnosis(Kukar 2003), criminal justice(Berk et al. 2018; Rudin and Ustun 2018) and
autonomous driving (Huval et al. 2015), it is critical for the
learning algorithms to ensure the robustness against potential unseen data. Therefore, robust learning methods have
recently aroused much attention due to its favorable property of robustness guarantee(Ben-Tal and Nemirovski 1998;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2017).
Instead of optimizing the empirical cost on training data,
robust learning methods seek to optimize the worst-case cost
over an uncertainty set and can be further separated into
two main branches named adversarially and distributionally
robust learning. In adversarially robust learning, the uncertainty set is constructed point-wisely(Goodfellow, Shlens,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8662

