The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Graph-neighbor Coherence Preserving Network for Unsupervised
Cross-modal Hashing
Jun Yu∗1 , Hao Zhou1 , Yibing Zhan1 , Dacheng Tao2
1

HangZhou Dianzi University
2
The University of Sydney
yujun@hdu.edu.cn, zhouhao@hdu.edu.cn, zybjy@hdu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised cross-modal hashing (UCMH) has become a
hot topic recently. Current UCMH focuses on exploring data
similarities. However, current UCMH methods calculate the
similarity between two data, mainly relying on the two data’s
cross-modal features. These methods suffer from inaccurate
similarity problems that result in a suboptimal retrieval Hamming space, because the cross-modal features between the
data are not sufficient to describe the complex data relationships, such as situations where two data have different
feature representations but share the inherent concepts. In
this paper, we devise a deep graph-neighbor coherence preserving network (DGCPN). Specifically, DGCPN stems from
graph models and explores graph-neighbor coherence by consolidating the information between data and their neighbors. DGCPN regulates comprehensive similarity preserving
losses by exploiting three types of data similarities (i.e., the
graph-neighbor coherence, the coexistent similarity, and the
intra- and inter-modality consistency) and designs a half-real
and half-binary optimization strategy to reduce the quantization errors during hashing. Essentially, DGCPN addresses the
inaccurate similarity problem by exploring and exploiting the
data’s intrinsic relationships in a graph. We conduct extensive
experiments on three public UCMH datasets. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of DGCPN, e.g., by improving the mean average precision from 0.722 to 0.751 on
MIRFlickr-25K using 64-bit hashing codes to retrieve texts
from images. We will release the source code package and
the trained model on https://github.com/Atmegal/DGCPN.

Bride, Rose

Neighbor Coherence
Flower, Rose

Wedding, Bride

Figure 1: Cross-modal examples of three images and their
coexistent tags. Rose and wedding have high similarities because the rose is a fundamental component of a wedding.
However, this intricate relationship cannot be derived by
using visual appearances and linguistic tags of the given
“rose” and “wedding”. Nevertheless, such a connection can
be inferred by their neighbor coherence that both “rose” and
“wedding” have high similarities of the “bride, rose”.

for a large volume of multimedia data (Feng, Wang, and
Li 2014; Wang et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2020). By contrast,
cross-modal hashing (CMH) methods use compact Hamming space. Due to lower data storage and higher retrieval
efficiency, CMH methods have become a hot topic recently.
CMH methods can be roughly classified into two categories: supervised methods (Jiang and Li 2017) and unsupervised methods (Su, Zhong, and Zhang 2019). Supervised methods require semantic labels, whereas unsupervised methods only need to know whether heterogeneous
data are coexistent (Wang et al. 2016). In most real-world
situations, semantic labels are unavailable, and manual annotations are time-consuming and expensive; and consequently, unsupervised CMH (UCMH) methods are more
flexible and feasible.
Current UCMH methods focused on generating data similarities that reflect the data’s semantic relationships. They
used data similarities as optimization targets to preserve data
similarities during hashing (Su, Zhong, and Zhang 2019;
Yang et al. 2020b; Liu et al. 2020). Although current UCMH
methods achieved promising improvements, they still suffer from inaccurate similarity problems, limiting retrieval
performance. Most methods calculate similarities between
data, using features only between the corresponding two
data (Yang et al. 2020b). However, features between data are

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval (CMR) aims to retrieve relevant data
when given queries that have different modalities of the retrieval data (Wang et al. 2016). Due to the explosion of multimedia data on the Internet (Yu, Rui, and Chen 2013; Yang
et al. 2020c), cross-modal retrieval has become an essential technique in information retrieval (Yang et al. 2020c)
and multi-modal data mining (Qiao et al. 2019b,a; Yang
et al. 2020a,c; Li et al. 2020). Generally, CMR methods
map heterogeneous data into a common space. In this common space, similarities between data can be directly measured. However, most CMR methods use real-valued common spaces, and they suffer from high computation burden
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4626

