The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Goal Multi-Agent Path Finding via
Decoupled and Integrated Goal Vertex Ordering
Pavel Surynek ∗
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Information Technology, Thákurova 9, 160 00 Praha 6, Czechia
pavel.surynek@fit.cvut.cz

Abstract

multiple goal locations such as performing maintenance or
pickup operation (Pansart, Catusse, and Cambazard 2018;
Briant et al. 2020).
Having multiple goals per agent adds a significant new
challenge to the problem consisting of determining the order
of visiting agent’s goal vertices. Hence the ordering of goals
as well as non-conflicting path finding are subject to decision
making which in addition to this aims on the optimization of
various objectives such as commonly adopted sum-of-costs
(Standley 2010; Sharon et al. 2013)
We introduce a problem we call a multi-goal multi-agent
path finding (MG-MAPF). The problem shares movement
rules with the standard MAPF but generalizes it by allowing
each agent to have multiple goal vertices. Each of the agent’s
goal vertices must be visited at least once to successfully
solve MG-MAPF.

We introduce multi-goal multi agent path finding (MGMAPF) which generalizes the standard discrete multi-agent
path finding (MAPF) problem. While the task in MAPF is
to navigate agents in an undirected graph from their starting
vertices to one individual goal vertex per agent, MG-MAPF
assigns each agent multiple goal vertices and the task is to
visit each of them at least once. Solving MG-MAPF not only
requires finding collision free paths for individual agents but
also determining the order of visiting agent’s goal vertices so
that common objectives like the sum-of-costs are optimized.
We suggest two novel algorithms using different paradigms
to address MG-MAPF: a heuristic search-based algorithm
called Hamiltonian-CBS (HCBS) and a compilation-based algorithm built using the satisfiability modulo theories (SMT),
called SMT-Hamiltonian-CBS (SMT-HCBS).

Introduction

Contribution

Mutli-agent path finding (MAPF) (Silver 2005; Ryan 2008;
Surynek 2009; Luna and Bekris 2011; Wang and Botea
2011; Ma and Koenig 2017) is an abstraction for many reallife problems where agents, both autonomous or passive,
need to be moved (see (Felner et al. 2017; Ma and Koenig
2017) for a survey). The environment in MAPF is modeled
as an undirected graph where vertices represent positions
and edges define the topology 1 .
The standard variant of MAPF assumes that each agent
starts in a specified starting vertex and its task is to reach a
specified goal vertex. While such formalization encompass
many real-life navigation tasks (Cáp et al. 2013; Ma et al.
2017a) there still exist problems especially in logistic domain where the standard MAPF lacks expressiveness.
Such problems that cannot be expressed as MAPF include
situations where agents have multiple goals so that instead
of reaching single goal location agents need to perform a
round-trip to service a set of goals. Many real-life applications requires that agents perform certain task at each of

We introduce two novel solving algorithms for MG-MAPF:
a search-based Hamiltonian CBS (HCBS), a derivative of
the CBS algorithm (Sharon et al. 2015), and a compilationbased algorithm, called SMT-Hamiltonian-CBS, derived
from SMT-CBS (Surynek 2019b).
The important feature of HCBS is that it decouples the
goal vertex ordering from collision free path finding, making
HCBS a three level search algorithm where at the high-level,
the standard CBS conflict resolution search is performed and
the low level search for collision-free circuit is further divided into two levels. The higher level of circuit-finding determines the goal vertex ordering while the lower level finds
a collision free circuit visiting all goals following the order
determined by the higher level.
The compilation-based approach uses the ideas from
solvers for satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) (Barrett,
de Moura, and Stump 2005; Barrett et al. 2009) namely lazy
construction of formulae. A significant feature of this approach is that collision avoidance and goal vertex ordering
are integrated and solved at once.
The paper is organized as follows: basic definitions from
MAPF and its properties are introduced first. Then searchbased HCBS and related MG-MAPF specific heuristics are
developed. Compilation-based SMT-HCBS follows in the
next section. Finally both new algorithms are experimentally
evaluated and compared.

∗

The author has been supported by GAČR - the Czech Science
Foundation, grant registration number 19-17966S.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Similar setup is used in graph pebbling (Kornhauser, Miller,
and Spirakis 1984; Parberry 2015; Ratner and Warmuth 1990)
where however the focus is rather on computational complexity.

12409

