The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

F IX M Y P OSE: Pose Correctional Captioning and Retrieval
Hyounghun Kim* , Abhay Zala* , Graham Burri, Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{hyounghk, aszala, ghburri, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Current Pose

Target Pose

Abstract
Interest in physical therapy and individual exercises such as
yoga/dance has increased alongside the well-being trend, and
people globally enjoy such exercises at home/office via video
streaming platforms. However, such exercises are hard to follow without expert guidance. Even if experts can help, it
is almost impossible to give personalized feedback to every
trainee remotely. Thus, automated pose correction systems
are required more than ever, and we introduce a new captioning dataset named F IX M Y P OSE to address this need. We
collect natural language descriptions of correcting a “current”
pose to look like a “target” pose. To support a multilingual
setup, we collect descriptions in both English and Hindi. The
collected descriptions have interesting linguistic properties
such as egocentric relations to the environment objects, analogous references, etc., requiring an understanding of spatial relations and commonsense knowledge about postures. Further,
to avoid ML biases, we maintain a balance across characters
with diverse demographics, who perform a variety of movements in several interior environments (e.g., homes, offices).
From our F IX M Y P OSE dataset, we introduce two tasks: the
pose-correctional-captioning task and its reverse, the targetpose-retrieval task. During the correctional-captioning task,
models must generate the descriptions of how to move from
the current to the target pose image, whereas in the retrieval task, models should select the correct target pose given
the initial pose and the correctional description. We present
strong cross-attention baseline models (uni/multimodal, RL,
multilingual) and also show that our baselines are competitive
with other models when evaluated on other image-difference
datasets. We also propose new task-specific metrics (objectmatch, body-part-match, direction-match) and conduct human evaluation for more reliable evaluation, and we demonstrate a large human-model performance gap suggesting room
for promising future work. Finally, to verify the sim-to-real
transfer of our F IX M Y P OSE dataset, we collect a set of real
images and show promising performance on these images.
Data and code are available: https://fixmypose-unc.github.io.

1

Description 1 (English): slide your right foot back one step and bend your knees,
bring your wrists closer to your shoulders but maintain the position of your hands,
finally drop your arms at the shoulder to level your hands with your neck.
Description 2 (English): bend both of your legs. bring both of your arms down
almost below your ears. your left palm should be facing towards the chair. the
back of your right hand should be facing the glass table.
Description 3 (English): bend both knees away from the lamp, lower down your
body towards the rug, bring both hands down above your shoulder, right palm
facing front and left palm facing the chair, tilt your head back a little towards the
lamp.
Description 1 (Hindi): अपने दािहने पैर को एक कदम पीछे िखसकाएं और अपने घुटनों को मोड़ें,

अपनी कलाई को अपने कं धों के करीब लाएं लेिकन अपने हाथों की िस्थित को बनाए रखें, अंत में अपनी गदर्न
के साथ अपने हाथों को समतल करने के िलए अपने हाथों को कं धे पर रखें।

Figure 1: Current and target image pair and the corresponding correctional descriptions in both English and Hindi (we
show only one of the three Hindi descriptions due to space).

in the office) learning health and exercise activities such as
yoga, dance, and physical therapy is growing. Through advanced video streaming platforms, people can watch and follow the physical movements of experts, even without the expert being physically present (and hence scalable and less
expensive). For such remote activities to be more effective,
appropriate feedback systems are needed. For example, a
feedback system should catch errors from the user’s movements and give proper guidance to correct their poses. Related to this line of work, many efforts have been made on
human pose estimation and action recognition (Johnson and
Everingham 2010, 2011; Andriluka et al. 2014; Toshev and
Szegedy 2014; Wei et al. 2016; Andriluka et al. 2018; Yan,
Xiong, and Lin 2018; Zhao, Peng et al. 2019; Cao et al.
2019; Sun et al. 2019; Verma et al. 2020; Rong, Shiratori,
and Joo 2020). Research on describing the difference between multiple images has also been recently active (Jhamtani and Berg-Kirkpatrick 2018; Tan et al. 2019; Park, Darrell, and Rohrbach 2019; Forbes et al. 2019). However, there
has been less focus on the human pose-difference captioning tasks, which require solving unique challenges such as

Introduction

As the well-being trend grows and people globally move to
a new online lifestyle, interest in remotely (i.e., at home or
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Equal contribution.

13161

