The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Majority Opinion Diffusion in Social Networks: An Adversarial Approach
Ahad N. Zehmakan
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
abdolahad.noori@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract

effect of marketing and political campaigns, and in general
advance our knowledge of the cognitive processes behind
social influence.
The study of opinion diffusion and the evolution of social dynamics on networks has attracted the attention of
researchers from a vast spectrum of disciplines such as
economics (Bharathi, Kempe, and Salek 2007), epidemiology (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani 2001), social psychology (Yin et al. 2019), statistical physics (Gärtner and
Zehmakan 2020), and political sciences (N. Zehmakan
and Galam 2020). It has also gained significant popularity
in theoretical computer science, especially in the quickly
growing literature focusing on the interface between social
choice and social networks, cf. (Bredereck and Elkind 2017)
and (Auletta, Ferraioli, and Greco 2018).
From a theoretical viewpoint, it is natural to introduce and
study mathematical models which mimic different opinion
dynamics. Of course in the real world, they are too complex to be explained in purely mathematical terms. However,
the main idea is to comprehend their general principles and
make crude approximations at discovering certain essential
aspects of them which are otherwise totally hidden by the
complexity of the full phenomenon.
In these models, it is usually assumed that we have a graph
G and initially some nodes are colored, say black or white.
Then, in each round a group of nodes get colored or update
their color based on a predefined rule. Graph G is meant to
represent a social network, where each agent is modeled as a
node and edges indicate relations between them, e.g., friendship, common interests, advice, or various forms of interactions. Furthermore, black and white stand for the opinion of
an agent regarding an innovation or a political party, etc.
In the plethora of opinion diffusion models, thresholdbased ones are certainly the best known, cf. (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), (Apt and Markakis 2014),
and (Zehmakan 2020). There, nodes (i.e., agents) adopt a
color (i.e., opinion) if it is shared by a certain number or fraction of their connections. Particularly, the majority-based
models, where each node chooses the most frequent color
among its neighbors, have received a substantial amount of
attention, cf. (Chistikov et al. 2020). This imitating behavior
can be explained in several ways: an agent that sees a majority agreeing on an opinion might think that her neighbors
have access to some information unknown to her and hence

We introduce and study a novel majority based opinion diffusion model. Consider a graph G, which represents a social
network. Assume that initially a subset of nodes, called seed
nodes or early adopters, are colored either black or white,
which correspond to positive or negative opinion regarding
a consumer product or a technological innovation. Then, in
each round an uncolored node, which is adjacent to at least
one colored node, chooses the most frequent color among its
neighbors.
Consider a marketing campaign which advertises a product
of poor quality and its ultimate goal is that more than half
of the population believe in the quality of the product at the
end of the opinion diffusion process. We focus on three types
of attackers which can select the seed nodes in a deterministic or random fashion and manipulate almost half of them to
adopt a positive opinion toward the product (that is, to choose
black color). We say that an attacker succeeds if a majority of
nodes are black at the end of the process. Our main purpose
is to characterize classes of graphs where an attacker cannot
succeed. In particular, we prove that if the maximum degree
of the underlying graph is not too large or if it has strong expansion properties, then it is fairly resilient to such attacks.
Furthermore, we prove tight bounds on the stabilization time
of the process (that is, the number of rounds it needs to end)
in both settings of choosing the seed nodes deterministically
and randomly. We also provide several hardness results for
some optimization problems regarding stabilization time and
choice of seed nodes.

1

Introduction

In real life, we usually have specific perspectives on various topics, such as consumer products, technological innovations, life styles, and political events and by communicating with friends, family, and colleagues, our opinions are
influenced. Opinion diffusion and (mis)-information spreading can affect different aspects of our lives such as economy,
defense, fashion, even personal affairs. Therefore, there has
been a growing interest to understand how opinions form
and diffuse because of the existence of social ties among
a community’s members and how the structure of a social
network can influence this process. This would enable us
to obtain better predictions of electoral results, control the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5611

