The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Pareto Optimization for Subset Selection with Dynamic Partition Matroid
Constraints
Anh Viet Do, Frank Neumann
Optimisation and Logistics, School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
vietanh.do@adelaide.edu.au, frank.neumann@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

been carried out for evolutionary algorithms on some example functions and classical combinatorial optimization problems such as shortest paths, but in general the theoretical
understand on complex dynamic problems is rather limited (Roostapour, Pourhassan, and Neumann 2018). In this
paper, we follow the approach of carrying out theoretical
runtime analysis of evolutionary algorithms with respect to
their runtime and approximation behavior. This well established area of research has significantly increased the theoretical understanding of evolutionary computation methods (Neumann and Witt 2010; Doerr, B., Neumann, F. (Eds.)
2020).
Many recent studies on submodular and near-submodular
optimization have investigated Pareto optimization approaches based on evolutionary computation. Qian et al.
(2017) derive an approximation guarantee for the POMC
algorithm for maximizing monotone function under a
monotone constraint. They show that POMC achieves an
(αf /2)(1 − 1/eαf )-approximation within at most cubic expected run time. The recent study of Qian et al. (2019)
extends the results to a variant of the GSEMO algorithm
(which inspired POMC) to the problem of maximizing general submodular functions, but under a cardinality constraint. It results reveal that non-monotonicity in objective
functions worsens approximation guarantees.
In our work, we extend existing results for POMC (Roostapour et al. 2019) to partition matroid constraints with dynamic thresholds. We show that the proven adaptation efficiency facilitated by maintaining dominating populations
can be extended for multiple constraints with appropriately
defined dominance relations. In particular, we prove that
POMC can achieve new approximation guarantees quickly
whether the constraints thresholds are tightened or relaxed.
Additionally, we study POMC experimentally on the dynamic max cut problem and compare its results against the
results of greedy algorithms for underlying static problems.
Our study evaluates the efficiency in change adaptation, thus
assuming immaculate change detection. Our results show
that POMC is competitive to GREEDY during unfavorable
changes, and outperforming GREEDY otherwise.
In the next section, we formulate the problem and introduce the Pareto optimization approach that is subject to our
investigations. Then we analyze the algorithm in terms of
runtime and approximation behaviour when dealing with dy-

In this study, we consider the subset selection problems with
submodular or monotone discrete objective functions under
partition matroid constraints where the thresholds are dynamic. We focus on POMC, a simple Pareto optimization approach that has been shown to be effective on such problems.
Our analysis departs from singular constraint problems and
extends to problems of multiple constraints. We show that
previous results of POMC’s performance also hold for multiple constraints. Our experimental investigations on random
undirected maxcut problems demonstrate POMC’s competitiveness against the classical GREEDY algorithm with restart
strategy.

Introduction
Many important real-world problems involve optimizing a
submodular function. Such problems include maximum coverage, maximum cut (Goemans and Williamson 1995), maximum influence (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Éva Tardos 2003),
sensor placement problem (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin
2008; Krause and Guestrin 2011), as well as many problems in the machine learning domain (Liu et al. 2013; Wei,
Iyer, and Bilmes 2015; Lin and Bilmes 2011, 2010; Stobbe and Krause 2010). Much work has been done in the
area of submodular optimization under static constraints. A
particularly well-studied class of algorithms in this line of
research is greedy algorithms, which have been shown to
be efficient in exploiting submodularity (Cornuejols, Fisher,
and Nemhauser 1977; Călinescu et al. 2011; Friedrich et al.
2019; Bian et al. 2017). Important recent results on the use
of evolutionary algorithms for submodular optimization are
summarized in (Zhou, Yu, and Qian 2019).
Real-world problems are seldom solved once, but rather
many times over some period of time, during which they
change. Such changes demand adapting the solutions that
would otherwise become poor or infeasible. The dynamic
nature of these problems presents many interesting optimization challenges, which have long been embraced by
many researchers. A lot of research in the evolutionary computation literature has addressed these types of problems
from an applied perspective. Theoretical investigations have
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12284

