The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Truthful Mechanisms for Dichotomous Valuations∗
Moshe Babaioff1 , Tomer Ezra2 , Uriel Feige3
1

Microsoft Research
Tel Aviv University
3
Weizmann Institute
moshe@microsoft.com, tomer.ezra@gmail.com, uriel.feige@weizmann.ac.il
2

Abstract

valuation functions of the agents are restricted, and specifically, have the dichotomous marginals property. We say that
a valuation function f has dichotomous marginals (or for
brevity, we say that f is dichotomous) if for every set S of
items and every item a, the marginal value of a relative to S
is either 0 or 1. Namely, f (S ∪ a) − f (S) ∈ {0, 1}.
The study of fairness with dichotomous preferences was
initiated by Bogomolnaia and Moulin (2004), with additional extensive research of such preferences in various settings (see references in Section 1.2). The above references
provide multiple examples of situations that can be modeled using dichotomous preferences. We provide another example that involves constraints not captured by prior work.
Consider a setting where the agents are arts students seeking work as museum guides. The items are different shifts
in which the students can work as guides in the local arts
museum. Suppose that among the shifts (or combinations of
shifts) that are feasible for a given student in a given month
(for example, one student cannot work on weekends, another
student can work at most two shifts a week, etc.), the student
may wish to work for as many shifts as possible during the
month, but other than that is indifferent to the exact choice
of shifts (as long as the combination of shifts is feasible for
the student). A model that first-order approximates this setting is one in which the valuation function of a student is
modeled as being dichotomous.1 The allocation problem is
to assign students to shifts. Economic efficiency may correspond to filling as many shifts as possible. Fairness may
correspond to trying to equalize the number of shifts that
each student receives (subject to the feasibility constraints).
Incentive compatibility means that it is a dominant strategy
for a student to report her true valuation function to the museum – providing an incorrect report cannot lead to a situation in which she receives a bundle of shifts of higher value
to her.

We consider the problem of allocating a set on indivisible items to players with private preferences in an efficient
and fair way. We focus on valuations that have dichotomous
marginals, in which the added value of any item to a set is
either 0 or 1, and aim to design truthful allocation mechanisms (without money) that maximize welfare and are fair.
For the case that players have submodular valuations with dichotomous marginals, we design such a deterministic truthful
allocation mechanism. The allocation output by our mechanism is Lorenz dominating, and consequently satisfies many
desired fairness properties, such as being envy-free up to any
item (EFX), and maximizing the Nash Social Welfare (NSW).
We then show that our mechanism with random priorities is
envy-free ex-ante, while having all the above properties expost. Furthermore, we present several impossibility results
precluding similar results for the larger class of XOS valuations.

1

Introduction

A central problem in Algorithmic Game Theory is the problem of allocating indivisible goods among players with private preferences. This problem is particularly challenging
in settings in which utilities cannot be transferred between
players (no money). One consideration in allocating the
items is the economic efficiency of the allocation, as we want
the best for society as a whole. Another consideration is fairness of the allocation, because in the absence of money, there
is no other way for the players to evenly share the welfare
generated by the efficient allocation.
In this work we design allocation mechanisms that enjoy desirable properties, related to their economic efficiency,
to fairness of the allocation, and to incentive compatibility
(truthfulness). Importantly, we consider only settings without money, so a mechanism defines an allocation rule, but
does not involve a payment rule, as there are no payments.
With general valuations, even without any fairness properties, the VCG mechanism is the unique truthful welfaremaximizing mechanism, and it requires payments. Consequently, the focus of our work is on instances in which the

1.1

Our Contribution and Techniques

We now provide an overview of our main results. Some definitions and technicalities are omitted from this overview, but
1
In the full version we discuss a relaxation of the assumption
that all desired shifts are exactly equivalent for the student, allowing strict preference, while still assuming approximately the same
marginals.

∗
A full version with addition results and the missing proofs appears in https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.10704.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5119

