The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Model-Free Online Learning in Unknown Sequential Decision Making Problems
and Games
Gabriele Farina,1 Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Strategic Machine, Inc.,
3
Strategy Robot, Inc., 4 Optimized Markets, Inc.
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

In TFSDM, the environment may react adversarially to
what the agent does. This is important to take into account, for
example, in game-theoretic settings and multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) because the other agents’ learning
makes the environment nonstationary for the agent (Sandholm and Crites 1996; Matignon, Laurent, and Le Fort-Piat
2012). This is in contrast to the standard assumption in singleagent reinforcement learning where the environment is oblivious to the agent instead of adversarial. Hence, learning strong
policies (aka. strategies) in TFSDM problems is especially
challenging, and the agent must be careful about exploration
because exploration actions can change the environment.
Online, regret minimization methods have been successfully used in TFSDM. In particular, the counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) framework decomposes the overall regret of an agent to local regrets at individual decision
nodes (aka. information sets in game theory) (Zinkevich et al.
2007). That enables significantly larger TFSDMs to be tackled. Many enhancements have been developed on top of the
basic CFR framework (Lanctot et al. 2009; Tammelin 2014;
Brown and Sandholm 2015; Brown, Kroer, and Sandholm
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017a, 2019a; Farina, Kroer,
and Sandholm 2019), and have led to major milestones in
imperfect-information games such as poker (Bowling et al.
2015; Moravčík et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017b,
2019b). Many of those methods guarantee low regret even
against an adversarial environment—which, in turn, enables
the computation of game-theoretic solutions such as Nash
equilibrium, coarse correlated equilibrium (Moulin and Vial
1978; Celli et al. 2020), best responses, etc.
However, those methods usually come with two drawbacks:
(i) they require an explicit upfront model of the agent’s decision space, and (ii) depending on the online learning model
used, they require full feedback, at all times t, about the
payoffs assigned by the environment—even in parts of the decision space not encountered at time t. There has been work
towards an online learning setting, called the bandit optimization setting, that drops (ii) (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020).
Most MARL algorithms apply for the unknown game setting
and drop both (i) and (ii), often at the cost of invalidating any
regret guarantees. In this paper, we give, to our knowledge,
the first regret-minimization
p algorithm that guarantees sublinear (specifically O(T 3/4 log 1/p) with probability 1 − p)
regret even when requirements (i) and (ii) are both dropped.

Regret minimization has proved to be a versatile tool for treeform sequential decision making and extensive-form games. In
large two-player zero-sum imperfect-information games, modern extensions of counterfactual regret minimization (CFR)
are currently the practical state of the art for computing a
Nash equilibrium. Most regret-minimization algorithms for
tree-form sequential decision making, including CFR, require
(i) an exact model of the player’s decision nodes, observation
nodes, and how they are linked, and (ii) full knowledge, at
all times t, about the payoffs—even in parts of the decision
space that are not encountered at time t. Recently, there has
been growing interest towards relaxing some of those restrictions and making regret minimization applicable to settings for
which reinforcement learning methods have traditionally been
used—for example, those in which only black-box access to
the environment is available. We give the first, to our knowledge, regret-minimization algorithm that guarantees sublinear
regret with high probability even when requirement (i)—and
thus also (ii)—is dropped. We formalize an online learning
setting in which the strategy space is not known to the agent
and gets revealed incrementally whenever the agent encounters new decision points. We give an efficient algorithm that
achieves O(T 3/4 ) regret with high probability for that setting,
even when the agent faces an adversarial environment. Our
experiments show it significantly outperforms the prior algorithms for the problem, which do not have such guarantees. It
can be used in any application for which regret minimization
is useful: approximating Nash equilibrium or quantal response
equilibrium, approximating coarse correlated equilibrium in
multi-player games, learning a best response, learning safe
opponent exploitation, and online play against an unknown
opponent/environment.

1

Introduction

A tree-form sequential decision making (TFSDM) problem
formalizes in a tree-form structure the interaction of an agent
with an unknown and potentially adversarial environment.
The agent’s tree includes decision nodes, observation nodes,
and terminal nodes. TFSDM captures the problem that a
player faces in an extensive-form game. TFSDM also captures MDPs and POMDPs where the agent conditions on
observed history, but TFSDM problems are more general
because the Markovian assumption is not necessarily made.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5381

