The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Learning of Graph Hierarchical Abstractions
with Differentiable Coarsening and Optimal Transport
Tengfei Ma1∗ , Jie Chen1,2∗
1

IBM Research,
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Tengfei.Ma1@ibm.com, chenjie@us.ibm.com
2

Abstract

tion and pooling. The pooling operation reduces the spatial
dimensions of an image and forms a hierarchical abstraction
through successive downsampling. For graphs, a similar hierarchical abstraction is particularly important for maintaining the structural information and deriving a faithful feature
representation. A challenge, however, is that unlike image
pixels that are spatially regular, graph nodes are irregularly
connected and hence pooling is less straightforward.
Several graph neural networks perform pooling in a hierarchical manner. The work of Bruna et al. (2014) builds
a multiresolution hierarchy of the graph with agglomerative clustering, based on -covering. The work of Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst (2016) and Fey et al.
(2018) employ Graclus that successively coarsens a graph
based on the heavy-edge matching heuristic. The work of Simonovsky and Komodakis (2017) constructs the hierarchy
through a combined use of spectral polarity and Kron reduction. These neural networks build the graph hierarchy as
preprocessing, which defines in advance how pooling is performed given a graph. No learnable parameters are attached.
Recently, hierarchical abstractions as a learnable neural
network module surfaced in graph representation learning.
Representative approaches include D IFF P OOL (Ying et al.
2018b), G RAPH U-N ET (Gao and Ji 2019), and SAGP OOL (Lee, Lee, and Kang 2019). All approaches treat the
learnable hierarchy as part of the neural network (in conjunction with a predictive model), which is trained with a
downstream task in a (semi-)supervised manner.
In practice, however, supervised signals (e.g., labels)
are scarce and are often laborious and expensive to obtain. Hence, in this work, we propose an unsupervised approach, called OTC OARSENING, that produces a hierarchical abstraction of a graph independent of downstream tasks.
Therein, node features for the graphs in the hierarchy are
derived simultaneously, so that they can be used for different tasks through training separate downstream predictive
models. OTC OARSENING consists of two ingredients: a parameterized graph coarsening strategy in the algebraic multigrid (AMG) style; and an optimal transport that minimizes
the structural transportation between two consecutive graphs
in the hierarchy, thus replacing the cross-entropy or other
losses that rely on labeling information. The “OT” part of
the name comes from Optimal Transport. We show that this
unsupervised approach produces meaningful coarse graphs

Hierarchical abstractions are a methodology for solving
large-scale graph problems in various disciplines. Coarsening is one such approach: it generates a pyramid of graphs
whereby the one in the next level is a structural summary
of the prior one. With a long history in scientific computing, many coarsening strategies were developed based on
mathematically driven heuristics. Recently, resurgent interests exist in deep learning to design hierarchical methods
learnable through differentiable parameterization. These approaches are paired with downstream tasks for supervised
learning. In practice, however, supervised signals (e.g., labels) are scarce and are often laborious to obtain. In this work,
we propose an unsupervised approach, coined OTC OARSEN ING , with the use of optimal transport. Both the coarsening
matrix and the transport cost matrix are parameterized, so that
an optimal coarsening strategy can be learned and tailored
for a given set of graphs without use of labels. We demonstrate that the proposed approach produces meaningful coarse
graphs and yields competitive performance compared with
supervised methods for graph classification and regression.

Introduction
A proliferation of graph neural networks (Bruna et al. 2014;
Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Duvenaud et al. 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling
2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Chen, Ma, and
Xiao 2018; Velic̆ković et al. 2018; Ying et al. 2018a; Liao
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019b; Scarselli et al. 2009; Li et al.
2016; Gilmer et al. 2017; Jin et al. 2017) emerged recently
with wide spread applications ranging from theorem proving (Wang et al. 2017), chemoinformatics (Jin et al. 2017;
Fout et al. 2017; Schütt et al. 2017), to planning (Ma et al.
2020). These models learn sophisticated feature representations of a graph and its constituents (i.e., nodes and edges)
through layers of feature transformation. Several architectures (Xu et al. 2019b; Morris et al. 2019; Maron et al. 2019)
are connected to the Weisfeiler–Lehman (WL) graph isomorphism test (Shervashidze et al. 2011) because of the resemblance in iterative node (re)labeling.
An image analog of graph neural networks is convolutional neural networks, whose key components are convolu∗

These two authors contribute equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8856

