The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Argumentation Frameworks with Strong and Weak Constraints:
Semantics and Complexity
Gianvincenzo Alfano, Sergio Greco, Francesco Parisi, Irina Trubitsyna
Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering,
University of Calabria, Italy
{g.alfano, greco, fparisi, i.trubitsyna}@dimes.unical.it

Abstract
Dung’s abstract Argumentation Framework (AF) has
emerged as a central formalism in formal argumentation. Key
aspects of the success and popularity of Dung’s framework
include its simplicity and expressiveness. Integrity constraints
help to express domain knowledge in a compact and natural way, thus keeping easy the modeling task even for problems that otherwise would be hard to encode within an AF.
In this paper, after providing an intuitive semantics based on
Lukasiewicz’s logic for AFs with (strong) constraints, called
Constrained AFs (CAFs), we propose Weak constrained AFs
(WAFs) that enhance CAFs with weak constraints. Intuitively, these constraints can be used to find “optimal” solutions to problems defined through CAFs. We provide a
detailed complexity analysis of CAFs and WAFs, showing
that strong constraints do not increase the expressive power
of AFs in most cases, while weak constraints systematically
increase the expressive power of CAFs under several wellknown argumentation semantics.

a

b

c

a

b

c

d

ā

b̄

c̄

ā

b̄

c̄

d¯

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) AF Λ of Example 1; (b) AF Λ0 of Example 3.
For this reason, Dung’s framework has been extended by
the introduction of further constructs, such as preferences
(Amgoud and Cayrol 1998; Modgil and Prakken 2013) and
integrity constraints (Coste-Marquis, Devred, and Marquis
2006; Arieli 2015), to achieve more comprehensive, natural, and compact ways of representing useful relationships
among arguments. In particular, enhancing AFs with constraints allow us to naturally and compactly express domain
conditions that need to be taken into account to filter out unfeasible solutions, as illustrated in the following example.
Example 1. Albert, Betty and Charlie wish to attend a basketball game on Saturday evening, but only two tickets are
available. In an attempt to model this situation by an AF Λ,
the following six arguments can be used: a (resp., b, c) states
that Albert (resp., Betty, Charlie) attends the game, whereas
ā (resp., b̄, c̄) states that Albert (resp., Betty, Charlie) does
not attend the game. The direct graph encoding Λ is shown
in Figure 1(a), where double arrows are used to represent
mutually attacks between arguments. Specifically, every argument a (resp., b, c) attacks and is attacked by argument ā
(resp., b̄, c̄), i.e., only one of them can be accepted. Moreover, every argument ā (resp., b̄, c̄) is attacked by the other
two arguments b̄ and c̄ (resp., ā and c̄; ā and b̄) since the argument that Albert (resp., Betty, Charlie) attends the game
can be accepted only if one of the arguments stating that
Betty or Charlie (resp., Albert or Charlie; Albert or Betty)
do not attend the game is accepted. Thus, the set of attacks
between every pair in {ā, b̄, c̄} models the fact that at most
one argument among ā, b̄ and c̄ can be accepted and then, as
a consequence, at least two arguments among a, b and c can
be accepted, i.e., all available tickets are sold.
The extensions of AF Λ under the well-known preferred
and stable semantics are E1 = {a, b, c̄}, E2 = {a, b̄, c},
E3 = {ā, b, c}, and E4 = {a, b, c}, where the presence of an

Introduction
Formal argumentation is an important field of research
within Artificial Intelligence (Bench-Capon and Dunne
2007; Simari and Rahwan 2009; Atkinson et al. 2017). In
particular, Dung’s abstract Argumentation Framework (AF)
has emerged as a central formalism for modelling disputes
between two or more agents (Dung 1995). An AF consists
of a set of arguments and a binary attack relation over the
set of arguments that specifies conflicts between arguments
(if argument a attacks argument b, then b is acceptable only
if a is not). Hence, arguments are abstract entities whose
role is determined by attacks. We can think of an AF as a
directed graph whose nodes represent arguments and edges
represent attacks. As for graph theory, an important aspect
of the success of Dung’s framework is that it is a simple yet
powerful formalism. The meaning of an AF is given in terms
of argumentation semantics, which intuitively tell us the sets
of arguments (called extensions) that can collectively be accepted to support a point of view in a dispute.
Despite the expressive power and generality of AFs, in
some cases it is difficult to accurately model domain knowledge by an AF in a natural and easy-to-understand way.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6175

