The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Variational Inference for Learning Representations
of Natural Language Edits
Edison Marrese-Taylor, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo
Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo
{emarrese,machelreid,matsuo}@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

process, extending previous work and effectively proposing
a new technique to obtain representations that can capture
holistic semantic information in the document editing process. Since inference in latent variable models can often be
difficult or intractable, our proposal follows previous work
framing the inference problem as optimization (Kingma and
Welling 2014; Bowman et al. 2016), which makes it an Edit
Variational Encoder (EVE). Since it is a known fact that latent variable models for text face additional challenges due
to the discrete nature of language (Bowman et al. 2016), in
this paper, we also propose a specific mechanism to mitigate
this issue.
In addition to proposing EVE, we also note that the empirical evaluation of edit representation has, so far, mainly
been based on semi-automatic techniques. For example, including visual inspection of edit clusters or human evaluation of certain quality aspects of the representations. As
these evaluations mechanisms are generally time consuming
and labor intensive, in this paper we propose a set of extrinsic downstream tasks specifically designed to more comprehensively evaluate the quality of edit representations. Our
motivation is to help advance research in this task by introducing a fully automatic, well-defined way to measure what
the learned latent space is capable of capturing. Similar endeavors have been a key element in tracking progress and developing new approaches in computer vision (Russakovsky
et al. 2015; Antol et al. 2015) and natural language processing (Wang et al. 2018). We draw inspiration from several
relevant problems from the latter, and leverage resourced
from three different tasks, namely Wikipedia editing, machine translation post-editing and grammatical error correction to present our evaluation scheme.
Our results indicate that evaluation metrics that are related
to the task used to obtain edit representations are generally
good predictors for the performance of these representations
in downstream tasks, although not always. Compared to existing approaches, our model obtains better scores on the intrinsic evaluation, and the representations obtained by our
approach can also consistently deliver better performance in
our set of introduced downstream tasks. Our code and data
are available on GitHub1 .

Document editing has become a pervasive component of the
production of information, with version control systems enabling edits to be efficiently stored and applied. In light of
this, the task of learning distributed representations of edits
has been recently proposed. With this in mind, we propose a
novel approach that employs variational inference to learn a
continuous latent space of vector representations to capture
the underlying semantic information with regard to the document editing process. We achieve this by introducing a latent variable to explicitly model the aforementioned features.
This latent variable is then combined with a document representation to guide the generation of an edited version of this
document. Additionally, to facilitate standardized automatic
evaluation of edit representations, which has heavily relied
on direct human input thus far, we also propose a suite of
downstream tasks, PEER, specifically designed to measure
the quality of edit representations in the context of natural
language processing.

Introduction
Editing documents has become a pervasive component of
many human activities (Miltner et al. 2019). This is, to some
extent, explained by the advent of the electronic storage of
documents, which has greatly increased the ease with which
we can edit them.
From source code to text files, specially over an extended
period of time, users often perform edits that reflect a similar
underlying change. For example, software programmers often have to deal with the task of performing repetitive code
edits to add new features, refactor, and fix bugs during software development. On the other hand, right before a conference deadline technical papers worldwide are finalized and
polished, often involving common fixes for grammar, clarity,
and style (Yin et al. 2019). In light of this, it is reasonable
to wonder if it would be possible to automatically extract
rules from these common edits. This has lead researchers to
recently propose the task of learning distributed representations of edits (Yin et al. 2019).
In this paper, we explore the performance of latent models in capturing properties of edits. Concretely, we introduce
a continuous latent variable to model features of the editing
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13552

https://github.com/epochx/PEER

