The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Characterizing the Evasion Attackability of Multi-label Classifiers
Zhuo Yang,1 Yufei Han, 2 Xiangliang Zhang 1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
2
Norton Research Group, Sophia Antipolis, France
zhuo.yang@kaust.edu.sa, yfhan.hust@gmail.com, xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

can ever cause. The problem of attackability assessment in a
general setting can be defined as: given a magnitude bound
of the adversarial perturbation and the distribution of
legal input data instances, what is the worst-case missclassification risk of h under the attack? Classifier h is
more attackable if it has a higher risk, while h is certified
to be not attackable if its output cannot be changed by any
adversarial noise within the magnitude bound. Via attackability assessment, we aim at answer the following questions:
• What are the factors determining the attackability level of
a multi-label classifier?
• Can we derive an empirically computable attackability
measurement for a multi-label classifier?
Echoing the questions raises two challenges: First, analyzing the worst-case classification risk on adversarial instances with PAC-learning framework requires a fixed distribution of adversarial instances. However, it is a well received
fact that such a distribution depends radically on the targeted
classifier’s property, thus it is not fixed and closely associated with the classifier’s architecture. The celebrated works
(Yin, Ramchandran, and Bartlett 2019; Khim and Loh 2018;
Tu, Zhang, and Tao 2019) proposed to mitigate the gap via
the lens of Rademacher complexity. Nevertheless, they all
focused on single-label scenarios, thus can’t be applied to
answer the questions above. Second, evaluating the worstcase risk for an input instance needs to explore the maximal
set of jointly attackable labels. Since labels are not mutually
exclusive in multi- label tasks, the label exploration process
is in nature an NP-hard mixed-integer programming problem. The adversarial noise generation method in (Song et al.
2018) applies only in the targeted attack scenario, where the
attacked labels are given. Few effort has been dedicated to
study the feasibility of label space exploration.
To address the challenges above, we conduct both theoretical and empirical attackability analysis of a multi-label
classifier. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We measure the attackability of a multi-label classifier
by evaluating the expected worst-case miss-classification
loss over the distribution of adversarial examples. We instantiate the study to linear and deep neural networks,
which are popularly deployed in multi-label applications.
Our analysis unveils that the attack strength, the regularity of the targeted classifier and the empirical loss on un-

Evasion attack in multi-label learning systems is an interesting, widely witnessed, yet rarely explored research topic.
Characterizing the crucial factors determining the attackability of the multi-label adversarial threat is the key to interpret
the origin of the adversarial vulnerability and to understand
how to mitigate it. Our study is inspired by the theory of adversarial risk bound. We associate the attackability of a targeted multi-label classifier with the regularity of the classifier
and the training data distribution. Beyond the theoretical attackability analysis, we further propose an efficient empirical
attackability estimator via greedy label space exploration. It
provides provably computational efficiency and approximation accuracy. Substantial experimental results on real-world
datasets validate the unveiled attackability factors and the effectiveness of the proposed empirical attackability indicator.

Introduction
Evasion attack has been witnessed widely in real-world
practices of multi-label learning (Song et al. 2018). For example, a creepware/stalkware usually has multiple malicious
labels as it sniffs the victim’s privacy via different mobile
services. To avoid being flagged, the entities authoring these
malwares (Roundy et al. 2020; Freed et al. 2018) tend to
hide their key malicious labels, such as rending remotely
recording phone calls or accessing private files, by slightly
reprogramming app binary structures. Meanwhile, they preserve less harmful labels like GPS tracking to pretend to
be benign parental control. Another example can be found
in image recommendation systems. An adversary tends to
embed spam/toxic advertisements (Gupta et al. 2013) into
a recommended image with other harmless contents. These
malicious contents are so well tuned that the sanitary check
system is deceived by the camouflaged image, while recognizing correctly other harmless scenarios.
Despite of the widely existence of multi-label adversarial
threats, it has been a rarely investigated, yet important topic
to evaluate the robustness of a multi-label classifier under
evasion attack (a.k.a. attackability). Intuitively, assessing
the attackability of a multi-label classifier h with an input
instance is to explore the maximal perturbation on h’s output that an input adversarial noise of bounded magnitudes
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10647

