The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Memory based Attention Network for Sequential Recommendation
Qiaoyu Tan 1 , Jianwei Zhang 2 , Ninghao Liu 1 , Xiao Huang 3
Hongxia Yang 2 , Jingren Zhou 2 , Xia Hu 1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
2
Alibaba Group
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{qytan,nhliu43,xiahu}@tamu.edu, xiaohuang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
{zhangjianwei.zjw, yang.yhx, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

2020). However, these methods ignore the temporal dynamics of user behaviors.
To capture sequential dynamics for user modeling, various sequential recommendation methods have been proposed to make recommendations based on user’s past behaviors (Hidasi et al. 2015; Tang and Wang 2018; Tan et al.
2021). They aim to predict the next item(s) that a user is
likely to interact with, given her/his historical interactions.
Recently, a myriad of attempts that build upon sequential
neural networks, such as recurrent neural network (RNNs),
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and self-attention
networks, have achieved promising results in various recommendation scenarios (Hidasi and Karatzoglou 2018; Yuan
et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2018). The basic paradigm is to encode a user’s historical
interactions into a vector using various sequential modules
based on the behavior sequence, which is obtained by sorting her/his past behaviors in chronological order.
However, as many E-commerce and social media systems keep accumulating users’ records, the behavior sequences have become extraordinarily long. For example,
more than twenty thousand customers on the Alibaba ecommerce platform have interacted with over one thousand
items from April to September 2018 (Ren et al. 2019). Despite the fertile information contained in these long behavior
sequences, existing sequential recommendation algorithms
would achieve sub-optimal performance in modeling long
behavior sequences. The reason is that standard sequential
architectures (e.g., RNNs, CNNs, attention networks) are insufficient to capture long-term dependencies confirmed in
sequence learning (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014; Yu
and Koltun 2015; Dai et al. 2019). Directly applying them
to model long behavior sequences would result in significant performance degeneration. Thus, in this paper, we target at exploring sequential recommendation with extraordinary long user behavior sequences.
There are three major challenges in learning from long
behavior sequences. 1) Given that the response time in
real-world systems is limited, it has become expensive to
scan over the entire behavior sequence at each prediction
time (Zhu et al. 2018). Existing sequential recommender
systems often require read the whole behavior sequence.
A few recent long sequential recommendation methods explore splitting the whole input behavior sequence into short-

Sequential recommendation has become increasingly essential in various online services. It aims to model the dynamic
preferences of users from their historical interactions and predict their next items. The accumulated user behavior records
on real systems could be very long. This rich data brings
opportunities to track actual interests of users. Prior efforts
mainly focus on making recommendations based on relatively recent behaviors. However, the overall sequential data
may not be effectively utilized, as early interactions might affect users’ current choices. Also, it has become intolerable to
scan the entire behavior sequence when performing inference
for each user, since real-world system requires short response
time. To bridge the gap, we propose a novel long sequential recommendation model, called Dynamic Memory-based
Attention Network (DMAN). It segments the overall long behavior sequence into a series of sub-sequences, then trains the
model and maintains a set of memory blocks to preserve longterm interests of users. To improve memory fidelity, DMAN
dynamically abstracts each user’s long-term interest into its
own memory blocks by minimizing an auxiliary reconstruction loss. Based on the dynamic memory, the user’s shortterm and long-term interests can be explicitly extracted and
combined for efficient joint recommendation. Empirical results over four benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our model in capturing long-term dependency over
various state-of-the-art sequential models.

Introduction
Recommender systems have become an important tool in
various online systems such as E-commerce, social media, and advertising systems to provide personalized services (Hidasi et al. 2015; Ying et al. 2018b). One core stage
of live industrial systems is candidate selection and ranking (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016), which is responsible for retrieving a few hundred relevant items from a million or even billion scale corpus. Previously, researchers resort to collaborative filtering approaches (Sarwar et al. 2001)
to solve it by assuming that like-minded users tend to exhibit
similar preferences on items. Typical examples including
models based on matrix factorization (Sarwar et al. 2001),
factorization machines (Rendle 2010), and graph neural networks (Ying et al. 2018b; Wang et al. 2019b; Tan et al.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4384

