The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ordinal Historical Dependence in Graphical Event Models with Tree
Representations
Debarun Bhattacharjya, Tian Gao, Dharmashankar Subramanian
Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center∗
{debarunb, tgao, dharmash}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

arrival epochs that decay over time [Bacry, Mastromatteo,
and Muzy 2015; Etesami et al. 2016; Xu, Luo, and Zha 2017;
Yu et al. 2020]. Another line of work considers models where
the conditional intensity rate is a piece-wise constant function
of historical occurrences [Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu 2011;
Parikh, Gunawardana, and Meek 2012; Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018] . Other parametric approaches have
also been pursued [Simma et al. 2008], as have approaches
involving neural architectures [Du et al. 2016; Mei and Eisner
2017; Xiao et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2020].
All the aforementioned temporal models fit within the highlevel framework of graphical event models (GEMs) [Didelez
2008; Meek 2014], which are graphical representations of
marked point processes that explicitly indicate which labels’
historical occurrences have a direct influence on the process
dynamics of any particular event label. Such a graphical
framework improves interpretability and can be tremendously
insightful in applications where knowledge discovery is the
key task. The piece-wise constant family has an additional
advantage beyond interpretability; given a graph, learning
the conditional intensity parameters can typically be done
efficiently using summary statistics [Gunawardana, Meek,
and Xu 2011; Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018].
Recent work within the piece-wise constant family of
GEMs has shown the promise of ordinal historical dependence, where an event label’s arrival rate is determined by the
recent historical order in which its underlying causal events
have occurred [Bhattacharjya, Gao, and Subramanian 2020].
However, the state-of-the-art model and its associated learner
cannot adequately handle the super-exponential number of
potential orders as a function of the causes. This greatly limits
the model’s applicability on practical datasets as it is often unable to identify more than two or three parents. Furthermore,
the model assumes access to user-provided inputs which may
be unavailable without domain expertise. In this paper, we
introduce a novel tree-based representation for conditional intensity parameters that compactly captures ordinal historical
dependence, as well as an associated learner that is effective
and more insightful for real-world datasets.

Graphical event models are representations that capture process independence between different types of events in multivariate temporal point processes. The literature consists of
various parametric models and approaches to learn them from
multivariate event stream data. Since these models are interpretable, they are often able to provide beneficial insights
about event dynamics. In this paper, we show how to compactly model the situation where the order of occurrences of
an event’s causes in some recent historical time interval impacts its occurrence rate; this sort of historical dependence is
common in several real-world applications. To overcome the
practical challenge of parameter explosion due to the number
of potential orders that is super-exponential in the number of
parents, we introduce a novel graphical event model based
on a parametric tree representation for capturing ordinal historical dependence. We present an approach to learn such a
model from data, demonstrating that the proposed model fits
several real-world datasets better than relevant baselines. We
also showcase the potential advantages of such a model to an
analyst during the process of knowledge discovery.

1

Introduction & Related Work

Modeling temporal relationships between various types (labels) of events in time-stamped streams of event occurrences
is useful in a wide variety of applications, including system reliability, social networks, manufacturing processes,
retail, healthcare, politics, and finance. It is well known that
multivariate event streams in continuous time can be modeled as samples from a marked (or multivariate) point process [Aalen, Borgan, and Gjessing 2008; Cox and Lewis
1972] – a stochastic process that involves counting processes
for event labels. Each label is associated with a conditional
intensity function that determines its rate of occurrence at any
time given historical occurrences of its causal event labels.
The literature on multivariate point processes is vast and
varied, spanning parametric as well as neural models for
specifying how conditional intensity rates vary with historical occurrences. Parametric models that are most popular are
primarily of two types. One stream of research explores multivariate Hawkes processes with jumps in intensity at historical

Motivation. We motivate the model with the help of an
illustrative example involving social unrest. Consider the
(ordinal) graphical event model in Figure 1(a) with 4 types of
recurring events: natural disasters (D) such as earthquakes or

∗
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release: distribution unlimited
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6759

