The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Avoiding Reopenings in Best First
Suboptimal Search with General Bounding Functions
Jingwei Chen,1 Nathan R. Sturtevant,1
1

Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada
jingwei5@ualberta.ca, nathanst@ualberta.ca

Abstract

gorithm available for additive bounding requires performing
node re-openings, which are expensive in some domains.
Our recent research studied the sufficient conditions for
a Best-First Search (BFS) using a priority function Φ to
find bounded suboptimal solutions without having to reopen
nodes (Chen and Sturtevant 2019). Two example priority
functions (or Φ functions) were introduced, XDP and XUP,
which improve the performance of WA*.
However, there were a few limitations to this work. First,
Φ was required to be differentiable. It was unclear whether
non-differentiable functions, such as piecewise functions
could be used. Secondly, the work only provided sufficient
conditions for avoiding re-expansions. The conditions can
be used to determine whether Φ will find bounded suboptimal solutions without re-expansions; however, without necessary conditions, we can not decide whether a Φ will cause
the algorithm to find unbounded solutions. Thirdly, the conditions relied on consistent heuristics and undirected graphs.
Thus, it was an open question whether some Φ functions
will work with inconsistent heuristics. Fourthly, these results
only applied to B = Bw .
In this paper, we resolve those issues in the following
ways: (1) we show that, given a few basic assumptions on
Φ, a consistent heuristic is a necessary condition for avoiding re-openings; (2) we present necessary conditions and the
cases where they apply; (3) we relax previous assumptions
by allowing continuous but not differentiable Φ-functions;
(4) we extend the results to other bounding functions. Our
new priority functions result in significant improvement over
XDP and XUP.

Recent work introduced XDP and XUP priority functions for
best-first bounded-suboptimal search that do not need to perform state re-expansions as long as the search heuristic is
consistent. However, that work had several limitations that
are rectified here. This paper analyzes the sufficiency and necessity of the conditions used to formulate XDP and XUP.
The analysis presents a simpler proof and generalizes the result in three aspects: (1) the priority function no longer has
to be differentiable everywhere, (2) the quality of the solution does not have to be bounded by a constant factor, and
(3) directed graphs are handled correctly. These results allow
the introduction of more priority functions, such as piecewise
linear functions, and more variants of bounded-suboptimal
search, such as constant suboptimality. Several new priority
functions are presented in this paper that, according to empirical results, can significantly outperform existing approaches
including XDP.

1

Introduction

Heuristic search algorithms such as A* are able to find
optimal paths between a given start and goal state. For
many time-sensitive applications, such as embedded systems (Benton, Do, and Ruml 2007) or video games (Bulitko
et al. 2011), a quick but suboptimal solution is more favorable than a slow but optimal solution. Algorithms aimed at
finding suboptimal solutions are called suboptimal search
algorithms. Research has focused on bounded suboptimal
search (BSS), which guarantees that the solution found has
cost no greater than B(C ∗ ), where B : R → R is a given
bounding function and C ∗ is the optimal solution cost. The
most popular bounding function is Bw (x) = wx, which
means when the optimal solution is C ∗ , the returned solution is guaranteed to fall in the range of [C ∗ , wC ∗ ]. Algorithms designed for solving this problem include weighted
A* (WA*) (Pohl 1970), A* (Pearl and Kim 1982), Optimistic Search (Thayer and Ruml 2008), EES (Thayer and
Ruml 2011), and DPS (Gilon, Felner, and Stern 2016).
There are other types of bounding functions, such as additive bounding function Bγ (x) = x + γ, where γ is a given
constant (Valenzano et al. 2013). Unfortunately, the only al-

2

Background

A bounded suboptimal search (BSS) problem is defined by a
n-tuple {G, start, goal, h, B}. The state space, G, is a finite
directed graph whose vertices are states and whose edges are
pairs of states. Each edge (u, v) ∈ G has a cost c(u, v). We
assume there is at most one edge between each pair of states,
and the edge costs are non-negative. A path in G is a finite
sequence U = (u0 , . . . , un ) of states in G where (ui , ui+1 )
is an edge in G for 0 ≤ i < n.
Let d(u, v) be the cost of the cheapest path from state u to
state v in G. If there is no path from u to v then d(u, v) = ∞.
We let g ∗ (u) = d(start, u). The shortest path from start to
goal is the optimal solution cost C ∗ = d(start, goal). In

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3688

