The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Open Intent Classification with Adaptive Decision Boundary
Hanlei Zhang,1, 2 Hua Xu,1, 2∗ Ting-En Lin1, 2
1

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
zhang-hl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@tsinghua.edu.cn, ting-en.lte@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Open intent classification is a challenging task in dialogue
systems. On the one hand, it should ensure the quality of
known intent identification. On the other hand, it needs to
detect the open (unknown) intent without prior knowledge.
Current models are limited in finding the appropriate decision boundary to balance the performances of both known
intents and the open intent. In this paper, we propose a postprocessing method to learn the adaptive decision boundary
(ADB) for open intent classification. We first utilize the labeled known intent samples to pre-train the model. Then, we
automatically learn the adaptive spherical decision boundary
for each known class with the aid of well-trained features.
Specifically, we propose a new loss function to balance both
the empirical risk and the open space risk. Our method does
not need open intent samples and is free from modifying the
model architecture. Moreover, our approach is surprisingly
insensitive with less labeled data and fewer known intents.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets show
that our method yields significant improvements compared
with the state-of-the-art methods. The codes are released at
https://github.com/thuiar/Adaptive-Decision-Boundary.

Figure 1: An example of open intent classification. Book
flight and Restaurant reservation are two known intents. We
should identify them correctly while detecting the sentences
with the open intent.

et al. (2013) propose the concept of open space risk as the
measure of open classification. Fei and Liu (2016) reduce
the open space risk by learning the closed boundary of each
positive class in the similarity space. However, they fail
to capture high-level semantic concepts with SVM. Bendale and Boult (2016) manage to reduce the open space
risk through deep neural networks (DNNs), but need to
sample open classes for selecting the core hyperparameters. Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017) use the softmax probability as the confidence score, but also need to select the confidence threshold with negative samples. Shu, Xu, and Liu
(2017) replace softmax with the sigmoid activation function,
and calculate the confidence thresholds of each class based
on statistics. However, the statistics-based thresholds can not
learn the essential differences between known classes and
the open class. Lin and Xu (2019a) propose to learn the deep
intent features with the margin loss and detect the unknown
intent with local outlier factor (Breunig et al. 2000). However, it has no specific decision boundaries for distinguishing
the open intent, and needs model architecture modification.
Most of the existing methods need to design specific classifiers for identifying the open class (Bendale and Boult
2016; Shu, Xu, and Liu 2017; Lin and Xu 2019a), and perform poorly with the common classifier (Hendrycks and
Gimpel 2017). Moreover, the performance of open classi-

Introduction
Identifying the user’s open intent plays a significant role in
dialogue systems. As shown in Figure 1, we have two known
intents for specific purposes, such as book flight and restaurant reservation. However, there are also utterances with irrelevant or unsupported intents that our system cannot handle. It is necessary to distinguish these utterances from the
known intents as much as possible. On the one hand, effectively identifying the open intent can improve customer satisfaction by reducing false-positive error. On the other hand,
we can use the open intent to discover potential user needs.
We regard open intent classification as an (n+1)-class
classification task as suggested in (Shu, Xu, and Liu 2017;
Lin and Xu 2019a), and group open classes into the (n+1)th
class . Our goal is to classify the n-class known intents into
their corresponding classes correctly while identifying the
(n+1)th class open intent. To solve this problem, Scheirer
∗

Hua Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14374

