The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TabNet: Attentive Interpretable Tabular Learning
Sercan Ö. Arık, Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI
Sunnyvale, CA
soarik@google.com, tpfister@google.com

Abstract

ments particularly for large datasets (Hestness et al. 2017). In
addition, unlike tree learning, DNNs enable gradient descentbased end-to-end learning for tabular data which can have a
multitude of benefits: (i) efficiently encoding multiple data
types like images along with tabular data; (ii) alleviating the
need for feature engineering, which is currently a key aspect
in tree-based tabular data learning methods; (iii) learning
from streaming data and perhaps most importantly (iv) endto-end models allow representation learning which enables
many valuable application scenarios including data-efficient
domain adaptation (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016),
generative modeling (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015) and
semi-supervised learning (Dai et al. 2017).
We propose a new canonical DNN architecture for tabular
data, TabNet. The main contributions are summarized as:
1. TabNet inputs raw tabular data without any preprocessing
and is trained using gradient descent-based optimization,
enabling flexible integration into end-to-end learning.
2. TabNet uses sequential attention to choose which features to reason from at each decision step, enabling interpretability and better learning as the learning capacity
is used for the most salient features (see Fig. 1). This
feature selection is instance-wise, e.g. it can be different
for each input, and unlike other instance-wise feature selection methods like (Chen et al. 2018) or (Yoon, Jordon,
and van der Schaar 2019), TabNet employs a single deep
learning architecture for feature selection and reasoning.
3. Above design choices lead to two valuable properties: (i)
TabNet outperforms or is on par with other tabular learning models on various datasets for classification and regression problems from different domains; and (ii) TabNet
enables two kinds of interpretability: local interpretability
that visualizes the importance of features and how they
are combined, and global interpretability which quantifies
the contribution of each feature to the trained model.
4. Finally, for the first time for tabular data, we show significant performance improvements by using unsupervised
pre-training to predict masked features (see Fig. 2).

We propose a novel high-performance and interpretable canonical deep tabular data learning architecture, TabNet. TabNet
uses sequential attention to choose which features to reason
from at each decision step, enabling interpretability and more
efficient learning as the learning capacity is used for the most
salient features. We demonstrate that TabNet outperforms
other variants on a wide range of non-performance-saturated
tabular datasets and yields interpretable feature attributions
plus insights into its global behavior. Finally, we demonstrate
self-supervised learning for tabular data, significantly improving performance when unlabeled data is abundant.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown notable success
with images (He et al. 2015), text (Lai et al. 2015) and audio
(Amodei et al. 2015). For these, canonical architectures that
efficiently encode the raw data into meaningful representations, fuel the rapid progress. One data type that has yet to
see such success with a canonical architecture is tabular data.
Despite being the most common data type in real-world
AI (as it is comprised of any categorical and numerical features), (Chui et al. 2018), deep learning for tabular data remains under-explored, with variants of ensemble decision
trees (DTs) still dominating most applications (Bansal 2020).
Why? First, because DT-based approaches have certain benefits: (i) they are representionally efficient for decision manifolds with approximately hyperplane boundaries which are
common in tabular data; and (ii) they are highly interpretable
in their basic form (e.g. by tracking decision nodes) and there
are popular post-hoc explainability methods for their ensemble form, e.g. (Lundberg, Erion, and Lee 2018) – this is an
important concern in many real-world applications; (iii) they
are fast to train. Second, because previously-proposed DNN
architectures are not well-suited for tabular data: e.g. stacked
convolutional layers or multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) are
vastly overparametrized – the lack of appropriate inductive
bias often causes them to fail to find optimal solutions for tabular decision manifolds (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016; Shavitt and Segal 2018; Xu et al. 2019).
Why is deep learning worth exploring for tabular data?
One obvious motivation is expected performance improve-

Related Work
Feature selection: Feature selection broadly refers to judiciously picking a subset of features based on their usefulness for prediction. Commonly-used techniques such as forward selection and Lasso regularization (Guyon and Elisseeff

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6679

