The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Influence of Memory in Multi-Agent Consensus
David Kohan Marzagão,1 Luciana Basualdo Bonatto,2 Tiago Madeira,3
Marcelo Matheus Gauy,3 Peter McBurney1
1

King’s College London
University of Oxford
3
University of São Paulo
{david.kohan, peter.mcburney}@kcl.ac.uk, basualdobona@maths.ox.ac.uk, {madeira, mmgauy}@ime.usp.br
2

Abstract

of the decisions are represented by a set of finite states or
labels, often called opinions or colours, which are the possible decision options for each agent at each round of the
process. The local nature of agent knowledge is manifested
by the topology of the graph, in that nodes are typically only
connected to some other nodes, and not to all others. Thus,
an agent or node may know at the start of each round the
states at the previous round of the nodes to which it is connected, and then use this local knowledge to decide what
state it should adopt at the current round. Agent decisions
are made synchronously. Synchronous consensus processes
have been extensively studied (e.g. Martinez et al. (2005);
Lynch (1996); Cao, Xiao, and Wang (2015); Olfati-Saber,
Fax, and Murray (2007)). The protocol will typically assume
that all agents have the same desired final goal, which is that
all nodes choose a particular state, i.e., reach a consensus.
These protocols also typically assume that the agents are
fungible; in other words, that they all use the same algorithm to decide what state to adopt at each round and are
not otherwise internally distinguishable (although they may
have different numbers of connections). For the context of
this paper, we assume all agents act sincerely, without malice or whimsy.

Multi-agent consensus problems can often be seen as a sequence of autonomous and independent local choices between a finite set of decision options, with each local choice
undertaken simultaneously, and with a shared goal of achieving a global consensus state. Being able to estimate probabilities for the different outcomes and to predict how long it
takes for a consensus to be formed, if ever, are core issues for
such protocols.
Little attention has been given to protocols in which agents
can remember past or outdated states. In this paper, we propose a framework to study what we call memory consensus
protocol. We show that the employment of memory allows
such processes to always converge, as well as, in some scenarios, such as cycles, converge faster. We provide a theoretical analysis of the probability of each option eventually winning such processes based on the initial opinions expressed
by agents. Further, we perform experiments to investigate network topologies in which agents benefit from memory on the
expected time needed for consensus.

Introduction
Many applications of distributed computing involve autonomous entities making individual, independent assessments of some situation, based only on limited or local
knowledge, in repeated decision rounds until a global consensus decision emerges, if it ever does. The most famous
of these applications nowadays is probably the decisionmaking process used in blockchain or distributed ledger applications, but computational applications long predated the
development of Bitcoin in 2008 (Nakamoto 2009; Tsitsiklis 1984; Olfati-Saber, Fax, and Murray 2007). Applications
continue to emerge, for example, in the design of collective
decision-making processes for groups of autonomous robots
or drones (Yan, Jouandeau, and Cherif 2013; Ismail and Sariff 2018).
Many of these decision processes can be modelled as
a process between autonomous agents played on a graph,
where the nodes of the graph represent the autonomous entities, and the edges between nodes represent connections or
information transfers between these entities. The outcomes

Core issues for such protocols involve being able to compute the consensus probabilities for each of the different outcomes and to predict how long it takes for a consensus to
be formed. A known feature of synchronous consensus processes, however, is that, for some network topologies (e.g.,
even cycles), they may encounter deadlocks, i.e., configurations from which no consensus can be reached (Hassin and
Peleg 2001, Sec 2.1). Moreover, some network topologies
(e.g., odd cycles) may have structure locally similar to the
ones where deadlocks are encountered and the consensus
process may take a long time to converge as a result. We
aim to address these issues by considering that agents may
remember and take into account previous rounds in their
decision-making.
This paper asks what are the effects, if any, on the likelihood and speed of convergence of agents having a memory of some past states of the current process. In what we
call memory consensus protocols, agents may copy either
their neighbours’ past states or their current ones, according
to different probabilities. We will show that, with memory,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11254

