The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Neural Network-Based Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series
Ailin Deng, Bryan Hooi
National University of Singapore
ailin@comp.nus.edu.sg, bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

allow them to diagnose and respond to the anomaly as
quickly as possible.
Due to the inherent lack of labeled anomalies in historical data, and the unpredictable and highly varied nature of anomalies, the anomaly detection problem is typically treated as an unsupervised learning problem. In past
years, many classical unsupervised approaches have been
developed, including linear model-based approaches (Shyu
et al. 2003), distance-based methods (Angiulli and Pizzuti
2002), and one-class methods based on support vector machines (Schölkopf et al. 2001). However, such approaches
generally model inter-relationships between sensors in relatively simple ways: for example, capturing only linear relationships, which is insufficient for complex, highly nonlinear relationships in many real-world settings.
Recently, deep learning-based techniques have enabled
improvements in anomaly detection in high-dimensional
datasets. For instance, Autoencoders (AE) (Aggarwal 2015)
are a popular approach for anomaly detection which uses
reconstruction error as an outlier score. More recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Li et al. 2019) and
LSTM-based approaches (Qin et al. 2017) have also reported promising performance for multivariate anomaly detection. However, most methods do not explicitly learn
which sensors are related to one another, thus facing difficulties in modelling sensor data with many potential interrelationships. This limits their ability to detect and explain
deviations from such relationships when anomalous events
occur.
How do we take full advantage of the complex relationships between sensors in multivariate time series? Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Defferrard, Bresson,
and Vandergheynst 2016) have shown success in modelling
graph-structured data. These include graph convolution networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016), graph attention networks (GATs) (Veličković et al. 2017) and multi-relational
approaches (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018). However, applying
them to time series anomaly detection requires overcoming two main challenges. Firstly, different sensors have very
different behaviors: e.g. one may measure water pressure,
while another measures flow rate. However, typical GNNs
use the same model parameters to model the behavior of
each node. Secondly, in our setting, the graph edges (i.e. relationships between sensors) are initially unknown, and have

Given high-dimensional time series data (e.g., sensor data),
how can we detect anomalous events, such as system faults
and attacks? More challengingly, how can we do this in a
way that captures complex inter-sensor relationships, and detects and explains anomalies which deviate from these relationships? Recently, deep learning approaches have enabled
improvements in anomaly detection in high-dimensional
datasets; however, existing methods do not explicitly learn
the structure of existing relationships between variables, or
use them to predict the expected behavior of time series. Our
approach combines a structure learning approach with graph
neural networks, additionally using attention weights to provide explainability for the detected anomalies. Experiments
on two real-world sensor datasets with ground truth anomalies show that our method detects anomalies more accurately
than baseline approaches, accurately captures correlations between sensors, and allows users to deduce the root cause of a
detected anomaly.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth in interconnected devices and sensors
in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) such as vehicles, industrial systems and data centres, there is an increasing need to
monitor these devices to secure them against attacks. This is
particularly the case for critical infrastructures such as power
grids, water treatment plants, transportation, and communication networks.
Many such real-world systems involve large numbers of
interconnected sensors which generate substantial amounts
of time series data. For instance, in a water treatment plant,
there can be numerous sensors measuring water level, flow
rates, water quality, valve status, and so on, in each of their
many components. Data from these sensors can be related in
complex, nonlinear ways: for example, opening a valve results in changes in pressure and flow rate, leading to further
changes as automated mechanisms respond to the change.
As the complexity and dimensionality of such sensor data
grow, humans are increasingly less able to manually monitor this data. This necessitates automated anomaly detection approaches which can rapidly detect anomalies in highdimensional data, and explain them to human operators to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4027

