The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive Clustering
Yunfan Li1 , Peng Hu1 , Zitao Liu2 , Dezhong Peng1,4,5 , Joey Tianyi Zhou3 , Xi Peng1 *
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
TAL Education Group, China
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
4
Shenzhen Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
5
College of Computer & Information Science, Southwest University, China
yunfanli.gm@gmail.com, penghu.ml@gmail.com, zitao.jerry.liu@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn,
joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com, pengx.gm@gmail.com
Abstract
In this paper, we propose an online clustering method called
Contrastive Clustering (CC) which explicitly performs the
instance- and cluster-level contrastive learning. To be specific, for a given dataset, the positive and negative instance
pairs are constructed through data augmentations and then
projected into a feature space. Therein, the instance- and
cluster-level contrastive learning are respectively conducted
in the row and column space by maximizing the similarities
of positive pairs while minimizing those of negative ones. Our
key observation is that the rows of the feature matrix could
be regarded as soft labels of instances, and accordingly the
columns could be further regarded as cluster representations.
By simultaneously optimizing the instance- and cluster-level
contrastive loss, the model jointly learns representations and
cluster assignments in an end-to-end manner. Besides, the
proposed method could timely compute the cluster assignment for each individual, even when the data is presented
in streams. Extensive experimental results show that CC remarkably outperforms 17 competitive clustering methods on
six challenging image benchmarks. In particular, CC achieves
an NMI of 0.705 (0.431) on the CIFAR-10 (CIFAR-100)
dataset, which is an up to 19% (39%) performance improvement compared with the best baseline. The code is available
at https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/2021-AAAI-CC.

Figure 1: The key observation. By regarding the rows of the
feature matrix as the soft labels of instances (i.e., P (cj |xi )
denotes the probability of sample i belonging to cluster j),
the columns could be interpreted as cluster representations
distributed over the dataset. As a result, the instance- and
cluster-level contrastive learning could be conducted in the
row and column space of the feature matrix, respectively.

Introduction

For example, JULE (Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016) progressively merges data points and takes the clustering results as supervisory signals to learn a more discriminative
representation by a neural network. DeepClustering (Caron
et al. 2018) iteratively groups the features with k-means and
uses the subsequent assignments to update the deep network.
This kind of alternation-learning method would suffer from
the error accumulated during the alternation between the
stages of representation learning and clustering, which results in suboptimal clustering performance. Moreover, the
aforementioned methods can only deal with offline tasks,
i.e., the clustering is based on the whole dataset, which limits their application on large-scale online learning scenarios,
i.e., to cluster the data stream.
To conquer the aforementioned offline limitation, this paper proposes an online deep clustering method called Contrastive Clustering (CC). Our idea comes from the observa-

As one of the most fundamental tools in unsupervised learning, clustering could group data into different clusters without any label. Although some promising results have been
achieved recently (Nie et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2016; Nie et al.
2016; Liu, Shen, and Tsang 2017; Wang et al. 2020), most
of the algorithms would produce undesirable results due to
the over-high complexity in real-world datasets. To solve the
problem, deep clustering (Guo et al. 2017b; Ghasedi Dizaji
et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2016, 2018) utilizes neural networks
to extract representative information from images for facilitating the downstream clustering tasks. In very recent, the
focus of the community has shifted to how to learn representation and perform clustering in an end-to-end fashion.
* Corresponding author: Xi Peng
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8547

