The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph-Based Tri-Attention Network for Answer Ranking in CQA
Wei Zhang1 , Zeyuan Chen1 , Chao Dong1 , Wen Wang1 , Hongyuan Zha2 , Jianyong Wang3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shanghai Institute for AI Education, East China Normal University
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
zhangwei.thu2011@gmail.com, chenzyfm@outlook.com, {51174500084, 51164500120}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Input Answer A
It's not difficult; just
return a proxy object
(rather than a pointer)
which executes code
in its destructor,……

In community-based question answering (CQA) platforms,
automatic answer ranking for a given question is critical
for finding potentially popular answers in early times. The
mainstream approaches learn to generate answer ranking
scores based on the matching degree between question and
answer representations as well as the influence of respondents. However, they encounter two main limitations: (1) Correlations between answers in the same question are often
overlooked. (2) Question and respondent representations are
built independently of specific answers before affecting answer representations. To address the limitations, we devise
a novel graph-based tri-attention network, namely GTAN,
which has two innovations. First, GTAN proposes to construct a graph for each question and learn answer correlations
from each graph through graph neural networks (GNNs).
Second, based on the representations learned from GNNs,
an alternating tri-attention method is developed to alternatively build target-aware respondent representations, answerspecific question representations, and context-aware answer
representations by attention computation. GTAN finally integrates the above representations to generate answer ranking scores. Experiments on three real-world CQA datasets
demonstrate GTAN significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
answer ranking methods, validating the rationality of the network architecture.

Input Question Q

Input Answer B

Every bit auf code
Execution of code in
after a (unconditional)
a function after the
return statement of
return statement has
any function/method
been accessed in c++.
in C/C++ is……

Respondent A

𝑊. : 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟
𝑊7 : return Q
𝑊= : any

…
B
𝑾𝟑

…

…

Score
Generation

𝑾𝟐

A

Respondent B
Alternating
Tri-Attention

𝑾𝟏

CQA-Based
GNN

2

𝐒𝐜𝐨𝐫𝐞𝐀

𝐒𝐜𝐨𝐫𝐞𝐁

GTAN

Figure 1: An illustrative example of automatic answer ranking in CQA for one question and its answers.
To this end, some conventional approaches (Shah and
Pomerantz 2010; Hu et al. 2013; Tymoshenko and Moschitti 2015; Omari et al. 2016) conduct tedious feature engineering to find effective features, whereas they are laborintensive and have limited generalization ability. Thus recent efforts (Shen et al. 2015; Qiu and Huang 2015; Fang
et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2017; Hu et al.
2018; Lyu et al. 2019) are devoted to deep representation
learning approaches for measuring the matching degree between target questions and answers. In particular, a few recent studies (Zhao et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Lyu et al.
2019; Xie et al. 2020) additionally build respondent representations based on their IDs or historical answers, hoping
to reveal user expertise on answer quality. It is worth noting
that the respondent role embodies the unique characteristics
of CQA, as compared to general question answering.
However, the above approaches are subject to two inherent limitations. Firstly, they learn each answer representation independently, yet the correlations between answers belonging to the same question are overlooked, which provide
some clues in characterizing answers (see Figure 3 where
top-ranked answers associated with the same question have
larger similarities). Secondly, each question and respondent
are assumed to only have one context-free representation for
affecting answer representations, which does not conform to
real situations. On the one hand, different parts of a question
might be addressed by its different answers. As shown in

Introduction
Community-based question answering (CQA) is a pivotal
online service gathering the wisdom of the crowd. It enables
users to ask and answer questions, and draws much research
interest (Ji et al. 2012). Popular CQAs, including StackOverflow, Quora, and Zhihu, have been the crucial entries for
modern knowledge sharing and retrieval due to the accumulated millions of questions and answers. Consequently, it
is of great importance for CQA platforms to support highquality answer selection for ordinary users. Although the
votes (e.g., thumbs-up) received by each answer can be the
standards to prioritize high-quality answers, their accumulation inevitably needs notable time costs (see Figure 2). As
such, automatic answer ranking is indispensable for quickly
finding potentially popular answers with high quality.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14463

