The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Lipschitz Lifelong Reinforcement Learning
∗

Erwan Lecarpentier1, 2 , David Abel3 , Kavosh Asadi3, 4 , Yuu Jinnai3 ,
Emmanuel Rachelson1 , Michael L. Littman3
2

1
ISAE-SUPAERO, Université de Toulouse, France
ONERA, The French Aerospace Lab, Toulouse, France
3
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
4
Amazon Web Service, Palo Alto, California, USA
erwanlecarpentier@mailbox.org

Abstract

performance degradation, as the computed upper bound provably does not underestimate the optimal Q-value function.
Our contributions are as follows. First, we study theoretically the Lipschitz continuity of the optimal Q-value function
in the task space by introducing a metric between MDPs
(Section 3). Then, we use this continuity property to propose
a value-transfer method based on a local distance between
MDPs (Section 4). Full knowledge of both MDPs is not required and the transfer is non-negative, which makes the
method applicable online and safe. In Section 4.3, we build
a PAC-MDP algorithm called Lipschitz RMax, applying this
transfer method in the online Lifelong RL setting. We provide
sample and computational complexity bounds and showcase
the algorithm in Lifelong RL experiments (Section 5).

We consider the problem of knowledge transfer when an agent
is facing a series of Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks. We
introduce a novel metric between Markov Decision Processes
and establish that close MDPs have close optimal value functions. Formally, the optimal value functions are Lipschitz
continuous with respect to the tasks space. These theoretical results lead us to a value-transfer method for Lifelong RL,
which we use to build a PAC-MDP algorithm with improved
convergence rate. Further, we show the method to experience
no negative transfer with high probability. We illustrate the
benefits of the method in Lifelong RL experiments.

1

Introduction

Lifelong Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an online problem
where an agent faces a series of RL tasks, drawn sequentially.
Transferring knowledge from prior experience to speed up
the resolution of new tasks is a key question in that setting
(Lazaric 2012; Taylor and Stone 2009). We elaborate on the
intuitive idea that similar tasks should allow a large amount
of transfer. An agent able to compute online a similarity measure between source tasks and the current target task could
be able to perform transfer accordingly. By measuring the
amount of inter-task similarity, we design a novel method
for value transfer, practically deployable in the online Lifelong RL setting. Specifically, we introduce a metric between
MDPs and prove that the optimal Q-value function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to the MDP space. This property makes it possible to compute a provable upper bound
on the optimal Q-value function of an unknown target task,
given the learned optimal Q-value function of a source task.
Knowing this upper bound accelerates the convergence of an
RMax-like algorithm (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002), relying on an optimistic estimate of the optimal Q-value function.
Overall, the proposed transfer method consists of computing
online the distance between source and target tasks, deducing
the upper bound on the optimal Q value function of the source
task and using this bound to accelerate learning. Importantly,
the method exhibits no negative transfer, i.e., it cannot cause

2

Background and Related Work

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) is
a framework for sequential decision making. The problem
is typically modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Puterman 2014) consisting of a 4-tuple hS, A, R, T i, where
S is a state space, A an action space, Rsa is the expected
a
reward of taking action a in state s and Tss
0 is the transition
probability of reaching state s0 when taking action a in state
s. Without loss of generality, we assume Rsa ∈ [0, 1]. Given
aPdiscount factor γ ∈ [0, 1), the expected cumulative return
t at
t γ Rst obtained along a trajectory starting with state s and
action a using policy π in MDP M is denoted by QπM (s, a)
and called the Q-function. The optimal Q-function Q∗M is the
∗
highest attainable expected return from s, a and VM
(s) =
maxa∈A Q∗M (s, a) is the optimal value function in s. Notice
1
that Rsa ≤ 1 implies Q∗M (s, a) ≤ 1−γ
for all s, a ∈ S × A.
This maximum upper bound is used by the RMax algorithm
as an optimistic initialization of the learned Q function. A
key point to reduce the sample complexity of this algorithm
is to benefit from a tighter upper bound, which is the purpose
of our transfer method.
Lifelong RL (Silver, Yang, and Li 2013; Brunskill and Li
2014) is the problem of experiencing online a series of MDPs
drawn from an unknown distribution. Each time an MDP
is sampled, a classical RL problem takes place where the
agent is able to interact with the environment to maximize
its expected return. In this setting, it is reasonable to think
that knowledge gained on previous MDPs could be re-used

∗
Kavosh Asadi finished working on this project before joining
Amazon.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8270

