The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-correcting Q-Learning
Rong Zhu1∗ , Mattia Rigotti 2
1

ISTBI, Fudan University
2
IBM Research AI
rongzhu56@gmail.com, mr2666@columbia.edu

Abstract

However, Q-learning is known to incur a maximization
bias, i.e., the overestimation of the maximum expected action value, which can result in poor performance in MDPs
with stochastic rewards. This issue was first pointed out by
Thrun and Schwartz (1993), and further investigated by van
Hasselt (2010) that proposed Double Q-learning as a way of
mitigating the problem by using the so-called double estimator, consisting in two separately updated action value functions. By decoupling action selection and reward estimation
with these two estimators, Double Q-learning addresses the
overestimation problem, but at the cost of introducing a systematic underestimation of action values. In addition, when
rewards have zero or low variances, Double Q-learning displays slower convergence than Q-learning due to its alternation between updating two action value functions.
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of a
new self-correcting estimator to estimate the maximum expected value. Our method is based on the observation that
in Q-learning successive updates of the Q-function at time
steps n and n−1 are correlated estimators of the optimal action value that can be combined into a new “self-correcting”
estimator, once the resulting combination is maximized over
actions. Crucially, using one value function (at different time
steps) allows us to avoid having to update two action value
functions. First, we will show how to combine correlated
estimators to obtain a self-correcting estimator that is guaranteed to balance the overestimation of the single estimator
and the underestimation of the double estimator. We then
show that, if appropriately tuned, this strategy can completely remove the maximization bias, which is particularly
pernicious in domains with high reward variances. Moreover, it can also attain faster convergence speed than Qlearning in domains where rewards are deterministic or with
low variability. Importantly, Self-correcting Q-learning does
not add any additional computational or memory costs compared to Q-learning. Finally, we propose a Deep Q Network
version of Self-correcting Q-learning that we successfully
test on the Atari 2600 domain.

The Q-learning algorithm is known to be affected by the maximization bias, i.e. the systematic overestimation of action
values, an important issue that has recently received renewed
attention. Double Q-learning has been proposed as an efficient algorithm to mitigate this bias. However, this comes at
the price of an underestimation of action values, in addition to
increased memory requirements and a slower convergence. In
this paper, we introduce a new way to address the maximization bias in the form of a “self-correcting algorithm” for approximating the maximum of an expected value. Our method
balances the overestimation of the single estimator used in
conventional Q-learning and the underestimation of the double estimator used in Double Q-learning. Applying this strategy to Q-learning results in Self-correcting Q-learning. We
show theoretically that this new algorithm enjoys the same
convergence guarantees as Q-learning while being more accurate. Empirically, it performs better than Double Q-learning
in domains with rewards of high variance, and it even attains
faster convergence than Q-learning in domains with rewards
of zero or low variance. These advantages transfer to a Deep
Q Network implementation that we call Self-correcting DQN
and which outperforms regular DQN and Double DQN on
several tasks in the Atari 2600 domain.

1

Introduction

The goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is to learn to map
situations to actions so as to maximize a cumulative future
reward signal (Sutton and Barto 2018). Q-learning proposed
by Watkins (1989) is one of the most popular algorithms
for solving this problem, and does so by estimating the optimal action value function. The convergence of Q-learning
has been proven theoretically for discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), and for undiscounted MDPs with
the condition that all policies lead to a zero-cost absorbing
state (Watkins and Dayan 1992; Tsitsiklis 1994; Jaakkola,
Jordan, and Singh 1994). Q-learning has been widely successfully deployed on numerous practical RL problems in
fields including control, robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013) and human-level game play (Mnih et al. 2015).
∗

Related work. Beside Double Q-learning, other methods
have been proposed to reduce the maximization bias, e.g.,
removing the asymptotic bias of the max-operator under a
Gaussian assumption (Lee, Defourny, and Powell 2013), estimating the maximum expected value by Gaussian approx-

Part of the work was done while at Columbia University

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11185

