The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Incremental Embedding Learning via Zero-Shot Translation
Kun Wei, Cheng Deng∗ , Xu Yang, and Maosen Li
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
{weikunsk, chdeng.xd, xuyang.xd, maosenli95}@gmail.com

Abstract
Modern deep learning methods have achieved great success
in machine learning and computer vision fields by learning a set of pre-defined datasets. Howerver, these methods
perform unsatisfactorily when applied into real-world situations. The reason of this phenomenon is that learning new
tasks leads the trained model quickly forget the knowledge
of old tasks, which is referred to as catastrophic forgetting.
Current state-of-the-art incremental learning methods tackle
catastrophic forgetting problem in traditional classification
networks and ignore the problem existing in embedding networks, which are the basic networks for image retrieval,
face recognition, zero-shot learning, etc. Different from traditional incremental classification networks, the semantic gap
between the embedding spaces of two adjacent tasks is the
main challenge for embedding networks under incremental
learning setting. Thus, we propose a novel class-incremental
method for embedding network, named as zero-shot translation class-incremental method (ZSTCI), which leverages
zero-shot translation to estimate the semantic gap without any
exemplars. Then, we try to learn a unified representation for
two adjacent tasks in sequential learning process, which captures the relationships of previous classes and current classes
precisely. In addition, ZSTCI can easily be combined with
existing regularization-based incremental learning methods
to further improve performance of embedding networks. We
conduct extensive experiments on CUB-200-2011 and CIFAR100, and the experiment results prove the effectiveness
of our method. The code of our method has been released in
https://github.com/Drkun/ZSTCI.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of semantic gap. (a) Data and prototypes of three classes of task 1 after training task 1. (b) Data
and prototypes of three classes after the training process of
task 2.

catastrophic forgetting (Robins 1995; McCloskey and Cohen 1989), which means the network loses the knowledge
learned from previous tasks.
To alleviate catastrophic forgetting, many incremental
learning strategies (Liu et al. 2018; Rebuffi et al. 2017) are
proposed, which can be divided into three categories, storing
training samples (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Aljundi et al. 2018),
regularizing the parameters updates (Li and Hoiem 2017;
Liu et al. 2018) and learning generative models to replay the
samples of previous tasks (Shin et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2018).
All these methods aim to transfer the knowledge of previous
tasks to current task, which preserve the ability learned previously. Learning without forgetting (LwF) (Li and Hoiem
2017) adds a distillation loss to preserve the old knowledge
while sequentially learning new tasks. iCaRL (Rebuffi et al.
2017) maintains an episodic memory of the exemplars and
incrementally learns the nearest-neighbor classifier for new
classes. DGDMN (Kamra, Gupta, and Liu 2017) uses Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) to generate old samples in each new phase for data
replaying, and good results are obtained in the multi-task incremental setting.
The methods mentioned above aim to address catastrophic forgetting in classification networks, which learn the

Introduction
In recent years, incremental learning (IL) (McCloskey and
Cohen 1989; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017) has gained significant
attention in machine learning (Yang et al. 2018b) and computer vision fields (Wang et al. 2018), which requests the
model can learn new tasks sequentially without forgetting
the tasks learned previously. Different from other traditional
methods trained on a set of pre-defined datasets, incremental learning methods are trained in a consecutive manner.
For different tasks in the training process, only the data of
current task is available to be learned. Thus, in the process of sequential learning, the network would suffer from
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10254

