The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CrossNER: Evaluating Cross-Domain Named Entity Recognition
Zihan Liu, Yan Xu, Tiezheng Yu, Wenliang Dai, Ziwei Ji,
Samuel Cahyawijaya, Andrea Madotto, Pascale Fung
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
zihan.liu@connect.ust.hk, pascale@ece.ust.hk

Abstract

Reuters News as the source domain, and utilize NER
datasets from Twitter (Derczynski, Bontcheva, and Roberts
2016; Lu et al. 2018), biomedicine (Nédellec et al. 2013) and
CBS SciTech News (Jia, Liang, and Zhang 2019) as target
domains. However, we find two drawbacks in utilizing these
datasets for cross-domain NER evaluation. First, most target
domains are either close to the source domain or not narrowed down to a specific topic or domain. Specifically, the
CBS SciTech News domain is close to the Reuters News domain (both are related to news) and the content in the Twitter domain is generally broad since diverse topics will be
tweeted about and discussed on social media. Second, the
entity categories for the target domains are limited. Except
the biomedical domain, which has specialized entities in the
biomedical field, the other domains (i.e., Twitter and CBS
SciTech News) only have general categories, such as person
and location. However, we expect NER models to recognize
certain entities related to target domains.
In this paper, we introduce a new human-annotated crossdomain NER dataset, dubbed CrossNER, which contains
five diverse domains, namely, politics, natural science, music, literature and artificial intelligence (AI). And each domain has particular entity categories; for example, there are
“politician”, “election” and “political party” categories specialized for the politics domain. As in previous works, we
consider the CoNLL2003 English NER dataset as the source
domain, and five domains in CrossNER as the target domains. We collect ∼1000 development and test examples for
each domain and a small size of data samples (100 or 200)
in the training set for each domain since we consider a lowresource scenario for target domains. In addition, we collect
the corresponding five unlabeled domain-related corpora for
the domain-adaptive pre-training, given its effectiveness for
domain adaptation (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan 2019; Donahue
et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Gururangan et al. 2020).
We evaluate existing cross-domain NER models on our
collected dataset and explore using different levels of domain corpus and masking strategies to continue pre-training
language models (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)). Results
show that emphasizing the partial corpus with specialized
entity categories in BERT’s domain-adaptive pre-training
(DAPT) consistently improves its domain adaptation ability. Additionally, in the DAPT, BERT’s masked language
modeling (MLM) can be enhanced by intentionally masking

Cross-domain named entity recognition (NER) models are
able to cope with the scarcity issue of NER samples in target domains. However, most of the existing NER benchmarks
lack domain-specialized entity types or do not focus on a certain domain, leading to a less effective cross-domain evaluation. To address these obstacles, we introduce a cross-domain
NER dataset (CrossNER), a fully-labeled collection of NER
data spanning over five diverse domains with specialized entity categories for different domains. Additionally, we also
provide a domain-related corpus since using it to continue
pre-training language models (domain-adaptive pre-training)
is effective for the domain adaptation. We then conduct comprehensive experiments to explore the effectiveness of leveraging different levels of the domain corpus and pre-training
strategies to do domain-adaptive pre-training for the crossdomain task. Results show that focusing on the fractional
corpus containing domain-specialized entities and utilizing
a more challenging pre-training strategy in domain-adaptive
pre-training are beneficial for the NER domain adaptation,
and our proposed method can consistently outperform existing cross-domain NER baselines. Nevertheless, experiments
also illustrate the challenge of this cross-domain NER task.
We hope that our dataset and baselines will catalyze research
in the NER domain adaptation area. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/zliucr/CrossNER.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a key component in text
processing and information extraction. Contemporary NER
systems rely on numerous training samples (Ma and Hovy
2016; Lample et al. 2016; Chiu and Nichols 2016; Dong
et al. 2016; Yadav and Bethard 2018), and a well-trained
NER model could fail to generalize to a new domain due to
the domain discrepancy. However, collecting large amounts
of data samples is expensive and time-consuming. Hence, it
is essential to build cross-domain NER models that possess
transferability to quickly adapt to a target domain by using
only a few training samples.
Existing cross-domain NER studies (Yang, Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2017; Jia, Liang, and Zhang 2019; Jia
and Zhang 2020) consider the CoNLL2003 English NER
dataset (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder 2003) from
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13452

