The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SMART: A Situation Model for Algebra Story Problems via Attributed Grammar
Yining Hong, Qing Li, Ran Gong, Daniel Ciao, Siyuan Huang, Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
yininghong@cs.ucla.edu, {liqing, nikepupu, danielciao, huangsiyuan}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract

World Knowledge

te
pu

pd
ate
3.U

World

om
2.C

Situation Model

Solving algebra story problems remains a challenging task in
artificial intelligence, which requires a detailed understanding of real-world situations and a strong mathematical reasoning capability. Previous neural solvers of math word problems directly translate problem texts into equations, lacking
an explicit interpretation of the situations, and often fail to
handle more sophisticated situations. To address such limits of neural solvers, we introduce the concept of a situation
model, which originates from psychology studies to represent
the mental states of humans in problem-solving, and propose
SMART, which adopts attributed grammar as the representation of situation models for algebra story problems. Specifically, we first train an information extraction module to extract nodes, attributes, and relations from problem texts and
then generate a parse graph based on a pre-defined attributed
grammar. An iterative learning strategy is also proposed to
improve the performance of SMART further. To rigorously
study this task, we carefully curate a new dataset named
ASP6.6k. Experimental results on ASP6.6k show that the proposed model outperforms all previous neural solvers by a
large margin while preserving much better interpretability. To
test these models’ generalization capability, we also design an
out-of-distribution (OOD) evaluation, in which problems are
more complex than those in the training set. Our model exceeds state-of-the-art models by 17% in the OOD evaluation,
demonstrating its superior generalization ability.

Math Knowledge

Ans: 60

Mathematical
Concepts
depart

After 2
hours

depart

After 2
hours

1.Generate

The two cars A and B are 20 kilometers apart. Car B is in front
and Car A is behind. The two cars depart at the same time. Car A
catches up with Car B after 2 hours. Car B is traveling 50
kilometers per hour and Car A is traveling at what speed every
hour?

Figure 1: The process of human solving algebra story problems: We first hallucinate a situation model from the text and
then perform arithmetic reasoning on the situation model to
compute an answer. If we fail to generate a correct solution,
we can adjust our situation model accordingly.
from the community of artificial intelligence and natural language processing often mix them with other types of problems, such as number problems and geometry problems, into
one whole task called Math Word Problems (MWPs) (Wang,
Liu, and Shi 2017a; Huang et al. 2016; Amini et al. 2019)
Recent works on Math Word Problems (Wang, Liu, and
Shi 2017a; Huang et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2018; Xie and
Sun 2019; Hong et al. 2021) focused on using end-to-end
neural networks (e.g., Seq2Seq, Seq2Tree) to directly translate a problem text into an expression, which is then executed to get the final answer. Although they seem to obtain
satisfying performance, such end-to-end neural models suffer from the following drawbacks:
• Lack of interpretability. The expressions generated by
neural networks are hard to interpret without the intermediate problem-solving process. An exemplary expression from Figure 3 is “(24+60)/[1-(1-(2/5))*(3/10)(2/5)*(3/4)-(2/5)]”, which makes no sense to humans,
even though it generates the correct answer.
• Lack of generalization ability. These neural solvers usually fail in scenarios that are more sophisticated than those
in training.
To address these issues in current research on Math Word
Problems, we make the following efforts in this work.
First, we curate a new benchmark named ASP6.6k, which

Introduction
Algebra Story Problems, depicted by Hinsley, Hayes, and
Simon (1977) as “twentieth-century fables”, remain a critical challenge in modern artificial intelligence. An algebra
story problem typically describes a real-world situation and
inquires about an unknown fact in the situation. It goes beyond arithmetic since one has to first comprehend the situation, recognize the goal in the problem, and then develop
a solution for it (Nathan, Kintsch, and Young 1992). Psychology studies (Bjork and Bowyer-Crane 2013; Abedi and
Lord 2001) also indicate that algebra story problems can
serve as a test of children’s cognitive skills to perform arithmetic reasoning on real-world tasks. However, although algebra story problems are distinguished per se, related works
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13009

