The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Intuitive Physics with Multimodal Generative Models
Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari,1,2 Francois R. Hogan,1 Michael Jenkin,1,3
David Meger,1,2 Gregory Dudek1,2
1

Samsung AI Center Montreal
2
McGill University
3
York University
srezaei@cim.mcgill.ca, {f.hogan, greg.dudek}@samsung.com, {m.jenkin, david.meger}@partner.samsung.com
Abstract
Predicting the future interaction of objects when they come
into contact with their environment is key for autonomous
agents to take intelligent and anticipatory actions. This paper
presents a perception framework that fuses visual and tactile
feedback to make predictions about the expected motion of
objects in dynamic scenes. Visual information captures object
properties such as 3D shape and location, while tactile information provides critical cues about interaction forces and resulting object motion when it makes contact with the environment. Utilizing a novel See-Through-your-Skin (STS) sensor
that provides high resolution multimodal sensing of contact
surfaces, our system captures both the visual appearance and
the tactile properties of objects. We interpret the dual stream
signals from the sensor using a Multimodal Variational Autoencoder (MVAE), allowing us to capture both modalities of
contacting objects and to develop a mapping from visual to
tactile interaction and vice-versa. Additionally, the perceptual
system can be used to infer the outcome of future physical
interactions, which we validate through simulated and realworld experiments in which the resting state of an object is
predicted from given initial conditions.

Figure 1: Predicting the outcome of physical interactions.
Given an external perturbation on a bottle, how can we predict if the bottle will topple or translate? This paper reasons
across visual and tactile modalities to infer the motion of
objects in dynamic scenes.

and slippage. This paper shows that the combination of these
signals is ideal to predict the object motion that will result
in dynamic scenarios. Namely, we predict the final stable
outcome of passive physical dynamics on objects based on
sensing their initial state with touch and vision.
Previous research has shown that it is challenging to predict the trajectory of objects in motion, due to the unknown
frictional and geometric properties and indeterminate pressure distributions at the interacting surface (Fazeli et al.
2020). To alleviate these difficulties, we focus on learning a
predictor trained to capture the most informative and stable
elements of a motion trajectory. This is in part inspired by recent findings in Time-Agnostic Prediction (Jayaraman et al.
2018), where the authors show that the prediction accuracy
and reliability of predictive models can be vastly improved
by focusing on outcomes at key events in the future. Furthermore, this approach mitigates the error drift from which
visual prediction typically suffer; where uncertainties and
errors propagate forward in time to produce blurry and imprecise predictions. For example, in Fig. 1, when predicting
the outcome of an applied push on a bottle, an agent should
reason about the most important consequence of this action:
will the bottle topple over or will it translate forward? To
study this problem, we present a novel artificial perception

Introduction
Recently, several authors have pointed out the synergies between the senses of touch and vision: one enables direct
measurement of 3D surface and inertial properties, while
the other provides a holistic view of the projected appearance. Methods such as Li et al. (2019) have trained joint
perceptual components, allowing better inference of physical properties from images, for example. This paper extends
this reasoning into dynamic prediction: how can we predict
the future motion of an object from visual and tactile measurements of its initial state? If a previously unseen object
is dropped into a human’s hand, we are able to infer the object’s category and guess at some of its physical properties,
but the most immediate inference is whether it will come
to rest safely in our palm, or if we need to adjust our grasp
on the object to maintain contact. Vision allows rapid indexing to capture overall object properties, while the tactile
signal at the point of contact fills in a crucial gap, allowing direct physical reasoning about balance, contact forces
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6110

