The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable Verification of Quantized Neural Networks
Thomas A. Henzinger, Mathias Lechner, Ðord̄e Žikelić
IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
{tah,mlechner, dzikelic}@ist.ac.at

Abstract

The verification problem for neural networks consists of
checking validity of some input-output relation. More precisely, given two conditions over inputs and outputs of the
network, the goal is to check if for every input sample which
satisfies the input condition, the corresponding output of the
neural network satisfies the output condition. Verification of
neural networks has many important practical applications
such as checking robustness to adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Tjeng, Xiao, and Tedrake 2019), proving safety
in safety-critical applications (Huang et al. 2017) or output
range analysis (Dutta, Chen, and Sankaranarayanan 2019),
to name a few. There are many efficient methods for verification of neural networks (e.g. (Katz et al. 2017; Tjeng,
Xiao, and Tedrake 2019; Bunel et al. 2018)), however most
of them ignore rounding errors in computations. The few
approaches that can handle the semantics of rounding operations are overapproximation-based methods, i.e., incomplete verification (Singh et al. 2018, 2019). The imprecision introduced by quantization stands in stark contrast with
the idealization made by verification methods for standard
neural networks, which disregards rounding errors that appear due to the network’s semantics. Consequently, verification methods developed for standard networks are not
sound for and cannot be applied to quantized neural networks. Indeed, recently it has been shown that specifications that hold for a floating-point representation of a network need not necessarily hold after quantizing the network (Giacobbe, Henzinger, and Lechner 2020). As a result, specialized verification methods that take quantization
into account need to be developed, due to more complex semantics of quantized neural networks. Groundwork on such
methods demonstrated that special encodings of networks
in terms of Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) (Clark
and Cesare 2018) with bit-vector (Giacobbe, Henzinger, and
Lechner 2020) or fixed-point (Baranowski et al. 2020) theories present a promising approach towards the verification
of quantized networks. However, the size of networks that
these tools can handle and runtimes of these approaches do
not match the efficiency of advanced verification methods
developed for standard networks like Reluplex(Katz et al.
2017) and Neurify (Wang et al. 2018a).
In this paper, we provide first evidence that the verifica-

Formal verification of neural networks is an active topic of research, and recent advances have significantly increased the
size of the networks that verification tools can handle. However, most methods are designed for verification of an idealized model of the actual network which works over real arithmetic and ignores rounding imprecisions. This idealization is
in stark contrast to network quantization, which is a technique
that trades numerical precision for computational efficiency
and is, therefore, often applied in practice. Neglecting rounding errors of such low-bit quantized neural networks has been
shown to lead to wrong conclusions about the network’s correctness. Thus, the desired approach for verifying quantized
neural networks would be one that takes these rounding errors
into account. In this paper, we show that verifying the bitexact implementation of quantized neural networks with bitvector specifications is PSPACE-hard, even though verifying
idealized real-valued networks and satisfiability of bit-vector
specifications alone are each in NP. Furthermore, we explore
several practical heuristics toward closing the complexity gap
between idealized and bit-exact verification. In particular, we
propose three techniques for making SMT-based verification
of quantized neural networks more scalable. Our experiments
demonstrate that our proposed methods allow a speedup of
up to three orders of magnitude over existing approaches.

Introduction
Deep neural networks for image classification typically consist of a large number of sequentially composed layers.
Computing the output of such a network for a single input
sample may require more than a billion floating-point operations (Tan and Le 2019). Consequently, deploying a trained
deep neural network imposes demanding requirements on
the computational resources available at the computing device that runs the network. Quantization of neural networks
is a technique that reduces the computational cost of running a neural network by reducing the arithmetic precision
of computations inside the network (Jacob et al. 2018). As a
result, quantization has been widely adapted in industry for
deploying neural networks in a resource-friendly way. For
instance, Tesla’s Autopilot Hardware 3.0 is designed for primarily running 8-bit quantized neural networks 1 .
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3787

https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/tesla_(car_company)/fsd_chip

