The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Knowledge Driven Regularization for Deep Neural Networks
Zhaojing Luo,1 Shaofeng Cai,1 Can Cui,1 Beng Chin Ooi,1 Yang Yang2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhaojing, shaofeng, cuican, ooibc}@comp.nus.edu.sg, dlyyang@gmail.com

Abstract

Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Russakovsky et al.
2015). However, in real-world applications, the training data
is generally limited (Che et al. 2015; Luo et al. 2018). This
causes over-fitting, which affects the model performance.

In many real-world applications, the amount of data available for training is often limited, and thus inductive bias
and auxiliary knowledge are much needed for regularizing
model training. One popular regularization method is to impose prior distribution assumptions on model parameters, and
many recent works also attempt to regularize training by integrating external knowledge into specific neurons. However,
existing regularization methods fail to take account of the interaction between connected neuron pairs, which is invaluable internal knowledge for adaptive regularization for better
representation learning as training progresses. In this paper,
we explicitly take into account the interaction between connected neurons, and propose an adaptive internal knowledge
driven regularization method, CORR-Reg. The key idea of
CORR-Reg is to give a higher significance weight to connections of more correlated neuron pairs. The significance
weights adaptively identify more important input neurons for
each neuron. Instead of regularizing connection model parameters with a static strength such as weight decay, CORRReg imposes weaker regularization strength on more significant connections. As a consequence, neurons attend to
more informative input features and thus learn more diversified and discriminative representation. We derive CORR-Reg
with the Bayesian inference framework and propose a novel
optimization algorithm with the Lagrange multiplier method
and Stochastic Gradient Descent. Extensive evaluations on diverse benchmark datasets and neural network structures show
that CORR-Reg achieves significant improvement over stateof-the-art regularization methods.

𝐼,

𝐼-

𝐼.

𝐼/

𝑂,

0.2 0.73 0.03 0.04

𝑂-

0.3

0.1

0.5

𝑂,

𝑂.

𝐼-

𝐼.

0.1

𝑂. 0.11 0.33 0.08 0.48
𝑂/ 0.32 0.19 0.37 0.12

𝐼,

𝐼/

Figure 1: Significance weight for adaptive regularization.
Regularizing training by integrating auxiliary knowledge (Mesnil et al. 2013; Lample et al. 2016) into the training of deep neural networks is widely adopted to alleviate
the issue of training with insufficient data. Different techniques of injecting external knowledge into networks have
been proposed, e.g., into the first or the last layer (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2013; Che et al. 2015; Tran et al.
2015; Brust and Denzler 2018). These methods are proposed
based on the observation that the meanings of the neurons
of these layers can be linked to external knowledge. While
these methods have been proven to be effective in improving model training, external knowledge is typically difficult
to obtain, and it requires domain knowledge to transfer such
knowledge to guide the network training.
In the connectionist viewpoint (He et al. 2016b; Ren et al.
2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), neurons are the basic
components in the network to extract features and build up
representation, although the exact interpretation of the extracted features is intractable. Further, the relation between
neurons pairs, e.g., their correlation, is a strong indicator
of the representation learning process and can be obtained
and exploited during training. This leads us to the following
question: Can we exploit internal knowledge of the network
during the training process to regularize training?
To answer this question, we examine the interaction between neurons and based on the correlation of the neuron
connection, we propose CORR-Reg, an adaptive knowledge

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant improvements in
machine learning and data mining technology (Zhang, Kumar, and Ré 2014; Goodfellow et al. 2014; He et al. 2015;
Ooi et al. 2015; Veit, Wilber, and Belongie 2016; Wang et al.
2016). In particular, deep neural networks produce recordbreaking results for a wide range of applications (Wang et al.
2015; He et al. 2016a; Zhang et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018;
Tay et al. 2018; Luo et al. 2019) due to their unprecedented
model capacity and representation power. The success of
deep neural networks is highly dependent on the availability of large amounts of training data (Deng et al. 2009;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8810

