The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Balanced Open Set Domain Adaptation via Centroid Alignment
Mengmeng Jing1 , Jingjing Li1∗ , Lei Zhu2 , Zhengming Ding3 , Ke Lu1 , Yang Yang 1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Shandong Normal University,
3
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
jingmeng1992@gmail.com, lijin117@yeah.net, leizhu0608@gmail.com, zding1@tulane.edu, kel@uestc.edu.cn,
dlyyang@gmail.com
Abstract

domain. (2) The existence of the unknown samples makes
it difficult to recognize the unknown samples while maintain the classification performance for the known samples.
Existing methods generally handle OSDA tasks by addressing the above two problems. For example, Saito et al. (Saito
et al. 2018b) train a classifier to build a decision boundary for known and unknown, and train a generator to make
target samples far from the boundary. Liu et al. (Liu et al.
2019) adopt a coarse-to-fine weighting mechanism to progressively separate the samples of known and unknown.
Although many OSDA methods are good at classifying
the known samples, they ignore the classification ability
for the unknown samples, making them unbalanced OSDA
methods. Specifically, there are two widely used evaluation metrics for OSDA, i.e., the mean accuracy for all
classes (OSacc ) and the mean accuracy for the known classes
(OS∗acc ) (Panareda Busto and Gall 2017). Under these metrics, many state-of-the-art methods achieve high OSacc and
OS∗acc , but in fact, they have low classification performance
for unknown samples. For example, in Office-31 dataset,
STA (Liu et al. 2019) has a high average accuracy for samples of the known classes (OS∗acc =94.6%), but its accuracy
for unknown class samples is only 50.5% (see Table 1).
Since all unknown classes are regarded as one class, with
the increase of the number of known classes, the smaller the
contribution of unknown samples to the total OSacc , the easier they are to be ignored by existing methods. Low classification performance for unknown samples causes a high
false positive rate for known classes, which reduces the practical value of many OSDA methods. In addition, ignoring
the classification ability for the unknown samples results in
that many existing OSDA methods suffer from high open set
risk (Luo et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2020).
Considering the unbalanced problem, in this paper, we argue that we should pay equal attention to the classification
performance of known and unknown classes. To this end,
we propose a balanced OSDA method based on centroid
alignment in a hyperspherical latent space. The ”balanced”
means that our method can recognize the unknown class
samples while maintain high classification performance for
the known class samples. The motivation of our method is
that, we take the centroids of the classes in the source domain as the centroids of samples in both domains, and use
the centroid deviation angle to measure the discrepancy be-

Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) is a challenging domain adaptation setting which allows the existence of unknown classes on the target domain. Although existing OSDA
methods are good at classifying samples of known classes,
they ignore the classification ability for the unknown samples,
making them unbalanced OSDA methods. To alleviate this
problem, we propose a balanced OSDA methods which could
recognize the unknown samples while maintain high classification performance for the known samples. Specifically, to
reduce the domain gaps, we first project the features to a hyperspherical latent space. In this space, we propose to bound
the centroid deviation angles to not only increase the intraclass compactness but also enlarge the inter-class margins.
With the bounded centroid deviation angles, we employ the
statistical Extreme Value Theory to recognize the unknown
samples that are misclassified into known classes. In addition,
to learn better centroids, we propose an improved centroid update strategy based on sample reweighting and adaptive update rate to cooperate with centroid alignment. Experimental
results on three OSDA benchmarks verify that our method
can significantly outperform the compared methods and reduce the proportion of the unknown samples being misclassified into known classes.

Introduction
In the field of artificial intelligence, it is common to make
cross-domain knowledge transfer, e.g., cross-domain semantic segmentation (Hoffman et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018a),
cross-domain object classification (Long et al. 2018b; Jing
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2018b,a, 2019, 2020) and cross-language
text classification (Prettenhofer and Stein 2010). However,
in real-world applications, a more common situation is that
the target domain is mixed with samples of unknown classes.
Traditional domain adaptation methods would fail to cope
with this situation. Therefore, Open Set Domain Adaptation
(OSDA) is proposed to address the problem of domain adaptation with unknown classes in the target domain (Baktashmotlagh et al. 2018; Panareda Busto and Gall 2017).
There are two major challenges in OSDA: (1) The large
inter-domain gaps make the well-trained classifier in the
source domain suffers a large classification risk in the target
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8013

