The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Lifelong Multi-Agent Path Finding in Large-Scale Warehouses∗
Jiaoyang Li,1 Andrew Tinka,2 Scott Kiesel,2
Joseph W. Durham,2 T. K. Satish Kumar,1 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California
2
Amazon Robotics
jiaoyanl@usc.edu, {atinka, skkiesel, josepdur}@amazon.com, tkskwork@gmail.com, skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract

Existing methods for solving lifelong MAPF include (1)
solving it as a whole (Nguyen et al. 2017), (2) decomposing it into a sequence of MAPF instances where one replans paths at every timestep for all agents (Wan et al. 2018;
Grenouilleau, van Hoeve, and Hooker 2019), and (3) decomposing it into a sequence of MAPF instances where one
plans new paths at every timestep for only the agents with
new goal locations (Cáp, Vokrı́nek, and Kleiner 2015; Ma
et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019).
In this paper, we propose a new framework RollingHorizon Collision Resolution (RHCR) for solving lifelong
MAPF where we decompose lifelong MAPF into a sequence
of Windowed MAPF instances and replan paths once every
h timesteps (replanning period h is user-specified) for interleaving planning and execution. A Windowed MAPF instance is different from a regular MAPF instance in the following ways:
1. it allows an agent to be assigned a sequence of goal locations within the same Windowed MAPF episode, and
2. collisions need to be resolved only for the first w
timesteps (time horizon w ≥ h is user-specified).
The benefit of this decomposition is two-fold. First, it keeps
the agents continually engaged, avoiding idle time, and thus
increasing throughput. Second, it generates pliable plans that
adapt to continually arriving new goal locations. In fact, resolving collisions in the entire time horizon (i.e., w = ∞) is
often unnecessary since the paths of the agents can change
as new goal locations arrive.
We evaluate RHCR with various MAPF solvers, namely
CA* (Silver 2005) (incomplete and suboptimal), PBS (Ma
et al. 2019) (incomplete and suboptimal), ECBS (Barer
et al. 2014) (complete and bounded suboptimal), and
CBS (Sharon et al. 2015) (complete and optimal). We show
that, for each MAPF solver, using a bounded time horizon
yields similar throughput as using the entire time horizon
but with a significantly smaller runtime. We also show that
RHCR outperforms existing work and can scale up to 1,000
agents (= 38.9% of the empty cells on the map) for simulated
warehouse instances.

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of moving a team of agents to their goal locations without collisions. In this paper, we study the lifelong variant of MAPF,
where agents are constantly engaged with new goal locations, such as in large-scale automated warehouses. We propose a new framework Rolling-Horizon Collision Resolution (RHCR) for solving lifelong MAPF by decomposing
the problem into a sequence of Windowed MAPF instances,
where a Windowed MAPF solver resolves collisions among
the paths of the agents only within a bounded time horizon
and ignores collisions beyond it. RHCR is particularly well
suited to generating pliable plans that adapt to continually
arriving new goal locations. We empirically evaluate RHCR
with a variety of MAPF solvers and show that it can produce
high-quality solutions for up to 1,000 agents (= 38.9% of the
empty cells on the map) for simulated warehouse instances,
significantly outperforming existing work.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of moving a team of agents from their start locations to their goal
locations while avoiding collisions. The quality of a solution
is measured by flowtime (the sum of the arrival times of all
agents at their goal locations) or makespan (the maximum of
the arrival times of all agents at their goal locations). MAPF
is NP-hard to solve optimally (Yu and LaValle 2013).
MAPF has numerous real-world applications, such as
autonomous aircraft-towing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016),
video game characters (Li et al. 2020b), and quadrotor swarms (Hönig et al. 2018). Today, in automated
warehouses, mobile robots called drive units already autonomously move inventory pods or flat packages from one
location to another (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2007;
Kou et al. 2020). However, MAPF is only the “one-shot”
variant of the actual problem in many applications. Typically, after an agent reaches its goal location, it does not stop
and wait there forever. Instead, it is assigned a new goal location and required to keep moving, which is referred to as
lifelong MAPF (Ma et al. 2017) and characterized by agents
constantly being assigned new goal locations.

2

∗

This paper is an extension of (Li et al. 2020c).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Background

In this section, we first introduce several state-of-the-art
MAPF solvers and then discuss existing research on life11272

