The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Entity Structure Within and Throughout: Modeling Mention Dependencies
for Document-Level Relation Extraction
Benfeng Xu1∗ , Quan Wang2 , Yajuan Lyu2 , Yong Zhu2 , Zhendong Mao1†
1

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
benfeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wangquan05, lvyajuan, zhuyong}@baidu.com, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Entities, as the essential elements in relation extraction tasks,
exhibit certain structure. In this work, we formulate such
structure as distinctive dependencies between mention pairs.
We then propose SSAN, which incorporates these structural
dependencies within the standard self-attention mechanism
and throughout the overall encoding stage. Specifically, we
design two alternative transformation modules inside each
self-attention building block to produce attentive biases so as
to adaptively regularize its attention flow. Our experiments
demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed entity structure
and the effectiveness of SSAN. It significantly outperforms
competitive baselines, achieving new state-of-the-art results
on three popular document-level relation extraction datasets.
We further provide ablation and visualization to show how
the entity structure guides the model for better relation extraction. Our code is publicly available.1

1

Figure 1: An example excerpted from DocRED. Different
mention dependencies are distinguished by colored edges,
with the target relations listed in below.

Introduction

Relation extraction aims at discovering relational facts from
raw texts as structured knowledge. It is of great importance
to many real-world applications such as knowledge base
construction, question answering, and biomedical text analysis. Although early studies mainly limited this problem under an intra-sentence and single entity pair setting, many recent works have made efforts to extend it into documentlevel texts (Li et al. 2016a; Yao et al. 2019), making it a
more practical but also more challenging task.
Document-level texts entail a large quantity of entities defined over multiple mentions, which naturally exhibit meaningful dependencies in between. Figure 1 gives an example
from the recently proposed document-level relation extraction dataset DocRED (Yao et al. 2019), which illustrates several mention dependencies: 1) Coming Down Again and the
Rolling Stones that both reside in the 1st sentence are closely
related, so we can identify R1: Performer (blue link) based
on their local context; 2) Coming Down Again from the 1st
sentence, It from the 2nd sentence, and The song from the

5th sentence refer to the same entity (red link), so it is necessary to consider and reason with them together; 3) the
Rolling Stones from the 1st sentence and Mick Jagger from
the 2nd sentence, though not display direct connections, can
be associated via two coreferential mentions: Coming Down
Again and it, which is essential to predict the target relation R2: Member of (green link) between the two entities.
Similar dependency also exists between the Rolling Stones
and Nicky Hopkins, which helps identify R3: Member of
between them. Intuitively, such dependencies indicate rich
interactions among entity mentions, and thereby provide informative priors for relation extraction.
Many previous works have tried to exploit such entity
structure, in particular the coreference dependency. For example, it is a commonly used trick to simply encode coreferential information as extra features, and integrate them
into the initial input word embeddings. Verga, Strubell,
and McCallum (2018) propose an adapted version of multiinstance learning to aggregate the predictions from coreferential mentions. Others also directly apply average pooling
to the representations of coreferential mentions (Yao et al.
2019). In summary, these heuristic techniques only use entity dependencies as complementary evidence in the pre- or
post- processing stage, and thus bear limited modeling abil-

∗

Work done while the first author was an intern at Baidu Inc..
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/Research/tree/master/KG/
AAAI2021 SSAN
†

14149

