The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visualization of Supervised and Self-Supervised Neural Networks
via Attribution Guided Factorization
Shir Gur, Ameen Ali, Lior Wolf
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

Abstract

et al. 2017) and (ii) relevance propagation methods (Bach
et al. 2015; Nam et al. 2019; Gu, Yang, and Tresp 2018;
Iwana, Kuroki, and Uchida 2019), which project high-level
activations back to the input domain, mostly based on the
deep Taylor decomposition by (Montavon et al. 2017). The
two families are used for different purposes, and are evaluated by different sets of experiments and performance metrics. As we show in Sec. , both types of methods have complementary sets of advantages and disadvantages: gradient
based methods, such as Grad-CAM, are able to provide a
class specific visualization for deep layers, but fail to do so
for the input image, and also provide a unilateral result. In
contrast, attribution based methods, excel in visualizing at
the input image level, and have bipartite results, but lack in
visualizing class specific explanations.
We present a novel method for class specific visualization of deep image recognition models. The method is able
to overcome the limitations of the previous work, by combining ideas from both families of methods, and accumulating across the layers both gradient information, and relevance attribution. The method corrects for what we term the
saliency bias. This bias draws the attention of the network
towards the salient activations, and can prevent visualizing
other image objects. This has led to the claims that visualization methods mimic the behavior of edge detectors, and
that the generated heatmaps are largely independent of the
network weights (Adebayo et al. 2018).
There are two different questions that explainability
method often tackle: (i) which pixels affect classification
the most, and (ii) which pixels are identified as belonging
to the predicted class. Our method answers the second one
and outperforms the relevant literature methods in multiple
ways. First, the locations we identify are much more important to the classification outcome than those of the baselines,
when looking inside the region of a target class. Second, we
are able to identify regions of multiple classes in each image, and not just the prominent class, see Fig. 1. Our method
greatly outperforms recent multi-class work (Gu, Yang, and
Tresp 2018; Iwana, Kuroki, and Uchida 2019).
The main contributions of our work are: (1) a novel explainability method, that combines both gradient and attribution techniques, as well as a new attribution guided factorization technique for extracting informative class-specific
attributions from the input feature map and its gradients. (2)

Neural network visualization techniques mark image locations by their relevancy to the network’s classification. Existing methods are effective in highlighting the regions that
affect the resulting classification the most. However, as we
show, these methods are limited in their ability to identify
the support for alternative classifications, an effect we name
the saliency bias hypothesis. In this work, we integrate two
lines of research: gradient-based methods and attributionbased methods, and develop an algorithm that provides perclass explainability. The algorithm back-projects the per pixel
local influence, in a manner that is guided by the local attributions, while correcting for salient features that would otherwise bias the explanation. In an extensive battery of experiments, we demonstrate the ability of our methods to classspecific visualization, and not just the predicted label. Remarkably, the method obtains state of the art results in benchmarks that are commonly applied to gradient-based methods as well as in those that are employed mostly for evaluating attribution methods. Using a new unsupervised procedure, our method is also successful in demonstrating that selfsupervised methods learn semantic information. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/shirgur/AGFVisualization.

Introduction
The most common class of explainability methods for image classifiers visualize the reason behind the classification
of the network as a heatmap. These methods can make the
rationale of the decision accessible to humans, leading to
higher confidence in the ability of the classifier to focus on
the relevant parts of the image, and not on spurious associations, and help debug the model. In addition to the human
user, the “computer user” can also benefit from such methods, which can seed image segmentation techniques (Ahn,
Cho, and Kwak 2019; Huang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019;
Hoyer et al. 2019), or help focus generative image models,
among other tasks.
The prominent methods in the field can be divided into
two families: (i) gradient-based maps, which consider the
gradient signal as it is computed by the conventional backpropagation approach (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017;
Smilkov et al. 2017; Srinivas and Fleuret 2019; Selvaraju
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11545

