The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DropLoss for Long-Tail Instance Segmentation
Ting-I Hsieh1∗ , Esther Robb2∗ , Hwann-Tzong Chen1,3 , Jia-Bin Huang2
1

National Tsing Hua University

2

Virginia Tech

3

Aeolus Robotics

Abstract
Long-tailed class distributions are prevalent among the practical applications of object detection and instance segmentation.
Prior work in long-tail instance segmentation addresses the
imbalance of losses between rare and frequent categories by
reducing the penalty for a model incorrectly predicting a rare
class label. We demonstrate that the rare categories are heavily
suppressed by correct background predictions, which reduces
the probability for all foreground categories with equal weight.
Due to the relative infrequency of rare categories, this leads
to an imbalance that biases towards predicting more frequent
categories. Based on this insight, we develop DropLoss – a
novel adaptive loss to compensate for this imbalance without
a trade-off between rare and frequent categories. With this
loss, we show state-of-the-art mAP across rare, common, and
frequent categories on the LVIS dataset. Codes are available
at https://github.com/timy90022/DropLoss.

(a) Gradient percentage

(b) Prediction scores

Figure 1: Motivation. (a) Percentage of gradient updates
from incorrect foreground classification (blue) and groundtruth background anchors (orange) on LVIS (Gupta, Dollár,
and Girshick 2019). We divide the categories into “frequent”
(white shading), “common” (orange shading), and “rare” (yellow shading). For rare categories, background gradients occupy a disproportionate percentage of total gradients. (b) The
distribution of average foreground class prediction scores
for ground-truth background bounding boxes at earlier (red)
and later (blue) training stages. We find that, for background
bounding boxes, the prediction scores of rare categories are
more severely suppressed, and the training is biased towards
predicting more frequent categories.

Introduction
Object detection and instance segmentation have a wide array of practical applications. State-of-the-art object detection
methods adopt a multistage framework (Girshick et al. 2014;
Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015) trained on large-scale datasets
with abundant examples for each object category (Lin et al.
2014). However, datasets used in real-word applications commonly fall into a long-tailed distribution over categories, i.e.,
the majority of classes have only a small number of training examples. Training a model on these datasets inevitably
induces an undesired bias towards frequent categories. The
limited diversity of rare-category samples further increases
the risk of overfitting. Methods for addressing the issues involving long-tailed distributions commonly fall into several
groups: i) resampling to balance the category frequencies, ii)
reweighting the losses of rare and frequent categories, and
iii) specialized architectures or feature transformations.
The instance segmentation problem presents unique challenges for learning long-tailed distributions, as it contains
multiple training objectives to supervise region proposal,
bounding box regression, mask regression, and object classification. Each of these losses contributes to the overall

balance of model training. The prior state-of-the-art in longtail instance segmentation (Tan et al. 2020) discovered a
phenomenon where the predictions for rare categories are
suppressed by incorrect foreground class predictions. To reduce these “discouraging gradients” and allow the network
to explore the solution space for rare categories, the EQL
method (Tan et al. 2020) removes losses to rare categories
from incorrect foreground classification. However, we observe that most “discouraging gradients” in fact originate
from correct background classification (where a bounding
box does not contain any labeled objects). In the background
case, the classification branch receives losses to suppress all
foreground class prediction scores.
In Figure 1, we study the effect of such discouraging gradients on the different categories of a long-tail dataset, categorized by number of training images into rare (1-10 images),
common (11-100), and frequent (> 100) categories. We find
that these losses disproportionately affect rare and common
categories, due to the infrequency of “encouraging gradients”

∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1549

