The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Time Series Anomaly Detection with Multiresolution Ensemble Decoding
Lifeng Shen 1 , Zhongzhong Yu 2 , Qianli Ma 2, 3 , James T. Kwok 1
1

Department of Computer Science and Enginering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology), Ministry of Education
lshenae@cse.ust.hk, yuzzhong2020@foxmail.com, qianlima@scut.edu.cn, jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

Existing time series anomaly detection techniques can be
roughly categorized as either predictive or reconstructionbased. Classical predictive models include the autoregressive moving average (ARMA) and autoregressive integrated
moving average (ARIMA) models (Wold 1938). They are
linear regressors and use the prediction error as anomaly
score. More recently, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
(Zhang et al. 2019) and other deep predictors (Filonov,
Lavrentyev, and Vorontsov 2016) are also used. However,
these methods depend largely on the models’ extrapolation
capacities (Yoo, Kim, and Kim 2019). On the other hand,
reconstruction-based methods learn a compressed representation for the core statistical structures of normal data, and
then use this to reconstruct the time series. Points or segments that cannot be well reconstructed are considered as
outliers. Reconstruction methods are popular in applications
such as anomalous rhythm detection (Zhou et al. 2019) and
network traffic monitoring (Kieu, Yang, and Jensen 2018).
In this paper, we focus on reconstruction-based methods.
In deep learning, the recurrent auto-encoder (RAE) (Malhotra et al. 2016) has demonstrated good performance in
time series anomaly detection. Following the well-known
sequence-to-sequence framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014), the RAE consists of an encoder and a decoder. The
reconstruction error at each time step is used as an anomaly
score. Very recently, other autoencoder variants have also
been proposed. For example, Yoo, Kim, and Kim (2019) developed the recurrent reconstructive network (RRN), which
uses self-attention and feedback transition to help capture
the temporal dynamics. Kieu et al. (2019) proposed the recurrent autoencoder ensemble based on ensemble learning
(Dietterich 2000). Both the encoders and decoders consist
of several RNNs with sparse skip connections. On inference,
the median reconstruction error from all decoders is used as
the anomaly score. However, the RAE and its variants can
have difficulties in decoding long time series due to error
accumulation from previous time steps.
In this paper, we propose the Recurrent Autoencoder with
Multiresolution Ensemble Decoding (RAMED). Inspired by
(Kieu et al. 2019), RAMED also has an ensemble of decoders. However, the difference is that the proposed decoders capture the time series’ temporal information at multiple resolutions. This is achieved by controlling the number
of decoding steps in the decoders. With a short decoding

Recurrent autoencoder is a popular model for time series
anomaly detection, in which outliers or abnormal segments
are identified by their high reconstruction errors. However,
existing recurrent autoencoders can easily suffer from overfitting and error accumulation due to sequential decoding. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient recurrent network ensemble called Recurrent Autoencoder with Multiresolution Ensemble Decoding (RAMED). By using decoders
with different decoding lengths and a new coarse-to-fine fusion mechanism, lower-resolution information can help longrange decoding for decoders with higher-resolution outputs.
A multiresolution shape-forcing loss is further introduced to
encourage decoders’ outputs at multiple resolutions to match
the input’s global temporal shape. Finally, the output from
the decoder with the highest resolution is used to obtain an
anomaly score at each time step. Extensive empirical studies
on real-world benchmark data sets demonstrate that the proposed RAMED model outperforms recent strong baselines on
time series anomaly detection.

Introduction
Anomaly detection aims to identify anomalous patterns from
data. In particular, time series anomaly detection has received a lot of attention in the past decade (Gupta et al. 2014;
Cook, Misirli, and Fan 2020). Time series data can be easily found in many real-world applications. One example is
cyber-physical systems such as smart buildings, factories,
and power plants (Chia and Syed 2014; Ding et al. 2016),
in which there are a large number of sensors. Efficient and
robust time series anomaly detection can help monitor system behaviors such that potential risks and financial losses
can be avoided. However, detecting outliers from time series
data is challenging. First, finding and labeling of anomalies
are very time-consuming and expensive in practice. Moreover, time series data usually have complex nonlinear and
high-dimensional dynamics that are difficult to model. To
alleviate the first issue, time series anomaly detection is usually formulated as an one-class classification problem (Ruff
et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019), in which the training set contains only normal samples.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9567

