The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Verifiable Training Using Pairwise Class Similarity
Shiqi Wang1 , Kevin Eykholt2 , Taesung Lee2 , Jiyong Jang2 , Ian Molloy2
1

Columbia University
2
IBM Research
tcwangshiqi@cs.columbia.edu; {kheykholt, Taesung.Lee}@ibm.com; {jjang, molloyim}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

from a normal input, adversarial examples consistently induce predictable errors in machine learning models. While
many defensive techniques have been developed, most fall
short as they obfuscate the discovery process rather that truly
reducing the number of adversarial examples a model is vulnerable to. One effective defense against adversarial examples is verifiable training as it creates models with provable
robustness guarantees. With respect to a robustness criteria,
which identifies a region around an input where the model’s
prediction must remain stable, verifiable training maximizes
the potential number of input samples a model is certified to
be robust for within that region.
Although verifiable robust training creates models with
provable robustness, it often comes at the cost of lower
performance on clean data. For example, on CIFAR10, a
LeNet model trained using CROWN-IBP, a state-of-the-art
verifiable training method, with respect to a L∞ robustness
8
region  = 255
, has significantly lower clean performance
compared to a model created through normal training (i.e.,
57.10% error rate vs. 21.53% error rate). With such poor
baseline performance, certified performance on adversarial
samples is limited, having only a 69.92% error rate. This
means that in presence of an adversary, only about 30% of
the inputs are guaranteed to be correctly classified.

Input feature dimension 2

Verifiable training has shown success in creating neural networks that are provably robust to a given amount of noise.
However, despite only enforcing a single robustness criterion, its performance scales poorly with dataset complexity.
On CIFAR10, a non-robust LeNet model has a 21.63% error rate, while a model created using verifiable training and a
L∞ robustness criterion of 8/255, has an error rate of 57.10%.
Upon examination, we find that when labeling visually similar classes, the model’s error rate is as high as 61.65%. Thus,
we attribute the loss in performance to inter-class similarity. Classes that are similar (i.e., close in the feature space)
increase the difficulty of learning a robust model. While it
may be desirable to train a model to be robust for a large
robustness region, pairwise class similarities limit the potential gains. Furthermore, consideration must be made regarding the relative cost of mistaking one class for another. In
security or safety critical tasks, similar classes are likely to
belong to the same group, and thus are equally sensitive.
In this work, we propose a new approach that utilizes interclass similarity to improve the performance of verifiable
training and create robust models with respect to multiple adversarial criteria. First, we cluster similar classes using agglomerate clustering and assign robustness criteria based on
the degree of similarity between clusters. Next, we propose
two methods to apply our approach: (1) the Inter-Group Robustness Prioritization method, which uses a custom loss term
to create a single model with multiple robustness guarantees
and (2) the neural decision tree method, which trains multiple
sub-classifiers with different robustness guarantees and combines them in a decision tree architecture. Our experiments
on Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR10 demonstrate that by prioritizing the robustness between the most dissimilar groups, we
improve clean performance by up to 9.63% and 30.89% respectively. Furthermore, on CIFAR100, our approach reduces
the clean error rate by 26.32%.

Introduction
Dramatic improvements in the accuracy of neural networks
on various tasks has been made, but their robustness is often not prioritized. However, with poor robustness, the security and reliability of models is in question when exposed to
adversarial examples. Despite appearing indistinguishable

Robustness region
Optimal decision boundary

Input feature dimension 1
Figure 1: During verification, inputs belonging to similar
classes may have overlapping robustness regions when the
robustness region is too large.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10201

