The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling Heterogeneous Relations across Multiple Modes for Potential Crowd
Flow Prediction
Qiang Zhou1 , Jingjing Gu1,* , Xinjiang Lu2 , Fuzhen Zhuang3,4 , Yanchao Zhao1 , Qiuhong Wang1 ,
Xiao Zhang5
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
2
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research,
3
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), ICT, Beijing, China,
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China,
5
Shandong University
{zhouqnuaacs, gujingjing}@nuaa.edu.cn, luxinjiang@baidu.com, zhuangfuzhen@ict.ac.cn,
{yczhao, baoh9491}@nuaa.edu.cn, xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract

Taxi Flows

Potential crowd flow prediction for new planned transportationsites is a fundamental task for urban planners and administrators. Intuitively, the potential crowd flow of the new comingsite can be implied by exploring the nearby sites. However, the transportation modes of nearby sites (e.g. bus stations,bicycle stations) might be different from the target site
(e.g. subway station), which results in severe data scarcity issues. To this end, we propose a data-driven approach, named
MOHER, to predict the potential crowd flow in a certain
mode for a new planned site. Specifically, we first identify
the neighbor regions of the target site by examining the geographical proximity as well as the urban function similarity. Then, to aggregate these heterogeneous relations, we devise a cross-mode relational GCN, a novel relation-specific
transformation model, which can learn not only the correlations but also the differences between different transportation
modes. Afterward, we design an aggregator for inductive potential flow representation. Finally, an LTSM module is used
for sequential flow prediction. Extensive experiments on realworld data sets demonstrate the superiority of the MOHER
framework comparedwith the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Build or not?

Low
Moderate
Relatively High
High

Taxi Flows

Taxi Pedestrian Subway Station
Planned Station

(a)

Low
Moderate
Relatively High
High

Bike Station

(b)

Figure 1: (a): An example of the subway station placement
problem. (b): From the same origin, the outgoing crowd
flows in different modes are different and similar: 1) different travel distances and destinations; and 2) similar traffic
volume distributions depicted in the pie charts.

In general, the potential crowd flow of a new planned site
can be estimated by examining nearby sites in a collective
way. For example, (Gong et al. 2020) studies the potential
flow prediction of a new subway station with neighbor subway stations. However, as the transportation sites in the same
mode often locate far from each other, the transportation
modes of nearby sites might be different from the planned
target site as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), which leads to severe
data scarcity issues.
Recently, advanced matrix/tensor completion approaches,
e.g. (Babu, Sure, and Bhuma 2020; Mutinda et al. 2019;
Takeuchi, Kashima, and Ueda 2017), have been proposed
to solve the Kriging problems of unrecorded samples. Some
researchers (Li et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2019; Chen, Yang, and
Sun 2020) have also put many efforts to solve the data sparsity problem in traffic completion and prediction. However,
these methods are essentially transductive and could hardly
be applied for new sites/nodes directly using trained models.
Besides, it is not worthy to retrain the model from scratch
only for a single site.

Introduction
Public transportation site selection acts as a pivotal part in
urban planning. For example, is it appropriate to build a
subway station in the target site/region when promoting urban infrastructure construction. To answer this question, existing methods, like (Lin, Huang, and Xu 2020; JelokhaniNiaraki and Malczewski 2015), mainly focus on how to balance the trade-offs between efficiency and cost, only a few
studies (Chen et al. 2015; Gong et al. 2020) focus on site selection through predicting future demands. How to fulfil the
traffic demands in the future is the key to assess the quality
of a site selection, especially for a transportation site. Therefore, potential crowd flow prediction of new planned sites is
one of the most fundamental and important tasks for the city
planners and administrators.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4723

