The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalized Zero-Shot Learning via Disentangled Representation
Xiangyu Li* , Zhe Xu* , Kun Wei, Cheng Deng †
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{xdu xyLi, zhexu}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {weikunsk, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) aims to recognize images belonging to unseen classes that are unavailable in the training
process, while Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) is a
more realistic variant that both seen and unseen classes appear during testing. Most GZSL approaches achieve knowledge transfer based on the features of samples that inevitably
contain information irrelevant to recognition, bringing negative influence for the performance. In this work, we propose a
novel method, dubbed Disentangled-VAE, which aims to disentangle category-distilling factors and category-dispersing
factors from visual as well as semantic features, respectively.
In addition, a batch re-combining strategy on latent features
is introduced to guide the disentanglement, encouraging the
distilling latent features to be more discriminative for recognition. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on four challenging benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Illustration of the overall concept of our method.
Distilling latent factors (in terms of rhombuses) and dispersing latent factors (in terms of triangles) are disentangled
from paired visual and semantic features of seen classes.
Classifier (in terms of ovalities) is trained using only the
distilling latent features of both seen and semantic-part of
unseen classes.

Introduction
Benefiting from the fast development of deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Ju et al. 2020b,a; Yang
et al. 2020), supervised image classification (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Chang et al.
2020) has achieved remarkable success. However, the success is principally owed to abundant labeled data, which is
costly or even impossible to acquire in most cases. Thus,
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) (Palatucci et al. 2009; Larochelle,
Erhan, and Bengio 2008) is proposed to tackle the problem
above. In ZSL setting, the classes covered by the training images are referred to as the seen classes, while other classes
are referred to as unseen classes, whose images are not available during training. Compared to ZSL that only unseen
classes appear in the testing phase, Generalized Zero-Shot
Learning (GZSL) is a more realistic and challenging variant
of ZSL, that is, testing images can come from both seen and
unseen classes.
Due to its promising application, GZSL has received extensive attention. Methods for GZSL can be roughly divided

into three categories based on the space where the classification is conducted: (1) semantic-space (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Frome et al. 2013), (2) visualspace (Kumar Verma et al. 2018; Xian et al. 2018b; Felix
et al. 2018), and (3) common-space (Schonfeld et al. 2019).
Semantic-space based methods learn a mapping from visual space to semantic space on seen classes and generalize
the learned mapping to unseen classes. Visual-space based
methods formalize GZSL as a missing data problem and
generate unseen images or image features to augment data.
Common-space based methods embed visual features and
semantic features into a common latent space.
Most GZSL approaches (Xian, Schiele, and Akata 2017;
Kumar Verma et al. 2018; Xian et al. 2018b; Felix et al.
2018; Schonfeld et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2019; Wei, Deng,
and Yang 2020; Zhao et al. 2018; Min et al. 2020) achieve
knowledge transfer based on overall representations of samples. The visual and semantic features inevitably contain information that is irrelevant to classification and influences

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1966

