The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Comfort Aware-Reinforcement Learning
for Depth Adjustment of Stereoscopic 3D Images
Hak Gu Kim1,2 * , Minho Park1 , Sangmin Lee1 , Seongyeop Kim1 , Yong Man Ro1†
1

Image and Video Systems Lab., KAIST, Korea
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
hakgu.kim@epfl.ch, {roger618, sangmin.lee, seongyeop, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

considering the perceptual effects of the changed depth and
visual comfort levels. In addition, they mainly focused on
the visual comfort improvement rather than the depth perception. There is a trade-off between the visual comfort improvement and the perceived depth degradation in the depth
adjustment process. That is why human experts carefully
and iteratively manipulate depths, not in a direct way.
For a human expert, the depth adjustment procedure is a
sequence of iterative decision making for S3D contents. A
human expert iteratively conducts depth editing operations
until the levels of visual comfort and the perceived depth fit
what he has in mind. Adjusting depths to the optimal is complex operations that need to consider the perceptual aspect as
well as spatial distortions. The perceptual effect should be
taken into account to prevent undesirable perceptual sideeffects such as excessive visual discomfort or unnoticeable
depth in stereoscopic viewing.
Inspired by human expert’s sequential decision making
which benefits depth editing, we propose a novel depth adjustment framework by combining the knowledge of human binocular perception and deep reinforcement learning named VCA-RL (Visual Comfort Aware Reinforcement
Learning). Despite recent advances in deep learning-based
S3D applications (e.g., visual comfort assessment (Jeong,
Kim, and Ro 2017; Kim et al. 2018) and stereo matching (Yang et al. 2019; Tulyakov, Ivanov, and Fleuret 2018;
Chang and Chen 2018; Poggi et al. 2019)), it is hard to extend these approaches to the depth adjustment task due to
the complex non-linear operation, subjective nature of human visual system, and the lack of expensive pairs of input
and processed S3D contents. In this paper, we firstly formulate the depth adjustment process as a Markov decision
process to control the distance between the left and right
cameras (i.e., stereo baseline) in a sequential way. By iteratively adjusting the stereo baseline via camera movement
actions, the range of disparity could be carefully controlled
to achieve satisfying visual experiences (see Fig. 1). In particular, to find a proper 3D visual satisfaction comprising
visual comfort and perceived depth, we design a novel visual comfort aware reward function based on the guidance
of objective visual comfort assessment metric. Based on the
visual comfort aware reward, our agent can learn the optimal sequence of camera movement actions preserving both
visual comfort and perceived depth in stereoscopic viewing.

Depth adjustment aims to enhance the visual experience of
stereoscopic 3D (S3D) images, which accompanied with improving visual comfort and depth perception. For a human
expert, the depth adjustment procedure is a sequence of iterative decision making. The human expert iteratively adjusts
the depth until he is satisfied with the both levels of visual
comfort and the perceived depth. In this work, we present a
novel deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based approach for
depth adjustment named VCA-RL (Visual Comfort Aware Reinforcement Learning) to explicitly model human sequential
decision making in depth editing operations. We formulate
the depth adjustment process as a Markov decision process
where actions are defined as camera movement operations to
control the distance between the left and right cameras. Our
agent is trained based on the guidance of an objective visual
comfort assessment metric to learn the optimal sequence of
camera movement actions in terms of perceptual aspects in
stereoscopic viewing. With extensive experiments and user
studies, we show the effectiveness of our VCA-RL model on
three different S3D databases.

Introduction
With the concerns on the viewing safety in stereoscopic 3D
(S3D) displays, depth adjustment has increasingly gained
importance for improving visual experience of stereoscopic images such as visual comfort and depth perception
(Meesters, IJsselsteijn, and Seuntiëns 2004; Lambooij et al.
2009; Tam et al. 2011). For a proper viewing experience
of S3D contents, highly skilled professionals (e.g., stereographers) carefully control the camera parameters such as a
camera baseline using professional depth editing tools. It requires not only expertise in stereoscopy, but also a lot of
time and effort (Tam et al. 2011). Therefore, it is essential to
develop an automatic depth adjustment method.
Previous studies have proposed various depth adjustment
methods to improve visual comfort by shifting the zero disparity plane (ZDP) or scaling the disparity range of a scene.
However, a common shortcoming of these existing works is
that they edited the given disparities in a direct way without
* Work done as a part of the research project in KAIST
†

Corresponding author (ymro@kaist.ac.kr)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1762

