The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Pre-train Graph Neural Networks
Yuanfu Lu1, 2∗ , Xunqiang Jiang1 , Yuan Fang3 , Chuan Shi1, 4
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent Inc. China
3
Singapore Management University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
luyuanfu@bupt.edu.com, skd621@bupt.edu.cn, yfang@smu.edu.sg, shichuan@bupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

performance in many tasks, such as node and graph classification (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017), recommendation systems (Fan et al. 2019; Ying et al.
2018a) and graph generation (Li et al. 2018; You et al. 2018).
However, training GNNs usually requires abundant labeled
data, which are often limited and expensive to obtain.
Inspired by pre-trained language models (Devlin et al.
2019; Mikolov et al. 2013) and image encoders (Girshick
et al. 2014; Donahue et al. 2014; He et al. 2019), recent advances in pre-training GNNs have provided insights into reducing the labeling burden and making use of abundant unlabeled data. The primary goal of pre-training GNNs (Navarin,
Tran, and Sperduti 2018; Hu et al. 2019, 2020) is to learn
transferable prior knowledge from mostly unlabeled data,
which can be generalized to downstream tasks with a quick
fine-tuning step. Essentially, those methods mainly follow a
two-step paradigm: (1) pre-training a GNN model on a large
collection of unlabeled graph data, which derives generic
transferable knowledge encoding intrinsic graph properties;
(2) fine-tuning the pre-trained GNN model on task-specific
graph data, so as to adapt the generic knowledge to downstream tasks. However, here we argue that there exists a gap
between pre-training and fine-tuning due to the divergence of
the optimization objectives in the two steps. In particular, the
pre-training step optimizes the GNN to find an optimal point
over the pre-training graph data, whereas the fine-tuning step
aims to optimize the performance on downstream tasks. In
other words, the pre-training process completely disregards
the need to quickly adapt to downstream tasks with a few
fine-tuning updates, leaving a gap between the two steps. It
is inevitable that such divergence will significantly hurt the
generalization ability of the pre-trained GNN models.
Challenges and Present Work. In this work, we propose to
alleviate the divergence between pre-training and fine-tuning.
However, alleviating this divergence is non-trivial, presenting
us with two key challenges. (1) How to narrow the gap caused
by different optimization objectives? Existing pre-training
strategies for GNNs fall into a two-step paradigm, and the optimization gap between the two steps significantly limits the
ability of pre-trained GNNs to generalize to new downstream
tasks. Hence, it is vital to re-examine the objective of the
pre-training step to better match that of the fine-tuning step.
(2) How to simultaneously preserve node- and graph-level
information with completely unlabeled graph data? Existing

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the de facto
standard for representation learning on graphs, which derive
effective node representations by recursively aggregating information from graph neighborhoods. While GNNs can be
trained from scratch, pre-training GNNs to learn transferable
knowledge for downstream tasks has recently been demonstrated to improve the state of the art. However, conventional
GNN pre-training methods follow a two-step paradigm: 1)
pre-training on abundant unlabeled data and 2) fine-tuning on
downstream labeled data, between which there exists a significant gap due to the divergence of optimization objectives in
the two steps. In this paper, we conduct an analysis to show the
divergence between pre-training and fine-tuning, and to alleviate such divergence, we propose L2P-GNN, a self-supervised
pre-training strategy for GNNs. The key insight is that L2PGNN attempts to learn how to fine-tune during the pre-training
process in the form of transferable prior knowledge. To encode
both local and global information into the prior, L2P-GNN
is further designed with a dual adaptation mechanism at both
node and graph levels. Finally, we conduct a systematic empirical study on the pre-training of various GNN models, using
both a public collection of protein graphs and a new compilation of bibliographic graphs for pre-training. Experimental
results show that L2P-GNN is capable of learning effective and
transferable prior knowledge that yields powerful representations for downstream tasks. (Code and datasets are available
at https://github.com/rootlu/L2P-GNN.)

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as the state of
the art for representation learning on graphs, due to their ability to recursively aggregate information from neighborhoods
on the graph, naturally capturing both graph structures as well
as node or edge features (Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2020; Wu et al.
2020; Dwivedi et al. 2020). Various GNN architectures with
different aggregation schemes have been proposed (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Ying et al. 2018b; Hasanzadeh et al. 2019;
Qu, Bengio, and Tang 2019; Pei et al. 2020; Munkhdalai and
Yu 2017). Empirically, these GNNs have achieved impressive
∗
Part of the work was done while a visiting research student at
Singapore Management University.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4276

