The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Neural Network to Dilute Outliers for Refactoring Monolith Application
Utkarsh Desai, Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, Srikanth Tamilselvam
IBM Research
udesai26@in.ibm.com, samb.bandyo@gmail.com, srikanth.tamilselvam@in.ibm.com

Abstract

applications into microservices. This is done by mapping
business functions onto the code structure and identifying
the functional boundaries such that there are less dependencies across the services (Jin et al. 2019). In typical monoliths, there are classes (or programs) loaded with overlapping functionalities. We refer to such classes as outliers or
refactorable candidates. They typically require top attention
from the developers for modification during refactoring to
make the microservices independent and deployable. But
identifying functional boundaries on the existing code is a
hard task (Gouigoux and Tamzalit 2017) and the effort gets
multiplied when done without the help of original developers, which is typically the case with legacy applications.
In the software engineering community, the problem is
often referred as software decomposition and several approaches (Fritzsch et al. 2018) have been proposed. The approaches range from process mining, genetic algorithms to
graph based clustering. Graphs are a natural way to represent
application implementation structure. The classes in the application can be considered as nodes and its interaction with
the other classes can be considered as edges. Further, the
nodes can carry multiple features based on their type and
their invocation pattern. Figure 1 demonstrates the translation of an application into a graph. Therefore, the application
refactoring problem can be viewed as a graph based clustering task. In the past, many clustering techniques have been
applied on code (Shtern and Tzerpos 2012), but they often
consider only the structural features of the application i.e the
dependency of classes. Also, none of these approaches have
looked into attributed graph networks or attempted to minimize the effect of outlier nodes during clustering.
Graph based mining tasks have received significant attention in recent years due to development of graph representation learning that maps the nodes of a graph to a vector
space (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017). They have also been applied to a diverse set of applications such as social networks (Kipf and
Welling 2017), drug discovery (Gilmer et al. 2017), traffic
networks (Guo et al. 2019), etc. In this work, we propose a
novel graph neural network based solution to refactor monolith applications into a desired number of microservices. The
main contributions of our paper are listed below.

Microservices are becoming the defacto design choice for
software architecture. It involves partitioning the software
components into finer modules such that the development can
happen independently. It also provides natural benefits when
deployed on the cloud since resources can be allocated dynamically to necessary components based on demand. Therefore, enterprises as part of their journey to cloud, are increasingly looking to refactor their monolith application into one
or more candidate microservices; wherein each service contains a group of software entities (e.g., classes) that are responsible for a common functionality. Graphs are a natural
choice to represent a software system. Each software entity
can be represented as nodes and its dependencies with other
entities as links. Therefore, this problem of refactoring can
be viewed as a graph based clustering task. In this work, we
propose a novel method to adapt the recent advancements in
graph neural networks in the context of code to better understand the software and apply them in the clustering task. In
that process, we also identify the outliers in the graph which
can be directly mapped to top refactor candidates in the software. Our solution is able to improve state-of-the-art performance compared to works from both software engineering
and existing graph representation based techniques.

1

Introduction

Microservices is an architectural style that structures an application as a set of smaller services 1 . These services are
built around business functionalities and follow “Single Responsibility Principle”2 . This allows the team to develop
business functionalities independently. Also, they naturally
benefit from cloud deployment due to the support for differential and dynamic addition of resources like CPU, memory, disk space to specific services based on the demand.
However, there are lot of existing monolith applications currently in use that cannot fully tap these benefits due to their
architecture style. Monoliths package all the business functionalities into a single deployable unit making them unsuitable to fully leverage cloud benefits. Therefore, there
is a surge in enterprises wanting to refactor their monolith
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html
2
https://www.infoq.com/articles/microservices-intro

1. We propose a novel way to translate the application implementation structure to an attributed graph structure
72

