The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A General Setting for Gradual Semantics Dealing with Similarity
Leila Amgoud, 1 Victor David 2
1

IRIT–CNRS–ANITI, Toulouse University, France
2
IRIT–CNRS, Toulouse University, France
Leila.Amgoud@irit.fr, Victor.David@irit.fr

Abstract

property, called Counting (or strict monotony) in (Amgoud
et al. 2017), is satisfied by some existing gradual semantics
like h-Categorizer (Besnard and Hunter 2001) and its variants that are discussed in (Amgoud and Doder 2019). Let us
illustrate the property with the following example.
Example 1. Consider the three graphs G1 , G2 , and G3 of
the Figure 1. According to those semantics, A1 is strictly
weaker than A2 due to B2 which further weakens A1 . It is
also strictly weaker than A3 due to B1 which decreases further the strength of A1 .
As defined in the literature, the Counting property seems
reasonable when the attackers of an argument are all different, i.e, not redundant. However, it may lead to inaccurate
evaluations when similarities exist between them. Consider
again the four graphs of the Figure 1.
Example 1 (Cont) Assume that each argument Bi (i =
1, . . . , 4) supports the same claim “lowering taxes” with a
premise Pi , where:
P1 Better living standards for all.
P2 Improving quality of life.
P3 Better healthcare and social justice.
P4 Better working standards for all.
The two arguments B1 and B2 are identical or totally similar since they support the same claim with the same evidence. One of them is thus redundant, and considering both
in the evaluation of A1 is questionable. A reasonable semantics would declare A1 , A2 and A3 as equally strong.
Consider now B1 and B3 . They are partially similar since
each of them brings a new piece of evidence (eg., entertainment for B1 , and social justice for B3 ) in addition to the
common one (better healthcare which is part of better living
standards). Finally, B4 is based on a completely different evidence, making it dissimilar to the three others. Hence, one
would expect to declare A2 (resp. A1 , A3 ) as stronger than
A4 since the group {B1 , B3 } of A2 ’s attackers is weaker
than the group {B1 , B4 } of A4 ’s ones. Indeed, the former
contains some redundancy which should be removed, while
the latter does not (B1 and B4 being different).
To sum up, ignoring (total or partial) similarities would
lead to inaccurate evaluations of arguments, and thus to
wrong recommendations by argumentation systems. Therefore, a semantics should be able to take them into account.

The paper discusses theoretical foundations that describe
principles and processes involved in defining semantics that
deal with similarity between arguments. Such semantics compute the strength of an argument on the basis of the strengths
of its attackers, similarities between those attackers, and an
initial weight ascribed to the argument. We define a semantics
by three functions: an adjustment function that updates the
strengths of attackers on the basis of their similarities, an aggregation function that computes the strength of the group of
attackers, and an influence function that evaluates the impact
of the group on the argument’s initial weight. We propose intuitive constraints for the three functions and key rationality
principles for semantics, and show how the former lead to the
satisfaction of the latter. Then, we propose a broad family of
semantics whose instances satisfy the principles. Finally, we
analyse the existing adjustment functions and show that they
violate some properties, then we propose novel ones and use
them for generalizing h-Categorizer.

Introduction
Argumentation is a useful approach for solving various theoretical problems (Simari and Rahwan 2009) and practical
ones (Atkinson et al. 2017). It aims at increasing or decreasing acceptability of claims by supporting them with arguments. Roughly speaking, an argument is a set of premises
(or statements) intended to establish a definite claim. Its
strength depends on the plausibility of the premises, the nature of the link between the premises and the claim, and
the prior acceptability of the claim. Generally, an argument
may be weakened by other arguments that undermine one or
more of its three components. Thus, evaluation of argument
strength is a crucial task, and a sizeable amount of methods, called semantics, has been proposed in the literature.
The very first ones are extension-based (Dung 1995) and the
recent ones are gradual semantics (Cayrol and LagasquieSchiex 2005) that quantify strength and thus ascribe a value
(representing strength) to every argument.
Under gradual semantics, the strength of an argument depends on the strengths of the argument’s attackers. Therefore, it may be that each attacker has an (negative) impact
on the argument and contributes to decrease it strength. This
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6185

