The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Signaling in Bayesian Network Congestion Games:
the Subtle Power of Symmetry
Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
{name.surname}@polimi.it

Abstract

which is a randomized mapping from network states to action recommendations (i.e., routes suggestions) for the players. The commitment assumption is realistic in many settings [Dughmi 2017]. These include BNCGs, where signaling schemes are usually implemented as software (e.g., realtime traffic apps) whose features are publicly revealed by
the sender. One argument to that effect is that reputation
and credibility may be a key factor for the long-term utility
of the sender [Rayo and Segal 2010]. We focus on the notion of ex ante persuasiveness, as introduced by Xu [2020]
and Celli, Coniglio, and Gatti [2020], where the receivers are
incentivized to follow the sender’s recommendations having observed only the signaling scheme. This assumes credible receivers’ commitments to following recommendations,
which is reasonable in practice. In our setting, it is natural to
assume that each player decides to either follow the signaling scheme (i.e., adopting the traffic app) or act based on
her prior belief about the network state. In some cases, the
receivers could also be forced to stick to their ex ante commitment by contractual agreements or penalties.

Network congestion games are a well-understood model of
multi-agent strategic interactions. Despite their ubiquitous
applications, it is not clear whether it is possible to design
information structures to ameliorate the overall experience of
the network users. We focus on Bayesian games with atomic
players, where network vagaries are modeled via a (random)
state of nature which determines the costs incurred by the
players. A third-party entity—the sender—can observe the
realized state of the network and exploit this additional information to send a signal to each player. A natural question is
the following: is it possible for an informed sender to reduce
the overall social cost via the strategic provision of information to players who update their beliefs rationally? The paper
focuses on the problem of computing optimal ex ante persuasive signaling schemes, showing that symmetry is a crucial
property for its solution. Indeed, we show that an optimal ex
ante persuasive signaling scheme can be computed in polynomial time when players are symmetric and have affine cost
functions. Moreover, the problem becomes NP-hard when
players are asymmetric, even in non-Bayesian settings.

Introduction

Related Works Arnott, De Palma, and Lindsey [1991]
and Acemoglu et al. [2018] study the impact of information on traffic congestion. Several recent works focus on
non-atomic games [Das, Kamenica, and Mirka 2017; Massicot and Langbort 2019; Wu, Amin, and Ozdaglar 2018;
Vasserman, Feldman, and Hassidim 2015]. The majority of
these works focus on ex interim persuasiveness, where the
receivers are incentivized to follow recommendations after
receiving them. Bhaskar et al. [2016] study the inapproximability of finding optimal ex interim persuasive signaling
schemes in non-atomic games. Liu and Whinston [2019] focus on atomic games with costs uncertainties and study ex
interim persuasion by placing stringent constraints on the
network structure. To the best of our knowledge, the present
work is the first studying ex ante persuasion in general
atomic BNCGs. Other related works study the simpler problem of finding (coarse) correlated equilibria in non-Bayesian
congestion games [Christodoulou and Koutsoupias 2005;
Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2008]. The closest to our
work is that of Jiang and Leyton-Brown [2011], who provide a polynomial-time algorithm to find an optimal coarse
correlated equilibrium (i.e., an ex ante persuasive signaling
scheme in the non-Bayesian setting) in simple congestion

Network congestion games, where players seek to minimize their own costs selfishly, are a canonical example of
a setting where externalities may induce socially inefficient
outcomes [Roughgarden 2005]. In real-world problems, the
state of the network may be uncertain, and not known to
its users (e.g., drivers may not be aware of road works and
accidents in a road network). This setting is modeled via
Bayesian network congestion games (BNCGs). We investigate whether providing players with partial information
about the state of the network may mitigate inefficiencies.
We model this information-structure design problem
through the Bayesian persuasion framework by Kamenica
and Gentzkow [2011]. At its core, this framework involves
an informed sender trying to influence the behavior of a
set of self-interested players—the receivers—via the provision of payoff-relevant information. In the specific case
of BNCGs, the sender is informed about the realized state
of the network. The model assumes that the sender has the
ability to commit to a publicly disclosed signaling scheme,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5252

