The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ideography Leads Us to the Field of Cognition: A Radical-Guided Associative
Model for Chinese Text Classification
Hanqing Tao1 , Shiwei Tong1 , Kun Zhang3 , Tong Xu1,2 , Qi Liu1,2 , Enhong Chen1,2∗ , Min Hou1,2
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{hqtao, tongsw, minho}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tongxu, qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, {zhang1028kun}@gmail.com
Abstract

Cognitive psychology research shows that humans have the
instinct for abstract thinking, where association plays an essential role in language comprehension. Especially for Chinese, its ideographic writing system allows radicals to trigger
semantic association without the need of phonetics. In fact,
subconsciously using the associative information guided by
radicals is a key for readers to ensure the robustness of semantic understanding. Fortunately, many basic and extended concepts related to radicals are systematically included in
Chinese language dictionaries, which leaves a handy but unexplored way for improving Chinese text representation and
classification. To this end, we draw inspirations from cognitive principles between ideography and human associative behavior to propose a novel Radical-guided Associative Model
(RAM) for Chinese text classification. RAM comprises two
coupled spaces, namely Literal Space and Associative Space,
which imitates the real process in people’s mind when understanding a Chinese text. To be specific, we first devise a
serialized modeling structure in Literal Space to thoroughly capture the sequential information of Chinese text. Then,
based on the authoritative information provided by Chinese
language dictionaries, we design an association module and
put forward a strategy called Radical-Word Association to use
ideographic radicals as the medium to associate prior concept words in Associative Space. Afterwards, we design an
attention module to imitate people’s matching and decision
between Literal Space and Associative Space, which can balance the importance of each associative words under specific contexts. Finally, extensive experiments on two real-world
datasets prove the effectiveness and rationality of RAM, with
good cognitive insights for future language modeling.

Figure 1: The cognitive process when understanding a Chinese text and inferring its possible label, where radical of
each Phono-semantic Compound Character is circled in red.

of the text, but also expand a series of association in their
minds based on those features (Kuvska et al. 2016). In fact, the language symbols in a text that we can directly obtain or perceive are literal features. For Chinese, its writing system derived from pictographs makes its literal features ideographic (Unger 2004). Moreover, as the semantic component used to compose Phono-semantic Compound
Characters (Tung 2012) which take up over 80% of all Chinese characters, each radical has a pictorial glyph origin.
This vivid feature has been inherited for thousands of years,
often allowing readers to understand the meaning of Chinese characters without knowing their pronunciation, which
forms a unique cognitive process in the mode of conveying
semantics compared with English and other phonetic languages (Tzeng et al. 1979). As shown by the example in
Figure 1, ideographic radicals prompt us to associate prior
concepts with corresponding Chinese characters: “climate”
for “snow”, “foot” for “road”, “water” for “slippery”, etc.,
which helps us grasp relevant attributes of characters and
approximate the core idea of classification label “Traffic”.
Meanwhile, association in psychology refers to the psychological connection between concepts, events or mental states, usually derived from specific experiences (Klein
2018). It allows people to use prior concepts outside a given
text to assist comprehension during reading. Actually, associative behavior is a fundamental and effective principle in
psycho-linguistics for explaining examples of cognition and
knowledge learning through accumulated experience (Dick-

Introduction
Due to the uniqueness of ideography and great potential for
future applications, the research of Chinese text classification has been appealing in recent years (Liao, Sun, and Gu
2019; Tao et al. 2019). However, traditional Chinese text classification methods usually ignore the essence of Chinese ideographic characteristics (DeFrancis 1986), that is,
associative information guided by ideographic radicals.
Most of the time, when people receive a certain text,
they will not only grasp it according to the literal features
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13898

