The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Policy-Guided Heuristic Search with Guarantees
Laurent Orseau,1 Levi H. S. Lelis2
1

2

DeepMind, UK
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada
lorseau@google.com, levi.lelis@ualberta.ca

Abstract
The use of a policy and a heuristic function for guiding search
can be quite effective in adversarial problems, as demonstrated
by AlphaGo and its successors, which are based on the PUCT
search algorithm. While PUCT can also be used to solve singleagent deterministic problems, it lacks guarantees on its search
effort and it can be computationally inefficient in practice.
Combining the A* algorithm with a learned heuristic function
tends to work better in these domains, but A* and its variants
do not use a policy. Moreover, the purpose of using A* is
to find solutions of minimum cost, while we seek instead to
minimize the search loss (e.g., the number of search steps).
LevinTS is guided by a policy and provides guarantees on
the number of search steps that relate to the quality of the
policy, but it does not make use of a heuristic function. In this
work we introduce Policy-guided Heuristic Search (PHS), a
novel search algorithm that uses both a heuristic function and
a policy and has theoretical guarantees on the search loss that
relates to both the quality of the heuristic and of the policy.
We show empirically on the sliding-tile puzzle, Sokoban, and
a puzzle from the commercial game ‘The Witness’ that PHS
enables the rapid learning of both a policy and a heuristic function and compares favorably with A*, Weighted A*, Greedy
Best-First Search, LevinTS, and PUCT in terms of number of
problems solved and search time in all three domains tested.

1

Introduction

1

In this work we are interested in tackling single-agent deterministic problems. This class of problems includes numerous real-world applications such as robotics, planning
and pathfinding, computational biology (Edelkamp, Schroedl,
and Koenig 2010), protein design (Allouche et al. 2019), and
program synthesis (Cropper and Dumancic 2020).
AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2017), and descendants such as
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al. 2020) combine a learned value
function with a learned policy in the PUCT search algorithm (Rosin 2011; Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), which is
a Monte-Carlo tree search algorithm (Chang et al. 2005;
Coulom 2007), to tackle stochastic and adversarial games
with complete information, and also a few single-agent
games. The policy guides the search locally by favoring the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An extended version of this paper can be found at http://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.11505.

12382

most promising children of a node, whereas the value function ranks paths globally, thus complementing each other.
PUCT, based on UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006) and
PUCB (Rosin 2011), is indeed designed for adversarial and
stochastic games such as Go and Chess, and UCT and PUCB
come with a guarantee that the value function converges to
the true value function in the limit of exploration—however
this guarantee may not hold when replacing actual rewards
with an estimated value, as is done in the mentioned works.
Although these algorithms perform impressively well for
some adversarial games, it is not clear whether the level of
generality of PUCT makes it the best fit for difficult deterministic single-agent problems where a planning capability is
necessary, such as the PSPACE-hard Sokoban problem (Culberson 1999). The more recent algorithm MuZero (Schrittwieser et al. 2020) adapts AlphaZero to single-agent Atari
games, but these games are mostly reactive and MuZero
performs poorly on games that require more planning like
Montezuma’s Revenge—although this may arguably pertain
to MuZero needing to learn a model of the environment.
In the context of single-agent search the value function is
known as a heuristic function and it estimates the cost-to-go
from a given state to a solution state. McAleer et al. (2019)
used MCTS to learn a heuristic function—but not a policy—
to tackle the Rubik’s cube, but later replaced MCTS entirely
with weighted A* (Pohl 1970; Ebendt and Drechsler 2009),
which is a variant of the A* algorithm (Hart, Nilsson, and
Raphael 1968) that trades off solution quality for search time.
They observe that “MCTS has relatively long runtimes and
often produces solutions many moves longer than the length
of a shortest path” (Agostinelli et al. 2019), and tackle a few
more problems such as the sliding tile puzzle and Sokoban.
Levin Tree Search (LevinTS) (Orseau et al. 2018) uses a
learned policy to guide its search in single-agent problems
and comes with an upper bound on the number of search
steps that accounts for the quality of the policy.
In this work we combine the policy-guided search of the
LevinTS algorithm with the heuristic-guided search of A* in
an algorithm we call Policy-guided Heuristic Search (PHS).
PHS retains the upper bound of LevinTS—we also prove an
almost matching lower bound—but we extend this guarantee
to the use of a heuristic function, showing that an accurate
heuristic can greatly reduce the number of search steps.
We compare our algorithm with several policy-guided and

