The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semantic-guided Reinforced Region Embedding
for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Jiannan Ge, Hongtao Xie ∗ , Shaobo Min, Yongdong Zhang
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{gejn, mbobo}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Visual Embedding

Abstract

Visual space mapping

Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) aims to recognize
images from either seen or unseen domain, mainly by learning a joint embedding space to associate image features
with the corresponding category descriptions. Recent methods have proved that localizing important object regions can
effectively bridge the semantic-visual gap. However, these are
all based on one-off visual localizers, lacking of interpretability and flexibility. In this paper, we propose a novel Semanticguided Reinforced Region Embedding (SR2E) network that
can localize important objects in the long-term interests to
construct semantic-visual embedding space. SR2E consists of
Reinforced Region Module (R2M) and Semantic Alignment
Module (SAM). First, without the annotated bounding box
as supervision, R2M encodes the semantic category guidance
into the reward and punishment criteria to teach the localizer
serialized region searching. Besides, R2M explores different
action spaces during the serialized searching path to avoid
local optimal localization, which thereby generates discriminative visual features with less redundancy. Second, SAM
preserves the semantic relationship into visual features via
semantic-visual alignment and designs a domain detector to
alleviate the domain confusion. Experiments on four public
benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed SR2E is an effective GZSL method with reinforced embedding space, which
obtains averaged 6.1% improvements.

Semantic space
mapping

Semantic Embedding

Refining Localizer

Embedding Space
Black Tern
1 white wings
1 brown forehead
0 green nape
0 purple belly
1 eat fish
0 long bill length

Feature extractor

Attributes

Figure 1: Localizing the bird in an image through a serialized search. As the optimizing of the localizer, the visual
description can better match the semantic information in the
embedding space, which is indicated by the blue dotted line.

edge learned from the seen domain can be directly transferred to the unseen domain.
The commonly used semantic descriptor includes humandefined information and learning-based information. The
former contains attributes information (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Jayaraman and Grauman 2014),
and the latter includes label embedding using Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al. 2013) or GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and
Manning 2014) algorithm. In order to associate the visual
image features with corresponding category descriptions, a
joint embedding space has been constructed in current methods, where both visual features and category descriptions are
projected, and the recognition becomes the nearest neighbor searching problem. Among these methods, some works
(Socher et al. 2013; Fu et al. 2015; Morgado and Vasconcelos 2017) span the embedding space directly using category description to preserve the semantic topology, and others (Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2017; Yu et al. 2018; Annadani
and Biswas 2018) select the visual space as the embedding
space for better visual discrimination. According to (Fu et al.
2015), learning a latent intermediate space between the visual and semantic space can take both advantages of visual
discrimination and semantic preservation, but it is hard to
learn. Thus, current methods (Li et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2019)
leverage the visual attention mechanism to localize discriminative local regions and select critical visual elements to
construct a good intermediate embedding space, thereby improving the semantic-visual association. Nevertheless, these

Introduction
Recently, the deep learning algorithms (Min et al. 2020; Sio
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2020) have developed rapidly due to the massive increase in labeled data. For
example, traditional classification tasks require a large number of images with category labels for training. However,
it is infeasible to annotate all kinds of species and learn a
classifier for them due to the species diversity in the real
world. To handle this issue, Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) offers an effective solution, which utilizes category descriptions, such as the representation of color, habit,
and some other features, to connect the seen and unseen domain categories (Yang et al. 2016; Cappallo, Mensink, and
Snoek 2015). Since the category descriptions for two domains share the same semantic space, the recognition knowl∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1406

