The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepTrader: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach for Risk-Return
Balanced Portfolio Management with Market Conditions Embedding
Zhicheng Wang1,2 , Biwei Huang3 , Shikui Tu1,2 , Kun Zhang3 , Lei Xu1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Centre for Cognitive Machines and Computational Health (CMaCH), Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
{wwwangzhch, tushikui, leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn, biweih@andrew.cmu.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu
Abstract

temporal structures of stock returns were learned by a temporal factor analysis (TFA) model which is based on the arbitrage pricing theory (APT) in finance, and the portfolio
weights are represented by an extended normalized radial
basis function (ENRBF) (Chiu and Xu 2003, 2004).
Efforts have been made in deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) for portfolio management with promising results
(Deng et al. 2016; Jin and El-Saawy 2016; Jiang, Xu, and
Liang 2017). Similar to games, portfolio management also
interacts with the environment (financial market) and maximizes the cumulative rewards (returns). However, the abovementioned methods share some common limitations. First,
they overlook the intrinsic connection and interplay among
different stocks. The price fluctuation of one stock may
strongly imply the trend of a set of related stocks. Recently,
Wang et al. (2019) alleviated this limitation by introducing
the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) across
different assets. Nevertheless, the stock interrelationships
are computed based on the similarity between the input sequences along a local region, which may omit the interrelations over a long time span. Second, existing DRL methods
usually neglect market conditions, such as stock indexes and
how many stocks rise or fall, and then just treat the input financial signals independently from the rest of the market,
leading to limited performance on the risk-return balancing.
In this paper, we propose a DRL-based model called
DeepTrader for portfolio management. DeepTrader mainly
includes two units to handle the problems of cross-asset interrelationship learning and risk-return balancing, respectively. One unit, which is called asset scoring unit, takes
individual stock data as input and learns to represent them
as “winner scores” for each asset. The winner score indicates how likely a stock is going to rise in the future. To
better encode the interrelationships among all stocks, we
construct a graph based on different dependence characterizations to capture interrelationships hierarchically, whether
long or short, spatial or temporal. The other unit, known as
market scoring unit, leverages the market sentiment indicators as input and then embeds financial situations as an indicator to adjust the proportion of long and short funds in
every trading period. This dynamic adjustment allows the
model to reduce the risk induced by complicated market ups
and downs in a timely and effective manner. Moreover, while
using the price-rising rate as the reward function in the asset

Most existing reinforcement learning (RL)-based portfolio management models do not take into account the
market conditions, which limits their performance in
risk-return balancing. In this paper, we propose DeepTrader, a deep RL method to optimize the investment
policy. In particular, to tackle the risk-return balancing
problem, our model embeds macro market conditions
as an indicator to dynamically adjust the proportion between long and short funds, to lower the risk of market
fluctuations, with the negative maximum drawdown as
the reward function. Additionally, the model involves a
unit to evaluate individual assets, which learns dynamic
patterns from historical data with the price rising rate
as the reward function. Both temporal and spatial dependencies between assets are captured hierarchically
by a specific type of graph structure. Particularly, we
find that the estimated causal structure best captures the
interrelationships between assets, compared to industry
classification and correlation. The two units are complementary and integrated to generate a suitable portfolio
which fits the market trend well and strikes a balance between return and risk effectively. Experiments on three
well-known stock indexes demonstrate the superiority
of DeepTrader in terms of risk-gain criteria.

Introduction
Portfolio management aims to allocate resources to obtain
optimal returns while avoiding the risk at the same time. To
overcome the weakness of human decision making, a great
quantity of investment strategies have been proposed (Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers 1995; Malkiel 1989; Jegadeesh
and Titman 1993). These traditional strategies usually perform well in some cases but fail in others as they may not
properly adapt to the changing market environment.
Machine learning was adopted to build the trading and
portfolio system. For example, the system could be trained
by RL (Moody et al. 1998) or by maximizing the expected
profit via the so-called adaptive supervised learning decision networks (Xu and Cheung 1997; Hung, Cheung, and
Xu 2003). The system could also be built by directly maximizing a portfolio objective, e.g., Sharpe ratio, where the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

643

