The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Conceptualized and Contextualized Gaussian Embedding
Chen Qian1 , Fuli Feng2∗ , Lijie Wen1∗ , Tat-Seng Chua2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Scholar of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
qc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, fulifeng93@gmail.com, wenlj@tsinghua.edu.cn, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
cat

Word embedding can represent a word as a point vector or
a Gaussian distribution in high-dimensional spaces. Gaussian distribution is innately more expressive than point vector owing to the ability to additionally capture semantic
uncertainties of words, and thus can express asymmetric
relations among words more naturally (e.g., animal entails cat but not the reverse). However, previous Gaussian embedders neglect inner-word conceptual knowledge
and lack tailored Gaussian contextualizer, leading to inferior
performance on both intrinsic (context-agnostic) and extrinsic (context-sensitive) tasks. In this paper, we first propose a
novel Gaussian embedder which explicitly accounts for innerword conceptual units (sememes) to represent word semantics more precisely; during learning, we propose Gaussian
Distribution Attention over Gaussian representations to adaptively aggregate multiple sememe distributions into a word
distribution, which guarantees the Gaussian linear combination property. Additionally, we propose a Gaussian contextualizer to utilize outer-word contexts in a sentence, producing contextualized Gaussian representations for contextsensitive tasks. Extensive experiments on intrinsic and extrinsic tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach, achieving state-of-the-art performance with near
5.00% relative improvement.

pear
fruit

cat

animal
lion

apple

(a) Point embedding

pear
fruit

anim
al

lion

apple

(b) Gaussian embedding

Figure 1: Point embedding vs. Gaussian embedding (a multidimensional Gaussian distribution is exemplified as a softregion ellipse for better visualization). As for the latter, more
specific words (e.g., cat and lion) have smaller uncertainties, while those denoting broader concepts (e.g., animal)
have larger uncertainties.

Gaussian embedding (Figure 1(b)), on the other hand, represents each word as a “probabilistic” Gaussian distribution, which is innately more expressive owing to the ability to additionally capture semantic uncertainties of words
(as their “geometric shapes”) to represent words more naturally and more accurately than point vectors (Vilnis and McCallum 2015). For example, as Figure 1(b) shows, a word
with larger uncertainty (e.g. animal) can semantically entail some words with smaller uncertainties (e.g. cat).
Nevertheless, recent advances are primarily focused on
point embedding, making the line of Gaussian embedding
lag very far behind. Concretely, sharing inner-word and
outer-word linguistic information between words has shown
remarkable success in point-embedding-based techniques
(Bojanowski et al. 2017; Peters et al. 2018). Many point
embedders consider inner-word information (e.g., FASTT EXT) by explicitly encouraging words sharing similar
inner-word structures (e.g., surface subwords or conceptual
units) to have “close” points (Bojanowski et al. 2017; Niu
et al. 2017). Meanwhile, point-based contextualizers consider outer-word contexts (e.g., E LMO) to yield dynamic
representations for a word in different sentences, leading
to dynamic representations and better word sense disambiguation (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019). By contrast, the line of Gaussian embedding: 1) represents word

Introduction
Word embedding aims to learn low-dimensional word representations that encode semantic and syntactic information
(Mikolov et al. 2013a). According to the form of word representations, word embedding evolves in two main directions: point embedding and Gaussian embedding. Point embedding (Figure 1(a)) represents each word as a deterministic point vector (Mikolov et al. 2013a) in a semantic space
where the semantic similarity and other symmetric word relations can be effectively captured by the relative positions
of points. However, it struggles to naturally model entailments among words (e.g., animal entails cat but not the
reverse) or other asymmetric relations. Asymmetries can reveal hierarchical structures among words (Athiwaratkun and
Wilson 2018) and are crucial in knowledge representation
and reasoning (Roller, Erk, and Boleda 2014). By contrast,
∗

Fuli Feng and Lijie Wen are the co-corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13683

