The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Communicative Message Passing for Inductive Relation Reasoning
Sijie Mai* , Shuangjia Zheng* , Yuedong Yang† , Haifeng Hu†
Sun Yat-sen University
{maisj, zhengshj9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yangyd25, huhaif}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

have been developed to fulfill the gap between KGs and realworld knowledge, which are referred as link prediction or
knowledge graph completion tasks. After condensing entities and relations into a low-dimensional vector space, these
models predict missing facts by operating the entity and relation embeddings.
Despite the impressiveness of model performance, most
of KG embeddings methods inherently assume a fixed set of
entities in the graph and ignore the evolving nature of KGs.
In fact, many real-world KGs are ever-evolving (Trivedi
et al. 2017), with novel entities being added over time e.g.,
new users in social media platforms or new molecules in
biomedical knowledge graphs. As these entities were unknown to the model during training, the model does not obtain their embeddings, and hence have no means to infer the
relations for these entities. Thus, the ability to make predictions on new entities avoiding costly re-training from scratch
is desirable for production-ready machine learning models.
Some efforts have been made to obtain the inductive embeddings for new entities using external resources (Wang
et al. 2014; Xie et al. 2016b; Zhong et al. 2015). Although
these approaches may be useful, they required extra computation over massive resources, which are time-consuming
and may not always be feasible. An alternative is to induce
probabilistic logic rules by enumerating statistical regularities and patterns embedded in the knowledge graph (Meilicke et al. 2018; Yang, Yang, and Cohen 2017), which is
entity-independent and hence inherently inductive. However, these methods suffer from scalability issues and are
less expressive due to their rule-based nature.
Taking inspiration from the success of graph neural networks (GNNs) in graph data modeling, extensive studies applied GNNs to learn the embeddings for KGs (Schlichtkrull
et al. 2018; Shang et al. 2019; Nathani et al. 2019), among
which most of them were adopted in transductive settings.
By extending a subgraph-based link prediction method that
performs in the basic network (Zhang and Chen 2018), recent work GraIL (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020) shed
light on the evolution issue for KG. The basic strategy behind GraIL can be split into three steps: (i) extracting the
enclosing subgraph surrounding the target triplets, (ii) annotating the relative position of each entity in the extracted subgraph, and (iii) scoring the annotated subgraph with a GNN.
It can be beneficial to the inference of entirely novel entities

Relation prediction for knowledge graphs aims at predicting
missing relationships between entities. Despite the importance of inductive relation prediction, most previous works
are limited to a transductive setting and cannot process previously unseen entities. The recent proposed subgraph-based
relation reasoning models provided alternatives to predict
links from the subgraph structure surrounding a candidate
triplet inductively. However, we observe that these methods often neglect the directed nature of the extracted subgraph and weaken the role of relation information in the subgraph modeling. As a result, they fail to effectively handle
the asymmetric/anti-symmetric triplets and produce insufficient embeddings for the target triplets. To this end, we introduce a Communicative Message Passing neural network for
Inductive reLation rEasoning, CoMPILE, that reasons over
local directed subgraph structures and has a vigorous inductive bias to process entity-independent semantic relations. In
contrast to existing models, CoMPILE strengthens the message interactions between edges and entitles through a communicative kernel and enables a sufficient flow of relation
information. Moreover, we demonstrate that CoMPILE can
naturally handle asymmetric/anti-symmetric relations without the need for explosively increasing the number of model
parameters by extracting the directed enclosing subgraphs.
Extensive experiments show substantial performance gains
in comparison to state-of-the-art methods on commonly used
benchmark datasets with variant inductive settings.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are collections of factual information represented in the form of relational triplets. Each
relation triplet can be organized as (h, r, t) where h and t
represents the head and tail entities and r is the relation between h and t. KGs have played a critical role across variety of tasks like Question Answering (Zhang et al. 2017)
, Semantic Search (Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017), Dialogue Generation (He et al. 2017) and many more. However, because of the limitations of human knowledge and
extraction algorithms, they tend to suffer from incompleteness, that is, absent links in the KGs. Numerous methods
* These two authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4294

