The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Answering Complex Queries in Knowledge Graphs
with Bidirectional Sequence Encoders
Bhushan Kotnis, Carolin Lawrence, Mathias Niepert
NEC Laboratories Europe
Heidlberg, Germany
{bhushan.kotnis,carolin.lawrence,mathias.niepert}@neclab.eu

Abstract

Fig. 1). We address answering conjunctive query composed
from entities and relations of an incomplete KG.
Note that this is not a question answering (KBQA) task
(Hu et al. 2018) nor a subtask of KBQA. In KBQA the
knowledge graph is assumed to be complete and the task is
to match the natural language query to an appropriate subgraph. In our setting, a conjunctive query is provided.
Prior work proposed methods for answering path
queries by composing standard scoring functions such as
T RANS E (Bordes et al. 2013) and D IST M ULT (Yang et al.
2014) used in knowledge graph completion models for link
prediction (Guu, Miller, and Liang 2015). Models that encode sequences such as RNNs,(Das et al. 2017), were also
used for encoding paths. More recent methods addressed the
problem of answering queries composed of several paths intersecting at a missing entity, e.g., (Hamilton et al. 2018;
Ren, Hu, and Leskovec 2020), by composing triple scoring
functions along with neural network based intersection operators. Building on this, (Daza and Cochez 2020) propose relational Graph Convolutional Networks for answering conjunctive queries.
The problem with recent methods which use intersection
operators or GCNs is that such models aggregate information only along the paths starting from the source and ending at the intersection (see Fig. 2 (left)). These approaches,
however, cannot model complex dependencies between various parts of the query that are not directly connected. Additionally such models cannot jointly infer missing entities in
queries with more than one missing entity.
We propose to explicitly model more complex dependencies between the components of the queries and to answer
queries that are not restricted to a single missing entity. Answering these queries, however, is not straightforward. For
instance, in the example of Fig. 1, one needs to consider all
rivers that flow through both countries and perform a set intersection for obtaining the common rivers.
To address the challenge of answering novel query types
and the shortcomings of existing approaches, we propose
B I QE, a Bi-directional Query Encoder, that uses a bidirectional transformer to incorporate the entire query context.
There is no obvious way to feed a query graph to a transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) because sequences contain positional information while the various branches of a query
graph are permutation invariant. In this paper, we propose a

Representation learning for knowledge graphs (KGs) has
focused on the problem of answering simple link prediction queries. In this work we address the more ambitious
challenge of predicting the answers of conjunctive queries
with multiple missing entities. We propose Bidirectional
Query Embedding (B I QE), a method that embeds conjunctive queries with models based on bi-directional attention mechanisms. Contrary to prior work, bidirectional selfattention can capture interactions among all the elements of
a query graph. We introduce two new challenging datasets
for studying conjunctive query inference and conduct experiments on several benchmark datasets that demonstrate B I QE
significantly outperforms state of the art baselines.

Introduction
Linked data structures such as graphs and specifically
Knowledge Graphs (KG) are well suited for representing a
wide variety of heterogeneous data. Knowledge graphs represent real-world entities along with their types, attributes,
and relationships. Most existing work on machine learning
for knowledge graphs has focused on simple link prediction
problems where the query asks for a single missing entity
(or relation type) in a single triple. A major benefit of knowledge graph systems, however, is their support of a wide variety of logical queries. For instance, SPARQL a typical
query language for RDF-based knowledge graphs supports
a variety of query types. However, it can query only for facts
that exist in the database, it cannot infer missing knowledge.
To address this shortcoming, we are interested in the
problem of computing probabilistic answers to conjunctive
queries (see for example Figure 1) that can be mapped to
subgraph matching problems and which form a subset of
SPARQL. Every query can be represented with a graph
pattern, which we refer to as the query graph, with some
of its entities missing. Path queries are conjunctive queries
that can be expressed using a linear recursion, while directed
acyclic graph queries express at least one binary recursion.
For instance, the query illustrated in Fig. 1 ”Name cities
that are located on rivers that flow through Germany and
France?” is an instance of such a conjunctive query (see
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4968

