The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Topic-Aware Slide Generation For Academic Papers With Unsupervised
Mutual Learning
Da-Wei Li, * 1 Danqing Huang, 2 Tingting Ma, ∗ 3 Chin-Yew Lin 2
1

School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
dwlee@pku.edu.cn, dahua@microsoft.com, hittingtingma@gmail.com, cyl@microsoft.com
Paper (truncated)
(Abstract) Summarization based on text extraction is inherently limited, but
generation-style abstractive methods have proven challenging to build. In this work,
we propose a fully data-driven approach to abstractive sentence summarize. (…)
(Introduction) To test the effectiveness of this approach we run extensive
comparisons with multiple abstractive and extractive baselines, (…) Our approach
outperforms a machine translation system trained on the same large-scale
dataset and yields a large improvement over the highest scoring system in the
DUC-2004 competition.
(Related Work) Most of these models utilize recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for
generation as opposed to feedforward models. We hope to incorporate an RNNLM in future work.
(Conclusion) We combine this probabilistic model with a generation algorithm which
produces accurate abstractive summaries. As a next step we would like to further
improve the grammaticality of the summaries in a data-driven way, as well as
scale this system to generate paragraph-level summaries.

Abstract
Slides are commonly used to present information and tell
stories. In academic and research communities, slides are
typically used to summarize findings in accepted papers for
presentation in meetings and conferences. These slides for
academic papers usually contain common and essential topics
such as major contributions, model design, experiment details and future work. In this paper, we aim to automatically
generate slides for academic papers. We first conducted an
in-depth analysis of how humans create slides. We then mined
frequently used slide topics. Given a topic, our approach extracts relevant sentences in the paper to provide the draft slides.
Due to the lack of labeling data, we integrate prior knowledge
of ground truth sentences into a log-linear model to create
an initial pseudo-target distribution. Two sentence extractors
are learned collaboratively and bootstrap the performance of
each other. Evaluation results on a labeled test set show that
our model can extract more relevant sentences than baseline
methods. Human evaluation also shows slides generated by
our model can serve as a good basis for preparing the final
presentations.

Figure 1: An academic paper example. Sentences relevant to
two topics Contribution (in red) and Future Work (in blue) are
in different paper sections. Given the full paper, we retrieve
relevant sentences for each topic to create the draft slides.

Introduction
Slides are commonly used to present information and tell
stories. In academic and research communities, slides are
typically used to summarize findings in accepted papers for
presentation in meetings and conferences. Automatically generating slides from papers aiming to reduce authors’ time and
efforts in slide creation would improve the authors’ productivity. Slides for academic papers usually contain common and
essential topics such as major contributions, model design,
experiment details and future work. Given a paper, we aim to
generate a set of draft slides covering the essential topics in
academic presentations. In this way, we hope to offer paper
authors a quick start slide creation experience rather than
require them to create slide decks from scratch.
The task of generating slides for academic papers is very
challenging and remains under-investigated. Early proposals (Masao and Kôiti 1999; Yasumura, Takeichi, and Nitta
2003; Sravanthi, Chowdary, and Kumar 2009) are mainly
* This work is done while the authors were in internships in
Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13243

rule-based extractive methods with simple heuristics. They
seldom report empirical evaluation results. Recently, some
statistical learning approaches (Hu and Wan 2015; Wang,
Wan, and Du 2017) have been proposed. They collect <paper,
slide> pairs and use the alignments between slide contents
and paper to learn the importance of phrases or sentences
in the paper. They then design some heuristics to group sentences of high-importance as the final slides. We observe two
major limitations in previous works. First, they do not consider slide topics during generation. The content in one slide
should address one topic (e.g., paper contribution). Previous
works extract sentences according to the sequential section
order in a paper. The extracted sentences are grouped into
slides based on predefined constraints without considering
the topics of slides. Second, the slide datasets for training are
small and not publicly available. Large and publicly available resources of academic paper slides are rare on the Web
and difficult to collect. As far as we could find, the largest
dataset (Hu and Wan 2015) only contains 1,000 pairs of slide
and paper for training.
In this paper, we introduce a topic-aware paper to slide
generation approach based on sentence selection. Take Figure 1 for example. Given the topic “Contribution” as a query,
we extract relevant sentences (highlighted in red) in the paper

