The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Monocular Depth in Dynamic Scenes via
Instance-Aware Projection Consistency
Seokju Lee1 , Sunghoon Im2 , Stephen Lin3 , In So Kweon1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST)
3
Microsoft Research
{seokju91, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr, sunghoonim@dgist.ac.kr, stevelin@microsoft.com
2

Abstract
We present an end-to-end joint training framework that explicitly models 6-DoF motion of multiple dynamic objects,
ego-motion, and depth in a monocular camera setup without supervision. Our technical contributions are three-fold. First, we
highlight the fundamental difference between inverse and forward projection while modeling the individual motion of each
rigid object, and propose a geometrically correct projection
pipeline using a neural forward projection module. Second,
we design a unified instance-aware photometric and geometric consistency loss that holistically imposes self-supervisory
signals for every background and object region. Lastly, we
introduce a general-purpose auto-annotation scheme using any
off-the-shelf instance segmentation and optical flow models to
produce video instance segmentation maps that will be utilized
as input to our training pipeline. These proposed elements are
validated in a detailed ablation study. Through extensive experiments conducted on the KITTI and Cityscapes dataset, our
framework is shown to outperform the state-of-the-art depth
and motion estimation methods. Our code, dataset, and models
are publicly available.

(a) Inverse projection (Casser et al. 2019a) and forward projection.

(b) Reversed warping (Wang et al. 2018b) and forward projection.

Figure 1: Different rendering techniques on dynamic objects.
Inverse projection and reversed inverse warping cause significant appearance distortions and ghosting effects, while our
forward projection technique preserves object appearance.

Introduction
Knowledge of the 3D environment structure and the motion of dynamic objects is essential for autonomous navigation (Shashua, Gdalyahu, and Hayun 2004; Geiger et al.
2014). The 3D structure is valuable because it implicitly models the relative position of the agent, and it is also utilized to
improve the performance of high-level scene understanding
tasks such as detection and segmentation (Lee et al. 2015,
2017; Yang et al. 2018; Shin, Kwon, and Tomizuka 2019;
Behley et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019b). Besides scene structure,
the 3D motion of the agent and traffic participants such as
pedestrians and vehicles is also required for safe driving. The
relative direction and speed between them are taken as the
primary inputs for determining the next direction of travel.
Recent advances in deep neural networks (DNNs) have
led to a surge of interest in depth prediction using monocular images (Eigen, Puhrsch, and Fergus 2014; Garg et al.
2016) and stereo images (Mayer et al. 2016; Chang and Chen
2018), as well as in optical flow estimation (Dosovitskiy

et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2018; Lv et al. 2018). These supervised methods require a large amount and broad variety of
training data with ground-truth labels. Studies have shown
significant progress in unsupervised learning of depth and
ego-motion from unlabeled image sequences (Zhou et al.
2017; Godard, Mac Aodha, and Brostow 2017; Wang et al.
2018a; Mahjourian, Wicke, and Angelova 2018; Ranjan et al.
2019). The joint optimization framework uses a network for
predicting single-view depth and pose, and exploits view synthesis of images in the sequence as the supervisory signal.
However, these works ignore or mask out regions of moving
objects for pose and depth inference.
In this work, rather than considering these moving objects
as nuisances under the assumption of static structure, we utilize them as important clues for estimating 3D object motions.
This problem can be formulated as factorization of object
and camera motion. Factorizing object motion in monocular
sequences is a challenging problem, especially in complex
urban environments that contain numerous dynamic objects.
To address this problem, we propose a novel framework

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1863

