The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Instance Mining with Class Feature Banks for Weakly Supervised Object
Detection
Yufei Yin1 , Jiajun Deng1 , Wengang Zhou1,2 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yinyufei, dengjj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Proposals

Recent progress on weakly supervised object detection
(WSOD) is characterized by formulating WSOD as a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem and taking online refinement with the selected region proposals from MIL. However, MIL inclines to select the most discriminative part rather
than the entire instance as the top-scoring region proposals,
which leads to weak localization capability for weakly supervised object detectors. We attribute this problem to the limited intra-class diversity within a single image. Specifically,
due to the lack of annotated bounding boxes, the network
tends to focus on the most common parts of each class and
neglect the diverse parts of objects. To solve the problem, we
introduce a novel Instance Mining with Class Feature Banks
(IM-CFB) framework, which includes a Class Feature Banks
(CFB) module and a Feature Guided Instance Mining (FGIM)
algorithm. Concretely, Class Feature Banks (CFB) consist of
sub-banks for each class, which are utilized to collect diversity information from a broader view. At the training stage,
the RoI features of reliable region proposals are recorded
and updated in the CFB. Then, FGIM leverages the features
recorded in the CFB to ameliorate the region proposal selection of the MIL branch. Extensive experiments conducted on
two publicly available datasets, Pascal VOC 2007 and 2012,
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. More remarkably, our method achieves 54.3% on mAP and 70.7% on CorLoc on Pascal VOC 2007. When further re-trained by a FastRCNN detector, we obtain to-date the best reported mAP and
CorLoc of 55.8% and 72.2%, respectively.

MIL

Filter

Select

Yes?

Feature Bank

Figure 1: Illustration of our purposed Feature Guided Instance Mining (FGIM). The top part represents the MIL
branch and the bottom part represents the FGIM algorithm.
Benefited by the extra box-level information from the feature bank, FGIM is able to obtain tighter bounding boxes. In
turn, these boxes are utilized as positive samples to update
the feature bank. Best viewed in color.

et al. 2020) have been made on weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) to alleviate the requirement of fine-grained
annotation. However, there is still a large performance gap
between weakly supervised and fully supervised methods.
Many recent WSOD approaches follow a two-stage
paradigm, where Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is applied with a CNN model, and the region proposals selected
from MIL are utilized for further refinement. However, MIL
inclines to locate discriminative parts rather than the entire
instance, limiting the accuracy of the selected region proposals. To address this issue, Yan et al. (Yan et al. 2019)
design an extra MIL branch to refine the initial results and
Yang et al. (Yang, Li, and Dou 2019) utilize guided attention
module to enhance features. Nevertheless, these approaches
only focus on a single image, but leave the intra-class diversity uninvestigated. In particular, objects are usually diverse
in appearances, (e.g., shape, posture), even if they belong to
the same class, while the diversity information for each class
is limited in a single image. Hence, the network tends to focus on the most common parts of each class and neglect the
diverse parts of objects.

Introduction
With the revolution of deep learning, object detection techniques have been greatly improved in recent years (Girshick
2015; Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016;
Lin et al. 2017). However, many object detection methods
with deep learning follow a fully supervised setting and require a large corpus of box-level annotation data, which is
laborious and expensive to collect. Recently, substantial efforts (Tang et al. 2017, 2018; Wei et al. 2018; Gao et al.
2018; Wan et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2018; Arun, Jawahar, and
Kumar 2019; Li et al. 2019; Diba et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2018; Kim et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2020; Chen
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3190

