The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Story Ending Generation with Multi-Level Graph Convolutional Networks over
Dependency Trees
∗

Qingbao Huang,1,2 Linzhang Mo,2 Pijian Li,2 Yi Cai,1,3
Qingguang Liu,2 Jielong Wei,2 Qing Li,4 Ho-fung Leung5
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
qbhuang@gxu.edu.cn, 1912302009@st.gxu.edu.cn, ycai@scut.edu.cn
Abstract

they suffer from a well known issue of generating noncoherent and generic plots. Very recently, Guan et al. propose a model that uses an incremental encoding approach
and conducts one hop reasoning over the ConceptNet graph
to augment the representation of words in the context (Guan,
Wang, and Huang 2019). Owing to incorporating external
commonsense knowledge, the content of generated endings
appears more abundant. In terms of coherence and reasonability, however, there is still a big gap between machines
and human. One reason is that the proposed incremental encoding approach can build relationship of words in adjacent
sentences incrementally, however, it cannot directly capture
information from non-adjacent sentences, especially longrange sentences. The other possible reason is that an over
reliance on exteral commonsense knowledge beyond context could lead to deviating from the main theme.
We consider clues hidden in the whole context are vital to high-quality ending generation, therefore it is necessary to seek an approach to better grasp the long-range dependency relations. Actually, there are many useful entities
(e.g., Tom, phone, biggest screen) and events (refer to a verb
or action here, e.g., bought, change) in the sentences (cf.
Figure 1), which are beneficial to reveal the logical relationship hidden in the story context. Besides, we can find that
the key word phone has some relations with other sentences,
while the phrase biggest screen has a causal relationship
with the fourth sentence (biggest screen → pain to carry).
Furthermore, some sentences have causal relationships with
others, from which the context clue (bought phone →
got biggest screen → be great look → be pain carry →
change smaller one) can be inferred . To understand story
context adequately, models should try to capture relations
and events hidden in the input sentences.
Dependency trees have been proven to be effective in
extracting relations (Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Guo,
Zhang, and Lu 2019) and events (McClosky, Surdeanu, and
Manning 2011) in text for the ability of capturing long-range
syntactic relations. In Figure 1, we obtain the dependency
relations of each sentence by the Stanford Syntactic Parsing tool (De Marneffe et al. 2014), and select the words

As an interesting and challenging task, story ending generation aims at generating a reasonable and coherent ending
for a given story context. The key challenge of the task is
to comprehend the context sufficiently and capture the hidden logic information effectively, which has not been well
explored by most existing generative models. To tackle this
issue, we propose a context-aware Multi-level Graph Convolutional Networks over Dependency Parse (MGCN-DP) trees
to capture dependency relations and context clues more effectively. We utilize dependency parse trees to facilitate capturing relations and events in the context implicitly, and Multilevel Graph Convolutional Networks to update and deliver
the representation crossing levels to obtain richer contextual
information. Both automatic and manual evaluations show
that our MGCN-DP can achieve comparable performance
with state-of-the-art models. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/VISLANG-Lab/MLGCN-DP.

Introduction
Story ending generation (SEG) is an interesting and challenging task in machine comprehension and natural language generation, which aims at completing the plot and
concluding a story ending given a context. A recently
proposed stories corpus named ROCStories (Mostafazadeh
et al. 2016a) provides a suitable dataset for SEG. The original task is to select a correct story ending from two candidates, while the variational task SEG is to generate a reasonable ending. The latter is more challenging, because models
must “understand” the story context, and then generate reasonable, coherent, and diverse endings according to the logic
relation and causality information.
Previous works (Li, Ding, and Liu 2018; Gupta
et al. 2019) are mainly based on Sequence-to-Sequence
(Seq2Seq) model (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). Because of generating a sentence at a stroke in a left-to-right
manner and training with Maximum Likelihood Estimate,
∗

Corresponding author: Yi Cai (ycai@scut.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13073

