The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Behavioral Consistence for Universal User Representation
Jie Gu* , Feng Wang∗ , Qinghui Sun,
Zhiquan Ye, Xiaoxiao Xu, Jingmin Chen, Jun Zhang
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{yemu.gj,wf135777,yuyang.sqh,beichen.yzq,xiaoxiao.xuxx,jingmin.cjm,zj157077}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

the designed application scenarios but fail on other unseen
tasks. Accordingly, to ensure performance, we have to train
a particular representation model for each downstream task.
But this is time-consuming and would cost a lot of computing and storage resources.
In contrast, this work focuses on learning universal user
representations. Basically, we attempt to learn a behavior
data encoder on a large amount of unlabeled user logs to
infer user representations. The obtained representations are
expected to be informative and applicable to various unseen
downstream tasks (like preference prediction). Compared to
the task-specific ones, universal representation model shows
great advantages in reducing engineering works, saving time
and computational costs. Despite the potential advantages,
so far there are only few public works discussing this subject (Benton, Arora, and Dredze 2016; Ding, Bickel, and
Pan 2017; Robertson 2004; Andrews and Bishop 2019). One
challenge in learning such a universal encoder is to design a
proper task to guide the encoder being capable of fully identifying valuable user information.
Through data exploration and analysis, we observe that
most of our users exhibit consistent behaviors over a relatively long time span. This is probably because behaviors of
users are usually predominated by some consistent or slowly
evolved factors like gender, age, hobbies, etc. For example, a
man may have long-term and consistent interests in searching men’s clothing/shoes. Such a kind of behavioral consistency motivates us to develop a new learning task by mining
the implicit dependencies between behaviors.
Accordingly, a novel objective named as behavioral consistency loss is presented. During training, each sample consists of two disjoint sets of user behaviors, i.e., the input and
target sets respectively. The encoder generates the universal
user representation based on the input behavior data. Then
the loss is built by predicting the number of occurrences of
every element in the target set. Such an objective guides the
representation model to fully discover and characterize the
underlying consistent factors shared within user behaviors.
The learned universal representations would thus retain rich
information, leading to a better performance and wider range
of applications. Our method falls into the self-supervised
learning paradigm in the sense that user behavior sequence
itself can provide supervisory signal (LeCun 2020).
Besides the need of a proper learning task, another key to

User modeling is critical for developing personalized services
in industry. A common way for user modeling is to learn user
representations that can be distinguished by their interests or
preferences. In this work, we focus on developing universal
user representation model. The obtained universal representations are expected to contain rich information, and be applicable to various downstream applications without further
modifications (e.g., user preference prediction and user profiling). Accordingly, we can be free from the heavy work of
training task-specific models for every downstream task as
in previous works. In specific, we propose Self-supervised
User Modeling Network (SUMN) to encode behavior data
into the universal representation. It includes two key components. The first one is a new learning objective, which guides
the model to fully identify and preserve valuable user information under a self-supervised learning framework. The
other one is a multi-hop aggregation layer, which benefits the
model capacity in aggregating diverse behaviors. Extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets show that our approach
can outperform state-of-the-art unsupervised representation
methods, and even compete with supervised ones.

Introduction
User modeling is one of the most important issues in the era
of big data. It helps business to better understand behaviors
of users and then improve the quality of commercial services. A recent common solution is to learn an encoder to
convert collected user behavior data (e.g., search queries in
e-commerce platform) into low dimensional representations
with neural networks. Such an end-to-end learning paradigm
can not only reduce feature engineering work but also improve performance compared to hand-crafted methods.
A large proportion of current user modeling approaches
are task-specific. That is, they are trained specifically for certain downstream applications in a supervised fashion, e.g.,
for click rate prediction and personalized recommendation
(Zhou et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019). Since the
models would be easily biased to the learning task, the generalization ability of these task-specific user representations
can probably be limited. They might only perform well in
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4063

