The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Escaping Local Optima with Non-Elitist Evolutionary Algorithms
Duc-Cuong Dang1 , Anton Eremeev2 , Per Kristian Lehre3
1

Southampton Business School, University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
2
Sobolev Institute of Mathematics SB RAS, 13, Pevtsov str., Omsk, 644099, Russia
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT Birmingham, United Kingdom
d.c.dang@soton.ac.uk, eremeev@ofim.oscsbras.ru, p.k.lehre@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Most discrete evolutionary algorithms (EAs) implement
elitism, meaning that they make the biologically implausible
assumption that the fittest individuals never die. While elitism
favours exploitation and ensures that the best seen solutions
are not lost, it has been widely conjectured that non-elitism is
necessary to explore promising fitness valleys without getting
stuck in local optima. Determining when non-elitist EAs outperform elitist EAs has been one of the most fundamental open
problems in evolutionary computation. A recent analysis of a
non-elitist EA shows that this algorithm does not outperform
its elitist counterparts on the benchmark problem JUMP.
We solve this open problem through rigorous runtime analysis of elitist and non-elitist population-based EAs on a class
of multi-modal problems. We show that with 3-tournament
selection and appropriate mutation rates, the non-elitist EA
optimises the multi-modal problem in expected polynomial
time, while an elitist EA requires exponential time with overwhelmingly high probability.
A key insight in our analysis is the non-linear selection profile
of the tournament selection mechanism which, with appropriate mutation rates, allows a small sub-population to reside on
the local optimum while the rest of the population explores the
fitness valley. In contrast, we show that the comma-selection
mechanism which does not have this non-linear profile, fails
to optimise this problem in polynomial time.
The theoretical analysis is complemented with an empirical
investigation on instances of the set cover problem, showing
that non-elitist EAs can perform better than the elitist ones.
We also provide examples where usage of mutation rates close
to the error thresholds is beneficial when employing non-elitist
population-based EAs.

Introduction
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are heuristic optimisation
methods inspired by evolution. Departing from nature –
where even the fittest individuals eventually die – EAs were
early on designed with elitism (Cavicchio 1970; De Jong
1975), where some of the fittest individuals are always copied
unchanged into the next generation. Both from a practical
and theoretical point of view, elitism was considered a necessary mechanism to ensures monotone progress. Elitism was
thought necessary to saturate good solutions (Beyer 1997),
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12275

and Rudolph used elitism as the essential property to guarantee that the canonical genetic algorithm (CGA) converges to
the optimum (Rudolph 1994).
In contrast, the less frequently employed non-elitist EAs
produce the new generation solely from the offspring of the
old generation, and the old generation is then discarded. Nonelitist EAs are highly inefficient if their mutation rates and
selection pressure have not been set appropriately. In particular, if the mutation rate exceeds the error threshold, a
quantity which depends on the selective pressure, then the
EA will require at least exponential time to locate any unique
global optimum (Lehre 2010). Error thresholds (or mutationselection balance) were originally studied in population genetics (Wilke 2005), virology (Biebricher and Eigen 2005), and
later introduced to evolutionary computation (Ochoa 2006).
Non-elitist EAs with mutation rates below the error threshold
optimise many pseudo-Boolean problems in expected polynomial time (Corus et al. 2018). For certain problems, the
mutation rate must be neither too high nor too low to ensure
polynomial runtime (Lehre and Yao 2012).
Our aim is to contribute to the long-standing open problem in evolutionary computation, to determine whether
non-elitism can lead to more efficient search than elitism
(Jägerskupper and Storch 2007; Doerr 2020). An attractive
hypothesis, which we call the escape hypothesis, is that nonelitism helps EAs escape local optima. Some believe that if
the population contains a local optimum, a non-elitist EA
may allow a sub-population sufficient time to explore less fit
fitness valleys around the optimum, to eventually discover
better solutions. In contrast, the locally optimal individual
in an elitist EA are thought to take over the population too
quickly. To progress, the elitist EA will require a long time to
discover a fitter solution through a low probability mutation
(or crossover) event.
So far, there has been no convincing evidence that the
escape hypothesis is true. To test the hypothesis, one could
attempt to analyse the runtime of elitist and non-elitist EAs
on multi-modal problems with well known structure.
The C LIFF problem has local optima which can be reached
easily through hill-climbing, and which are all separated
from the optimum by a fitness valley of Hamming width k.
The non-elitist (1,λ) EA with population size λ ≥ 5 log(n)
optimises C LIFF (for k = bn/3c) in expected time O(e5λ ),
whereas the elitist (1+λ) EA needs at least nn/4 function eval-

