The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-modal Graph Fusion for Named Entity Recognition with Targeted Visual
Guidance
Dong Zhang,1 Suzhong Wei,2 Shoushan Li,1 * Hanqian Wu,2 Qiaoming Zhu,1 Guodong Zhou1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
dzhang@suda.edu.cn, antcoder@outlook.com, lishoushan@suda.edu.cn, hanqian@seu.edu.cn,
{qmzhu, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-modal named entity recognition (MNER) aims to discover named entities in free text and classify them into predefined types with images. However, dominant MNER models do not fully exploit fine-grained semantic correspondences between semantic units of different modalities, which
have the potential to refine multi-modal representation learning. To deal with this issue, we propose a unified multi-modal
graph fusion (UMGF) approach for MNER. Specifically, we
first represent the input sentence and image using a unified
multi-modal graph, which captures various semantic relationships between multi-modal semantic units (words and visual
objects). Then, we stack multiple graph-based multi-modal
fusion layers that iteratively perform semantic interactions to
learn node representations. Finally, we achieve an attentionbased multi-modal representation for each word and perform
entity labeling with a CRF decoder. Experimentation on the
two benchmark datasets demonstrates the superiority of our
MNER model.

Figure 1: An example for multi-modal named entity recognition with (a) the whole visual cue, (b) averagely segmented
visual cues and (c) targeted visual cues.

Carvalho 2018), or guide the word learning a vision-aware
representation (Lu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018) based on
RNN framework; (2) segmenting the whole image averagely
into multiple regions (Figure 1(b)) and make them interact
with the text sequence based on Transformer framework (Yu
et al. 2020).
Despite their success, above studies do not fully exploit
the fine-grained semantic correspondences between semantic units within an input sentence-image pair. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, image (a) gives implicit global information, and image (b) includes local information of multiple
averagely segmented regions, but it is still implicit. It is difficult for these two kinds of information to spread the clues of
the ”gate” to the textual representations. The failed exploitation of this important clue may be due to two big challenges:
1) how to construct a unified representation to bridge the semantic gap between two different modalities, and 2) how to
achieve semantic interactions based on the unified representation. However, image (c) gives the targeted object region as
a clue. Relatively speaking, this kind of explicit information
is more likely to help us identify some words as the correct
entity type, such as “Brandenburg gate”. Therefore, we believe that such semantic correspondences can be exploited

Introduction
Multi-modal named entity recognition (MNER) has become
an important research direction in named entity recognition
(NER) (Lu et al. 2018; Kruengkrai et al. 2020), due to its
research significance in multi-modal deep learning and wide
applications, such as structural extraction from massive multimedia news and web product information. It significantly
extends the conventional text-based NER by taking images
as additional inputs. The assumption behind this is that the
structured extraction is expected to be more accurate than
purely text-based NER, since the visual context helps resolve ambiguous multi-sense words (Zhang et al. 2020a; Ju
et al. 2020).
Apparently, how to fully exploit visual information is one
of the core issues in MNER, which directly impacts the
model performance. To this end, a lot of efforts have been
made, roughly consisting of: (1) encoding the whole image
into a global feature vector (Figure 1(a)), which can be used
to augment each word representation (Moon, Neves, and
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14347

