The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

F2Net: Learning to Focus on the Foreground for Unsupervised Video Object
Segmentation
†

†

Daizong Liu1 , Dongdong Yu2 , Changhu Wang2 , Pan Zhou1*
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
ByteDance AI Lab, China
{dzliu, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, {yudongdong, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com
Input Frame

Abstract
Although deep learning based methods have achieved great
progress in unsupervised video object segmentation, difficult
scenarios (e.g., visual similarity, occlusions, and appearance
changing) are still not well-handled. To alleviate these issues,
we propose a novel Focus on Foreground Network (F2Net),
which delves into the intra-inter frame details for the foreground objects and thus effectively improve the segmentation
performance. Specifically, our proposed network consists of
three main parts: Siamese Encoder Module, Center Guiding
Appearance Diffusion Module, and Dynamic Information Fusion Module. Firstly, we take a siamese encoder to extract
the feature representations of paired frames (reference frame
and current frame). Then, a Center Guiding Appearance Diffusion Module is designed to capture the inter-frame feature
(dense correspondences between reference frame and current
frame), intra-frame feature (dense correspondences in current frame), and original semantic feature of current frame.
Specifically, we establish a Center Prediction Branch to predict the center location of the foreground object in current
frame and leverage the center point information as spatial
guidance prior to enhance the inter-frame and intra-frame
feature extraction, and thus the feature representation considerably focus on the foreground objects. Finally, we propose a Dynamic Information Fusion Module to automatically select relatively important features through three aforementioned different level features. Extensive experiments on
DAVIS2016, Youtube-object, and FBMS datasets show that
our proposed F2Net achieves the state-of-the-art performance
with significant improvement.

Center Prediction

Our Result

AnDiff

MAT

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Compared to other methods, our network shows
better segmentation performance under the challenging scenarios of visual similarity, occlusion, and appearance changing by considering the center information of the foreground.

Traditional methods tend to address this task by using
handcrafted or learnable features, such as objectness (Zhang,
Javed, and Shah 2013), motion boundary (Papazoglou and
Ferrari 2013), saliency (Wang, Shen, and Porikli 2015), and
trajectories (Ochs and Brox 2011). These are typically nonlearning methods working in a purely unsupervised manner
without using any training data. Recently, more research efforts have been devoted to tackling this task in deep learning
frameworks, leading to an unsupervised solution (no annotation used for any testing frame). Many of these (Zhou et
al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018c) employ twostream networks to combine local motion and appearance
information. Due to the usage of optical flow, they may fail
to correctly infer the foreground when the object is occluded
or nearly static (Tokmakov, Alahari, and Schmid 2017). Latest appearance matching based methods (Wang et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2019) are proposed to explore
higher-order relationships among video frames, which obtain more optimal results from a global view by attention
mechanisms. However, they lack robustness when there are
visually similar object existed in the background.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, there are three challenging scenarios: foreground-background visual similarity, object occlusion, and appearance changing. For appearance matching method Anchor Diffusion Network (AnDiff)
(Yang et al. 2019), it fails to separate the foreground camel
from the background one in the first video as the two camels
have similar appearance. It also can not handle the appearance changing problem as shown in the third video. For two
stream network MAT (Zhou et al. 2020), it only segments

Introduction
Unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) aims to
separate foreground objects from their background in a
video sequence without any prior information. Due to the
lack of prior knowledge about the foreground objects, this
task not only suffers from the common challenges (e.g. object deformation and occlusion) in other video-related tasks,
but also faces huge difficulties in accurately discovering the
most prominent and distinct objects across video frames
from a complex and diverse background.
†

Equal contributions. *Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2109

