The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Context-Aware Graph Convolution Network for Target Re-identification
Deyi Ji1 * , Haoran Wang2 * , Hanzhe Hu3 , Weihao Gan1 , Wei Wu1 , Junjie Yan1
1

SenseTime Research 2 Xidian University 3 Peking University
{jideyi, ganweihao, wuwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, wanghaoran@stu.xidian.edu.cn, huhz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

loss functions (Cheng et al. 2016; Yi et al. 2014; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Zheng et al. 2018), and have witnessed great performance improvements in recent years.
However, they treat each probe-gallery pair separately, without considering the relations between the query and gallery
images. Thus the context information has not been fully explored in these systems, as a result, many advanced works
(Zhou et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2020a) achieved the high top-1 accuracy of almost 95%
on the Market-1501 dataset, but the mAP is still less than
90%.
On the other hand, several methods have tried to optimize
the ranking results by exploiting the context information in
person Re-ID. However, most of them operate in an unsupervised or semi-supervised manner as a post-processing operation. Concretely, Karaman et al. (Karaman et al. 2014)
used a discriminative Conditional Random Field (CRF) to
exploit the local context among the near neighbors in a
semi-supervised way. Garcia et al. (Garcia et al. 2015) proposed a post-ranking framework and analyzed context information in an unsupervised way. K-reciprocal reranking
(Wang et al. 2019b) adjusted the gallery ranks using Jaccard distance calculated with k-reciprocal nearest neighbors
in the whole probe and gallery sets. Generally, these methods have two weaknesses. One is that they are not able to
take full advantage of context information among two sets,
as they perform as a post-process without training under the
supervision. Second, they are of the sizeable computational
quantity, since they need to take all query and gallery data
for the matrix calculation. The time and memory consumption issues are severe in practice, especially on a large scale
dataset. Besides, it is impractical to obtain all query images
in a real-life scenario, such as a surveillance camera where
the probe persons are dynamically changing in real-time environments.
For the first time, Shen et al. (Shen et al. 2018) proposed
a graph model to utilize the context information in a supervised way, named SGGNN. Their purpose was to learn a discriminative feature that can be used for binary classification.
With a siamese network, they processed one query image
and one gallery image to obtain the probe-gallery feature,
then took these features as nodes and used a Graph Neural Network to refine further. The work provided an empirical approach to explore context information, however,

Most existing re-identification methods focus on learning robust and discriminative features with deep convolution networks. However, many of them consider content similarity
separately and fail to utilize the context information of the
query and gallery sets, e.g. probe-gallery and gallery-gallery
relations, thus hard samples may not be well solved due to
the limited or even misleading information. In this paper,
we present a novel Context-Aware Graph Convolution Network (CAGCN), where the probe-gallery relations are encoded into the graph nodes and the graph edge connections
are well controlled by the gallery-gallery relations. In this
way, hard samples can be addressed with the context information flows among other easy samples during the graph reasoning. Specifically, we adopt an effective hard gallery sampler to obtain high recall for positive samples while keeping a
reasonable graph size, which can also weaken the imbalanced
problem in training process with low computation complexity. Experiments show that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both person and vehicle reidentification datasets in a plug and play fashion with limited
overhead.

Introduction
Re-identification (Re-ID) problems aim to determine corresponding targets across multiple cameras or different locations in the same camera from the gallery set with a given
probe. Existing Re-ID tasks focus on both person and vehicle which play an important role in intelligent surveillance systems. Much process has been made in recent years
in solving the specific problems of illumination variations,
viewpoint changes and occlusions (Song et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020). However, the
study on the context of the query and gallery sets receives
less attention in research community. To further illustrate the
point, we conduct an analysis of existing Re-ID methods.
On the one hand, a number of person Re-ID methods attempt to learn robust and discriminative features using welldesigned deep CNN (Li et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2017; Su et al.
2017; Song et al. 2018; Schumann and Stiefelhagen 2017;
Subramaniam, Chatterjee, and Mittal 2016) or fine-grained
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1646

