The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bidirectional Machine Reading Comprehension for
Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction
Shaowei Chen1 , Yu Wang1 , Jie Liu1,2 * , Yuelin Wang1
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Cloopen Research, Beijing, China
{shaoweichen, yuwang17, 1711496}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
jliu@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

Review:
POS

Aspect sentiment triplet extraction (ASTE), which aims to
identify aspects from review sentences along with their corresponding opinion expressions and sentiments, is an emerging
task in fine-grained opinion mining. Since ASTE consists of
multiple subtasks, including opinion entity extraction, relation detection, and sentiment classification, it is critical and
challenging to appropriately capture and utilize the associations among them. In this paper, we transform ASTE task
into a multi-turn machine reading comprehension (MTMRC)
task and propose a bidirectional MRC (BMRC) framework to
address this challenge. Specifically, we devise three types of
queries, including non-restrictive extraction queries, restrictive extraction queries and sentiment classification queries, to
build the associations among different subtasks. Furthermore,
considering that an aspect sentiment triplet can derive from
either an aspect or an opinion expression, we design a bidirectional MRC structure. One direction sequentially recognizes aspects, opinion expressions, and sentiments to obtain
triplets, while the other direction identifies opinion expressions first, then aspects, and at last sentiments. By making
the two directions complement each other, our framework can
identify triplets more comprehensively. To verify the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct extensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that BMRC achieves state-of-the-art performances.

NEG

The food was delicious, but the price was indeed expensive.

The result of aspect sentiment triplet extraction (ASTE):
{food, delicious, positive}
{price, expensive, negative}

Figure 1: An example of ASTE task. The aspects, opinion
expressions, and sentiments are marked with red, blue, and
green, respectively.

plete solution. To deal with this problem, the latest literature
(Peng et al. 2020) presents aspect sentiment triplet extraction
(ASTE) task, which aims to identify triplets such as (food,
delicious, positive) in Figure 1.
Although these studies have achieved great progress,
there are still several challenges existing in fine-grained
opinion mining. First, aspects and opinion expressions generally appear together in a review sentence and have explicit
corresponding relations. Hence, how to adequately learn the
association between ATE and OTE and make them mutually beneficial is a challenge. Second, the corresponding
relations between aspects and opinion expressions can be
complicated, such as one-to-many, many-to-one, and even
overlapped and embedded. Thus, it is challenging to flexibly
and exactly detect these relations. Third, each review sentence may contain multiple sentiments. For example, given
the review in Figure 1, the sentiments of price and food
are negative and positive, respectively. These sentiments are
generally guided by the corresponding relations between aspects and opinion expressions. Thus, how to properly introduce these relations to sentiment classification task is another challenge.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we deal with
ASTE task and formalize it as a machine reading comprehension (MRC) task. Given a query and a context, MRC
task aims to capture the interaction between them and extract
specific information from the context as the answer. Different from the general MRC task, we further devise multi-turn
queries to identify aspect sentiment triplets due to the complexity of ASTE. Specially, we define this formalization as

Introduction
Fine-grained opinion mining is an important field in natural language processing (NLP). It comprises various tasks,
such as aspect term extraction (ATE) (Liu, Xu, and Zhao
2012; Xu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2019), opinion
term extraction (OTE) (Fan et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020b),
and aspect-level sentiment classification (ASC) (Ma et al.
2017; Sun et al. 2019). Existing studies generally solve
these tasks individually or couple two of them as aspect and
opinion terms co-extraction task (Liu, Xu, and Zhao 2015;
Wang et al. 2016, 2017; Dai and Song 2019), aspect termpolarity co-extraction task (Luo et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a),
and aspect-opinion pair extraction task (Chen et al. 2020;
Zhao et al. 2020). However, none of these studies can identify aspects, opinion expressions, and sentiments in a com* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12666

