The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Analogical Image Translation for Fog Generation
Rui Gong, 1 Dengxin Dai, 1 Yuhua Chen, 1 Wen Li, 3 Danda Pani Paudel, 1 Luc Van Gool 1,2
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
2
VISICS, KU Leuven
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{gongr, dai, yuhua.chen, paudel, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, liwenbnu@gmail.com
Abstract

Analogy is a basic reasoning process to transfer information or meaning from the source to the target. Humans use
it commonly to solve problems, provide explanations and
make predictions (Hertzmann et al. 2001; Schunn and Dunbar 1996). In this paper, we explore the use of analogy as
a means for extracting the gist of image translation in the
source domain and apply it the target domain. Particularly,
we aim to solve the following problem:
Problem (“Analogical Image Translation”): Given images
of two styles in the source domain: A and A0 , with images
B of the first style in the target domain, learn the translation
gist and apply it to B to obtain B 0 , such that A : A0 :: B : B 0 .
The above problem cannot be addressed by the traditional
image translation methods, due to the absence of B 0 . On the
other hand, there exist only one work, up to our knowledge,
that exploits the concept of analogy for deep image translation, namely (Chen, Xu, and Jia 2020). However, (Chen,
Xu, and Jia 2020) does not use the concept of gist. In this
work, we demonstrate that the task of AIT can greatly benefit from modeling the concept of gist. In fact, our work also
introduces the formal concept of gist for the task at hand.
A schematic comparison of AIT to the standard image
translation is shown in Fig. 1. Our work is partially motivated by the difficulty in obtaining real training images for
semantic understanding tasks of autonomous driving in adverse conditions, e.g., the foggy weather. Despite tremendous progress, prior works in semantic scene understanding (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
Yu and Koltun 2016; Zhao et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017) have
mostly focused on the clear-weather, leading to unsatisfactory performance for adverse conditions (Halder, Lalonde,
and Charette 2019; Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool 2018;
Blum et al. 2019; Li et al. 2017). Collecting large-scale training datasets for such adverse conditions, and other corner
cases, may resolve the issue. Unfortunately, such solutions
are neither scalable and affordable, nor very practical.
To address the issues of scarce data, recent works focus
on synthesizing fog effects onto clear-weather images by using a physical optical model (Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool
2018; Hahner et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2016). The success of
these methods hinges on accurate depth and atmospheric
light estimation, both of which, however, are still open problems on their own. Therefore, the synthesized fog still suffers from artifacts. On the other hand, synthetic foggy im-

Image-to-image translation is to map images from a given
style to another given style. While exceptionally successful,
current methods assume the availability of training images
in both source and target domains, which does not always
hold in practice. Inspired by humans’ reasoning capability of
analogy, we propose analogical image translation (AIT) that
exploit the concept of gist, for the first time. Given images of
two styles in the source domain: A and A0 , along with images
B of the first style in the target domain, learn a model to translate B to B0 in the target domain, such that A : A0 :: B : B0 .
AIT is especially useful for translation scenarios in which
training data of one style is hard to obtain but training data
of the same two styles in another domain is available. For instance, in the case from normal conditions to extreme, rare
conditions, obtaining real training images for the latter case
is challenging. However, obtaining synthetic data for both
cases is relatively easy. In this work, we aim at adding adverse weather effects, more specifically fog, to images taken
in clear weather. To circumvent the challenge of collecting
real foggy images, AIT learns the gist of translating synthetic
clear-weather to foggy images, followed by adding fog effects
onto real clear-weather images, without ever seeing any real
foggy image. AIT achieves zero-shot image translation capability, whose effectiveness and benefit are demonstrated by
the downstream task of semantic foggy scene understanding.

Introduction
Image-to-image translation has enjoyed tremendous
progress in the last years. Excellent methods have been
developed for a diverse set of learning paradigms such as
supervised (Isola et al. 2017), unsupervised (Zhu et al. 2017;
Huang et al. 2018) and few-shot (Liu et al. 2019). While
exceptionally successful, current methods have a shared
assumption that training data, be it paired or unpaired,
is available for both styles 1 . This may limit the use of
image translation when data in one of the two styles is hard
to obtain, e.g. translation from a normal condition to an
extreme, corner-case condition. To address this, we take a
new route and propose analogical image translation (AIT)
which learns image translation via analogy.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We reserve ‘domains’ for analogy since the sought analogy
exists between domains, and use ‘styles’ for image translation.

1433

