The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Synchronous Interactive Decoding for
Multilingual Neural Machine Translation
Hao He,1,2 Qian Wang,1,2 Zhipeng Yu,3 Yang Zhao,1,2 Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Chengqing Zong1,2
1

2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing 100190, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Beijing Fanyu Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing 100083, China
hao.he@ia.ac.cn, qian.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yusade123@gmail.com,
zhaoyang2015@ia.ac.cn, {jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

(Johnson et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018) support multilingual
translation with single model, but the translation for each
sentence in a batch is independent. Multi-target translation
(Dong et al. 2015) supports to translate a source sentence
into several different target languages through a model with
one shared encoder and several different decoders. Although
employing multiple decoders, the model can still handle only one language pair at each moment during decoding, which
brings two problems: (i) the decoding process cannot use
complementary information among different languages; (ii)
for only depending on historical information without using
future information, it suffers from the issue of unbalanced
target language generations, i.e., the prefixes of sentences
are better predicted than the suffixes (Liu et al. 2016).
Several studies have explored these two issues. To exploit the multilingual complementary information, Wang et
al. 2019 synchronously translates a sentence into two different target languages, and allows the generated sequences to
attend to another language’s ongoing generation, to improve
translation quality. However, since only historical information is adopted in the translation, it still faces the unbalanced
output problem. Some studies (Liu et al. 2016; Zhang et al.
2018; Zhou, Zhang, and Zong 2019; Zhou et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020) alleviate this problem by introducing bidirectional decoding which provides both historical and future
information during decoding. However, these works cannot support bidirectional decoding for multiple languages
in a single decoder. Actually, the multilingual conversation
is quite a common scenario where one sentence needs to
be simultaneously translated into multiple other languages
(e.g., international group chat, conversation and meeting,
etc.). Therefore, it is a meaningful and promising direction
to design a synchronous interactive multilingual NMT model that enables the historical and future information of different target languages to interact with each other to improve
the translation performance.
For example (in Figure 1), the traditional NMT model
translates an English sentence into a Chinese sentence fromleft-to-right (L2R), which only depends on the historical information that has been generated (only blue box). However, for multi-target MNMT, all the forward (L2R) and backward (from-right-to-left, R2L) sequences of different target
languages share the same semantics. Therefore, at each step

To simultaneously translate a source language into multiple
different target languages is one of the most common scenarios of multilingual translation. However, existing methods
cannot make full use of translation model information during decoding, such as intra-lingual and inter-lingual future
information, and therefore may suffer from some issues like
the unbalanced outputs. In this paper, we present a new approach for synchronous interactive multilingual neural machine translation (SimNMT), which predicts each target language output simultaneously and interactively using historical and future information of all target languages. Specifically, we first propose a synchronous cross-interactive decoder
in which generation of each target output does not only depend on its generated sequences, but also relies on its future
information, as well as history and future contexts of other
target languages. Then, we present a new interactive multilingual beam search algorithm that enables synchronous interactive decoding of all target languages in a single model. We
take two target languages as an example to illustrate and evaluate the proposed SimNMT model on IWSLT datasets. The
experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
significant improvements over several advanced NMT and MNMT models.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) has greatly improved the
translation quality (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Gehring et al. 2017; Vaswani
et al. 2017) and promoted the studies on multilingual translation. Due to the powerful end-to-end modeling capability based on the encoder-decoder framework, it is possible
to handle multiple language pairs in a single model. As the
deployment cost among multiple languages pairs is significantly reduced, the single model-based approach becomes a
promising paradigm in multilingual NMT (MNMT).
Training a single model with multiple language pairs can
leverage the complementary information of different languages (Johnson et al. 2017), such as enabling zero-resource
translations, or improving the quality of low-resource translations. However, existing methods cannot make full use of
the information in the model during decoding. Some work
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12981

