The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Analysing the Noise Model Error for Realistic Noisy Label Data
Michael A. Hedderich, Dawei Zhu, Dietrich Klakow
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{mhedderich,dzhu,dietrich.klakow}@lsv.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
Distant and weak supervision allow to obtain large amounts
of labeled training data quickly and cheaply, but these automatic annotations tend to contain a high amount of errors. A
popular technique to overcome the negative effects of these
noisy labels is noise modelling where the underlying noise
process is modelled. In this work, we study the quality of
these estimated noise models from the theoretical side by
deriving the expected error of the noise model. Apart from
evaluating the theoretical results on commonly used synthetic
noise, we also publish NoisyNER, a new noisy label dataset
from the NLP domain that was obtained through a realistic
distant supervision technique. It provides seven sets of labels
with differing noise patterns to evaluate different noise levels on the same instances. Parallel, clean labels are available
making it possible to study scenarios where a small amount
of gold-standard data can be leveraged. Our theoretical results
and the corresponding experiments give insights into the factors that influence the noise model estimation like the noise
distribution and the sampling technique.

Figure 1: Visualization of the general noise model architecture. The base model works directly on the clean data and
predicts the clean label y. For noisily-labeled data, a noise
model is added after the base model’s predictions.

general concept is task-independent and can be added to existing deep learning architectures. It is visualized in Figure 1.
The base model is the model that was originally developed
for a specific classification task. It is directly used during
testing and when dealing with other clean data. When working with noisily-labeled data during training, a noise model
is added after the base model’s output. The noise model is an
estimate of the underlying noise process. The training process of the base model can benefit from it as the noise model
can be seen as changing the distribution of the labels from
the clean to the noisy. This will be properly defined below.
Many works on noise modeling assume that no manually
annotated, clean data is available. The recent trend in fewshot learning and specific works like (Lauscher et al. 2020;
Hedderich et al. 2020a) have shown, however, that it is both
realistic and beneficial to assume a small amount of manually labeled instances. This motivates us to study in this work
scenarios where a small amount of clean, gold-standard data,
as well as a large amount of noisily labeled data, are available.
In this paper, we focus on the quality of the noise model.
The better such a model is estimated, the better it can model
the relationship between clean and noisy labels. We are interested in the factors on which the quality of the noise
model depends. We show, both theoretically and empirically,
the influence of the clean data and the noise properties. We
also propose to adapt the sampling technique to obtain more
accurate estimates. Apart from helping to improve the understanding of these noise models in general, we hope that
the insights can also be useful guidance for practitioners.
In the noisy labels literature, theoretical insights are often
evaluated only on simulated noise processes, e.g. on MNIST
with added single-label-flip noise (Reed et al. 2015; Bekker

Introduction
One of the factors in the success of deep neural networks
is the availability of large, labeled datasets. Where such
labeled data is not available, distant and weak supervision have become popular. Related but different to semisupervised learning, in distant supervision, the unlabeled
data is automatically annotated by a separate process using e.g. rules and heuristics created by expert (Ratner et al.
2016) or exploiting the context of images (Mahajan et al.
2018). For tasks like information extraction from text (Mintz
et al. 2009), this has become one of the dominant techniques
to overcome the lack of labeled data.
While distant supervision allows generating labels in a
cheap and fast way, these labels tend to contain more errors than gold standard ones and training with this additional
data might even deteriorate the performance of a classifier
(see e.g. Fang and Cohn (2016)). Effectively leveraging this
noisily-labeled data for machine learning algorithms has,
therefore, become a very active field of research. One of the
major approaches is the explicit modeling of the noise. This
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7675

