The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual-Level Collaborative Transformer for Image Captioning
Yunpeng Luo1 , Jiayi Ji1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 * , Liujuan Cao1 ,
Yongjian Wu3 , Feiyue Huang3 , Chia-Wen Lin4 , Rongrong Ji1,2
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab
4
National Tsing Hua University
lyricpoem1997@gmail.com, jjyxmu@gmail.com,xssun@xmu.edu.cn, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn,
littlekenwu@tencent.com, garyhuang@tencent.com, cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract
Descriptive region features extracted by object detection networks have played an important role in the recent advancements of image captioning. However, they are still criticized
for the lack of contextual information and fine-grained details, which in contrast are the merits of traditional grid features. In this paper, we introduce a novel Dual-Level Collaborative Transformer (DLCT) network to realize the complementary advantages of the two features. Concretely, in
DLCT, these two features are first processed by a novel Dualway Self Attenion (DWSA) to mine their intrinsic properties,
where a Comprehensive Relation Attention component is also
introduced to embed the geometric information. In addition,
we propose a Locality-Constrained Cross Attention module
to address the semantic noises caused by the direct fusion
of these two features, where a geometric alignment graph
is constructed to accurately align and reinforce region and
grid features. To validate our model, we conduct extensive experiments on the highly competitive MS-COCO dataset, and
achieve new state-of-the-art performance on both local and
online test sets, i.e., 133.8% CIDEr on Karpathy split and
135.4% CIDEr on the official split.

Figure 1: (a) Limitations of region features on characterizing contextual (up) and detailed (down) information. (b) An
example of region features (left), grid features (right) and
their geometric alignment. Our model enables the interaction between two kinds of features based on their semantic
alignment constructed according to their geometric properties. (c) An illustration of semantic noise problem. Blue regions are the top-k attended regions (from deep to shallow)
by the red grid. In Transformer (left), the top-5 attended regions are all semantically unrelated. In our DLCT (right),
the red grid only attends to two semantically related regions.

Introduction
Image captioning is the task of generating a descriptive
statement automatically for an input image. Its main challenges not only lie in the comprehensive understanding of
objects and relationships in the image, but also in the generation of fluent sentences that match the visual semantics. With
years of developments, the great success of image captioning has been supported by a flurry of methods (Rennie et al.
2017; Anderson et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2020) and benchmark datasets (Lin et al. 2014).
Among these advancements, a milestone in image captioning is the introduction of visual region features extracted
by object detection networks (Anderson et al. 2018), e.g.,
Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015). Compared with the grid
features1 used in earlier methods (Vinyals et al. 2015), re-

gion features can provide object-level information, since
most salient regions in an image can be recognized and represented by a feature vector. Hence, region features greatly
reduce the difficulty of visual-semantic embeddings, based
on which recent endeavors have greatly boosted the performance of image captioning (Huang et al. 2019; Cornia et al.
2020; Pan et al. 2020).
Despite the great success, region features are still criticized for the lack of contextual information and fine-grained
details. As illustrated in Fig.1-(a), the detected regions may
not cover the entire image, leading to the inability to correctly describe the global scenes, e.g., in front of a store.
Meanwhile, each region is represented by a single feature vector, which inevitably loses object details in large
amounts, e.g., the colors of trains. However, these shortcomings are the merits of grid features which in contrast cover

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The feature maps of the pre-trained convolution neural networks (CNN).

2286

