The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Maintenance of Social Commitments in Multiagent Systems
Pankaj Telang1 Munindar P. Singh2 Neil Yorke-Smith3
1

SAS Institute, Cary, NC 27513, USA
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
3
Delft University of Technology, Delft, 2600GA, The Netherlands
ptelang@gmail.com, singh@ncsu.edu, n.yorke-smith@tudelft.nl
2

Abstract
We introduce and formalize a concept of a maintenance commitment, a kind of social commitment characterized by states
whose truthhood an agent commits to maintain. This concept
of maintenance commitments enables us to capture a richer
variety of real-world scenarios than possible using achievement commitments with a temporal condition. By developing
a rule-based operational semantics, we study the relationship
between agents’ achievement and maintenance goals, achievement commitments, and maintenance commitments. We motivate a notion of coherence which captures alignment between
an agents’ achievement and maintenance cognitive and social constructs, and prove that, under specified conditions, the
goals and commitments of both rational agents individually
and of a multiagent system are coherent.

1

Operator

Engine Mfr

Operate Aircraft

Monitor Engine Health

Scheduled

Parts Mfr

Request Maintenance
Unscheduled

Arrange Maintenance

Pull Aircraft

Introduction

Social commitments enable flexible coordination between
agents. Research has primarily focused on achievement commitments (Castelfranchi 1995; Singh 1991, 2012).
Consider an agent, such as an aircraft operator, who wishes
to maintain a condition, such as an aircraft being fit to fly.
Fig. 1 shows a high-level process flow of aerospace aftermarket services (van Aart et al. 2007). Its participants are
an airline operator (OPER), an aircraft engine manufacturer
(MFR), and a parts manufacturer (PMFR). Such situations
highlight the need for understanding maintenance. We motivate a new family of social commitments wherein a debtor
agent commits to a creditor agent that if some antecedent
condition holds it would maintain a consequent condition until some discharge condition holds. Maintenance here means
ensuring that the condition does not become false or, if it does
become false, then to re-establish its truthhood. Specifically,
we address how maintenance arises in connection with goals
and commitments, as needed for multiagent systems. In this
manner, our work contrasts with previous work on maintenance, which emphasizes single-agent settings and primarily
addresses maintenance goals.
Commitments are a natural basis for modelling interaction
between agents by representing the meanings of communication (Chocron and Schorlemmer 2018; Mallya and Singh
2007; Singh 2000) and for reasoning about safety and control
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11369

Remove Engine

Replace

Refurbish

Supply Parts

Figure 1: Aerospace aftermarket (van Aart et al. 2007).
(Marengo et al. 2011). Understanding maintenance commitments opens up the realm of social interaction. For example,
maintaining a green lawn or paying down a mortgage are
naturally modelled as maintenance commitments.
A major theme of this paper is capturing the dynamic relationships between an agent’s beliefs and goals (i.e., cognitive
state) and its commitments (i.e., social state). Maintenance
commitments enable richer relationships than otherwise possible, thereby supporting expanded forms of collaboration.
Specifically, a commitment can relate to both end and means
goals. For example, (1) an end goal of paying for a house may
lead you to a maintenance commitment of mortgage: paying
down a loan incrementally until it’s paid up. (2) The mortgage commitment may lead you to a maintenance (means)
goal of making loan payments, which (3) may lead you to
commit to doing a job to get paid every month.
Prior research has not adequately addressed maintenance
commitments, treating them instead as achievement commitments for temporal formulae of the form “always in the
future p” (Mallya, Yolum, and Singh 2003; Chesani et al.
2013). Such a formulation cannot capture the lawn example
above. In contrast, we treat maintenance commitments as a

