The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Novel Visual Interpretability for Deep Neural Networks by Optimizing
Activation Maps with Perturbation
Qinglong Zhang, Lu Rao, Yubin Yang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University
{wofmanaf, raoluSmile}@smail.nju.edu.cn, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Interpretability has been regarded as an essential component
for deploying deep neural networks, in which the saliencybased method is one of the most prevailing interpretable approaches since it can generate individually intuitive heatmaps
that highlight parts of the input image that are most important to the decision of the deep networks on a particular
classification target. However, heatmaps generated by existing methods either contain little information to represent objects (perturbation-based methods) or cannot effectively locate multi-class objects (activation-based approaches). To address this issue, a two-stage framework for visualizing the interpretability of deep neural networks, called Activation Optimized with Perturbation (AOP), is designed to optimize activation maps generated by general activation-based methods
with the help of perturbation-based methods. Finally, in order
to obtain better explanations for different types of images, we
further present an instance of the AOP framework, Smooth
Integrated Gradient-based Class Activation Map (SIGCAM),
which proposes a weighted GradCAM by applying the feature map as weight coefficients and employs I-GOS to optimize the base-mask generated by weighted GradCAM. Experimental results on common-used benchmarks, including
deletion and insertion tests on ImageNet-1k, and pointing
game tests on COCO2017, show that the proposed AOP
and SIGCAM outperform the current state-of-the-art methods significantly by generating higher quality image-based
saliency maps.

Figure 1: classification score (after softmax) on Densnet201:
“catamaran”: 0.521; “pirate”: 0.068. We gradually remove
“pirate” according to its mask(Left) and test its effect on
“catamaran” (Right). The deletion test shows that the removal of “pirate” significantly affects the classification score
of “catamaran”, although it is irrelevant to “catamaran”.

Smilkov et al. 2017). However, these changes do not necessarily indicate that the pixels or regions really have a significant impact on the prediction (An example is illustrated in
Figure 1).
Other approaches, such as activation-based methods including GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) and GradCAM++ (Chattopadhyay et al. 2018), use back-propagation
gradients as weights to combine the forward feature maps,
which favor distinguishing objects from the background, and
thus provide explanations with fine-grained details. However, these methods may capture too much meaningless information since the feature maps are not necessarily related
to the target category. On the other hand, gradients are classdiscriminative, which means optimizing gradients can better identify different object categories. Perturbation-based
methods such as the method in (Fong and Vedaldi 2017)(to
simplify, we call it EMP) and I-GOS (Qi, Khorram, and Li
2020) adopt gradients as masks and use them to edit an image to convert gradient optimization into a meta-predictor
problem. Nevertheless, heatmaps generated by perturbationbased approaches may contain very little information used
to represent an object. It has been widely demonstrated that
properly cascaded different kinds of deep learning methods can deliver continuous optimizing results (Yan et al.

Introduction
Understanding and explaining deep learning methods have
been attracting increasing attention in research communities since it helps to construct the trust of black-box models when making crucial decisions, particularly in applications including quantitative transaction, autopilot, and medical image analysis, etc.
One critical issue of understanding deep neural network
is to explicitly generate images that can shed light on parts
which are most related to the deep neural networks’ decision. A common way is to back-propagate the gradient or
its variants to the input image to decide which pixels or regions are more relevant to the change of the prediction (Qi,
Khorram, and Li 2020; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3377

