The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Few-Shot One-Class Classification via Meta-Learning
Ahmed Frikha 1, 2, 4 , Denis Krompaß 1, 2 , Hans-Georg Köpken 3 , Volker Tresp 2, 4
1

Siemens AI Lab
Siemens Technology
3
Siemens Digital Industries
4
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
ahmed.frikha@siemens.com
2

Abstract

of the developed approaches (Khan and Madden 2014) require a substantial amount of normal data to yield good generalization, in many real-world applications, e.g., in industrial manufacturing, only small datasets are available. Data
scarcity can have many reasons: data collection itself might
be expensive, e.g., in healthcare, or happens only gradually,
such as in a cold-start situation, or the domain expertise required for annotation is scarce and expensive.
To enable learning from few examples, viable approaches
(Lake et al. 2011; Ravi and Larochelle 2017; Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017) relying on meta-learning (Schmidhuber
1987) have been developed. However, they rely on having
examples from each of the task’s classes, which prevents
their application to OCC tasks. While recent meta-learning
approaches focused on the few-shot learning problem, i.e.,
learning to learn with few examples, we extend their use to
the OCC problem, i.e., learning to learn with examples from
only one class. To the best of our knowledge, the few-shot
OCC (FS-OCC) problem has only been addressed in (Kozerawski and Turk 2018; Kruspe 2019) in the image domain.
Our contribution is fourfold: Firstly, we show that classical OCC approaches fail in the few-shot data regime. Secondly, we provide a theoretical analysis showing that classical gradient-based meta-learning algorithms do not yield
parameter initializations suitable for OCC and that secondorder derivatives are needed to optimize for such initializations. Thirdly, we propose a simple episode generation strategy to adapt any meta-learning algorithm that uses a bi-level
optimization scheme to FS-OCC. Hereby, we first focus on
modifying the model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) algorithm (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) to learn initializations useful for the FS-OCC scenario. The resulting OneClass MAML (OC-MAML) maximizes the inner product
of loss gradients computed on one-class and class-balanced
minibatches, hence maximizing the cosine similarity between these gradients. Finally, we demonstrate that the proposed data sampling technique generalizes beyond MAML
to other metalearning algorithms, e.g., MetaOptNet (Lee
et al. 2019) and Meta-SGD (Li et al. 2017), by successfully
adapting them to the understudied FS-OCC.
We empirically validate our approach on eight datasets
from the image and time-series domains, and demonstrate its
robustness and maturity for real-world applications by successfully testing it on a real-world dataset of sensor read-

Although few-shot learning and one-class classification
(OCC), i.e., learning a binary classifier with data from only
one class, have been separately well studied, their intersection
remains rather unexplored. Our work addresses the few-shot
OCC problem and presents a method to modify the episodic
data sampling strategy of the model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) algorithm to learn a model initialization particularly suited for learning few-shot OCC tasks. This is done by
explicitly optimizing for an initialization which only requires
few gradient steps with one-class minibatches to yield a performance increase on class-balanced test data. We provide
a theoretical analysis that explains why our approach works
in the few-shot OCC scenario, while other meta-learning algorithms fail, including the unmodified MAML. Our experiments on eight datasets from the image and time-series domains show that our method leads to better results than classical OCC and few-shot classification approaches, and demonstrate the ability to learn unseen tasks from only few normal class samples. Moreover, we successfully train anomaly
detectors for a real-world application on sensor readings
recorded during industrial manufacturing of workpieces with
a CNC milling machine, by using few normal examples. Finally, we empirically demonstrate that the proposed data sampling technique increases the performance of more recent
meta-learning algorithms in few-shot OCC and yields stateof-the-art results in this problem setting.

Introduction
The anomaly detection (AD) task (Chandola, Banerjee, and
Kumar 2009; Aggarwal 2015) consists in differentiating
between normal and abnormal data samples. AD applications are common in various domains that involve different data types, including medical diagnosis (Prastawa et al.
2004), cybersecurity (Garcia-Teodoro et al. 2009) and quality control in industrial manufacturing (Scime and Beuth
2018). Due to the rarity of anomalies, the data underlying
AD problems exhibits high class-imbalance. Therefore, AD
problems are usually formulated as one-class classification
(OCC) problems (Moya, Koch, and Hostetler 1993), where
either only a few or no anomalous data samples are available
for training the model (Khan and Madden 2014). While most
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7448

