The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revisiting Iterative Back-Translation from the Perspective of Compositional
Generalization
Yinuo Guo1 * , Hualei Zhu2∗ , Zeqi Lin3 , Bei Chen3 , Jian-Guang Lou3 , Dongmei Zhang3
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University,
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
gyn0806@pku.edu.cn, zhuhualei@buaa.edu.cn
{Zeqi.Lin, jlou, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com
Abstract

a large amount of unlabelled data, which has been successfully used in many different areas such as machine translation (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016; He et al. 2016;
Skorokhodov et al. 2018) and semantic parsing (Yin et al.
2018; Cao et al. 2019). In sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
tasks, unlabelled data (i.e., monolingual data) are usually
cheap and abundant, containing a large amount of combinations that are unseen in limited labelled data (i.e., parallel data). Therefore, we propose a hypothesis that semisupervised learning can enable seq2seq models understand
and produce much more combinations beyond labelled data,
thus tackling the bottleneck of lacking compositional generalization. If this hypothesis holds true, the lack of compositional generalization would no longer be a bottleneck of
seq2seq models, as we can simply tackle it through exploiting large-scale monolingual data with diverse combinations.
In this work, we focus on Iterative Back-Translation (IBT)
(Hoang et al. 2018), a simple yet effective semi-supervised
method that has been successfully applied in machine translation. The key idea behind it is to iteratively augment original parallel training data with pseudo-parallel data generated from monolingual data. To our best knowledge, iterative back-translation has not been studied extensively from
the perspective of compositional generalization. This is partially because a concern about the quality of pseudo-parallel
data: due to the problem of lacking compositional generalization, for non-parallel data with unseen combinations beyond the parallel training data, pseudo-parallel data generated from them will be error-prone. It is natural to speculate
that errors in pseudo-parallel data are going to be reinforced
and then even harm the performance.
This paper broadens the understanding of iterative backtranslation from the perspective of compositional generalization, through answering three research questions: RQ1.
How does iterative back-translation affect neural seq2seq
models’ ability to generalize to more combinations beyond
parallel data? RQ2. If iterative back-translation is useful
from the perspective of compositional generalization, what
is the key that contributes to its success? RQ3. Is there a
way to further improve the quality of pseudo-parallel data,
thereby further improving the performance?
Main Contributions. (1) We empirically show that iterative back-translation substantially improves the perfor-

Human intelligence exhibits compositional generalization
(i.e., the capacity to understand and produce unseen combinations of seen components), but current neural seq2seq models lack such ability. In this paper, we revisit iterative backtranslation, a simple yet effective semi-supervised method,
to investigate whether and how it can improve compositional generalization. In this work: (1) We first empirically
show that iterative back-translation substantially improves the
performance on compositional generalization benchmarks
(CFQ and SCAN). (2) To understand why iterative backtranslation is useful, we carefully examine the performance
gains and find that iterative back-translation can increasingly
correct errors in pseudo-parallel data. (3) To further encourage this mechanism, we propose curriculum iterative backtranslation, which better improves the quality of pseudoparallel data, thus further improving the performance.

Introduction
Human intelligence exhibits compositional generalization,
the ability to understand and produce unseen combinations
of seen components (Chomsky 1965; Fodor and Pylyshyn
1988). For example, if a person knows the meaning of “run”
and “run twice”, once she learns the meaning of a new word
“jump”, she can immediately understand the meaning of
“jump twice”. This compositional generalization is essential in human cognition, enabling humans to learn semantics
from very limited data and extend to unseen data (Montague
1974; Partee 1984; Lake et al. 2017). Therefore, it is widely
believed that compositional generalization is a key property
towards human-like AI (Mikolov, Joulin, and Baroni 2016;
Bengio 2019; Mollica et al. 2020). However, in recent years,
accumulating evidences have shown that neural sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models exhibit limited compositional
generalization ability (Lake and Baroni 2018; Hupkes et al.
2020; Keysers et al. 2020; Furrer et al. 2020).
On the other hand, semi-supervised learning (Chapelle,
Scholkopf, and Zien 2009) is a machine learning paradigm
that alleviates the limited-data problem through exploiting
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
The first two authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7601

