The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploring Explainable Selection to Control Abstractive Summarization
Haonan Wang1 , Yang Gao1,∗ , Yu Bai1 , Mirella Lapata2 , Heyan Huang1,3
1 School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2 Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
3 Beijing Engineering Research Center of High Volume Language Information Processing and Cloud Computing Applications

{hnwang, gyang, yubai}@bit.edu.cn, mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk, hhy63@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

Currently, two broad strategies for tackling this problem
are explored. The first is to use pre-trained language model,
such as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), OpenAI GPT (Radford
et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on long-range contextual learning and various NLP tasks, such as QA (Xu et al. 2019)
and summarization (Liu and Lapata 2019; Zhang, Wei, and
Zhou 2019). The other idea is to use a select and generate
framework, where an extractor selects salient sentences, then
an abstractor generates a summary. The most recent frameworks based on this hybrid paradigm either follow a two-stage
pipeline (Chen and Bansal 2018; Sharma et al. 2019) or an
end-to-end learning approach (Hsu et al. 2018; Shen et al.
2019; Gehrmann, Deng, and Rush 2018). The most appealing advantage is to explicitly obtain desirable content of the
sources, such as entity-aware selection (Sharma et al. 2019)
or word selection through latent switch variables (Gehrmann,
Deng, and Rush 2018; Shen et al. 2019).
These approaches perform abstractive summaries which
largely rely on selecting informative content (extractor) as
well as aggregating into a summary in line with linguistic expression (abstractor). But, currently, the extractors are
largely black-box decisions without a rationale of what is
informative content. Peyrard (2019) proposed rigorous definitions of the concepts in summarization, including redundancy, relevance and informativeness. While, more in-depth
investigation of these concepts are needed for them to be truly
useful to document summarization. For instance, we need to
better understand inter-relations between sentences with respect to these attributes. We need methods for identifying
the sentence informativeness, identifying whether a sentence
is relevant to a document and, if so, to what extent. Another importance influence is the novelty of the contribution
a sentence makes to a summary.
Moreover, abstractive summarization suffers from a major
problem known as hallucination, where the model generates
fictional content (Maynez et al. 2020). The cause is believed
to due to misrepresenting content in a batch of input documents and fusing concepts across those documents when
generating abstractive summaries. Additionally, some of the
new terms introduced are thought to come from background
knowledge, not from the current inputs. Some researchers
have attempted to alleviate this problem with pointer mechanisms to desired content (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Wang

Like humans, document summarization models can interpret
a document’s contents in a number of ways. Unfortunately,
the neural models of today are largely black boxes that provide little explanation of how or why they generated a summary in the way they did. Therefore, to begin prying open the
black box and to inject a level of control into the substance of
the final summary, we developed a novel select-and-generate
framework that focuses on explainability. By revealing the latent centrality and interactions between sentences, along with
scores for sentence novelty and relevance, users are given a
window into the choices a model is making and an opportunity to guide those choices in a more desirable direction.
A novel pair-wise matrix captures the sentence interactions,
centrality and attribute scores, and a mask with tunable attribute thresholds allows the user to control which sentences
are likely to be included in the extraction. A sentence-deployed
attention mechanism in the abstractor ensures the final summary emphasizes the desired content. Additionally, the encoder is adaptable, supporting both Transformer- and BERTbased configurations. In a series of experiments assessed with
ROUGE metrics and two human evaluations, ESCA outperformed eight state-of-the-art models on the CNN/DailyMail
and NYT50 benchmark datasets.

Introduction
The ability to generate summaries of documents is a valuable tool over the past several years, and neural networks
have been responsible for a step-change in the quality of both
extractive and abstractive summarization. Extractive methods simply draw out and concatenate the key topic sentences
in a document (Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017; Zheng and
Lapata 2019), while abstractive techniques reorder words
and sentences and even generate new language to, hopefully, produce a concise and eloquent piece of the given content (See, Liu, and Manning 2017; Celikyilmaz et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019). However, despite recent advancements,
modelling concepts that span more than a few sentences,
i.e., long-range contexts, still a challenging task. Moreover,
current models provide little to no explanation of the interpretation they took away from parsing a document and why
they chose to summarize its content in the way that they did.
∗ Corresponding Author.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
13933

