The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parameterized Complexity of Small Decision Tree Learning
Sebastian Ordyniak1 and Stefan Szeider2
1

2

University of Leeds, School of Computing, Leeds, UK
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
sordyniak@gmail.com, stefan@szeider.net

Abstract

framework allows us to achieve a more fine-grained and
qualitative analysis, revealing properties of the input data in
terms of problem parameters that provide runtime guarantees for decision tree learning algorithms. The key notion
of Parameterized Complexity is fixed-parameter tractability (FPT) which generalizes the classical polynomial time
tractability by allowing the running time to be exponential in a function of the problem parameters while remaining polynomial in the input size (we provide more detailed
definitions in Section ). Fixed-parameter tractability captures the scalability of algorithms to large inputs as long
as the problem parameters remain small. Several key problems that arise in AI have been studied in terms of their
fixed-parameter tractability, including Planning (Bäckström
et al. 2012), SAT and CSP (Bessière et al. 2008; Gaspers
et al. 2014), Computational Social Choice (Bredereck et al.
2017), Machine Learning (Ganian et al. 2018), and Argumentation (Dvorák, Ordyniak, and Szeider 2012).
For decision tree learning, we consider parameterizations
of the following two fundamental NP-hard problems:
M INIMUM D ECISION T REE S IZE (DTS): we are given
a set of examples, labeled positive or negative, each over a
set of features; each feature f ranges over a linearly ordered
range of possible values, and an integer s (for size). The task
is to decide whether there exists a decision tree with at most
s tests or report that no such tree exists. Each test determines
whether a certain feature is below a certain threshold or not.
M INIMUM D ECISION T REE D EPTH (DTD) is defined
similarly, where instead of the bound s on the total number of tests, a bound d (for depth) on the number of tests on
any root-to-leaf path is provided.
For technical reasons, we define the problems as decision
problems; however, all our algorithms are constructive in the
sense that if they decide DTS or DTD affirmatively, then
they can output a witnessing decision tree; otherwise, they
report that a decision tree of the required size or depth does
not exist.
For both problems, it is natural to include the solution size
(i.e., s for DTS and d for DTD, respectively) as a parameter, since our objective is to learn decision trees where these
values are small. Another natural parameter is the number of
different values a feature ranges over, we refer to this number as the maximum domain size (Dmax ). It is reasonable to
assume this number to be small, as many features are even

We study the NP-hard problem of learning a decision tree
(DT) of smallest depth or size from data. We provide the first
parameterized complexity analysis of the problem and draw
a detailed parameterized complexity map for the natural parameters: size or depth of the DT, maximum domain size of
all features, and the maximum Hamming distance between
any two examples. Our main result shows that learning DTs
of smallest depth or size is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT)
parameterized by the combination of all three of these parameters. We contrast this FPT-result by various hardness results
that underline the algorithmic significance of the considered
parameters.

Introduction
Decision Trees have proved to be extremely useful tools
for the description, classification, and generalization of
data (Larose 2005; Murthy 1998; Quinlan 1986). Because
of their simplicity, decision trees are particularly attractive
for providing interpretable models of the underlying data, an
aspect whose importance has been stronly emphasized over
the recent years (Darwiche and Hirth 2020; Doshi-Velez and
Kim 2017; Goodman and Flaxman 2017; Lipton 2018; Monroe 2018). In this context, one prefers small trees (trees of
small size or small depth), as they are easier to interpret
and require fewer tests to make a classification. Small trees
are also preferred in view of the parsimony principle (Occam’s Razor) since small trees are expected to generalize
better to new data (Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009).
However, learning small trees is computationally costly: it
is NP-hard to decide whether a given data set can be represented by a decision tree of certain size or depth (Hyafil
and Rivest 1976). In view of this complexity barrier, several
constrained-based and SAT-based methods have been proposed for learning small decision trees (Bessiere, Hebrard,
and O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska et al. 2018; Avellaneda
2020; Schidler and Szeider 2021).
In this paper, we investigate the problem of finding small
decision trees (w.r.t. size or depth) under the framework of
Parameterized Complexity (Downey and Fellows 2013; Gottlob, Scarcello, and Sideri 2002; Niedermeier 2006). This
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6454

