The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimating Identifiable Causal Effects through Double Machine Learning
Yonghan Jung1 , Jin Tian2 , Elias Bareinboim 3
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
3
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
jung222@purdue.edu, jtian@iastate.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract

As a specific example, the celebrated back-door (BD)
condition (Pearl 2000, Sec. 3.3.1) (known as ignorability in
statistics (Rubin 1978)) states that PxP
(y) could be identified by adjustment – i.e., Px (y) =
z P (y|x, z)P (z) –
whenever there exists a set of covariates Z that blocks all
the backdoor paths between X and Y in the causal graph G.
Identification algorithms express a target effect in terms of
the observational distribution, then one needs to go further,
and estimate the resulting expression from finite samples. In
practice, whenever the number of samples are finite and the
set of covariates (e.g., Z) is high dimensional – i.e., almost
always – estimating causal expressions is quite challenging.
Effective estimators have been developed for specific settings. For instance, a plethora of estimators have been developed for the family of BD settings, including point and timeseries forms (Sequential BD, or SBD) (Pearl and Robins
1995); also called the g-formula (Robins 1986). These estimators include regression-based methods (e.g., (Hill 2011;
Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017)) or weighting-based
methods (Horvitz and Thompson 1952; Robins, Hernan, and
Brumback 2000; Johansson et al. 2018), to name a few.
More recently, estimators have been developed for identifiable causal functionals under settings beyond the typical
BD/SBD (Jung, Tian, and Bareinboim 2020a,b).
Further, doubly robust estimators have been developed
for the BD/SBD setting to address model misspecification
(Robins, Rotnitzky, and Zhao 1994; Bang and Robins 2005;
Van Der Laan and Rubin 2006; Dı́az and van der Laan
2013; Benkeser et al. 2017; Kennedy et al. 2017; Rotnitzky
and Smucler 2019; Smucler, Sapienza, and Rotnitzky 2020;
Colangelo and Lee 2020), and more recently, for some specific settings (Toth and van der Laan 2016; Rudolph and
van der Laan 2017; Fulcher et al. 2019; Kennedy 2018;
Bhattacharya, Nabi, and Shpitser 2020).
One noticeable feature shared across the aforementioned
estimators is the need of estimating conditional probabilities
(e.g., P (y|x, z), P (z)), called nuisance functions, or nuisance in short. Typically nuisance functions are estimated
by fitting a parametric model such as logistic regression.
In recent years, there is an explosion in the use of modern
machine learning (ML) methods to account for very complex and high-dimensional nuisance functions, which include random forests, boosted regression trees, deep neural
networks, to cite some prominent examples. However, these

Identifying causal effects from observational data is a pervasive challenge found throughout the empirical sciences. Very
general methods have been developed to decide the identifiability of a causal quantity from a combination of observational data and causal knowledge about the underlying system. In practice, however, there are still challenges to estimating identifiable causal functionals from finite samples. Recently, a method known as double/debiased machine learning (DML) (Chernozhukov et al. 2018) has been proposed to
learn parameters leveraging modern machine learning techniques, which is both robust to model misspecification and
bias-reducing. Still, DML has only been used for causal estimation in settings when the back-door condition (also known
as conditional ignorability) holds. In this paper, we develop a
new, general class of estimators for any identifiable causal
functionals that exhibit DML properties, which we name
DML-ID. In particular, we introduce a complete identification algorithm that returns an influence function (IF) for any
identifiable causal functional. We then construct the DML estimator based on the derived IF. We show that DML-ID estimators hold the key properties of debiasedness and doubly
robustness. Simulation results corroborate with the theory.

1

Introduction

Inferring causal effects from observational data is a fundamental task throughout the data-intensive sciences. There
exists a growing literature trying to understand the conditions under which causal conclusions can be drawn from
non-experimental data, which comes under the rubric of
causal inference (Pearl 2000; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). In
particular, the literature of causal effect identification (Pearl
2000, Def. 3.2.4) investigates the conditions under which an
interventional distribution P (Y = y|do(X = x)) (for short,
Px (y)), representing the causal effect of the treatment X on
the outcome Y , could be inferred from the observational distribution P (V ) and the causal graph G. Causal effect identification under various settings has been extensively studied,
and algorithms and graphical conditions have been developed (Pearl 1995; Tian and Pearl 2003; Huang and Valtorta
2006; Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Bareinboim and Pearl 2012,
2016; Jaber, Zhang, and Bareinboim 2018; Lee, Correa, and
Bareinboim 2019, 2020; Lee and Bareinboim 2020).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12113

