The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Linear Contextual Bandits with Graph-Structured Side Observations
Lingda Wang1 , Bingcong Li2 , Huozhi Zhou1 , Georgios B. Giannakis2 ,
Lav R. Varshney1 , Zhizhen Zhao1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities
{lingdaw2, hzhou35, varshney, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu, {lixx5599, georgios}@umn.edu

Abstract

side information. This has motivated studies on contextual
bandits (Li et al. 2010; Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori,
Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Agarwal et al. 2014) and graphical bandits (Mannor and Shamir 2011; Alon et al. 2013,
2015, 2017), which aim to address two categories of the
most common side information, contexts and side observations, respectively. In a contextual bandit problem, a learning agent chooses an action to play based on the context for
the current time step and the past interactions. In a graphical bandit setup, playing an action not only discloses its own
loss, but also the losses of its neighboring actions. Applications of contextual bandits include mobile health (Tewari
and Murphy 2017) and online personalized recommendation (Li et al. 2010), whereas applications of graphical bandits include viral marketing, online pricing, and online recommendation in social networks (Alon et al. 2017; Liu,
Zheng, and Shroff 2018).
However, contextual or graphical bandits alone may still
not capture many aspects of real-world applications in social networks efficiently. As a motivating example, consider
the viral marketing over a social network (Lobel, Sadler, and
Varshney 2017), where a salesperson aims to investigate the
popularity of a series of products. At each time step, the
salesperson could offer a survey (context) of some product
to a user together with a promotion. The salesperson also has
a chance to survey the user’s followers (side observations) in
this social network, which can be realized by assuming that
i) if the user would like to get the promotion, the user should
finish the questionnaire and share it in the social network,
and ii) if the followers would like to get the same promotion, they need to finish the same questionnaire shared by
the user.
This example demonstrates the importance of a new MAB
model that accounts for both context and side observations.
Thus, designing pertinently efficient algorithms with guarantees is valuable, which is also recognized in the recent
work on stochastic graphical contextual bandits (Singh et al.
2020). Mechanically combining existing algorithms for contextual bandits and graphical bandits leads to algorithms
with better empirical performance, compared to algorithms
designed solely for contextual or graphical bandits. This can
be verified by the genie-aided argument that side observations provide more information beyond the original contextual bandit problem, and will therefore not result in worse

This paper studies the adversarial graphical contextual bandits, a variant of adversarial multi-armed bandits that leverage
two categories of the most common side information: contexts and side observations. In this setting, a learning agent
repeatedly chooses from a set of K actions after being presented with a d-dimensional context vector. The agent not
only incurs and observes the loss of the chosen action, but
also observes the losses of its neighboring actions in the observation structures, which are encoded as a series of feedback graphs. This setting models a variety of applications
in social networks, where both contexts and graph-structured
side observations are available. Two efficient algorithms are
developed based on EXP3. Under mild conditions, our analysis shows that for undirected feedback graphs the first algorithm, EXP3-LGC-U, achieves a sub-linear regret with respect to the time horizon and the average independence number of the feedback graphs. A slightly weaker result is presented for the directed graph setting as well. The second algorithm, EXP3-LGC-IX, is developed for a special class of
problems, for which the regret is the same for both directed
as well as undirected feedback graphs. Numerical tests corroborate the efficiency of proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Thompson 1933; Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Auer et al.
2002) is an online learning model of paramount importance
for sequential decision making. Yielding algorithms with
both theoretical guarantees and convenient implementations
such as UCB1 (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002),
Thompson sampling (Agrawal and Goyal 2012; Kaufmann,
Korda, and Munos 2012; Thompson 1933), EXP3 (Auer
et al. 2002), and INF (Audibert and Bubeck 2009), MAB
has been of interest in many real-world applications: clinical trials (Thompson 1933), web advertising (Jiang 2015;
Li, Chen, and Giannakis 2019; Zhou et al. 2020), web
search (Kveton et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2019), and cognitive radio (Maghsudi and Hossain 2016), to just name
a few. While the classical MAB has received much attention, this model may not be delicate enough for applications, since it does not fully leverage the widely available
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10156

