The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

More the Merrier: Towards Multi-Emotion and Intensity Controllable Response
Generation
Mauajama Firdaus, Hardik Chauhan, Asif Ekbal and Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Patna, India
(mauajama.pcs16,hardik,asif,pb)@iitp.ac.in

Abstract

sheer understanding of emotions is insufficient; hence several works (Song et al. 2019; Colombo et al. 2019) have
concentrated in inducing emotions into the dialogue system.
Most of these existing research have focused on generating
emotionally aware (Rashkin et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2019) or
emotionally controlled responses (Zhou et al. 2018; Firdaus
et al. 2020c) expressing a single emotion or a particular intensity of the emotion (Ghosh et al. 2017).
Though the existing systems can express a particular emotion, they lack completeness in terms of emotional content in
the responses as humans inherently express multiple feelings
in their day-to-day conversations. Recent research trends
have focused on identifying multiple emotions in user utterances (Yu et al. 2018; Huang, Trabelsi, and Zaı̈ane 2020;
Firdaus et al. 2020b). This validates the fact that indeed human emotions are highly complex with the ability to express
more than one emotion at an instant. In addition, the intensity of emotions fluctuates in an utterance providing variations for a particular emotion in conversations. The existing conversational agents are insufficient in generating responses like “It’s amazing, I am thrilled you got promoted”
as shown in Table 1 since they are restricted in generating
one emotion only, thereby being unable to generate emotionally rich responses. From this example, it is also evident that intensity is essential for generating such responses
as the intensity level varies in joy and surprise emotions
present in the utterance. Even if the complete set of emotions is provided, the agent will have difficulty generating
the response mentioned above as one emotion has a higher
intensity than the other. Consequently, conversational agents
having the capability to express multiple emotions with corresponding intensity in their responses helps improve the
emotional content, thereby providing an enriched affective
outlook. To mimic this human-like behaviour in conversational agents, we propose the task of generating responses
conditioned on different emotions along with intensity.
Due to the unavailability of multi-emotion intensity labeled data for our proposed task, we create a large-scale dialogue dataset, MEIMD from 8 English TV series having 34k
conversations that have been labeled with multiple emotions
and their intensities. Examples of multi-label emotion conversations from our dataset are shown in Table 1. To solve
the task of emotional text generation conditioned on multiple emotions with intensity, we propose a novel neural ar-

The focus on conversational systems has recently shifted towards creating engaging agents by embedding emotions into
them. Human emotions are highly complex as humans can
express multiple emotions with varying intensity in a single
utterance, whereas the conversational agents convey only one
emotion in their responses. To infuse human-like behaviour
in the agents, we introduce the task of multi-emotion controllable response generation with the ability to express different
emotions with varying levels of intensity in an open-domain
dialogue system. We introduce a Multiple Emotion Intensity
aware Multi-party Dialogue (MEIMD) dataset having 34k
conversations taken from 8 different TV Series. We propose
a Multiple Emotion with Intensity-based Dialogue Generation (MEI-DG) framework. The system employs two novel
mechanisms: (i). Explicit Memory: to determine whether to
generate an emotion or generic word, while focusing on the
intensity of the desired emotions; and (ii). Implicit Memory:
to compute the number of words remaining to express the
emotion completely, thereby regulating the generation accordingly. The detailed evaluation shows that our proposed
approach attains superior performance compared to the baseline models.

Introduction
With the rapid growth in technology, the dependency of humans on technology has increased exponentially. Conversational agents in the form of personal assistants like Apple’s
Siri, Microsoft’s Cortana, etc. not only assist human in completing their desired goals but also behaves as a companion
to them. Therefore, it is essential to empower the conversational agents with the ability to perceive and express emotions to make them capable of interacting with the user at
the human level. These agents help enhance user satisfaction
(Prendinger, Mori, and Ishizuka 2005), while reducing the
breakdowns in conversations (Martinovski and Traum 2003)
and providing user retention. Hence, dialogue systems capable of generating replies while considering the user’s emotional state is the most desirable advancement in Artificial
Intelligence (AI). Previously, researchers have focused upon
classifying user emotions (Poria et al. 2019; Chauhan et al.
2019) in conversations. For building an intelligent agent,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12821

