The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tracking Interaction States for Multi-Turn Text-to-SQL Semantic Parsing
Run-Ze Wang1 , Zhen-Hua Ling∗ 1 , Jing-Bo Zhou2 , Yu Hu1,3
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Speech and Language Information Processing,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
3
iFLYTEK Research
wrz94520@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhling@ustc.edu.cn, zhoujingbo@baidu.com, yuhu@iflytek.com

Abstract

U1: What are the names of all the dorms?
Q1: SELECT dorm_name FROM dorm

The task of multi-turn text-to-SQL semantic parsing aims
to translate natural language utterances in an interaction
into SQL queries in order to answer them using a database
which normally contains multiple table schemas. Previous
studies on this task usually utilized contextual information to
enrich utterance representations and to further influence the
decoding process. While they ignored to describe and track
the interaction states which are determined by history SQL
queries and are related with the intent of current utterance. In
this paper, two kinds of interaction states are defined based
on schema items and SQL keywords separately. A relational
graph neural network and a non-linear layer are designed to
update the representations of these two states respectively.
The dynamic schema-state and SQL-state representations are
then utilized to decode the SQL query corresponding to
current utterance. Experimental results on the challenging
CoSQL dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, which achieves better performance than other published methods on the task leaderboard.

U2: Which of those dorms have a TV lounge?
Q2: SELECT T1.dorm_name FROM dorm AS T1 JOIN
has_amenity AS T2 ON T1.dormid = T2.dormid JOIN
dorm_amenity AS T3 ON T2.amenid = T3.amenid
WHERE T3.amenity_name = TV Lounge
U3: What dorms have no study rooms as amenities? |
Do you mean among those with TV Lounges? | Yes.
Q3: SELECT T1.dorm_name FROM dorm AS T1 JOIN
has_amenity AS T2 ON T1.dormid = T2.dormid JOIN
dorm_amenity AS T3 ON T2.amenid = T3.amenid
WHERE T3.amenity_name = TV Lounge EXCEPT
SELECT T1.dorm_name FROM dorm AS T1 JOIN
has_amenity AS T2 ON T1.dormid = T2.dormid JOIN
dorm_amenity AS T3 ON T2.amenid = T3.amenid
WHERE T3.amenity_name = Study Room

Instruction

Figure 1: An interaction example from CoSQL dataset.
Ui is the user utterance at the i-th turn while Qi is
its corresponding SQL query. The blue words are SQL
keywords. Because this paper only focuses on the text-toSQL task of CoSQL, we concatenate those utterances that
cannot be translated into SQL queries with their responds
offered in the original CoSQL dataset using “|”, such as U3 .

Querying relational databases and acquiring information
from it have been studied extensively when designing natural language interfaces to databases(Zelle and Mooney 1996;
Zhang et al. 2020). As such, a large body of research has
focused on the task of translating natural language user
utterances into SQL queries that existing database software
can execute (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher 2017; Xu, Liu,
and Song 2017; Yu et al. 2018a). While most of these
works focus on precisely mapping stand-alone utterances
to SQL queries (Krishnamurthy, Dasigi, and Gardner 2017;
Dong and Lapata 2018), users often access information by
multi-turn interactions in real-word applications. Therefor,
designing a text-to-SQL system for multi-turn scenario has
attracted more and more attention recently (Guo et al. 2019;
Bogin, Gardner, and Berant 2019b; Yu et al. 2019c, 2018c).
The multi-turn text-to-SQl task is more complex and
more challenging than traditional stand-alone text-to-SQL
task. The main challenge is how to utilize the contextual information in history utterances to help system better

parse current utterance. Figure 1 is an interaction example
extracted from CoSQL dataset (Yu et al. 2019a). We can
see from this figure that the phrase “those dorms” in U2
refers to the phrase “all the dorms” in U1 . And the phrases
“what dorms” and “those” in U3 also refer to the same things
as above. Besides, each predicted SQL query has obvious
overlaps with history ones. Furthermore, each interaction
corresponds to a database, called “schema”, with several
tables in it. The usage of table information in history queries
also contributes to decode current query. For example, the
SQL query Q2 mentions the “dorm”, “has amenity” and
“dorm amenity” tables in the schema. Thus, the new clause
“EXCEPT” in the SQL query Q3 is more likely to select its
contents from these tables.

∗

Zhen-Hua Ling is corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13979

