The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fairness, Semi-Supervised Learning, and More:
A General Framework for Clustering with Stochastic Pairwise Constraints
Brian Brubach 1 , Darshan Chakrabarti 2 , John P. Dickerson 3 ,
Aravind Srinivasan 3 , Leonidas Tsepenekas 3
1

Wellesley College, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 University of Maryland, College Park
bb100@wellesley.edu, darshanc@alumni.cmu.edu, {john, srin, ltsepene}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

returned assignment. In Sections 1.1-1.2, we discuss how
these constraints have enough expressive power to capture
a wide range of applications such as extending the notion
of Individual Fairness from classification to clustering, and
incorporating elements of Semi-Supervised clustering.
Another constraint we address is when C = F and every
chosen point j ∈ S must serve as an exemplar of the cluster it defines (the set of all points assigned to it). The subtle
difference here, is that an exemplar point should be assigned
to its own cluster, i.e., φ(j) = j for all j ∈ S. This constraint is highly relevant in strict classification settings, and
is trivially satisfied in vanilla clustering variants where each
point is always assigned to its nearest point in S. However,
the presence of additional requirements on φ makes its satisfaction more challenging. Previous literature, especially in
the context of fairness in clustering (Anderson et al. 2020;
Esmaeili et al. 2020; Bera et al. 2019; Bercea et al. 2019),
does not address this issue, but in our framework we explicitly offer the choice of whether or not to enforce it.

Metric clustering is fundamental in areas ranging from Combinatorial Optimization and Data Mining, to Machine Learning and Operations Research. However, in a variety of situations we may have additional requirements or knowledge,
distinct from the underlying metric, regarding which pairs
of points should be clustered together. To capture and analyze such scenarios, we introduce a novel family of stochastic pairwise constraints, which we incorporate into several
essential clustering objectives (radius/median/means). Moreover, we demonstrate that these constraints can succinctly
model an intriguing collection of applications, including
among others Individual Fairness in clustering and Must-link
constraints in semi-supervised learning. Our main result consists of a general framework that yields approximation algorithms with provable guarantees for important clustering
objectives, while at the same time producing solutions that
respect the stochastic pairwise constraints. Furthermore, for
certain objectives we devise improved results in the case of
Must-link constraints, which are also the best possible from a
theoretical perspective. Finally, we present experimental evidence that validates the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

1.1

Formal Problem Definitions

We are given a set of points C and a set of locations F ,
in a metric space characterized by the distance function
d : C ∪ F × C ∪ F 7→ R≥0 , which satisfies the triangle inequality. Moreover, the input includes a concise description
of a set L ⊆ 2F , that captures the allowable configurations
of location openings. The goal of all problems we consider,
is to find a set S ⊆ F , with S ∈ L, and an efficientlysampleable distribution D over assignments C 7→ S, such
that for a randomly drawn φ ∼ D we have: (i) an objective
function being minimized, and (ii) depending on the variant
at hand, further constraints are satisfied by φ. We study two
types of additional constraints imposed on φ.
• Stochastic Pairwise Constraints (SPC): We are given a
family
of sets P = {P1 , P2 , . . .}, where each Pq ⊆

C
is
a
set of pairs of points from C, and a sequence
2
ψ
=
(ψ
1 , ψ2 , . . .) with ψq ∈ [0, 1]. We then want
P
0
0
{j,j }∈Pq Prφ∼D [φ(j) 6= φ(j )] ≤ ψq |Pq |, ∀Pq ∈ P.

Introduction

In a generic metric clustering problem, there is a set of points
C, requiring service from a set of locations F , where both C
and F are embedded in some metric space. The sets C, F
do not need to be disjoint, and we may very well have C =
F . The goal is then to choose a set of locations S ⊆ F ,
where S might have to satisfy additional problem-specific
requirements and an assignment φ : C 7→ S, such that a
metric-related objective function over C is minimized.
However, in a variety of situations there may be external
and metric-independent constraints imposed on φ, regarding
which pairs of points j, j 0 ∈ C should be clustered together,
i.e., constraints forcing a linkage φ(j) = φ(j 0 ). In this work,
we generalize this deterministic requirement, by introducing
a novel family of stochastic pairwise constraints. Our input
is augmented with multiple sets Pq of pairs of points from
C (Pq ⊆ C2 for each q), and values ψq ∈ [0, 1]. Given
these, we ask for a randomized solution, which ensures that
in expectation at most ψq |Pq | pairs of Pq are separated in the

• Centroid Constraint (CC): When this is imposed on any
of our problems, we must first have C = F . In addition,
we should ensure that Prφ∼D [φ(i) = i] = 1 for all i ∈ S.
Special Cases of SPC: When each Pq ∈ P has |Pq | = 1,
we get two interesting resulting variants.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6822

