The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Pre-training Context and Time Aware Location Embeddings from
Spatial-Temporal Trajectories for User Next Location Prediction
Yan Lin,1,2 Huaiyu Wan,1,2,3 Shengnan Guo,1,2,4 Youfang Lin1,2,3,4∗
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
CAAC Key Laboratory of Intelligent Passenger Service of Civil Aviation, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Transport Industry of Big Data Appalication Technologies for Comprehensive Transport, Beijing, China
{ylincs, hywan, guoshn, yflin}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Resturants
Residential

Pre-training location embeddings from spatial-temporal trajectories is a fundamental procedure and very beneficial for
user next location prediction. In the real world, a location
usually has variable functionalities under different contextual
environments. If the exact functions of a location in the trajectory can be reflected in its embedding, the accuracy of user
next location prediction should be improved. Yet, existing
location embeddings pre-trained on trajectories are mostly
based on distributed word representations, which mix a location’s various functionalities into one latent representation
vector. To address this problem, we propose a Context and
Time aware Location Embedding (CTLE) model, which calculates a location’s representation vector with consideration
of its specific contextual neighbors in trajectories. In this way,
the multi-functional properties of locations can be properly
tackled. Furthermore, in order to incorporate temporal information in trajectories into location embeddings, we propose a subtle temporal encoding module and a novel pretraining objective, which further improve the quality of location embeddings. We evaluate our proposed model on two
real-world mobile user trajectory datasets. The experimental
results demonstrate that, compared with the existing embedding methods, our CTLE model can pre-train higher quality location embeddings and significantly improve the performance of downstream user location prediction models.

Visited
frequency

ɡ

Stayed
duration

(a) Visited time differences

Schools

Frequency

ɠ

Time (hour)

(b) Visited time distributions

Figure 1: Two aspects of temporal information contained in
human trajectories. (a) illustrates that in a trajectory, ¬ visited time difference between the same location can reveal
its visited frequency, and ­ the difference between two consecutive visiting records can be seen as the former location’s
stayed duration. (b) displays the variable visited time distributions of locations with different functionalities.
requires high quality embedding vectors for better discrimination between locations. Compared to the widely used
fully-connected embedding layers in most prediction models, pre-training location embeddings using un-supervised or
self-supervised objectives can incorporate more general and
comprehensive information of locations. In this way, they
can be shared across a wide range of downstream models
to improve the computation efficiency, while also promoting
the overall prediction performance.
The idea of capturing location characteristics from sequential trajectories is akin to language modelings in natural language processing (NLP). In fact, most existing pretrained location embedding methods are based on distributed
word representations, which are widely used in NLP systems. For example, DeepMove (Zhou and Huang 2018) implements Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) on trajectory data
to extract location function information. However, besides
sharing many similar characteristics with sentences, trajectories contain unique temporal information that shouldn’t be
ignored. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), in a trajectory, the relative visited time differences between locations can reflect
their properties such as visited frequency and stayed duration. On the other hand, time will affect peoples’ preferences
on locations, so the visited time of a location can be an indication of its functionalities, as shown in Figure 1(b). Geo-

Introduction
In recent years, the increasing availability of location-based
service (LBS) data, such as GPS trajectories, check-ins at
point-of-interests (POIs) and cellular signaling records, have
led to a burst of studies focused on mining spatial-temporal
data. Among them, user location prediction has received
much attention (Liu et al. 2016; Xiao et al. 2017; Kong
and Wu 2018), and can be utilized in multiple applications,
including modeling users’ mobility behaviors (Fu and Lee
2020), or recommending locations (POIs) for users (Zhao
et al. 2019). Among these researches, learning embedding
vectors for locations is a very fundamental and critical problem, due to the fact that accurate user location prediction
∗

Corresponding author: Youfang Lin
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4241

