The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive and Generative Graph Convolutional Networks for Graph-based
Semi-Supervised Learning
Sheng Wan, 1 Shirui Pan, 2 Jian Yang, 1 Chen Gong 1,3∗
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
3
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
wansheng315@hotmail.com, shirui.pan@monash.edu, csjyang@njust.edu.cn, chen.gong@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

and graph-based methods (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty
2003; Gong et al. 2015; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani
2006; Kipf and Welling 2017; Ma et al. 2019). Among them,
the graph-based SSL algorithms have gained much attention
due to its ease of implementation, solid mathematical foundation, and satisfactory performance.
In a graph-based SSL algorithm, all labeled and unlabeled data are represented by graph nodes and their relationships are depicted by graph edges. Then the problem is to transfer the labels of a handful of labeled nodes
(i.e., labeled examples) to the remaining massive unlabeled nodes (i.e., unlabeled examples) such that the unlabeled examples can be accurately classified. A popular
method is to use graph Laplacian regularization to enforce
the similar examples in the feature space to obtain similar label assignments, such as (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Gong et al. 2015; Bühler and Hein 2009). Recently, research attention has been shifted to the learning of
proper network embedding to facilitate the label determination (Kipf and Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Zhou et al. 2019; Veličković et al. 2018;
Hu et al. 2019; Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018), where Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have been demonstrated
to outperform traditional graph-based models due to its impressive representation ability (Wu et al. 2020a). Concretely,
GCNs generalize Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
(LeCun, Bengio et al. 1995) to graph-structured data based
on the spectral theory, and thus can reconcile the expressive
power of graphs in modeling the relationships among data
points for representation learning.
Although graph-based SSL methods have achieved noticeable progress in recent years, they do not directly tackle
the core problem of SSL, namely the shortage of supervision. One should note that the number of labeled data in
SSL problems is usually very limited, which poses a great
difficulty for stable network training and thus will probably
degrade the performance of GCNs. To accommodate this issue, in this paper, we aim at sufficiently extracting the supervision information carried by the available data themselves
for network training, and develop an effective transductive
SSL algorithm via using GCNs. That is to say, the goal is to
accurately classify the observed unlabeled graph nodes (Zhu

Graph-based Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) aims to transfer the labels of a handful of labeled data to the remaining massive unlabeled data via a graph. As one of the most
popular graph-based SSL approaches, the recently proposed
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have gained remarkable progress by combining the sound expressiveness of neural networks with graph structure. Nevertheless, the existing
graph-based methods do not directly address the core problem of SSL, i.e., the shortage of supervision, and thus their
performances are still very limited. To accommodate this issue, a novel GCN-based SSL algorithm is presented in this
paper to enrich the supervision signals by utilizing both data
similarities and graph structure. Firstly, by designing a semisupervised contrastive loss, improved node representations
can be generated via maximizing the agreement between different views of the same data or the data from the same class.
Therefore, the rich unlabeled data and the scarce yet valuable labeled data can jointly provide abundant supervision
information for learning discriminative node representations,
which helps improve the subsequent classification result. Secondly, the underlying determinative relationship between the
data features and input graph topology is extracted as supplementary supervision signals for SSL via using a graph generative loss related to the input features. Intensive experimental
results on a variety of real-world datasets firmly verify the
effectiveness of our algorithm compared with other state-ofthe-art methods.

Introduction
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) focuses on utilizing small
amounts of labeled data as well as relatively large amounts
of unlabeled data for model training (Zhu 2005). Over the
past few decades, SSL has attracted increasing research interests and various approaches have been developed (Zhu,
Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Joachims 1999), which
usually employ cooperative training (Blum and Mitchell
1998), support vector machines (Bennett and Demiriz 1999;
Li and Zhou 2010), consistency regularizers (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017; Laine and Aila 2016; Berthelot et al. 2019),
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10049

