The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Domain Multi-Task Rehearsal for Lifelong Learning
Fan Lyu1 , Shuai Wang1 , Wei Feng1 * , Zihan Ye2 , Fuyuan Hu2 and Song Wang1, 3
1

Colledge of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
School of Electronic & Information Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina
{fanlyu, wangshuai201909, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn, {zihanye@post, fuyuanhu@mail}.usts.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu
2

Classification

Abstract

…

Rehearsal, seeking to remind the model by storing old knowledge in lifelong learning, is one of the most effective ways to
mitigate catastrophic forgetting, i.e., biased forgetting of previous knowledge when moving to new tasks. However, the
old tasks of the most previous rehearsal-based methods suffer
from the unpredictable domain shift when training the new
task. This is because these methods always ignore two significant factors. First, the Data Imbalance between the new
task and old tasks that makes the domain of old tasks prone to
shift. Second, the Task Isolation among all tasks will make the
domain shift toward unpredictable directions; To address the
unpredictable domain shift, in this paper, we propose MultiDomain Multi-Task (MDMT) rehearsal to train the old tasks
and new task parallelly and equally to break the isolation
among tasks. Specifically, a two-level angular margin loss is
proposed to encourage the intra-class/task compactness and
inter-class/task discrepancy, which keeps the model from domain chaos. In addition, to further address domain shift of the
old tasks, we propose an optional episodic distillation loss on
the memory to anchor the knowledge for each old task. Experiments on benchmark datasets validate the proposed approach
can effectively mitigate the unpredictable domain shift.

ℳ1
ℳ2

ℳ1
ℳ2

𝒟3

Constrains

StoreMem

…
𝒟4

ℳ3 Constrains Classification

Step 3

Step 4

(a) Traditional rehearsal

…

ℳ1
ℳ2

Cross-domain
classification

TAM loss

𝒟3
StoreMem

Step 3

ℳ1
ℳ2
ℳ3

Cross-domain
classification

…
TAM loss

𝒟4
Step 4

(b) MDMT rehearsal

Figure 1: (a) Traditional rehearsal-based methods construct
single-task learning architecture for the new task (data from
training set D) and treat the old tasks (data from memory M) as the constraints of its training. (b) The proposed
MDMT rehearsal-based method trains old tasks and new
task equally and keep tasks from isolation via TAM loss.
Lazebnik 2018; Yoon et al. 2017). Regularization-based and
parameter isolation-based methods store no data from old
tasks and highly rely on extra regularizers or architectures,
resulting in their lower performance than the rehearsal-based
methods. Rehearsal-based methods store a small number of
samples in the training set, the model will retrain the saved
data when training the new task to avoid forgetting.
At each step of lifelong learning (see Fig. 1(a)), the
most existing rehearsal-based methods (Rebuffi et al. 2017;
Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018b; Guo
et al. 2019) focus on training the new task while treating the
stored data from old tasks as the constraints to preserve their
performance. However, the old tasks in these methods may
suffer from unpredictable domain shift that arises from two
significant factors in the lifelong learning process: 1) The
Data Imbalance between old and new task. The shrinkage of
training data of old tasks leads to their domains will be prone
to shift that manifests as the catastrophic forgetting. 2) The
Task Isolation among all tasks (old and new), which makes
such domain shift toward unpredictable directions and the
boundary between any two tasks may become weak.
To address the unpredictable domain shift, in this paper,
we propose a Multi-Domain Multi-Task (MDMT) Rehearsal

Introduction
Lifelong learning, also known as continual learning and incremental learning, aims to continually learn new knowledge from a sequence of tasks over a lifelong time. In contrast to traditional supervised learning, the lifelong setting
helps machine learning work like a more realistic human
learning by acquiring a new skill quickly with new training
data. All the while, catastrophic forgetting (French 1999;
Kirkpatrick et al. 2017) is the main challenge for lifelong
learning, which happens when the learner forgets the knowledge of old tasks while learning a new task. To seek a balance between the old tasks and the new task, many methods
have been proposed to handle the catastrophic forgetting in
recent years. Following (De Lange et al. 2019), their methods can be categorized into Rehearsal (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018b; Guo et al. 2019), Regularization (Li and Hoiem 2016; Chaudhry et al. 2018a; Dhar
et al. 2019) and Parameter Isolation (Mallya, Davis, and
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8819

