The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Local Relation Learning for Face Forgery Detection
Shen Chen1,2 * , Taiping Yao2 * , Yang Chen2 , Shouhong Ding2† , Jilin Li2 , Rongrong Ji1,3†
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent
3
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xiamen University
chenshen@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn,
{taipingyao, wizyangchen, ericshding, jerolinli}@tencent.com

Abstract

pretability. To relieve this problem, recent works (Nguyen
et al. 2019; Stehouwer et al. 2020) introduce the manipulated region mask as supervision to assist networks in locating speciﬁc forged regions. Although these methods have
achieved remarkable performance on high-quality images,
they are vulnerable to disturbances like image compression or noises. Moreover, the generalization issue is still not
well addressed. When applied to forgery generated by unseen face manipulation methods, they experience a signiﬁcant performance drop. Face X-ray (Li et al. 2020a) has noticed this generalization problem and designs new supervision named face X-ray, which focuses on the artifacts caused
by image blending between two images. However, it can not
be applied to forgery methods without using blending and
also be greatly affected by image noises. This means these
methods have not learned the intrinsic characteristics in face
forgery detection. In a word, most current methods use a
kind of global supervision by utilizing binary labels or manipulated region masks at the end of the network, but still
fail to learn robust and generalized features.

With the rapid development of facial manipulation techniques, face forgery detection has received considerable attention in digital media forensics due to security concerns.
Most existing methods formulate face forgery detection as
a classiﬁcation problem and utilize binary labels or manipulated region masks as supervision. However, without considering the correlation between local regions, these global
supervisions are insufﬁcient to learn a generalized feature and
prone to overﬁtting. To address this issue, we propose a novel
perspective of face forgery detection via local relation learning. Speciﬁcally, we propose a Multi-scale Patch Similarity
Module (MPSM), which measures the similarity between features of local regions and forms a robust and generalized similarity pattern. Moreover, we propose an RGB-Frequency Attention Module (RFAM) to fuse information in both RGB
and frequency domains for more comprehensive local feature
representation, which further improves the reliability of the
similarity pattern. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method consistently outperforms the state-of-the-arts
on widely-used benchmarks. Furthermore, detailed visualization shows the robustness and interpretability of our method.

1

To address the above issues, we propose a novel perspective of face forgery detection via local relation learning to
focuses on the relation of local regions, which is a generalized descriptor that can be used to effectively capture the
forged trace, such as abnormal texture (Liu et al. 2020) and
high frequency noise (Qian et al. 2020). Speciﬁcally, we design a Multi-scale Patch Similarity Module (MPSM) to explicitly model a second-order relationship between different
local regions and build a similarity pattern with pair-wise
cosine measurement. In this similarity pattern, real regions
are similar to each other, so as the forged regions. But real
regions and forged regions are not similar. By encoding local
forgery semantics which is more robust against disturbances
and less sensitive to speciﬁc manipulation methods, the similarity pattern further connects them and builds a global face
forgery representation, which is more robust and generalized
for forgery detection.

Introduction

Recent studies have shown rapid progress in facial manipulation, which enables an attacker to manipulate or forge
the facial area of human faces, such as Deepfakes (Tora
2018) and FaceSwap (Kowalski 2018). With the remarkable
success in synthesizing realistic faces, it becomes infeasible even for humans to distinguish whether an image has
been manipulated. At the same time, these forged images
may be abused for malicious purposes, causing severe trust
issues and security concerns in our society. Therefore, it is
of paramount importance to develop effective methods for
detecting face forgery.
Early works (Afchar et al. 2018; Nguyen, Yamagishi, and
Echizen 2019; Rössler et al. 2019) treat this challenge as a
binary classiﬁcation problem and develop CNNs to model
the decision boundary between real and forged faces. However, this setting is known to easy to overﬁt and lacks inter-

Moreover, to further improve the reliability of the similarity pattern, we propose an RGB-Frequency Attention Module (RFAM) to both consider RGB and frequency information and collaboratively learn a comprehensive local representation. Concretely, we ﬁrst transform the image into frequency domain and amplify the artifacts hidden in high fre-

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1081

