The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Camera-aware Proxies for Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Menglin Wang1 , Baisheng Lai2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xiaojin Gong1∗ , Xian-Sheng Hua2
1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Group
lynnwang6875@gmail.com, baisheng.lbs@alibaba-inc.com, jianqiang.hjq@alibaba-inc.com,
gongxj@zju.edu.cn, huaxiansheng@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper tackles the purely unsupervised person reidentification (Re-ID) problem that requires no annotations.
Some previous methods adopt clustering techniques to generate pseudo labels and use the produced labels to train ReID models progressively. These methods are relatively simple but effective. However, most clustering-based methods
take each cluster as a pseudo identity class, neglecting the
large intra-ID variance caused mainly by the change of camera views. To address this issue, we propose to split each
single cluster into multiple proxies and each proxy represents the instances coming from the same camera. These
camera-aware proxies enable us to deal with large intra-ID
variance and generate more reliable pseudo labels for learning. Based on the camera-aware proxies, we design both
intra- and inter-camera contrastive learning components for
our Re-ID model to effectively learn the ID discrimination ability within and across cameras. Meanwhile, a proxybalanced sampling strategy is also designed, which facilitates
our learning further. Extensive experiments on three largescale Re-ID datasets show that our proposed approach outperforms most unsupervised methods by a significant margin. Especially, on the challenging MSMT17 dataset, we gain
14.3 percent Rank-1 and 10.2 percent mAP improvements
when compared to the second place. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Terminator8758/CAP-master.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) T-SNE (van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) visualization of the feature distribution on Market-1501. The
features are extracted by an ImageNet-pretrained model for
images of 20 randomly selected IDs. The images from one
camera are marked with the same colored bounding boxes.
(b) and (c) display two sub-regions.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is the task of identifying
the same person in non-overlapping cameras. This task has
attracted extensive research interest due to its significance
in surveillance and public security. State-of-the-art Re-ID
performance is achieved mainly by fully supervised methods (Sun et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019). These methods
need sufficient annotations that are expensive and timeconsuming to attain, making them impractical in real-world
deployments. Therefore, more and more recent studies focus on unsupervised settings, aiming to learn Re-ID models via unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Wei et al.
2018a; Qi et al. 2019b; Zhong et al. 2019) or purely unsupervised (Lin et al. 2019; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Wu et al.

2019) techniques. Although considerable progress has been
made in the unsupervised Re-ID task, there is still a large
gap in performance compared to the supervised counterpart.
This work addresses the purely unsupervised Re-ID task,
which does not require any labeled data and therefore is
more challenging than the UDA-based problem. Previous
methods mainly resort to pseudo labels for learning, adopting Clustering (Lin et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2020), k-nearest
neighbors (k-NN) (Li, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Chen, Zhu,
and Gong 2018), or graph (Ye et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2019)
based association techniques to generate pseudo labels. The
clustering-based methods learn Re-ID models by iteratively
conducting a clustering step and a model updating step.
These methods have a relatively simple routine but achieve

∗
The corresponding author. This work was supported by Major
Scientific Research Project of Zhejiang Lab (No. 2019DB0ZX01).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2764

