The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relation-Aware Neighborhood Matching Model for Entity Alignment
Yao Zhu1 , Hongzhi Liu2∗ , Zhonghai Wu3,4 , Yingpeng Du2
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University, Beijing, China
{yao.zhu, liuhz, wuzh, dyp1993}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

aims at linking entities with the equivalent meaning from
different KGs. The facts can consequently be fused based
on the aligned entities.
Regarding the entity alignment task, most of the existing
research focused on constructing embedding-based models. These methods tried to embed the entities of KGs into
a latent space and calculated the distances between entity vectors as the evidences for alignment. TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), as an effective KG embedding model, has
been widely adopted for entity alignment (Hao et al. 2016;
Chen et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018). To better
utilize the information from neighbors, graph convolutional
networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) were utilized to
improve the representation learning of entities (Wang et al.
2018; Wu et al. 2019a; Ye et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020). However, these methods concentrated on learning comprehensive
embeddings for entities, meanwhile, may bring additional
noise from neighbors.
Recently, several studies tried to conduct subgraph matching when comparing the candidate entity pairs to enhance
the alignment (Xu et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020). However, these methods only compared the neighboring entities
but ignored the connected relations which also contain important information for neighborhood matching and entity
alignment. Moreover, existing methods paid less attention
to the positive interactions between the entity alignment task
and the relation alignment task. Our insights are described as
follows. First, neighborhood matching with relations can enhance the reliability of entity alignment. Figure 1 shows an
example of the entity alignment with neighborhood matching. Assume the entities Rome, Renaissance, F lorence
and M ichelangelo in the two KGs have been aligned. If we
only consider the neighboring entities when matching subgraphs, the entity Italy (in Chinese) in KG1 is more likely to
be misaligned with the entity David Statue in KG2. However, if we compare the connected relations at the same time
and consider the 1-to-1 property of relation capital, the entity Italy can be correctly aligned crossing two KGs. This
implies that relations play a significant role in neighborhood
matching not only for the semantic meaning but also for the
mapping property. Second, relation alignments can help to
find the alignments of entities, and on the other hand, entity alignments can also assist the relation alignment task.
Specifically, the entity alignment can be inferred based on

Entity alignment which aims at linking entities with the
same meaning from different knowledge graphs (KGs) is a
vital step for knowledge fusion. Existing research focused
on learning embeddings of entities by utilizing structural
information of KGs for entity alignment. These methods
can aggregate information from neighboring nodes but may
also bring noise from neighbors. Most recently, several researchers attempted to compare neighboring nodes in pairs to
enhance the entity alignment. However, they ignored the relations between entities which are also important for neighborhood matching. In addition, existing methods paid less attention to the positive interactions between the entity alignment
and the relation alignment. To deal with these issues, we propose a novel Relation-aware Neighborhood Matching model
named RNM for entity alignment. Specifically, we propose
to utilize the neighborhood matching to enhance the entity
alignment. Besides comparing neighbor nodes when matching neighborhood, we also try to explore useful information
from the connected relations. Moreover, an iterative framework is designed to leverage the positive interactions between
the entity alignment and the relation alignment in a semisupervised manner. Experimental results on three real-world
datasets demonstrate that the proposed model RNM performs
better than state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In knowledge graphs (KGs), facts are presented as triples of
(h, r, t), indicating there is a relation r from the head entity h to the tail entity t. Real-world KGs such as DBpedia (Lehmann et al. 2015), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2007), and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), which
store a great deal of knowledge, have been employed in various applications like recommendation systems (Cao et al.
2019b), question answering (Huang et al. 2019), and search
engines (Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017).
However, each individual KG may be incomplete. Since
different KGs are constructed independently from different
data sources, they are usually complementary to each other.
Therefore, integrating heterogeneous knowledge from various KGs has become an urgent issue. Entity alignment is a
vital step for knowledge fusion from different KGs, which
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4749

