The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scheduling of Time-Varying Workloads Using Reinforcement Learning
Shanka Subhra Mondal1 * , Nikhil Sheoran2 * , Subrata Mitra2†
1

Princeton University
2
Adobe Research
smondal@princeton.edu, sheoran@adobe.com, subrata.mitra@adobe.com

Abstract

Mishra et al. 2010). This can happen because of algorithmic phases (Amvrosiadis et al. 2018; Reiss et al. 2012;
Mitra et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2007), variations in load
or the number of users interacting with the workload. For
user-facing services, such temporal resource usages can
have daily and seasonal patterns due to fluctuations in userdemands (Amvrosiadis et al. 2018; Mishra et al. 2010) (e.g.
some services are mostly used during working hours while
some are used during holiday seasons).
In a multi-tenant cluster, services are developed and deployed by different engineering groups, where none, including the cluster manager, usually have a detailed understanding of the temporal resource-usage characteristics of each of
these services. (Garefalakis et al. 2018) reported that today
a substantial fraction of common clusters as well as dedicated cluster in production are devoted to only long-running
workloads. When placing long-running workload containers, the cluster scheduler must also target operational excellence, such as improving overall cluster utilization, minimizing performance degradation due to resource contention
(e.g. memory usage of two workloads on the same machine
spikes at the same time), service level objective (SLO) violations due to resource over utilization or exhaustion, resource
fragmentation and the number of machines used. Finding
optimum initial placement for these workloads are crucial
as later migration has a high overhead and causes degraded
user-experience (Garefalakis et al. 2018).
Problem Statement: In this paper we explore how we
can build a self-learning scheduler that can take historical
resource-usage characteristics for each service1 as a timeseries: rd (t) and attempt to optimize various components
of operational excellence in a cluster. Here rd (t) is the resource usage along the measurable resource dimension d
(CPU, Memory etc.) and t is a timestamp.
The absence of optimal co-location labels makes this an
unsupervised problem. Since the impacts of placement decisions are not immediately observable, a cost-based heuristic
would be sub-optimal. While Reinforcement Learning is a
feasible solution, the large number of ways a variety of services can be co-located over different machines in the cluster, makes state-transition probability modeling infeasible.

Resource usage of production workloads running on shared
compute clusters often fluctuate significantly across time.
While simultaneous spike in the resource usage between two
workloads running on the same machine can create performance degradation, unused resources in a machine results
in wastage and undesirable operational characteristics for a
compute cluster. Prior works did not consider such temporal
resource fluctuations or their alignment for scheduling decisions. Due to the variety of time-varying workloads and their
complex resource usage characteristics, it is challenging to
design well-defined heuristics for scheduling them optimally
across different machines in a cluster. In this paper, we propose a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) based approach
to exploit various temporal resource usage patterns of timevarying workloads as well as a technique for creating equivalence classes among a large number of production workloads
to improve scalability of our method. Validations with real
production traces from Google and Alibaba show that our
technique can significantly improve metrics for operational
excellence (e.g. utilization, fragmentation, resource exhaustion etc.) for a cluster compared to the baselines.

Introduction
In large production clusters, multiple workloads are colocated on the same machine to achieve operational efficiency at scale. They share the underlying physical resources of the machine such as CPU, cache, memory, disk,
network-bandwidth. Today, the standard practice is to deploy these workloads as microservices inside containers that
are managed by various orchestration-engines (COEs) such
as Mesos (Hindman et al. 2011) and Kubernetes (Burns et al.
2016). These engines either use standard bin-packing algorithms or custom heuristics (Ghodsi et al. 2011; Garefalakis et al. 2018; Verma et al. 2015) to place these workloads on the available machines in a multi-tenant cluster.
However, a very significant fraction, if not all, of these services or applications show time-varying-workload (TVW)
characteristics, i.e. their resource usage vary significantly
over time (Tian, Zheng, and Wang 2019; Reiss et al. 2012;
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We use the terms TVWs, services, jobs, tasks or applications
interchangeably, to generally mean containerized microservices.

9000

