The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Data-driven Competitive Algorithms for Online Knapsack and Set Cover
Ali Zeynali,1 Bo Sun, 2 Mohammad Hajiesmaili, 1 Adam Wierman 3
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
3
California Institute of Technology, USA
azeynali@cs.umass.edu, bsunaa@connect.ust.hk, hajiesmaili@cs.umass.edu, adamw@caltech.edu
2

Abstract

ML advice (Lykouris and Vassilvtiskii 2018; Angelopoulos et al. 2020; Purohit, Svitkina, and Kumar 2018; Rohatgi 2020; Lee, Hajiesmaili, and Li 2019; Antoniadis et al.
2020b; Banerjee 2020; Wang, Li, and Wang 2020), and advice from multiple experts (Gollapudi and Panigrahi 2019).
In these approaches the goal is to allow online algorithms to
use (potentially noisy) predictions (or advice) about future
inputs. Such predictions capture the fact that, often, something is known about the future that could be used to improve the performance in typical cases. These approaches
have been successfully applied to design competitive algorithms that perform near-optimally in the typical case in settings such as the ski-rental problem (Purohit, Svitkina, and
Kumar 2018; Kodialam 2019; Angelopoulos et al. 2020; Bamas, Maggiori, and Svensson 2020; Wei and Zhang 2020),
online optimization with switching costs (Chen et al. 2016),
online caching (Lykouris and Vassilvtiskii 2018; Rohatgi
2020), and metrical task systems (Antoniadis et al. 2020a),
to name a few. However, in this literature, the power of ML
models has been leveraged to first, predict the future input,
and then modify the algorithms to use this additional input
to further improve the performance. In this way, the learning
and algorithmic parts are decoupled, and practical improvements could be obtained only when fine-grained predictions
of individual inputs are (nearly) perfect.
The idea of this paper is inspired by the fact that practitioners typically prefer to learn from the coarse-grained patterns observed in previous problem instances and then optimize over a class of algorithms that achieves high performance given the coarse-grained patterns. This approach has
been of interest of empirical studies for a long time (Semke,
Mahdavi, and Mathis 1998; Leyton-Brown, Nudelman, and
Shoham 2009; Kotthoff, Gent, and Miguel 2012; Winstein
and Balakrishnan 2013; Akhtar et al. 2018; De Cicco, Cilli,
and Mascolo 2019). However, developing a theoretical understanding of this approach has received attention only
recently, after a seminal work of Gupta and Roughgarden (Gupta and Roughgarden 2017, 2020) and its followups (Kleinberg et al. 2019; Balcan, Dick, and Vitercik 2018;
Alabi et al. 2019; Cohen-Addad and Kanade 2017; Roughgarden 2021).
Inspired by the above high-level idea, in this paper, we focus on developing data-driven competitive algorithms with
worst-case guarantees. The prior literature on online algo-

The design of online algorithms has tended to focus on algorithms with worst-case guarantees, e.g., bounds on the
competitive ratio. However, it is well-known that such algorithms are often overly pessimistic, performing sub-optimally
on non-worst-case inputs. In this paper, we develop an approach for data-driven design of online algorithms that maintain near-optimal worst-case guarantees while also performing learning in order to perform well for typical inputs. Our
approach is to identify policy classes that admit global worstcase guarantees, and then perform learning using historical
data within the policy classes. We demonstrate the approach
in the context of two classical problems, online knapsack and
online set cover, proving competitive bounds for rich policy
classes in each case. Additionally, we illustrate the practical
implications via a case study on electric vehicle charging.

1

Introduction

As the adoption of machine learning (ML) in infrastructure
and safety-critical domains grows, it becomes crucially important to ensure ML-driven algorithms can provide guarantees on their performance. Competitive analysis of online
algorithms has been a remarkably successful framework for
developing simple algorithms with worst-case guarantees.
The ultimate goal in this framework is to devise algorithms
with the best possible competitive ratio, which is defined as
the worst-case ratio between the cost of an online algorithm
and that of the offline optimal. However, because the focus
is on worst-case guarantees, the algorithms developed are
typically conservative and do not learn in a data-driven manner. The result is that worst-case optimized algorithms tend
to under perform for typical scenarios where worst-case inputs are uncommon. This phenomenon is wide-spread, but
the importance of provable guarantees for safety and robustness means relaxing worst-case assumptions is undesirable in many settings. An important open question is how to
achieve the “best-of-both-worlds”, both near-optimal performance in typical settings, which requires data-driven adaptation, and a near-optimal competitive ratio.
Toward this goal, there have been substantial efforts to improve the performance of competitive algorithms using predictions (Chen et al. 2016, 2015; Antoniadis et al. 2020a),
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10833

