The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explicitly Modeled Attention Maps for Image Classification
Andong Tan* 1,4 , Duc Tam Nguyen* 2,4 , Maximilian Dax3,4 , Matthias Nießner1 , Thomas Brox2
1

Technical University of Munich
2
University of Freiburg
3
University of Bonn
4
Robert Bosch GmbH
andong.tan@tum.de, nguyen@cs.uni-freiburg.de, maximiliandax@gmx.com, niessner@tum.de, brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Abstract

One key benefit of a self-attention layer is that such a layer
can incorporate the entire spatial context for the computation
of features in the subsequent layers through the calculation of
attention-maps. As an intuitive explanation, attention-maps
express how much attention different areas of the input receive when focusing on a particular pixel position. However,
the high degree of freedom of self-attention networks, such
as in (Bello et al. 2019), requires learning the weights for the
key and the query to calculate attention-maps. There is no
obvious need for this excessive, computationally expensive
parametrization in the context of computer vision tasks. By
visualizing the weights, we show that the content-dependent
key and query play a minor role in the final attention-maps,
where an area with high attention weight is more related to
the geometric position; compare Fig. 1c, 1g to Fig. 1b, 1f.
Further, in vision tasks such as image classification, a common observation is that neighbor pixels are more related than
distant ones. In other words, when focusing on particular
pixels, neighbor areas should receive higher attention.
Based on these insights, we propose a self-attention mechanism with explicitly modeled attention-maps, which considers the global context information with positive correlation
to the distance between pixels. The freedom of the attention
module is reduced to a predefined form (e.g., Gaussian kernel) with a learnable parameter, as illustrated in Fig. 2. We
integrate the local context prior in self-attention explicitly
by restricting the learnable attention-map to a centered, yet
global kernel with a learnable shape parameter. The primary
motivation is to maintain global information for the feature
computation while reducing the freedom caused by learning
key and query for higher efficiency. Surprisingly, networks
augmented with such modules not only outperform regular
self-attention in parameters, memory and computation cost,
but also achieve very competitive accuracy.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We analyze the efficiency of AA-Net (Bello et al. 2019)
and empirically show that geometric information plays an
essential role in attention-maps. (2) Based on the above analysis, we propose a novel self-attention module with explicitly
modeled attention-maps under the assumption that neighbor
pixels are more related than distant ones. We investigate fixed
attention-maps parametrized by different global, yet centered
simple functions (e,g, cosine, linear) to model monotonically
decreased attention paid to distant pixels w.r.t. centered pixel.

Self-attention networks have shown remarkable progress in
computer vision tasks such as image classification. The main
benefit of the self-attention mechanism is the ability to capture long-range feature interactions in attention-maps. However, the computation of attention-maps requires a learnable
key, query, and positional encoding, whose usage is often
not intuitive and computationally expensive. To mitigate this
problem, we propose a novel self-attention module with explicitly modeled attention-maps using only a single learnable
parameter for low computational overhead. The design of explicitly modeled attention-maps using geometric prior is based
on the observation that the spatial context for a given pixel
within an image is mostly dominated by its neighbors, while
more distant pixels have a minor contribution. Concretely, the
attention-maps are parametrized via simple functions (e.g.,
Gaussian kernel) with a learnable radius, which is modeled
independently of the input content. Our evaluation shows that
our method achieves an accuracy improvement of up to 2.2%
over the ResNet-baselines in ImageNet ILSVRC and outperforms other self-attention methods such as AA-ResNet152
in accuracy by 0.9% with 6.4% fewer parameters and 6.7%
fewer GFLOPs. This result empirically indicates the value of
incorporating geometric prior into self-attention mechanism
when applied in image classification.

Introduction
An attention mechanism allows the network to focus on the
global context in each layer. Attention is an essential part
of human vision, also known as foveation, which allows the
vision system to focus its limited resources on a small part of
the input signal. The implementation of this concept as selfattention in the transformer network (Vaswani et al. 2017)
has resulted in a substantial performance increase in natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford et al.
2018). Recent works in computer vision (Bello et al. 2019;
Parmar et al. 2019) proposed self-attention for object recognition tasks. Their suggested modification of common network
architectures, such as the Resnet (He et al. 2016a,b), leads
to significant performance improvement over the original
convolutional baseline.
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9799

