The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LET: Linguistic Knowledge Enhanced Graph Transformer
for Chinese Short Text Matching
Boer Lyu, Lu Chen* , Su Zhu, Kai Yu*
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence Production Technology and Systems, Beijing, China
{boerlv, chenlusz, paul2204, kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

sentence-1

有些You Xie
are a bit

Chinese short text matching is a fundamental task in natural language processing. Existing approaches usually take
Chinese characters or words as input tokens. They have two
limitations: 1) Some Chinese words are polysemous, and semantic information is not fully utilized. 2) Some models suffer
potential issues caused by word segmentation. Here we introduce HowNet as an external knowledge base and propose a
Linguistic knowledge Enhanced graph Transformer (LET) to
deal with word ambiguity. Additionally, we adopt the word
lattice graph as input to maintain multi-granularity information. Our model is also complementary to pre-trained language
models. Experimental results on two Chinese datasets show
that our models outperform various typical text matching approaches. Ablation study also indicates that both semantic
information and multi-granularity information are important
for text matching modeling.

1

<S>

他Ta

的话De Hua

有You

些Xie

⽔分Shui Fen

His

words

have

some

?

sememe

sense1:夸张

sense2:⽔汽

(exaggeration)

(moisture)

信息

information

物质

夸⼤

physical

boast

</S>

湿度

dampness

sense1:夸耀
(brag)

sentence-2

吹⽜Chui Niu
bragging

<S>

他Ta

在Zai

吹Chui

⽜Niu

He

is

blowing

cattle

</S>

Figure 1: An example of word segmentation and the potential
word ambiguity.

Introduction

Short text matching (STM) is generally regarded as a task
of paraphrase identification or sentence semantic matching.
Given a pair of sentences, the goal of matching models is to
predict their semantic similarity. It is widely used in question
answer systems (Liu, Rong, and Xiong 2018) and dialogue
systems (Gao et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2014).
Recent years have seen great progress in deep learning
methods for text matching (Mueller and Thyagarajan 2016;
Chen et al. 2017; Gong, Luo, and Zhang 2018; Lan and Xu
2018). However, almost all of these models are initially proposed for English text matching. For Chinese language tasks,
early work utilizes Chinese characters as input to the model,
or first segment each sentence into words, and then take these
words as input tokens. Although character-based models can
overcome the problem of data sparsity to some degree (Li
et al. 2019), the main drawback is that explicit word information is not fully utilized, which has been demonstrated to be
useful for semantic matching (Li et al. 2020b).
However, a large number of Chinese words are polysemous, which brings great difficulties to semantic understanding (Xu et al. 2016). Word polysemy in short text is more an
issue than that in long text because short text usually has less
* The corresponding authors are Lu Chen and Kai Yu.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13498

contextual information, so it is extremely hard for models to
capture the correct meaning. As shown in Fig. 1, the word
in red in sentence-1 actually has two meanings: one is to
describe bragging (exaggeration) and another is moisture. Intuitively, if other words in the context have similar or related
meanings, the probability of them will increase. To integrate
semantic information of words, we introduce HowNet (Dong
and Dong 2003) as an external knowledge base. In the view
of HowNet, words may have multiple senses/meanings and
each sense has several sememes to represent it. For instance,
the first sense exaggeration indicates some boast information
in his words. Therefore, it has sememes information and
boast. Similarly, we can also find the sememe boast describing the sense brag which belongs to the word “ChuiNiu
(bragging)” in sentence-2. In this way, model can better determine the sense of words and perceive that two sentences
probably have the same meaning.
Furthermore, word-based models often encounter some
potential issues caused by word segmentation. If the word segmentation fails to output “ChuiNiu (bragging)” in sentence-2,
we will lose useful sense information. In Chinese, “Chui
(blowing)” “Niu (cattle)” is a bad segmentation, which deviates the correct meaning of “ChuiNiu (bragging)”. To
tackle this problem, many researchers propose word lattice

