The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explaining Neural Matrix Factorization with Gradient Rollback
Carolin Lawrence, Timo Sztyler, Mathias Niepert
NEC Laboratories Europe, Kurfürsten-Anlage 36, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany
{carolin.lawrence, timo.sztyler, mathias.niepert}@neclab.eu

Abstract

also be used to estimate the uncertainty for a particular output
by exploring the stability of the output probability before and
after removing a small number of influential training samples.
We propose gradient rollback (GR), a novel approach
for influence estimation. GR is applicable to neural models
trained with gradient descent and is highly efficient especially when the number of parameters that are significantly
changed during any update step is moderately sized. This is
the case for neural matrix factorization methods. Here, we
focus on neural link prediction models for multi-relational
graphs (also known as knowledge base embedding models),
as these models subsume several other matrix factorization
models (Guo et al. 2020). They have found a wide range of
industry applications such as in recommender and question
answering systems. They are, however, black-box models
whose predictions are not inherently interpretable. Other
methods, such as rule-based methods, might be more interpretable, but typically have worse performance. Hence,
neural matrix factorization methods would greatly benefit
from being more interpretable (Bianchi et al. 2020). For an
illustration of matrix factorization and GR see Figure 1.
We explore two crucial questions regarding the utility of
GR. First, we show that GR is highly efficient at both training
and test time, even for large datasets and models. Second, we
show that its influence approximation error is smaller than
known bounds on the stability of stochastic gradient descent
for non-convex problems (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2016).
The stability of an ML model is defined as the maximum
change of its output one can expect on any sample when
retrained on a slightly different set of training samples. The
relationships between uniform stability and generalization of
a learning system is a seminal result (Bousquet and Elisseeff
2002). Here, we establish a close connection between the
stability of a learning system and the challenge of estimating training sample influence and, therefore, explaining the
model’s behavior. Intuitively, the more stable a model, the
more likely is it that we can estimate the influence of training
samples well. We show theoretically that the difference between GR’s influence approximation and the true influence
on the model behavior is (strictly) smaller than known bounds
on the stability of stochastic gradient descent.
We perform experiments on standard matrix factorization
datasets including those for knowledge base completion and
recommender systems. Concretely, GR can explain a pre-

Explaining the predictions of neural black-box models is an
important problem, especially when such models are used in
applications where user trust is crucial. Estimating the influence of training examples on a learned neural model’s behavior
allows us to identify training examples most responsible for a
given prediction and, therefore, to faithfully explain the output
of a black-box model. The most generally applicable existing
method is based on influence functions, which scale poorly
for larger sample sizes and models.
We propose gradient rollback, a general approach for influence
estimation, applicable to neural models where each parameter
update step during gradient descent touches a smaller number of parameters, even if the overall number of parameters is
large. Neural matrix factorization models trained with gradient
descent are part of this model class. These models are popular
and have found a wide range of applications in industry. Especially knowledge graph embedding methods, which belong to
this class, are used extensively. We show that gradient rollback
is highly efficient at both training and test time. Moreover,
we show theoretically that the difference between gradient
rollback’s influence approximation and the true influence on a
model’s behavior is smaller than known bounds on the stability
of stochastic gradient descent. This establishes that gradient
rollback is robustly estimating example influence. We also
conduct experiments which show that gradient rollback provides faithful explanations for knowledge base completion and
recommender datasets. An implementation1 and an appendix2
are available.

Introduction
Estimating the influence a training sample (or a set of training
samples) has on the behavior of a machine learning model
is a problem with several useful applications. First, it can
be used to interpret the behavior of the model by providing
an explanation for its output in form of a set of training
samples that impacted the output the most. In addition to
providing a better understanding of model behavior, influence
estimation has also been used to find adversarial examples,
to uncover domain mismatch, and to determine incorrect or
mislabeled examples (Koh and Liang 2017). Finally, it can
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/carolinlawrence/gradient-rollback
2
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.05516

4987

