The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Partially Non-Autoregressive Image Captioning
Zhengcong Fei1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
feizhengcong@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art image captioning systems usually
generated descriptions autoregressively, i.e., every forward
step conditions on the given image and previously produced
words. The sequential attribution causes a unavoidable decoding latency. Non-autoregressive image captioning, on the
other hand, predicts the entire sentence simultaneously and
accelerates the inference process significantly. However, it
removes the dependence in a caption and commonly suffers from repetition or missing issues. To make a better
trade-off between speed and quality, we introduce a partially non-autoregressive model, named P NAIC, which considers a caption as a series of concatenated word groups. The
groups are generated parallelly in global while each word
in group is predicted from left to right, and thus the captioner can create multiple discontinuous words concurrently
at each time step. More importantly, by incorporating curriculum learning-based training tasks of group length prediction
and invalid group deletion, our model is capable of generating accurate captions as well as preventing common incoherent errors. Extensive experiments on MS COCO benchmark
demonstrate that our proposed method achieves more than
3.5× speedup while maintaining competitive performance.

1

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of autoregressive, partially
non-autoregressive, and non-autoregressive caption decoder.
Autoregressive decoder generates the next word conditioned
on all preceding subsentence, while non-autoregressive decoder outputs all words in parallel. Comparatively, paritally
non-autoregressive decoder produces a caption as a series
of word groups. The groups are generated simultaneously
while each group is generated word-by-word conditioned
on both the image feature and history of all groups, e.g.,
the word “D” in the second group is predicted based on the
words “A”,“C”, and “E”.

Introduction

Describing the visual content of an image accurately and
quickly is a fundamental goal for the artificial intelligence
area, which has a wide range of applications in research and
production. Although image captioning has achieved stateof-the-art performance under an encoder-decoder paradigm
in recent years (Vinyals et al. 2015), most captioning models still suffer from the slow decoding speed problem due
to their autoregressive property, that is, the generation of
next target word depends on the given image and all previously produced words, making the decoding process intrinsically nonparallelizable and the inference high latency (Gu
et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2019). It is unaffordable for real-time
industrial scenarios sometimes. Recently, a flurry of nonautoregressive image captioning methods has been investigated to mitigate the slow decoding speed problem by generating all words independently in parallel (Jason et al. 2018;
Guo et al. 2020; Fei 2019). Specifically, non-autoregressive

models take basically the same structure as the autoregressive Transformer network (Vaswani et al. 2017). However,
instead of conditioning on the previously generated words
as the decoder in autoregressive models, they generate all
words in one step. Nevertheless, because of the lock of sufficient dependency information about surrounding words,
these captioning models suffer from poor captioning quality compared with autoregressive counterparts.
Numerious works have been proposed to handle the above
issues and seeking a trade-off between inference time and
caption performance. Generally, previous approaches can be
divided into two categories. One kind of works focuses on

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1309

