The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

End-to-end Semantic Role Labeling with Neural Transition-based Model
1

Hao Fei,1 Meishan Zhang,2 Bobo Li,1 Donghong Ji1 *

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of
Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Department of School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{hao.fei, boboli, dhji}@whu.edu.cn, mason.zms@gmail.com

Abstract

(1)

End-to-end semantic role labeling (SRL) has been received
increasing interest. It performs the two subtasks of SRL:
predicate identification and argument role labeling, jointly.
Recent work is mostly focused on graph-based neural models,
while the transition-based framework with neural networks
which has been widely used in a number of closely-related
tasks, has not been studied for the joint task yet. In this paper,
we present the first work of transition-based neural models
for end-to-end SRL. Our transition model incrementally discovers all sentential predicates as well as their arguments by
a set of transition actions. The actions of the two subtasks are
executed mutually for full interactions. Besides, we suggest
high-order compositions to extract non-local features, which
can enhance the proposed transition model further. Experimental results on CoNLL09 and Universal Proposition Bank
show that our final model can produce state-of-the-art performance, and meanwhile keeps highly efficient in decoding. We
also conduct detailed experimental analysis for a deep understanding of our proposed model.

stay.01

A1

A3

When victims and witnesses stay silent , nothing changes
1

(2)

2

3

4

5

6

7

A-TMP

8

9

A1

change.01

Figure 1: An example of end-to-end SRL, where two propositions are shown in one sentence.
greatly alleviate the error propagation problem, and meanwhile simplify the overall decoding process, thus receives
increasing attention. Graph-based models have been the
mainstream methods to end-to-end SRL, which are achieved
by enumerating all the possible predicates and their arguments exhaustively (He et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019). Their results show that end-to-end modeling can obtain better SRL performance.
Alternatively, the transition-based framework offers another solution for end-to-end modeling, which is totally orthogonal to the graph-based models. Transition-based models have been widely exploited for end-to-end sequence labeling (Zhang and Clark 2010; Lyu, Zhang, and Ji 2016;
Zhang, Zhang, and Fu 2018), structural parsing (Zhou et al.
2015; Dyer et al. 2015; Yuan, Jiang, and Tu 2019) and relation extraction (Wang et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019), which
are closely related to SRL. These models can also achieve
very competitive performances for a range of tasks, and
meanwhile maintain high efficiencies with linear-time decoding complexity.
In this work, we present the first work of exploiting the
neural transition-based architecture to end-to-end SRL. The
model handles SRL incrementally by predicting a sequence
of transition actions step by step, which are used to detect all
predicates as well as their semantic roles in a given sentence.
The two subtasks of end-to-end SRL, predicate identification and argument role labeling, are performed mutually in a
single model to make full interactions of them. For argument
role labeling, the recognition is conducted in a close-first
way, where the near-predicate roles are processed first. The
partial outputs of the incremental processing are denoted as
transition states. In addition, we suggest explicit high-order
compositions to enhance our transition-based model, lever-

Introduction

Semantic role labeling (SRL), as one of the core tasks to
identify the semantic predicates in text as well as their semantic roles, has sparked much interest in natural language
processing (NLP) community (Pradhan et al. 2005; Lei et al.
2015; Xia et al. 2019). SRL is a shallow semantic parsing,
aiming to uncover the predicate-argument structures, such as
‘who did what to whom, when and where’, The task can be
beneficial for a range number of downstream tasks, such as
information extraction (Christensen et al. 2011; Bastianelli
et al. 2013), question answering (Shen and Lapata 2007; Berant et al. 2013) and machine translation (Xiong, Zhang, and
Li 2012; Shi et al. 2016).
Traditionally, SRL is accomplished via two pipeline steps:
predicate identification (Scheible 2010) and argument role
labeling (Pradhan et al. 2005). More recently, there is growing interest in end-to-end SRL, which aims to achieve both
two subtasks by a single model (He et al. 2018). Given a
sentence, the goal is to recognize all possible predicates together with their arguments jointly. Figure 1 shows an example of end-to-end SRL. The end-to-end joint architecture can
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12803

