The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Few-shot Font Generation with Localized Style Representations and Factorization
Song Park,1,

∗

Sanghyuk Chun,2,

∗

Junbum Cha,3 Bado Lee,3 Hyunjung Shim1,

†

1

School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University
2
NAVER AI LAB
3
NAVER CLOVA
song.park@yonsei.ac.kr, sanghyuk.c@navercorp.com, junbum.cha@navercorp.com, bado.lee@navercorp.com,
kateshim@yonsei.ac.kr
Abstract

In this paper, we tackle a few-shot font generation problem; generating a new font library with very few references,
e.g., 8. Without additional training procedure (e.g., finetune
the model on the reference characters), our goal is to generate high quality, diverse styles in the few-shot font generation scenario. Our few-shot generation scenario consists
of training and generation stages. During model training, we
rely on many paired data which is easily accessible by public font libraries. On the other hand, at the generation stage,
we use only few-shot examples as unseen style references
without additional model finetuning. This scenario is particularly effective when the target style glyphs are expensive
to collect, e.g., historical handwriting, but we have a large
database for existing fonts, or computing resources are limited to run additional finetuning, e.g., on mobile devices. A
popular strategy to tackle the same problem is to separate
style and content representations from the given glyph images (Sun et al. 2018; Zhang, Zhang, and Cai 2018; Gao
et al. 2019; Srivatsan et al. 2019). These methods generate a
full font library by combining the target style representation
and the source content representations.
However, previous few-shot font generation methods
learn a universal style representation for each style, limited
in representing diverse local styles. It is particularly problematic when generating fonts for glyph-rich scripts, e.g.,
Chinese, Korean, and Thai. Every Chinese character consists
of a varying number of components (often called “radical”)
with a highly complex structure. This property induces the
visual quality of a Chinese character to be highly sensitive
to local damage or a distinctive local component-wise style.
The same issue was also pointed out by Cha et al.
(2020a,b) in that many previous methods often fail to transfer unseen styles for the few-shot Korean and Thai generation. To alleviate this problem, Cha et al. (2020a) propose
dual-memory architecture, named DM-Font. DM-font extracts component-wise local features for all components at
once, and then save them into two types of memory. Despite
its notable generation quality, DM-Font is restricted to complete compositional scripts, such as Korean and Thai (Cha
et al. 2020a,b). While each Korean or Thai character can
be decomposed into the fixed number of components and
positions, more complex script like Chinese can be decomposed into varying components and positions. As a result,
DM-Font fails to disentangle complex glyph structures and

Automatic few-shot font generation is a practical and widely
studied problem because manual designs are expensive and
sensitive to the expertise of designers. Existing few-shot font
generation methods aim to learn to disentangle the style and
content element from a few reference glyphs, and mainly focus on a universal style representation for each font style.
However, such approach limits the model in representing diverse local styles, and thus makes it unsuitable to the most
complicated letter system, e.g., Chinese, whose characters
consist of a varying number of components (often called “radical”) with a highly complex structure. In this paper, we propose a novel font generation method by learning localized
styles, namely component-wise style representations, instead
of universal styles. The proposed style representations enable us to synthesize complex local details in text designs.
However, learning component-wise styles solely from reference glyphs is infeasible in the few-shot font generation
scenario, when a target script has a large number of components, e.g., over 200 for Chinese. To reduce the number
of reference glyphs, we simplify component-wise styles by
a product of component factor and style factor, inspired by
low-rank matrix factorization. Thanks to the combination of
strong representation and a compact factorization strategy,
our method shows remarkably better few-shot font generation
results (with only 8 reference glyph images) than other stateof-the-arts, without utilizing strong locality supervision, e.g.,
location of each component, skeleton, or strokes. The source
code is available at https://github.com/clovaai/lffont.

Introduction
Text is a critical resource taking a considerable portion of the
information on the web. Thus, text design is essential to improve the quality of services and user experiences. However,
font design is labor-intensive and heavily depends on the expertise of designers, especially for glyph-rich scripts such
as Chinese. For this reason, various font generation methods
have been investigated to address a few-shot font generation
problem, which uses only a few reference font images for
automatically generating all the glyphs.
∗

Equal contribution. Work done at NAVER CLOVA.
Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2393

