The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ACMo: Angle-Calibrated Moment Methods for Stochastic Optimization
Xunpeng Huang, 1 Runxin Xu, 2, * , Hao Zhou, 1 Zhe Wang, 3, * Zhengyang Liu, 4, * Lei Li 1
1

Bytedance AI Lab, Shanghai, China
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Ohio State University, Columbus , Ohio , United States
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{huangxunpeng, zhouhao.nlp, lileilab}@bytedance.com,
runxinxu@gmail.com, wang.10982@osu.edu, zhengyang@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Additionally, second moments are used to adapt the learning rate of model parameters (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer
2011), performing smaller updates (i.e. low learning rates)
for parameters associated with frequently occurring features
and larger updates (i.e. high learning rates) for those associated with infrequent features. This always accelerates the
optimization process towards the objective. Moreover, Adam
is proposed to utilize both of first and second moments for
enjoying both of their benefits (Kingma and Ba 2015). Currently, it is one of the most widely used methods for neural
network training.
Although Adam has achieved a great success, we argue
that introducing extra second moments is not necessarily the
best way to boost the optimization efficiency. First, by designing special optimization problems, the solution of adaptive
gradient methods with second moments may fall into a local
minima of pool generalization (Wilson et al. 2017). Second,
keeping a copy of second moments (with the same size as the
parameters) brings high memory overhead, leading to smaller
mini-batch size for training. This may adversely affect the
performance of many applications that are sensitive to training batch size. Given the above concerns, could we design an
optimization approach that only uses first moments but enjoys
the benefits of both first (better generalization by escaping
saddle points) and second (fast convergence with adaptive
learning) moments?
In this paper, we offer an affirmative to the question by
proposing an Angle-Calibrated Moment method (ACMo)
for stochastic optimization. ACMo takes a further step by
explicitly requiring that the opposite direction of current
descent be in acute angles with both the current gradient and
the directions of historical mini-batch updating. Given the
angle constraint, ACMo is likely to ensure descents for all
mini-batch losses, while guaranteeing sufficient descent of
current mini batches. Although ACMo has abandoned the
second moment, on which many other methods rely, it still
takes the advantage of fast convergence as those methods.
We summarize our contributions below
• We propose ACMo, which is a new SGD variant. To the
best of our knowledge, ACMo is the first approach without relying on second moments, but still has comparable
convergence speed as compared with Adam-type methods.
• We provide a novel view and an intuitive analysis to under-

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a widely used method for
its outstanding generalization ability and simplicity. Adaptive
gradient methods have been proposed to further accelerate
the optimization process. In this paper, we revisit existing
adaptive gradient optimization methods with a new interpretation. Such new perspective leads to a refreshed understanding of the roles of second moments in stochastic optimization. Based on this, we propose Angle-Calibration Moment
method (ACMo), a novel stochastic optimization method. It
enjoys the benefits of second moments with only first moment updates. Theoretical analysis shows that ACMo is able
to achieve the same convergence rate as mainstream adaptive methods. Experiments on a variety of CV and NLP tasks
demonstrate that ACMo has a comparable convergence to
state-of-the-art Adam-type optimizers, and even a better generalization performance in most cases. The code is available
at https://github.com/Xunpeng746/ACMo.

Introduction
Deep neural network has been widely adopted in different
applications because of its excellent performance, which always requires a huge amount of data for training. Calculating
the full gradient of data and performing the full gradient descent (GD) become computationally expensive. Therefore,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become very popular
for training deep neural networks. Empirically, in each step
of the training, SGD samples a mini-batch of data and applies
gradient descent with the corresponding stochastic gradients
computed on the mini-batch.
In practice however, the vanilla SGD does not always produce good results, in which case many SGD variants are
proposed. Especially, relevant work has shown that incorporating momentum information into SGD can help with its
optimization process. Specifically, by introducing the first
moment, the SGD momentum can help the model escape
from some saddle points, and therefore improve its generalization. Intuitively, vanilla SGD walks along the steepest
path, whereas the added momentum makes the optimization
process smoother and quicker, thus helping the model to
barrel through narrow valleys.
* Work is done while at Bytedance AI Lab.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7857

