The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Is the Most Accurate AI the Best Teammate? Optimizing AI for Teamwork
Gagan Bansal,1 Besmira Nushi,2 Ece Kamar,2 Eric Horvitz,2 Daniel S. Weld 1, 3
1

University of Washington
2
Microsoft Research
3
Allen Institute for AI
{bansalg, weld}@cs.washington.edu, {nushi, eckamar, horvitz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
AI practitioners typically strive to develop the most accurate
systems, making an implicit assumption that the AI system
will function autonomously. However, in practice, AI systems
often are used to provide advice to people in domains ranging from criminal justice and finance to healthcare. In such
AI-advised decision making, humans and machines form a
team, where the human is responsible for making final decisions. But is the most accurate AI the best teammate? We
argue “not necessarily” — predictable performance may be
worth a slight sacrifice in AI accuracy. Instead, we argue that
AI systems should be trained in a human-centered manner,
directly optimized for team performance. We study this proposal for a specific type of human-AI teaming, where the human overseer chooses to either accept the AI recommendation or solve the task themselves. To optimize the team performance for this setting we maximize the team’s expected
utility, expressed in terms of the quality of the final decision,
cost of verifying, and individual accuracies of people and machines. Our experiments with linear and non-linear models
on real-world, high-stakes datasets show that the most accuracy AI may not lead to highest team performance and show
the benefit of modeling teamwork during training through improvements in expected team utility across datasets, considering parameters such as human skill and the cost of mistakes. We discuss the shortcoming of current optimization approaches beyond well-studied loss functions such as log-loss,
and encourage future work on AI optimization problems motivated by human-AI collaboration.

1

Figure 1: Consider a binary classification problem (purple
vs. yellow). Assume each blob is uniformly distributed and
of the same size. In a human-AI team, a more accurate classifier (h1 , left pane, learned using log-loss) may produce
lower team utility than a less accurate model (h2 , right pane).
Suppose the human can either quickly accept the AI’s recommendation or solve the task themselves, incurring a cost
λ in time or effort, to yield a more reliable result. The payoff matrix describes the utility of different outcomes. We
explore the policy where humans accept recommendations
when the AI is confident, but verify uncertain predictions
(shown in the light grey region surrounding each hyperplane). While h2 is less accurate than h1 (because B is incorrectly classified), it results in a higher team utility: Since h2
moved A outside the verify region, there are more correctly
classified inputs on which the user can rely on the system.

Introduction

Many AI systems are developed for use in collaborative settings, where people work with an AI teammate. For example, numerous applications of AI have been designed as advisory tools, providing input to people who are tasked with
making final decisions. Beyond the appropriateness of people making the final calls, the advisory role of AI systems
may be obligatory; legal requirements may prohibit complete automation (GDPR 2020; Nickelsburg 2020). Studies have demonstrated domains and tasks where humanAI teams may perform better than either the AI or human
alone (Nagar and Malone 2011; Patel et al. 2019; Kamar,

Hacker, and Horvitz 2012). For human-AI teams, optimizing the performance of the whole team is more important
than optimizing the performance of an individual member.
Yet, to date, the AI community has focused on maximizing
the individual accuracy of machine-learned models, assuming implicitly that this will optimize team performance. This
raises an important question: Is the most accurate AI the best
possible teammate for a human?
We argue that the most accurate model is not necessarily the best teammate. We show this formally, but the intuition is simple. Considering human-human teams, Is the
best-ranked tennis player necessarily the best doubles team-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11405

