The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Flexible Framework for Communication-Efficient Machine Learning
Sarit Khirirat 1 , Sindri Magnússon 2 , Arda Aytekin 3 , Mikael Johansson 1
1

2

Division of Decision and Control Systems, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden;
Department of Computer and System Science, Stockholm University, Sweden; 3 Ericsson, Sweden
sarit@kth.se, sindri.magnusson@dsv.su.se, arda@aytekin.biz, mikaelj@kth.se

gradient per second. The huge communication load easily
overburdens training even on loosely interconnected clusters and may render federated learning on some IoT or edge
devices infeasible.
To alleviate the communication bottleneck, much recent research has focused on compressed gradient methods.
These methods achieve communication efficiency by using
only the most informative parts of the gradients at each iteration. We may, for example, sparsify the gradient, i.e. use
only the most significant entries at each iteration and set the
rest to be zero (Alistarh et al. 2017, 2018; Stich, Cordonnier, and Jaggi 2018; Wen et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018;
Khirirat, Johansson, and Alistarh 2018; Wangni et al. 2018).
We may also quantize the gradient elements or do some
mix of quantization and sparsification (Alistarh et al. 2017;
Khirirat, Feyzmahdavian, and Johansson 2018; Magnússon
et al. 2017; Wangni et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2016; Rabbat
and Nowak 2005; Vogels, Karimireddy, and Jaggi 2020;
Magnússon, Shokri-Ghadikolaei, and Li 2020).
Several of the cited papers have demonstrated huge communication improvements for specific training problems.
However, these communication benefits are often realized
after a careful tuning of the compression level before training, e.g. the number of elements to keep when sparsifying
the gradient. We cannot expect there to be a universally good
compressor that works well on all problems, as shown by the
worst-case communication complexity of any optimization
methods in (Tsitsiklis and Luo 1987). There is generally a
delicate problem-specific balance between compressing too
much or too little. Trying to strike the right balance by hyperparameter tuning is expensive and the resulting tuning parameters will be problem-specific. Moreover, most existing
compression schemes are agnostic of the disparate communication costs for different technologies. In contrast, our proposed on-line mechanism adapts the compression level to
each gradient information and each platform-specific communication cost.
Contributions: We consider deterministic and stochastic
gradient methods in distributed settings where compressed
gradients are communicated at every iteration. We propose
a flexible framework for an on-line adaption of the gradient compression level to the problem data and communication technology used. This Communication-aware Adaptive Tuning (CAT) optimally adjusts the compression of

Abstract
With the increasing scale of machine learning tasks, it has
become essential to reduce the communication between computing nodes. Early work on gradient compression focused on
the bottleneck between CPUs and GPUs, but communicationefficiency is now needed in a variety of different system architectures, from high-performance clusters to energyconstrained IoT devices. In the current practice, compression
levels are typically chosen before training and settings that
work well for one task may be vastly sub-optimal for another
dataset on another architecture. In this paper, we propose a
flexible framework which adapts the compression level to the
true gradient at each iteration, maximizing the improvement
in the objective function that is achieved per communicated
bit. Our framework is easy to adapt from one technology to
the next by modeling how the communication cost depends
on the compression level for the specific technology. Theoretical results and practical experiments indicate that the automatic tuning strategies significantly increase communication
efficiency on several state-of-the-art compression schemes.

Introduction
The vast size of modern machine learning is shifting the focus on optimization and learning algorithms from centralized to distributed architectures. State-of-the-art models are
now typically trained using multiple CPUs or GPUs, and
data is increasingly being collected and processed in networks of resource-constrained devices, e.g., IoT devices,
smart phones, or wireless sensors. This trend is shifting the
bottleneck from the computation to the communication. The
shift is particularly striking when learning is performed on
energy-constrained devices that communicate over shared
wireless channels. Indeed, distributed training is often communication bound since the associated optimization algorithms hinge on frequent transmissions of gradients between
nodes. These gradients are typically huge: it is not uncommon for state-of-the-art models to have millions of parameters. To get a sense of the corresponding communication
cost, transmitting a single gradient or stochastic gradient using single precision (32 bits per entry) requires 40 MB for a
model with 10 million parameters. If we use 4G communications, this means that we can expect to transmit roughly one
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8101

