The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning General Policies from Small Examples Without Supervision
Guillem Francès,1 Blai Bonet,1 Hector Geffner2
1

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
guillem.frances@upf.edu, bonetblai@gmail.com, hector.geffner@upf.edu
2

Abstract

qualitative numerical planning problem or QNP (Srivastava
et al. 2011). A QNP is a standard STRIPS planning model
extended with non-negative numerical variables that can be
decreased or increased “qualitatively”; i.e., by uncertain positive amounts, short of making the variables negative. Unlike
standard planning with numerical variables (Helmert 2002),
QNP planning is decidable, and QNPs can be compiled
in polynomial time into fully observable non-deterministic
(FOND) problems (Bonet and Geffner 2020)
The main advantage of the formulation of generalized
planning based on QNPs is that it applies to standard relational domains where the pool of (ground) actions change
from instance to instance. On the other hand, while the planning domain is assumed to be given, the QNP abstraction is
not, and hence it has to be written by hand or learned. This
is the approach of Bonet, Francès, and Geffner (2019) where
generalized plans are obtained by learning the QNP abstraction from the domain representation and sample plans, and
then solving the abstraction with a QNP planner.
In this work, we build on this thread but introduce an alternative approach for computing general policies that is simpler, yet more powerful. The learning problem is cast as a
self-supervised classification problem where (1) a pool of
features is automatically generated from a general grammar
applied to the domain predicates, and (2) a small subset of
features is sought for separating “good” from “bad” state
transitions, and goals from non-goals. The problems of finding the “separating surface” while labeling the transitions as
“good” or “bad” are addressed jointly as a single combinatorial optimization task solved with a Weighted Max-SAT
solver. The approach yields general policies for a number of
benchmark domains.
The paper is organized as follows. We first review related
work and classical planning, and introduce a new language
for expressing general policies motivated by the work on
QNPs. We then present the learning task, the computational
approach for solving it, and the experimental results.

Generalized planning is concerned with the computation of
general policies that solve multiple instances of a planning
domain all at once. It has been recently shown that these policies can be computed in two steps: first, a suitable abstraction in the form of a qualitative numerical planning problem
(QNP) is learned from sample plans, then the general policies are obtained from the learned QNP using a planner. In
this work, we introduce an alternative approach for computing more expressive general policies which does not require
sample plans or a QNP planner. The new formulation is very
simple and can be cast in terms that are more standard in machine learning: a large but finite pool of features is defined
from the predicates in the planning examples using a general
grammar, and a small subset of features is sought for separating “good” from “bad” state transitions, and goals from
non-goals. The problems of finding such a “separating surface” while labeling the transitions as “good” or “bad” are
jointly addressed as a single combinatorial optimization problem expressed as a Weighted Max-SAT problem. The advantage of looking for the simplest policy in the given feature
space that solves the given examples, possibly non-optimally,
is that many domains have no general, compact policies that
are optimal. The approach yields general policies for a number of benchmark domains.

Introduction
Generalized planning is concerned with the computation of
general policies or plans that solve multiple instances of a
given planning domain all at once (Srivastava, Immerman,
and Zilberstein 2008; Bonet, Palacios, and Geffner 2009; Hu
and De Giacomo 2011; Belle and Levesque 2016; Segovia,
Jiménez, and Jonsson 2016). For example, a general plan for
clearing a block x in any instance of Blocksworld involves
a loop where the topmost block above x is picked up and
placed on the table until no such block remains. A general
plan for solving any Blocksworld instance is also possible,
like one where misplaced blocks and those above them are
moved to the table, and then to their targets in order. The
key question in generalized planning is how to represent and
compute such general plans from the domain representation.
In one of the most general formulations, general policies
are obtained from an abstract planning model expressed as a

Related Work
The computation of general plans from domain encodings
and sample plans has been addressed in a number of works
(Khardon 1999; Martı́n and Geffner 2004; Fern, Yoon, and
Givan 2006; Silver et al. 2020). Generalized planning has
also been formulated as a problem in first-order logic (Sri-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11801

