The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SWIFT: Scalable Wasserstein Factorization for Sparse Nonnegative Tensors
Ardavan Afshar,1 Kejing Yin,2 Sherry Yan,3 Cheng Qian,4 Joyce Ho,5 Haesun Park,1 Jimeng Sun6
1

Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
3
Research Development & Dissemination, Sutter Health, Walnut Creek, USA
4
Analytic Center of Excellence, IQVIA, Cambridge, USA
5
Department of Computer Science, Emory University, Atlanta, USA
6
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA
aafshar8@gatech.edu, cskjyin@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, YanSX@sutterhealth.org, alextoqc@gmail.com,
joyce.c.ho@emory.edu, hpark@cc.gatech.edu, jimeng@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

sparsity (Henderson et al. 2017), orthogonality (Wang et al.
2015), and smoothness (Afshar et al. 2018) are imposed on
tensor methods in order to improve the performance both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Moreover, depending on the
nature of input data, tensor methods fit different distributions on data including Gaussian (Bader and Kolda 2007),
Poisson (Chi and Kolda 2012), Bernoulli (Hong, Kolda, and
Duersch 2020) distributions and minimize various empirical
loss functions such as sum square loss, KL-divergence, and
log-loss. However, there are several limitations with these
techniques. 1) Existing factorization models often assume
some specific data distributions, yet in practice, the underlying distributions are complicated and often unknown. 2)
The nature of these factorization models neglects correlation
relations within each tensor mode (such as external knowledge about similarity among those features). Although there
are several extensions to tensor factorization approaches that
consider these similarity matrices as side information (Acar,
Kolda, and Dunlavy 2011; Kim et al. 2017), they are derived
under Gaussian distribution and are not directly generalizable
to unknown distributions.
Recent success of Wasserstein distance or loss (a.k.a. earth
mover’s distance or optimal transport distance) shows its
potential as a better measure of the difference between two
distributions (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Cuturi
2013; Frogner et al. 2015). This distance metric provides a
natural measure of the distance between two distributions
via a ground metric of choice and can be defined as the cost
of the optimal transport plan for moving the mass in the
source distribution to match that in the target one. Recently,
Wasserstein distance has been applied to matrix factorization
and dictionary learning problems with great success (Sandler
and Lindenbaum 2009; Rolet, Cuturi, and Peyré 2016; Qian
et al. 2016; Schmitz et al. 2018; Varol, Nejatbakhsh, and
McGrory 2019). To the best of our knowledge, its extension
to tensor factorization was never studied and is in fact nontrivial due to the following challenges:

Existing tensor factorization methods assume that the input tensor follows some specific distribution (i.e. Poisson, Bernoulli,
and Gaussian), and solve the factorization by minimizing some
empirical loss functions defined based on the corresponding
distribution. However, it suffers from several drawbacks: 1)
In reality, the underlying distributions are complicated and
unknown, making it infeasible to be approximated by a simple
distribution. 2) The correlation across dimensions of the input
tensor is not well utilized, leading to sub-optimal performance.
Although heuristics were proposed to incorporate such correlation as side information under Gaussian distribution, they
can not easily be generalized to other distributions. Thus, a
more principled way of utilizing the correlation in tensor factorization models is still an open challenge. Without assuming
any explicit distribution, we formulate the tensor factorization
as an optimal transport problem with Wasserstein distance,
which can handle non-negative inputs.
We introduce SWIFT, which minimizes the Wasserstein distance that measures the distance between the input tensor
and that of the reconstruction. In particular, we define the
N -th order tensor Wasserstein loss for the widely used tensor CP factorization and derive the optimization algorithm
that minimizes it. By leveraging sparsity structure and different equivalent formulations for optimizing computational
efficiency, SWIFT is as scalable as other well-known CP algorithms. Using the factor matrices as features, SWIFT achieves
up to 9.65% and 11.31% relative improvement over baselines
for downstream prediction tasks. Under the noisy conditions,
SWIFT achieves up to 15% and 17% relative improvements
over the best competitors for the prediction tasks.

Introduction
Tensor factorization techniques are effective and powerful
tools for analyzing multi-modal data and have been shown
tremendous success in a wide range of applications including spatio-temporal analysis (Bahadori, Yu, and Liu 2014;
Fanaee-T and Gama 2016), graph analysis (Gujral, Pasricha,
and Papalexakis 2020), and health informatics (Yin et al.
2019; He, Henderson, and Ho 2019) applications. Many constraints such as non-negativity (Kim, He, and Park 2014),

• Wasserstein loss is not well-defined for tensors: The
Wasserstein loss is originally defined over vectors, where
each entry of the vector represents one physical location
and the cost of transporting from one location to another is

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6548

