The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Theoretically Principled Deep RL Acceleration via
Nearest Neighbor Function Approximation
Junhong Shen, Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
jhshen@ucla.edu, linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract

Levine et al. 2016; Gu et al. 2017), Go (Silver et al. 2016)
and Atari playing (Mnih et al. 2013). However, several challenges still exist. First, the theoretical foundation of deep
RL has not been fully established (Arulkumaran et al. 2017;
Lake et al. 2018). It is often mysterious why an algorithm
works or fails in certain cases (Kansky et al. 2017). Second, empirical results suggest that model-free deep RL often
requires considerable samples to learn (Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011). Nonetheless, data can be expensive to acquire
in practical domains like healthcare (Kober, Bagnell, and
Peters 2013). High-dimensional input, such as pixel data,
demands a larger sample size even if the problem itself is
simple (Lillicrap et al. 2016). Third, online learning coupled
with neural networks is generally regarded as unstable (van
Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016). Hyperparameter tuning can
also affect the learning outcome. In sum, improving deep RL
with theory-based approaches is of critical importance.
On the other hand, great theoretical progress has been
made in tabular RL, where the state-action spaces are small
and finite. The sample complexity of tabular methods are
properly studied (e.g., Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2008; Azar,
Osband, and Munos 2017; Jin et al. 2018; Zanette and Brunskill 2019). Yet the best obtainable complexity depends linearly on the number of states, which can be huge in reality,
e.g., the game of Go has about 319×19 states. Thus, realworld application of tabular theories remains a challenge.
In this paper, we bridge the gap between RL theory and
practice by a theoretically principled deep RL acceleration
technique. Specifically, we exploit the structural properties
of the state-action space by using the nearest neighbor (NN)1
approximator for value estimation. Such a function approximator not only attains a theoretical guarantee in sample complexity but also possesses good generalization ability when
plugged into deep RL frameworks. In fact, we show that
the NN approximator with an upper-confidence construction
obtains a near-optimal regret O[H(DLK)d/(d+1) ] for both
low- and high-dimensional inputs in deterministic systems,
where K is the number of episodes, H is the episode length,
L is a Lipschitz constant related to the distance metric measuring state similarities, D and d are respectively the diameter and dimension of the intrinsic state-action space.

Recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable empirical success by integrating deep neural networks into RL frameworks. However, these algorithms often
require a large number of training samples and admit little
theoretical understanding. To mitigate these issues, we propose a theoretically principled nearest neighbor (NN) function approximator that can improve the value networks in
deep RL methods. Inspired by human similarity judgments,
the NN approximator estimates the action values using rollouts on past observations and can provably obtain a small
regret bound that depends only on the intrinsic complexity of the environment. We present (1) Nearest Neighbor
Actor-Critic (NNAC), an online policy gradient algorithm
that demonstrates the practicality of combining function approximation with deep RL, and (2) a plug-and-play NN update module that aids the training of existing deep RL methods. Experiments on classical control and MuJoCo locomotion tasks show that the NN-accelerated agents achieve higher
sample efficiency and stability than the baseline agents.
Based on its theoretical benefits, we believe that the NN approximator can be further applied to other complex domains
to speed-up learning.

Introduction
People learn a variety of relationships in life, e.g., we associate the force of pressing the gas pedal with the amount
of acceleration gained while driving. In the context of reinforcement learning (RL), where an agent interacts with the
environment to maximize the cumulative rewards, the learning objective is the relationship between state-action pairs
and future gains. Theories on associative learning suggest
that people learn from similarity measures (Carroll 1963;
Busemeyer et al. 1997): if x can predict y, they presume that
observations similar to x have similar y values. It is thus
natural to consider integrating similarity-based models into
active learning. A suitable choice for the RL setting is the
nearest neighbor function approximator (Emigh et al. 2016;
Shah and Xie 2018; Yang, Ni, and Wang 2019).
We study online episodic RL with unknown reward and
transition functions. Existing deep RL algorithms achieve
impressive results in robot control (e.g., Lillicrap et al. 2016;

1
Throughout the paper, the abbreviation “NN” is used to refer
to “nearest neighbor,” not “neural network.”

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9558

