The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Flexibly Distributional Representation for Low-quality 3D Face
Recognition
Zihui Zhang, Cuican Yu, Shuang Xu, Huibin Li ∗
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{zhangzihui247, ccy2017, shuangxu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, huibinli@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the superiority of using geometric information, 3D
Face Recognition (FR) has achieved great successes. Existing methods focus on high-quality 3D FR which is unpractical in real scenarios. Low-quality 3D FR is a more realistic
scenario but the low-quality data are born with heavy noises.
Therefore, exploring noise-robust low-quality 3D FR methods becomes an urgent and challenging problem. To solve
this issue, in this paper, we propose to learn flexibly distributional representation for low-quality 3D FR. Firstly, we introduce the distributional representation for low-quality 3D
faces due to that it can weaken the impact of noises. Generally, the distributional representation of a given 3D face is
restricted to a specific distribution such as Gaussian distribution. However, the specific distribution may be not up to
describing the complex low-quality face. Therefore, we propose to transform this specific distribution to a flexible one via Continuous Normalizing Flow (CNF), which can get rid of
the form limitation. This kind of flexible distribution can approximate the latent distribution of the given noisy face more
accurately, which further improves accuracy of low-quality
3D FR. Comprehensive experiments show that our proposed
method improves both low-quality and cross-quality 3D FR
performances on low-quality benchmarks. Furthermore, the
improvements are more remarkable on low-quality 3D faces
when the intensity of noise increases which indicate the robustness.

Figure 1: Illustration of high and low quality 3D face scans

et al. 2008), BU3D-FE (Yin et al. 2006), a large number
of 3D FR methods have been proposed during the past two decades (Gilani, Mian, and Eastwood 2017; Blanz and
Vetter 2003; Gilani and Mian 2018) and achieve high accuracies. It should be noted that almost all these methods
focus on 3D FR with high-quality 3D face scans captured
by high-precision 3D scanners. Although very high performances can be achieved, their 3D FR systems generally suffer from the problems of time-consuming data acquisition,
difficulty of moving and high cost, and thus are still far from
practical applications.
Recent years, the popularization of consumer depth cameras such as Kinect and RealSense, paves the way for real applications of 3D FR systems. Comparing with highprecision 3D scanners, consumer depth cameras are much
cheaper and smaller, and they have a very high frame rate
which is very important for real-time data acquisition and
algorithm processing. Unfortunately, the data captured by
those consumer depth cameras are often noisy and thus lowquality as shown in Figure 1. Therefore, it is quite necessary
to explore noise-robust algorithm for low-quality 3D FR.
There have been some prior studies on low-quality 3D FR.
Early explorations use traditional methods (Berretti, Bimbo,
and Pala 2012; Goswami et al. 2013; Min, Kose, and Dugelay 2014) such as ICP and PCA get promising results. However, the databases they used are unpractical because of few
subjects or variations. Lock3DFace (Zhang et al. 2016) is
the first large-scale benchmark which is appropriate for lowquality 3D FR. Later, Cui et al. gives a deep CNN based
baseline, while the authors focus on RGB-D FR and use a
private dataset to pre-train. In current state-of-the-art method

Introduction
Due to the rapid development of deep learning and big data
techniques, 2D face recognition (FR) has achieved great successes (Deng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018;
Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) and has drawn extensive attention in both academic community and industrial
community. However, existing 2D FR systems are still vulnerable to lighting, pose variations, makeup, presentation attacks and so on. 3D FR, which works by comparing facial
geometry shapes, is inherently robust to 2D texture related disturbing factors such as different races, shading, face
paint, video replay attack, print photo attack, etc.
With the public release of 3D face databases and benchmarks, e.g. FRGC (Phillips et al. 2005), Bosphorus (Savran
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3465

