The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing Balanced Graph Edge Partition with Effective Local Search
∗

Zhenyu Guo,1 Mingyu Xiao, 1 Yi Zhou, 1 Dongxiang Zhang, 2 Kian-Lee Tan 3
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Zhejiang University
3
National University of Singapore
Harry.Guo@outlook.com, myxiao@gmail.com, zhouyi0922@gmail.com, zhangdongxiang@zju.edu.cn,
tankl@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract

proven to be NP-Hard (Goemans and Williamson 1995;
Feder et al. 1999).
Vertex partition is a popular model in which the workload
of each part is evaluated by its number of vertices and
the communication overhead between two parts is evaluated by their connecting edges in the original graph. In the
past decades, there have been significant efforts devoted to
this problem, including both theoretical results (Andreev
and Racke 2006; Feldmann 2013) and heuristic algorithms.
However, the performance of vertex partition models may
degrade for parallel algorithms to handle power-law graphs
(Gonzalez et al. 2012). In fact, most natural graphs follow
a skewed degree distribution similar to the power-law distribution (Faloutsos, Faloutsos, and Faloutsos 1999; Newman,
Strogatz, and Watts 2001). We can observe that in realworld graphs, a small fraction of vertices may connect to
a large part of the graph. For example, celebrities in a social
network attract a huge number of followers. This property
brings non-trivial challenges to vertex partitioners, including workload balance, partitioning, communication, storage,
and computation (Gonzalez et al. 2012).
To address the issue of power-law distribution, edge partition was introduced to partition the graph based on edge
sets (Gonzalez et al. 2012). A vertex is allowed to appear in multiple parts sharing this vertex. The workload
of edge partition is evaluated by the number of edges in
each part while the communication overhead is evaluated
by the replication factor, which indicates the average time
of each vertex appearing in all the parts. Edge partition
is more efficient in power-law graphs, and several parallel
graph processing systems, including PowerGraph (Gonzalez
et al. 2012), Spark GraphX (Gonzalez et al. 2014) and Chaos
(Roy et al. 2015), have adopted edge partition as the default
partition strategy.

Graph partition is a key component to achieve workload
balance and reduce job completion time in parallel graph
processing systems. Among the various partition strategies,
edge partition has demonstrated more promising performance
in power-law graphs than vertex partition and thereby has
been more widely adopted as the default partition strategy
by existing graph systems. The graph edge partition problem,
which is to split the edge set into multiple balanced parts to
minimize the total number of copied vertices, has been widely
studied from the view of optimization and algorithms. In this
paper, we study local search algorithms for this problem to
further improve the partition results from existing methods.
More specifically, we propose two novel concepts, namely
adjustable edges and blocks. Based on these, we develop a
greedy heuristic as well as an improved search algorithm
utilizing the property of the max-flow model. To evaluate
the performance of our algorithms, we first provide adequate
theoretical analysis in terms of the approximation quality. We
significantly improve the previously known approximation
ratio for this problem. Then we conduct extensive experiments on a large number of benchmark datasets and stateof-the-art edge partition strategies. The results show that our
proposed local search framework can further improve the
quality of graph partition by a wide margin.

Introduction
Graph partition plays a key role in performance improvement for massive graph processing systems. In a distributed
graph system, such as Google Pregel (Malewicz et al. 2010),
GraphX (Gonzalez et al. 2014), and GraphLab (Low et al.
2012), the original graph may be too large to fit in memory
and has to be partitioned into multiple parts which are processed in parallel by multiple machines. The quality of graph
partition is often measured by two important performance
criteria. One is workload balance which expects the sizes of
the partitioned parts to be as equal as possible. The goal is
to reduce the overall job completion time (JCT) in parallel
systems, where the bottleneck is caused by the slowest job.
The other is communication overhead whose objective is to
minimize the connection among the parts. It is challenging
to compute the optimal partition as the problem has been

Contributions
In this paper, we focus on edge partition. Instead of proposing a new edge partition method, we adopt local search
techniques to further improve the partition results from existing methods. We will prove several structural properties of
edge partition and introduce two novel concepts named adjustable edges and blocks. Based on these concepts, we develop two types of effective local search algorithms, namely
LS-G and LS-F, which are complementary to state-of-the-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12336

