The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Does Head Label Help for Long-Tailed Multi-Label Text Classification
Lin Xiao1 , Xiangliang Zhang 2 , Liping Jing 1∗ , Chi Huang 1 , Mingyang Song1
1

Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology(KAUST), Saudi Arabia
xiaolin@bjtu.edu.cn, xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa, lpjing@bjtu.edu.cn,
17271034@bjtu.edu.cn, 19112026@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-label text classification (MLTC) aims to annotate documents with the most relevant labels from a number of candidate labels. In real applications, the distribution of label frequency often exhibits a long tail, i.e., a few labels are associated with a large number of documents (a.k.a. head labels),
while a large fraction of labels are associated with a small
number of documents (a.k.a. tail labels). To address the challenge of insufficient training data on tail label classification,
we propose a Head-to-Tail Network (HTTN) to transfer the
meta-knowledge from the data-rich head labels to data-poor
tail labels. The meta-knowledge is the mapping from fewshot network parameters to many-shot network parameters,
which aims to promote the generalizability of tail classifiers.
Extensive experimental results on three benchmark datasets
demonstrate that HTTN consistently outperforms the stateof-the-art methods. The code and hyper-parameter settings
are released for reproducibility1 .

(a) Label distribution in AAPD (b) Label distribution in RCV1

Introduction

(c) Label correlation in AAPD (d) Label correlation in RCV1

Multi-label text classification has become one of the core
tasks in natural language processing and has been widely
applied in topic recognition (Yang et al. 2016), question answering (Kumar et al. 2016), sentimental analysis (Cambria,
Olsher, and Rajagopal 2014) and so on. Even though various techniques have been proposed for multi-label learning,
it is still a challenging task due to two main characteristics. One important statistical characteristic is that multi-label
data usually follows a paw-law distribution (called as longtailed), especially for data with large number of labels. As
shown in Figure 1 (a)-(b),a few labels are associated with
a large number of documents (a.k.a. head labels), while a
large fraction of labels are associated with a small number
of documents (a.k.a. tail labels). In this situation, learning
classifiers for tail labels is much more difficult than that for
head labels, due to the poor generalizability caused by insufficient training instances.
The other is label dependency because multiple labels
may be assigned to one document, which makes it hard to
separate classes with common instances. On the other hand,

Figure 1: The label distribution and pairwise label correlation coefficients in AAPD and RCV1 datasets. Here, labels
are ordered by their frequency from the highest to the lowest
in all subfigures. The points with bright color indicate higher
correlation between labels in subfigure (c)-(d).

fortunately, such label dependency is helpful to construct the correlation among labels for knowledge transferring.
Figure 1 (c)-(d) illustrate the pairwise label correlation on
AAPD and RCV1 datasets. An interesting point is that there
are strong correlations between head labels, as well as between head and tail labels. To handle such multi-label data,
an intuitive idea is to make use of these label dependency,
which has been a hot research topic in multi-label learning.
Most existing studies focus on how to exploit label structure
(Zhang et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019), label content meaning (Pappas and Henderson 2019; Xiao et al. 2019; Du et al.
2019), or label co-occurrence patterns (Liu et al. 2017; Kurata, Xiang, and Zhou 2016) to built one classifier on all labels. Recently, (Wei and Li 2019) empirically demonstrate that
tail labels impact much less than head labels on the whole

∗
Liping Jing is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/xiaolin1207/HTTN-master

14103

