The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Infusing Multi-Source Knowledge with Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network
for Emotional Conversation Generation
Yunlong Liang1∗ , Fandong Meng2 , Ying Zhang1 , Yufeng Chen1 , Jinan Xu1† and Jie Zhou2
1

Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
{yunlongliang, zhying, chenyf, jaxu}@bjtu.edu.cn, {fandongmeng, withtomzhou}@tencent.com
Abstract

u1: "How about, you re moving!!"

joy

Monica

anger

Rachel

neutral

Phoebe

joy

Rachel

u5: I am not!

anger

Monica

Oh really?! Then how come all your stuff is
in this box?!
:u6

surprise

Rachel

u7: "Okay, you guys. You guys I think I know

neutral

Phoebe

No Phoebe I am mad! :u8

anger

Monica

Look! This is ridiculous. We should be
packing you!!

The success of emotional conversation systems depends on
sufficient perception and appropriate expression of emotions.
In a real-world conversation, we firstly instinctively perceive
emotions from multi-source information, including the emotion flow of dialogue history, facial expressions, and personalities of speakers, and then express suitable emotions according to our personalities, but these multiple types of information are insufficiently exploited in emotional conversation fields. To address this issue, we propose a heterogeneous graph-based model for emotional conversation generation. Specifically, we design a Heterogeneous Graph-Based
Encoder to represent the conversation content (i.e., the dialogue history, its emotion flow, facial expressions, and speakers’ personalities) with a heterogeneous graph neural network, and then predict suitable emotions for feedback. After that, we employ an Emotion-Personality-Aware Decoder
to generate a response not only relevant to the conversation
context but also with appropriate emotions, by taking the encoded graph representations, the predicted emotions from the
encoder and the personality of the current speaker as inputs.
Experimental results show that our model can effectively perceive emotions from multi-source knowledge and generate a
satisfactory response, which significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art models.

:u2

u3: "Hey, how are you guys doing?"
Great! Monica s moving! :u4

what s going on here. Okay, you guys"

Dialogue Context

Emotion Flow Facial Expressions Speakers

Figure 1: A dialogue example with multi-source knowledge
(i.e., the dialogue context, its emotion flow, facial expressions, and speakers). ui : the i-th utterance.
Recently, there have been some efforts in emotional conversation systems, which can be roughly divided into two
categories. (1) Several studies focus on building emotioncontrollable conversation systems (Zhou et al. 2018a;
Colombo et al. 2019; Song et al. 2019; Shen and Feng 2020)
based on user-input emotion, which mainly apply various
mechanisms to inject the specific emotion vector into the response generation process to enhance emotional expression.
However, to some extent, it is a constrained scenario due to
requiring an additional emotion input and these methods ignore the information from facial expressions and speakers’
personalities (Madotto et al. 2019). (2) Others pay attention
to automatically tracking the emotional state in dialogue history to generate emotional responses. Lubis et al.(2018)
and Li et al.(2019) utilize an additional RNN-based encoder (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to encode the discrete emotion label sequence (i.e., emotion flow) and maintain it as the emotional context for the decoder, showing
that the emotion flow can improve the emotion quality of
responses. However, such specific emotion label sometimes
can not fully express the complex and rich emotions of an
utterance said by a speaker. For example, utterance u3 in
Figure 1 can be labeled as neutral, but its corresponding facial expression of the speaker Phoebe reflects an additional
emotion of joy. And sometimes we can not correctly perceive the speaker’s emotions only through textual expres-

Introduction
Infusing emotions into conversation systems can substantially improve its usability and promote customers’ satisfaction (Prendinger and Ishizuka 2005; Partala and Surakka
2004). Moreover, perceiving emotions sufficiently is the
core premise of expressing emotions (Mayer and Salovey
1993). In real-life scenarios, humans can instinctively perceive complex or subtle emotions from multiple aspects, including the emotion flow of dialogue history, facial expressions and personalities of speakers, and then express suitable
emotions for feedback. Figure 1 shows the organization of
multi-source information in a dialogue graph and the relationship between them.
∗
Work was done when Yunlong Liang was an intern at Pattern
Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China.
†
Jinan Xu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13343

