The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Active Learning via Subspace Learning
Changsheng Li1 * , Kaihang Mao1 , Lingyan Liang2 , Dongchun Ren3 ,
Wei Zhang4 , Ye Yuan1 , Guoren Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Inspur Group Company Limited, China, 3 Meituan, Beijing, China
4
School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{lcs,khmao,yuan-ye}@bit.edu.cn, lianglingyan@inspur.com, rendongchun@meituan.com,
zhanggwei1103@163.com, wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract

One key point in unsupervised active learning is how to
evaluate representativeness of one sample. To this end, some
researchers propose to measure it through minimizing the
data reconstruction loss and taking the contributions to reconstructing other samples as its representativeness. Based
on this criteria, many unsupervised active learning methods
have been proposed in the past decade (Yu, Bi, and Tresp
2006; Zhang et al. 2011; Cai and He 2011; Nie et al. 2013;
Hu et al. 2013; Shi and Shen 2016; Li et al. 2019, 2020a,b).
Roughly speaking, unsupervised active learning can be divided into two categories: linear and nonlinear ones (Li et al.
2020a). For linear methods, they usually assume that each
sample can be well reconstructed by a linear combination
of a selected sample subset in the original space. The typical works include transductive experimental design (TED)
(Yu, Bi, and Tresp 2006), robust structured representation
(RRSS) (Nie et al. 2013), active learning via neighborhood
reconstruction (ALNR) (Hu et al. 2013), joint active learning
and feature selection (Li et al. 2019). Given the fact that intrinsic structures of data are often complex (e.g., nonlinearity) in practice, a few nonlinear works have been proposed to
handle such a case, including the manifold adaptive experimental design (MAED) algorithm (Cai and He 2011) and
deep unsupervised active learning (DUAL) (Li et al. 2020a).
They usually nonlinearly map original inputs into a latent
space, where a linear model is utilized to select samples. In
this paper, we focus on linear unsupervised active learning,
because of its simplicity but effectiveness.

Unsupervised active learning has been an active research
topic in machine learning community, with the purpose of
choosing representative samples to be labelled in an unsupervised manner. Previous works usually take the minimization of data reconstruction loss as the criterion to select representative samples, by which the original inputs can
be better approximated. However, data are often drawn from
low-dimensional subspaces embedded in an arbitrary highdimensional space in many scenarios, thus it might severely
bring in noise if attempting to precisely reconstruct all entries of one observation, leading to a suboptimal solution. In
view of this, this paper proposes a novel unsupervised Active
Learning model via Subspace Learning, called ALSL. In contrast to previous approaches, ALSL aims to discover low-rank
structures of data, and then perform sample selection based
on the learnt low-rank representations. To this end, we devise two different strategies and propose two corresponding
formulations to select samples with and under low-rank sample representations, respectively. Since the proposed formulations involve several non-smooth regularization terms, we develop a simple but effective optimization procedure to solve
them. Extensive experiments are performed on five publicly
available datasets, and experimental results demonstrate the
proposed first formulation achieves comparable performance
with the state-of-the-arts, while the second formulation significantly outperforms them, achieving a 13% improvement
over the second best baseline at most.

Introduction

Most of the above linear unsupervised algorithms select
representative samples relying on the reconstruction loss
minimization in the original space. However, in practice,
data are often approximately drawn from low-dimensional
subspaces embedded in an arbitrary high-dimensional space.
Obviously, it is not necessary to reconstruct all entries of
one observation well under such a case. In contrast, if features of the observations are noisy, reconstructing them even
degrades model performance, resulting in a suboptimal solution. Thus, it will be beneficial to sample selection, if we
can learn and leverage subspace structures of data during
training. We take Figure 1 as an example to illustrate the
main idea behind our method. Figure 1 (a) is the 2-D exhibition of data matrix from the Extended Yale Face B dataset

Recently, unsupervised active learning has attracted lots of
attention in machine learning community. Different from supervised active learning approaches pretraining a classifier
by labeled data (Roy and McCallum 2001; Gal, Islam, and
Ghahramani 2017; Yoo and Kweon 2019), the goal of unsupervised active learning is to select representative samples to
be labelled in an unsupervised manner, so as to better reduce
the cost of annotations but still guarantee the performance of
downstream models trained by the selected samples.
* Changsheng Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8332

