The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consecutive Decoding for Speech-to-text Translation
Qianqian Dong, 1,2∗ Mingxuan Wang, 3 Hao Zhou, 3 Shuang Xu, 1 Bo Xu, 1,2 Lei Li 3
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, 100190, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
ByteDance AI Lab, China
{dongqianqian2016, shuang.xu, xubo}@ia.ac.cn, {wangmingxuan.89, zhouhao.nlp, lileilab}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

to-end system has to integrate multiple complex deep learning tasks into a single model to solve the task, which introduces heavy burden for the cross-modal and cross-lingual
mapping. Therefore, it is still an open problem whether endto-end models or cascaded models are generally stronger.
We argue that a desirable ST model should take advantages of both end-to-end and cascaded models and acquire
the practically acceptable capabilities as follows: a) it should
be end-to-end to avoid error accumulation; b) it should be
flexible enough to leverage large-scale independent ASR or
MT data. At present, few existing end-to-end models can
meet all these goals. Most studies resort to pre-training or
multitask learning to bridge the benefits of cascaded and
end-to-end models (Bansal et al. 2019; Sung et al. 2019;
Sperber et al. 2019a). A de-facto framework usually initializes the ST model with the encoder trained from ASR data
(i.e. source audio and source text pairs) and then fine-tunes
on a speech translation dataset to make the cross-lingual
translation. However, it is still challenging for these methods to leverage the bilingual MT data, due to the lack of
intermediate text translating stage.
Our idea is motivated by two motivating insights from
ASR and MT models. a) A branch of ASR models has
intermediate steps to extract acoustic feature and decode
phonemes, before emitting transcription; and b) Speech
translation can benefit from decoding the source speech transcription in addition to the target translation text. We propose COSTT, a unified speech translation framework with
consecutive decoding for jointly modeling speech recognition and translation. COSTT consists of two phases, an
acoustic-semantic modeling phase (AS) and a transcriptiontranslation modeling phase (TT). The AS phase accepts the
speech features and generates compressed acoustic representations. For TT phases, we jointly model both the source
and target text in a single shared decoder, which directly
generates the speech text sequence and the translation sequence at one pass. This architecture is closer to cascaded
translation while maintaining the benefits of end-to-end
models. The combination of the AS and the first-part output of the TT phase serves as an ASR model; the TT phase
alone serves as an MT model; while the whole makes an
end-to-end speech translation by ignoring the first-part of TT
output. Simple and effective, COSTT is powerful enough to
cover the advantage of ASR, MT, and ST models simultane-

Speech-to-text translation (ST), which directly translates the
source language speech to the target language text, has attracted intensive attention recently. However, the combination of speech recognition and machine translation in a single
model poses a heavy burden on the direct cross-modal crosslingual mapping. To reduce the learning difficulty, we propose COnSecutive Transcription and Translation (COSTT),
an integral approach for speech-to-text translation. The key
idea is to generate source transcript and target translation text
with a single decoder. It benefits the model training so that
additional large parallel text corpus can be fully exploited
to enhance the speech translation training. Our method is
verified on three mainstream datasets, including Augmented
LibriSpeech English-French dataset, TED English-German
dataset, and TED English-Chinese dataset. Experiments show
that our proposed COSTT outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/
dqqcasia/st.

Introduction
Speech translation (ST) aims at translating from source language speech into the target language text. Traditionally,
it is realized by cascading an automatic speech recognition (ASR) and a machine translation (MT) (Sperber et al.
2017, 2019b; Zhang et al. 2019; Beck, Cohn, and Haffari
2019; Cheng et al. 2019). Recently, end-to-end ST has attracted much attention due to its appealing properties, such
as lower latency, smaller model size, and less error accumulation (Liu et al. 2019, 2018; Weiss et al. 2017; Bérard et al.
2018; Duong et al. 2016; Jia et al. 2019).
Although end-to-end systems are very promising, cascaded systems still dominate practical deployment in industry. The possible reasons are: a) Most research work compared cascaded and end-to-end models under identical data
situations. However, in practice, the cascaded system can
benefit from the accumulating independent speech recognition or machine translation data, while the end-to-end system still suffers from the lack of end-to-end corpora. b) Despite the advantage of reducing error accumulation, the end∗
The work was done while QD was a research intern at
ByteDance AI Lab.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12738

