The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-View Feature Representation for Dialogue Generation with
Bidirectional Distillation
Shaoxiong Feng,1 Xuancheng Ren,2 Kan Li,1 Xu Sun2,3
2

1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University
{shaoxiongfeng, likan}@bit.edu.cn, {renxc, xusun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

test data. Therefore, it is usually hard for these models to
learn generalizable features and they may easily get stuck in
a narrow local minimum that is fragile to data perturbation
(Chaudhari et al. 2017; Keskar et al. 2017).
To alleviate this problem, one line of work introduces
prior common knowledge of the real world to facilitate the
model generalization, such as redesigning objective functions (e.g., maximize mutual information or coherence) instead of only fitting target sequence (Li et al. 2016b; Feng
et al. 2020a), and modifying generation order (e.g., hierarchical or syntactic-based generation) instead of naive leftto-right generation (Su et al. 2018; Welleck et al. 2019). Intuitively, common knowledge is a class of knowledge that
benefits both the training and the test data, as it is reflected
generally in the whole corpus and not merely only works
for the training data. With the common knowledge as constraint, models can be guided to learn towards a better direction that can bridge the gap of training and test data distributions more easily. Dubey et al. (2018) also verified that
common knowledge from the real world plays an important
role in models’ quickly learning unfamiliar video games.
However, prior common knowledge is hard to manually
define, since it varies with tasks and domains and can be a
limiting factor if defined wrong. Recently, another line of
work (Arora, Khapra, and Ramaswamy 2019; Tahami, Ghajar, and Shakery 2020; Chen et al. 2020), using knowledge
distillation (KD; Ba and Caruana 2014; Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015), has successfully extracted knowledge from a
pre-trained teacher model to regularize the student model
for better generalization. The student model aims to achieve
a balance of using raw knowledge from the training data and
distilled knowledge from the teacher model, which makes
the student capture more common or generalizable knowledge and perform better in testing. Compared with previous work on introducing common knowledge, KD is more
straightforward and extensible. However, conventional KD
still faces two drawbacks:

Neural dialogue models suffer from low-quality responses
when interacted in practice, demonstrating difficulty in generalization beyond training data. Recently, knowledge distillation has been used to successfully regularize the student
by transferring knowledge from the teacher. However, the
teacher and the student are trained on the same dataset and
tend to learn similar feature representations, whereas the most
general knowledge should be found through differences. The
finding of general knowledge is further hindered by the unidirectional distillation, as the student should obey the teacher
and may discard some knowledge that is truly general but refuted by the teacher. To this end, we propose a novel training
framework, where the learning of general knowledge is more
in line with the idea of reaching consensus, i.e., finding common knowledge that is beneficial to different yet all datasets
through diversified learning partners. Concretely, the training
task is divided into a group of subtasks with the same number of students. Each student assigned to one subtask not only
is optimized on the allocated subtask but also imitates multiview feature representation aggregated from other students
(i.e., student peers), which induces students to capture common knowledge among different subtasks and alleviates the
over-fitting of students on the allocated subtasks. To further
enhance generalization, we extend the unidirectional distillation to the bidirectional distillation that encourages the student and its student peers to co-evolve by exchanging complementary knowledge with each other. Empirical results and
analysis demonstrate that our training framework effectively
improves the model generalization without sacrificing training efficiency.

Introduction
Neural dialogue generation has drawn increasing attention,
but current dialogue models still struggle with generalization, e.g., frequently producing generic and meaningless responses in inference (Mou et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016a; Serban et al. 2017b). Unlike machine translation or summarization, dialogue generation has more freedom and diversity
in the semantic and linguistic aspects of responses. Without
specific training guidance, they are prone to over-fitting certain aspects of corpora (e.g., naive target sequence prediction) that show distinct distributions between training and

• Lack of feature diversity: Because both the student and
the teacher are trained on the same dataset, they may learn
similar feature representations, which means the knowledge is not sufficiently diverse to conduct an effective regularization on the feature learning of the student.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Lack of student feedback: Previous work (Romero et al.
12812

