The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Radial-Basis Value Functions for Continuous Control
Kavosh Asadi1,2 , Neev Parikh2 , Ronald E. Parr3 , George D. Konidaris2 , Michael L. Littman2
1

Amazon Web Services
2
Brown University
3
Duke University

b a; θ) when A is disIt is trivial to solve arg maxa∈A Q(s,
crete. Therefore, a simple approach for continuous actions is
to partition the continuous action space. By performing this
discretization, we can essentially treat the original continuous problem as a discrete one. While this approach can be
effective in highly constrained settings, to uniformly cover
the action space, we need a partition size that grows exponentially with the number of action dimensions. Pazis and
Parr (2011) attempt to combat this issue via approximate linear programming, but scaling this approach to large domains
remains open.
Another line of work has shown the benefits of using function classes that are conducive to efficient action maximization. For example, Gu et al. (2016) explored function classes
that can capture an arbitrary dependence on the state, but
only a quadratic dependence on the action. Given a quadratic
action dependence, Gu et al. (2016) showed how to compute
b a; θ) quickly. A more general idea is to
arg maxa∈A Q(s,
use input–convex neural networks (Amos, Xu, and Kolter
b a; θ) to convex (or concave) func2017) that restrict Q(s,
tions with respect to a, so that the maximization problem
can be solved efficiently using convex-optimization techniques (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004). Unfortunately, these
approaches are unable to support universal function approximation (Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White 1989), and may
lead into inaccurate value functions regardless of the amount
of experience provided to the agent.
We introduce deep radial-basis value functions (RBVFs):
Q functions approximated by a standard deep neural network augmented with an RBF output layer. We show that
deep RBVFs enable us to efficiently and accurately identify
an approximately optimal action without impeding universal
function approximation.
Prior work in RL used RBVFs for problems with continuous states. (See, for example, Geramifard et al. (2013)
or Section 9.5.5 of Sutton and Barto (2018) for a discussion.) These results often use RBFs to transform the original
state space to a higher-dimensional space in which linear
function approximation yields accurate results. Our use of
RBFs is fundamentally different in two ways: a) we apply
RBFs to the action space not the state space, and b) we use
deep neural networks to learn the centroids that constitute
the RBFs. Applying RBFs to the action space allows us to

Abstract
A core operation in reinforcement learning (RL) is finding an
action that is optimal with respect to a learned value function.
This operation is often challenging when the learned value
function takes continuous actions as input. We introduce deep
radial-basis value functions (RBVFs): value functions learned
using a deep network with a radial-basis function (RBF) output layer. We show that the maximum action-value with respect to a deep RBVF can be approximated easily and accurately. Moreover, deep RBVFs can represent any true value
function owing to their support for universal function approximation. We extend the standard DQN algorithm to continuous control by endowing the agent with a deep RBVF. We
show that the resultant agent, called RBF-DQN, significantly
outperforms value-function-only baselines, and is competitive with state-of-the-art actor-critic algorithms.

Introduction
A fundamental object of interest in RL is the value (Q) function, which quantifies the expected return for taking action a
in state s. Many RL algorithms, such as Q-learning (Watkins
1989) and actor-critic (Barto, Sutton, and Anderson 1983),
learn an approximation of the Q function from environmental interactions. When using function approximation to learn
the Q function, the agent has a parameterized function class,
and learning consists of finding a parameter setting θ for the
b a; θ) that accurately repreapproximate value function Q(s,
sents the true Q function. A core operation here is finding
an optimal action with respect to the learned value function,
b a; θ). The need for performspecifically arg maxa∈A Q(s,
ing this operation arises not just for action selection, but also
b itself via bootstrapping (Sutton and Barto
when learning Q
2018).
b a; θ) is genThe optimization problem arg maxa∈A Q(s,
erally challenging if the action space A is continuous,
b a; θ) could have
because the learned value function Q(s,
many local maxima and saddle points; therefore, naı̈ve approaches such as gradient ascent can be expensive and inaccurate (Lim et al. 2018). Value-function-only algorithms
have thus remained under-explored in continuous control.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6696

