The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Object-Level Visual Context Modeling for Multimodal Machine
Translation: Masking Irrelevant Objects Helps Grounding
Dexin Wang and Deyi Xiong∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 300350
{dexinwang, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn

Source text a man sleeping in a green room on a couch

Abstract

Complete sentences: a man sleeping in a green room on a couch
Color deprivation: a man sleeping in a [color] room on a couch
Gender masking:
a [person] sleeping in a green room on a couch
Entity masking:
a [mask] sleeping in a green [mask] on a [mask]
Our masking:
a [person] sleeping in a [color] [scene] on a [other]

Visual context provides grounding information for multimodal machine translation (MMT). However, previous MMT
models and probing studies on visual features suggest that
visual information is less explored in MMT as it is often redundant to textual information. In this paper, we propose an
Object-level Visual Context modeling framework (OVC) to
efficiently capture and explore visual information for multimodal machine translation. With detected objects, the proposed OVC encourages MMT to ground translation on desirable visual objects by masking irrelevant objects in the visual modality. We equip the proposed OVC with an additional
object-masking loss to achieve this goal. The object-masking
loss is estimated according to the similarity between masked
objects and the source texts so as to encourage masking
source-irrelevant objects. Additionally, in order to generate
vision-consistent target words, we further propose a visionweighted translation loss for OVC. Experiments on MMT
datasets demonstrate that the proposed OVC model outperforms state-of-the-art MMT models and analyses show that
masking irrelevant objects helps grounding in MMT.1

Corresponding images

Target text ein mann schläft in einem grünen raum auf einem sofa
text-only machine translation

multimodal machine translation

Figure 1: Word masking in multimodal machine translation.
been regarded as a big challenge (Yang et al. 2020) for
years since Multi30K (Elliott et al. 2016) is proposed as a
benchmark dataset for MMT. Many previous MMT studies
on Multi30K, which exploit complete source texts during
both training and inference, have found that visual context is
needed only in special cases, e.g., translating sentences with
incorrect or ambiguous source words, by both human and
machine translation, and is hence marginally beneficial to
multimodal machine translation (Lala et al. 2018; Ive, Madhyastha, and Specia 2019).
In this paper, we hypothesize that visual context can be
efficiently exploited to enhance MMT, instead of being ignored as a redundant input, from three aspects as follows:
• Source text processing and encoding. In most cases,
source texts provide sufficient information for translation,
which makes visual context redundant. Therefore, weakening the input signal from the textual modality may force
MMT to pay more attention to the visual modality.
• Visual feature learning tailored for translation. Not all
parts in visual images are useful for translation. Learning
visual features that are not only linked but also complementary to source texts is desirable for MMT.
• Target word generation and decoding. Visual representations can be used to not only initialize the decoder (Zhou
et al. 2018) but also guide target word prediction (e.g., rewarding target prediction consistent with visual context).
Regarding the first aspect, we have witnessed that pioneering efforts (Caglayan et al. 2019; Ive, Madhyastha, and
Specia 2019), different from previous methods, mask specific words (e.g. gender-neutral words) in source texts, forc-

Introduction
Multimodal Machine Translation aims at translating a sentence paired with an additional modality (e.g. audio modality in spoken language translation or visual modality in
image/video-guided translation) into the target language (Elliott et al. 2016), where the additional modality, though
closely semantically related to the text, provides an alternative and complementary view to it. By contrast to textonly neural machine translation (NMT), MMT characterizes with the assumption that the additional modality helps improve translation by either grounding the meaning of
the text or providing multimodal context information (Lee
et al. 2018). Hence, MMT exhibits pronounced reliance on
language-vision/speech interaction.2
However, effectively integrating visual information and
language-vision interaction into machine translation has
∗
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source code is available at https://github.com/tjunlp-lab/OVC.
2
In this paper, we focus on multimodal machine translation with
both visual and textual modality.

2720

