The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Faster Game Solving via Predictive Blackwell Approachability: Connecting Regret
Matching and Mirror Descent
Gabriele Farina,1 Christian Kroer,2 Tuomas Sandholm1,3,4,5
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 2 IEOR Department, Columbia University
3
Strategic Machine, Inc., 4 Strategy Robot, Inc., 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

framework, where the problem of minimizing regret over
a player’s strategy space of an EFG is decomposed into a
set of regret-minimization problems over probability simplexes (Zinkevich et al. 2007; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm
2019c). Each simplex represents the probability over actions
at a given decision point. The CFR setup can be combined
with any regret minimizer for the simplexes. If both players
in a zero-sum EFG repeatedly play each other using a CFR
algorithm, the average strategies converge to a Nash equilibrium. Initially regret matching (RM) was the prevalent simplex regret minimizer used in CFR. Later, it was found that
by alternating strategy updates between the players, taking
linear averages of strategy iterates over time, and using a
variation of RM called regret-matching+ (RM+ ) (Tammelin
2014) leads to significantly faster convergence in practice.
This variation is called CFR+ . Both CFR and CFR+ guarantee convergence to Nash equilibrium at a rate of T −1/2 .
CFR+ has been used in every milestone in developing poker
AIs in the last decade (Bowling et al. 2015; Moravčík et al.
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2017, 2019b). This is in spite
of the fact that its theoretical rate of convergence is the same
as that of CFR with RM (Tammelin 2014; Farina, Kroer,
and Sandholm 2019a; Burch, Moravcik, and Schmid 2019),
and there exist algorithms which converge at a faster rate
of T −1 (Hoda et al. 2010; Kroer et al. 2020; Farina, Kroer,
and Sandholm 2019b). In spite of this theoretically-inferior
convergence rate, CFR+ has repeatedly performed favorably
against T −1 methods for EFGs (Kroer, Farina, and Sandholm 2018b; Kroer et al. 2020; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2019b; Gao, Kroer, and Goldfarb 2021). Similarly, the
follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) and online mirror descent (OMD) regret minimizers, the two most prominent algorithms in online convex optimization, can be instantiated
to have a better dependence on dimensionality than RM+
and RM, yet RM+ has been found to be superior (Brown,
Kroer, and Sandholm 2017).
There has been some interest in connecting RM to the
more prevalent (and more general) online convex optimization algorithms such as OMD and FTRL, as well as classical first-order methods. Waugh and Bagnell (2015) showed
that RM is equivalent to Nesterov’s dual averaging algorithm
(which is an offline version of FTRL), though this equivalence requires specialized step sizes that are proven correct
by invoking the correctness of RM itself. Burch (2018) stud-

Blackwell approachability is a framework for reasoning about
repeated games with vector-valued payoffs. We introduce
predictive Blackwell approachability, where an estimate of
the next payoff vector is given, and the decision maker tries to
achieve better performance based on the accuracy of that estimator. In order to derive algorithms that achieve predictive
Blackwell approachability, we start by showing a powerful
connection between four well-known algorithms. Follow-theregularized-leader (FTRL) and online mirror descent (OMD)
are the most prevalent regret minimizers in online convex
optimization. In spite of this prevalence, the regret matching (RM) and regret matching+ (RM+ ) algorithms have been
preferred in the practice of solving large-scale games (as the
local regret minimizers within the counterfactual regret minimization framework). We show that RM and RM+ are the
algorithms that result from running FTRL and OMD, respectively, to select the halfspace to force at all times in the underlying Blackwell approachability game. By applying the predictive variants of FTRL or OMD to this connection, we obtain predictive Blackwell approachability algorithms, as well
as predictive variants of RM and RM+ . In experiments across
18 common zero-sum extensive-form benchmark games, we
show that predictive RM+ coupled with counterfactual regret
minimization converges vastly faster than the fastest prior algorithms (CFR+ , DCFR, LCFR) across all games but two of
the poker games, sometimes by two or more orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Extensive-form games (EFGs) are the standard class of
games that can be used to model sequential interaction,
outcome uncertainty, and imperfect information. Operationalizing these models requires algorithms for computing game-theoretic equilibria. A recent success of EFGs is
the use of Nash equilibrium for several recent poker AI
milestones, such as essentially solving the game of limit
Texas hold’em (Bowling et al. 2015), and beating top human poker pros in no-limit Texas hold’em with the Libratus
AI (Brown and Sandholm 2017). A central component of all
recent poker AIs has been a fast iterative method for computing approximate Nash equilibrium at scale. The leading
approach is the counterfactual regret minimization (CFR)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5363

