The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning by Fixing: Solving Math Word Problems with Weak Supervision
Yining Hong, Qing Li, Daniel Ciao, Siyuan Haung, Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
yininghong@cs.ucla.edu, {liqing, danielciao, huangsiyuan}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Problem: A truck travels 100 kilometers in 2 hours. At this
speed, if it travels for another 3.5 hours, how many kilometers
will it complete for the entire journey? Answer: 275

Abstract
Previous neural solvers of math word problems (MWPs) are
learned with full supervision and fail to generate diverse solutions. In this paper, we address this issue by introducing a
weakly-supervised paradigm for learning MWPs. Our method
only requires the annotations of the final answers and can generate various solutions for a single problem. To boost weaklysupervised learning, we propose a novel learning-by-fixing
(LBF) framework, which corrects the misperceptions of the
neural network via symbolic reasoning. Specifically, for an
incorrect solution tree generated by the neural network, the fixing mechanism propagates the error from the root node to the
leaf nodes and infers the most probable fix that can be executed
to get the desired answer. To generate more diverse solutions,
tree regularization is applied to guide the efficient shrinkage
and exploration of the solution space, and a memory buffer
is designed to track and save the discovered various fixes for
each problem. Experimental results on the Math23K dataset
show the proposed LBF framework significantly outperforms
reinforcement learning baselines in weakly-supervised learning. Furthermore, it achieves comparable top-1 and much better top-3/5 answer accuracies than fully-supervised methods,
demonstrating its strength in producing diverse solutions.

Solution1: 100/2 ×(2 + 3.5)
Total Distance

×

Velocity
Distance 1

/

100

Total Time

Time 1

Time 1

2

2

+

Time 2

3.5

Solution2: 100 + 100/2×3.5
Total Distance

+

Distance 1

100

Distance 2

×

Velocity
Distance 1

100

/

Time 1

Time 2

3.5

2

Figure 1: Exemplar MWP with multiple solutions.
which executes the expression and generates the final answer.
Training these models requires the full supervision of the
solution expressions.
However, these fully-supervised approaches have three
drawbacks. First, current MWP datasets only provide one
solution for each problem, while there naturally exist multiple solutions that give different paths of solving the same
problem. For instance, the problem in Figure 1 can be solved
by “(100/2) × (2 + 3.5)” if we first calculate the speed and
then multiply it by the total time; alternatively, we can solve
it using “100 + 100/2 × 3.5” by summing the distances of
the first and second parts of the journey. The models trained
with full supervision on current datasets are forced to fit the
given solution and cannot generate diverse solutions. Second,
annotating the expressions for MWPs is time-consuming.
However, a large amount of MWPs with their final answers
can be mined effortlessly from the internet (e.g., online forums). How to efficiently utilize these partially-labeled data
without the supervision of expressions remains an open problem. Third, current supervised learning approaches suffer
from the train-test discrepancy. The fully-supervised learning
methods optimize expression accuracy rather than answer
accuracy. However, the model is evaluated by the answer

Introduction
Solving math word problems (MWPs) poses unique challenges for understanding natural-language problems and performing arithmetic reasoning over quantities with commonsense knowledge. As shown in Figure 1, a typical MWP
consists of a short narrative describing a situation in the
world and asking a question about an unknown quantity. To
solve the MWP in Figure 1, a machine needs to extract key
quantities from the text, such as “100 kilometers” and “2
hours”, and understand the relationships between them. General mathematical knowledge like “distance = velocity ×
time” is then used to calculate the solution.
Researchers have recently focused on solving MWPs using
neural-symbolic models (Ling et al. 2017; Wang, Liu, and
Shi 2017; Huang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Xie and Sun
2019). These models usually consist of a neural perception
module (i.e., Seq2Seq or Seq2Tree) that maps the problem
text into a solution expression or tree, and a symbolic module
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4959

