The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Complexity Landscape of Claim-Augmented Argumentation Frameworks
Wolfgang Dvořák, Alexander Greßler, Anna Rapberger, Stefan Woltran
TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation, Austria
{dvorak,agressle,arapberg,woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

jointly acceptable sets of arguments, commonly referred to
as extensions. In a final step these extensions are then reinterpreted in terms of the claims of the accepted arguments,
thus restating the result in the domain of the initial setting.
Recent research (Baroni and Riveret 2019; Dvořák, Rapberger, and Woltran 2020) has addressed the fact that the
re-interpretation part is not as obvious as it seems at first
glance. For instance, consider preferred semantics, which is
defined at the AF level as subset-maximal admissible sets (a
set is admissible if it attacks all its attackers). When looking
for preferred extensions in terms of claims, we can either (a)
take the preferred extensions of the AF and replace each argument by its claim, or (b) take the admissible sets of the
AF, replace each argument by its claim, and then select the
subset-maximal ones from the resulting set of extensions.
Example 1. Consider the following AF where each argument is labelled with its claim.

Claim-augmented argumentation frameworks (CAFs) provide a formal basis to analyze conclusion-oriented problems
in argumentation by adapting a claim-focused perspective;
they extend Dung AFs by associating a claim to each argument representing its conclusion. This additional layer offers
various possibilities to generalize abstract argumentation semantics, i.e. the re-interpretation of arguments in terms of
their claims can be performed at different stages in the evaluation of the framework: One approach is to perform the evaluation entirely at argument-level before interpreting arguments
by their claims (inherited semantics); alternatively, one can
perform certain steps in the process (e.g., maximization) already in terms of the arguments’ claims (claim-level semantics). The inherent difference of these approaches not only
potentially results in different outcomes but, as we will show
in this paper, is also mirrored in terms of computational complexity. To this end, we provide a comprehensive complexity analysis of the four main reasoning problems with respect
to claim-level variants of preferred, naive, stable, semi-stable
and stage semantics and complete the complexity results of
inherited semantics by providing corresponding results for
semi-stable and stage semantics. Moreover, we show that deciding, whether for a given framework the two approaches of
a semantics coincide (concurrence), can be surprisingly hard,
ranging up to the third level of the polynomial hierarchy.

a2 a
a1
a

b1
b

c1
c

b2 b
d1 d

The admissible sets are given by ∅,{a1 },{b1 },{b2 },{a1 , b2 },
{b1 , b2 }, {a2 , b1 }, {a1 , b2 , c1 }, and {a2 , b1 , b2 }. Selecting
the subset-maximal admissible sets before replacing each
argument by its claim (option (a)) thus yields the preferred
claim-sets {a, b, c}, {a, b}; observe that swapping those
steps (option (b)) results in the unique claim-set {a, b, c}.
Option (a) which we shall call inherited semantics in
what follows, is often used implicitly in instantiation-based
argumentation and has been explicitly studied in (Dvořák
and Woltran 2020). Option (b) has recently been advocated
in (Dvořák, Rapberger, and Woltran 2020) as an alternative way to lift concepts behind argumentation semantics to
claim-based semantics; we will refer to the latter as claimlevel semantics since parts of the semantic selection process takes place on the claim- rather than on the argumentlevel. As discussed in (Rapberger 2020), there are logic
programming semantics that, in the standard instantiation
model (Caminada et al. 2015a,b), correspond to claim-level
semantics and cannot be captured with inherited semantics.
To be independent from a particular instantiation schema,
Dvořák and Woltran (2020) introduced claim-augmented

Introduction
Abstract argumentation (Dung 1995) is nowadays acknowledged as the core reasoning mechanism for argumentation
in the broad sense (Atkinson et al. 2017), in particular in
instantiation-based approaches (see e.g. (Gorogiannis and
Hunter 2011)). This instantiation process starts from a (typically inconsistent) knowledge base, from which all possible
arguments are constructed. An argument contains a claim
and a support, the latter being a subset of the knowledge
base. The relationship between arguments is then settled, for
instance an argument α attacks argument β if the claim of α
contradicts (parts of) the support of β. The resulting network
is then interpreted as an abstract argumentation framework
(AF) and semantics for AFs are used to obtain a collection of
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6296

