The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Concept Reasoning Networks
Taesup Kim* 1, 2 , Sungwoong Kim 2 , Yoshua Bengio 1
1

Mila, Université de Montréal
2
Kakao Brain

Abstract

other hand, most convolutional neural networks are characterized by dense and local operations that take the advantage
of the weight sharing property. It hence typically lacks an
internal mechanism for high-level reasoning based on abstract semantic concepts such as those humans manipulate
with natural language and inspired by modern theories of
consciousness (Bengio 2017). It is related to system 2 cognitive abilities, which include things like reasoning, planning,
and imagination, that are assumed to capture the global context from interactions between a few abstract factors and accordingly give feedback to the local descriptor for decisionmaking.
There have been approaches to enhance capturing longrange dependencies such as non-local networks (Wang et al.
2018). The main concept of it, which is related to selfattention (Vaswani et al. 2017), is to compute a local descriptor by adaptively aggregating other descriptors from all
positions, regardless of relative spatial distance. In this setting, the image feature map is plugged into a fully-connected
graph neural network, where all local positions are fully connected to all others. It is able to capture long-range dependencies and extract the global context, but it still works with
dense operations and lacks high-level reasoning. Both LatentGNN (Zhang, He, and Yan 2019) and GloRe (Chen et al.
2019) alleviate these issues by introducing compact graph
neural networks with some latent nodes designed to aggregate local descriptors.
In this work, we propose Visual Concept Reasoning Networks (VCRNet) to enable reasoning between high-level visual concepts. We exploit a modularized multi-branch architecture that follows a split-transform-merge strategy (Xie
et al. 2017). While it explicitly has multiple branches
to simultaneously learn multiple visual concepts or properties, it only considers the dependencies or interactions
between them by using dense and local operations. We
extend the architecture by split-transform-attend-interactmodulate-merge stages, and this allows the model to capture the global context by reasoning with sparse interactions
between high-level visual concepts from different branches.
The main contributions of the paper are:

A split-transform-merge strategy has been broadly used as an
architectural constraint in convolutional neural networks for
visual recognition tasks. It approximates sparsely connected
networks by explicitly defining multiple branches to simultaneously learn representations with different visual concepts
or properties. Dependencies or interactions between these
representations are typically defined by dense and local operations, however, without any adaptiveness or high-level
reasoning. In this work, we propose to exploit this strategy and combine it with our Visual Concept Reasoning Networks (VCRNet) to enable reasoning between high-level visual concepts. We associate each branch with a visual concept and derive a compact concept state by selecting a few
local descriptors through an attention module. These concept
states are then updated by graph-based interaction and used
to adaptively modulate the local descriptors. We describe our
proposed model by split-transform-attend-interact-modulatemerge stages, which are implemented by opting for a highly
modularized architecture. Extensive experiments on visual
recognition tasks such as image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, scene recognition, and action
recognition show that our proposed model, VCRNet, consistently improves the performance by increasing the number of
parameters by less than 1%.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have shown notable success
in visual recognition tasks by learning hierarchical representations. The main properties of convolutional operations,
which are local connectivity and weight sharing, are the key
factors that make it more efficient than fully-connected networks for processing images. The local connectivity particularly comes up with a fundamental concept, receptive
field, that defines how far the local descriptor can capture
the context in the input image. In principle, the receptive
field can be expanded by stacking multiple convolutional
layers or increasing the kernel size of them. However, it is
known that the effective receptive field only covers a fraction of the theoretical size of it (Luo et al. 2016). This eventually restricts convolutional neural networks to capture the
global context based on long-range dependencies. On the

• We propose Visual Concept Reasoning Networks (VCRNet) that efficiently capture the global context by reasoning over high-level visual concepts.

* Now at Amazon Web Services (taesup@amazon.com).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8172

