The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LIREx: Augmenting Language Inference with Relevant Explanation
Xinyan Zhao,1 V.G.Vinod Vydiswaran2,1
1

School of Information; 2 Department of Learning Health Sciences
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 USA
{zhaoxy, vgvinodv}@umich.edu

Abstract
Natural language explanations (NLEs) are a special form of
data annotation in which annotators identify rationales (most
significant text tokens) when assigning labels to data instances, and write out explanations for the labels in natural
language based on the rationales. NLEs have been shown to
capture human reasoning better, but not as beneficial for natural language inference (NLI). In this paper, we analyze two
primary flaws in the way NLEs are currently used to train
explanation generators for language inference tasks. We find
that the explanation generators do not take into account the
variability inherent in human explanation of labels, and that
the current explanation generation models generate spurious
explanations. To overcome these limitations, we propose a
novel framework, LIREx, that incorporates both a rationaleenabled explanation generator and an instance selector to select only relevant, plausible NLEs to augment NLI models.
When evaluated on the standardized SNLI data set, LIREx
achieved an accuracy of 91.87%, an improvement of 0.32
over the baseline and matching the best-reported performance
on the data set. It also achieves significantly better performance than previous studies when transferred to the out-ofdomain MultiNLI data set. Qualitative analysis shows that
LIREx generates flexible, faithful, and relevant NLEs that allow the model to be more robust to spurious explanations.
The code is available at https://github.com/zhaoxy92/LIREx.

(a) Example of different NL explanations using different rationales.

(b) Example of correct and incorrect NL explanations generated
for a same premise-hypothesis, but favoring different labels.

Figure 1: Examples of NLEs in NLI task.

success in language modeling and generation have enabled
trained models to explicitly provide human-readable explanations for classification tasks (Kim et al. 2018; Huk Park
et al. 2018; Camburu et al. 2018; Kumar and Talukdar 2020;
Rajani et al. 2019). Similarly, studies such as (Rajani et al.
2019) have reported significant performance improvements
on commonsense reasoning tasks by including NLEs in
training a language generation model. However, these trends
do not carry over to natural language inference (NLI) task in
which a premise-hypothesis pair is expected to be classified
into entailment, neutral, or contradiction. Previous studies
on utilizing NLEs for NLI tasks have reported a drop in overall performance, even with powerful deep learning-based
models such as LSTM (Camburu et al. 2018), RoBERTa,
and GPT2 (Kumar and Talukdar 2020). We study this discrepancy in more detail and identify two primary issues, described below, with how NLEs have been incorporated for
the NLI task so far.

Introduction
Natural language explanations (NLEs) provided at the time
of assigning labels to data instances are likely to better capture human reasoning than the labels alone. NLEs are special
forms of data annotation in which annotators identify both
the class label and the rationales (most significant text tokens), and write out explanations in natural language. They
have been suggested to potentially improve the performance
and interpretability of deep learning-based models – i.e. either augmenting model performance by incorporating NLEs
as additional contextual features, or explaining model decisions by training an explanation generator. Researchers have
parsed NLEs into structured logical forms (Srivastava, Labutov, and Mitchell 2017; Hancock et al. 2018; Lee et al.
2020; Qin et al. 2020) or directly encoded them into a vectorbased semantic representation (Fidler et al. 2017). Recent

Issue 1: Lack of rationale in NLE Generation Current
approaches for explanation generation produce only one
specific explanation for each data instance. However, these
approaches ignore the variability in human reasoning and
alternative explanations. Annotators could assign the same
label to a data instance by considering different rationales.
For example, given the premise and the hypothesis shown

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14532

