The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Anticipating Future Relations via Graph Growing for Action Prediction
Xinxiao Wu,1 Jianwei Zhao,2 Ruiqi Wang1
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
{wuxinxiao,wang ruiqi}@bit.edu.cn, zhaojw374@nenu.edu.cn

Abstract

In this paper, we investigate how the fine-grained visual
relations between objects evolve over both spatial and temporal domains for action prediction. Inspired by the Gestalt
law in psychology that human beings have the innate tendency to perceive the incomplete as complete and then they
unconsciously attempt to fill in the gap (Farahzad 1998;
Ehrenstein, Spillmann, and Sarris 2003; Spillmann 2006),
we devote to anticipating the visual relations for the unobserved video part to enable a complete perception of the
video, thus facilitating action classification. With this in
mind, we propose a graph growing method that involves two
tasks: (1) reasoning relations in the observed video part via
graph neural networks and (2) synthesizing relations for the
unobserved video part via graph node generation and aggregation.
In the relation reasoning task, we propose a spatialtemporal relation reasoning model to extract the spatial relations between objects in still frames and explore how these
spatial relations dynamically change over time. Specifically,
we use gated graph neural network to perform the spatial
relation reasoning within video frames. Each video frame
is formulated as a spatial graph where the node denotes
an object and the directed edge denotes the spatial relation between two objects. For the temporal relation reasoning, we propose a long short-term graph convolutional network (LST-GCN) to model both the short-term and longterm temporal evolutions of the spatial relation with multiscale receptive fields. A spatial-temporal graph is built on
each video by formulating the spatial graph of each frame
as a super node and the temporal relations between frames
as directed edges. Consequently, the spatial-temporal relation reasoning is implemented by message propagation on
the spatial-temporal graph to learn the evolution of the structural information over both space and time.
In the relation synthesizing task, we propose a relation
synthesizing model to make the spatial-temporal graph built
in the reasoning task grow into representing the relations of
the complete video. The new grown part can be regarded as a
synthesized sub-graph to represent the relations of the unobserved video frames. Then the built spatial-temporal graph
from the observed video part can be called observed subgraph. The observed sub-graph is grown in multiple temporal scales to maintain the varying dynamics of relations
with different granularities. For the z-th scale, z nodes in

Predicting actions from partially observed videos is challenging as the partial videos containing incomplete action executions have insufficient discriminative information for classification. Recent progress has been made through enriching the
features of the observed video part or generating the features
for the unobserved video part, but without explicitly modeling the fine-grained evolution of visual object relations over
both space and time. In this paper, we investigate how the interaction and correlation between visual objects evolve and
propose a graph growing method to anticipate future object
relations from limited video observations for reliable action
prediction. There are two tasks in our method. First, we work
with spatial-temporal graph neural networks to reason object
relations in the observed video part. Then, we synthesize the
spatial-temporal relation representation for the unobserved
video part via graph node generation and aggregation. These
two tasks are jointly learned to enable the anticipated future
relation representation informative to action prediction. Experimental results on two action video datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
Action prediction refers to inferring action category labels
from partially observed videos that contain incomplete action executions. It is very challenging since it is difficult to
exploit sufficiently discriminative information from partial
videos to make accurate prediction. Many existing studies
(Cai et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019) learn an enriched feature
representation from the partial video by transferring discriminative information from the full video. Several other methods (Zhao and Wildes 2019; Gammulle et al. 2019) generate a feature representation of the unobserved video part
to enhance the complete action representation for classification. These methods have achieved promising performance
on action prediction, however, such considerable progress
has been made without exploring potentially valuable structure information within the video such as the interaction and
correlation between different object entities. It is a fact that
explicitly modeling the visual object relations in videos has
been demonstrated to play a pivotal role in action analysis
(Xiao et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2018; Wang, Li, and Van Gool
2018; Tsai et al. 2019).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2952

