The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Complete Closed Time Intervals-Related Patterns Mining
Omer David Harel, Robert Moskovitch
Software and Information Systems Engineering, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er Sheva, Israel
omerdavi@post.bgu.ac.il, robertmo@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

into a uniform representation of STIs. The STIs mostly represent periods of time that a variable is in a specific state
(defined by cutoffs), or segments of an increasing or a decreasing period of the values.
Incorporating various types of temporal variables into a
uniform STIs series representation, enables the discovery
of frequent TIRPs from multivariate heterogeneous temporal data. The discovered frequent TIRPs have a meaningful potential usage in real-world applications, being directly
used for knowledge discovery (Sacchi et al. 2007), classification (Patel, Hsu, and Lee 2008; Batal et al. 2009) or the
prediction of certain outcomes (Moskovitch et al. 2015). In
dynamic graphs, for example, frequent time intervals series
mining can be also used for the discovery of frequent temporal patterns of edge-interactions (Kostakis and Gionis 2017).
In addition, as will be explained in the Background section,
TIRPs are explicitly represented by the temporal relations
among their STIs. Therefore, they can be easily interpreted
by domain experts, which makes time intervals mining a
very attractive technique for temporal data analytics in reallife data.
The discovery of frequent closed TIRPs, on which we will
elaborate in the Background section, in particular, has a significant potential benefit over discovering the entire set of
frequent TIRPs. While a single frequent closed TIRP may
contain an exponential number (in the size of the TIRP) of
frequent sub-TIRPs that are not closed, their entire information is contained within the closed TIRP itself. Thus, the
discovery of frequent closed TIRPs potentially produces a
much more compact output of frequent TIRPs, which contains the complete information of all the frequent TIRPs.
However, the definition of the complete discovery of frequent closed TIRPs, a problem that was recently investigated
for the first time in (Chen, Weng, and Hui 2016), was not
addressed properly. Earlier methods have discovered only
the first instance of a TIRP within each STIs series in the
database. The following instances of the TIRPs, on the other
hand, have been ignored, which eventually results in an incomplete discovery of frequent closed TIRPs. In this paper we demonstrate this completeness problem, both qualitatively and quantitatively, and introduce a novel algorithm
which is complete. The algorithm also keeps track of the
complete set of instances of the frequent closed TIRPs that
it discovers.

Using temporal abstraction, various forms of sampled multivariate temporal data can be transformed into a uniform
representation of symbolic time intervals, from which Time
Intervals Related Patterns (TIRPs) can be then discovered.
Hence, mining TIRPs from symbolic time intervals offers
a comprehensive framework for heterogeneous multivariate
temporal data analysis. While the field of time intervals mining has gained a growing interest in recent decades, frequent
closed TIRPs mining was not investigated in its full complexity. Mining frequent closed TIRPs is highly effective due
to the discovery of a compact set of frequent TIRPs, which
contains the complete information of all the frequent TIRPs.
However, as we demonstrate in this paper, the recent advancements made in closed TIRPs discovery are incomplete, due to
the discovery of only the first instances of the TIRPs within
each STIs series in the database. In this paper we introduce
the TIRPClo algorithm – for complete and efficient mining
of frequent closed TIRPs. The algorithm utilizes a memoryefficient index and a novel method for data projection, due
to which it is the first algorithm to guarantee a complete discovery of frequent closed TIRPs. In addition, a rigorous runtime comparison of TIRPClo to state-of-the-art methods is
performed, demonstrating a significant speed-up on various
real-world datasets.

Introduction
In the recent two decades, there has been a growing interest
in discovering temporal knowledge through frequent temporal patterns, and particularly in the discovery of frequent
Time Intervals-Related Patterns (TIRPs) from symbolic time
intervals (STIs). STIs may be raw, i.e., describing events
having duration, such as a time period a patient is prescribed
on a medication or the period of time the green light is on in
a traffic light.
Alternatively, STIs can be created from time-points series after employing temporal abstraction methods (Shahar
1997; Lavrac, Keravnou, and Zupan 2000; Höppner 2002;
Lin et al. 2003; Mörchen and Ultsch 2005; Azulay et al.
2007; Moskovitch and Shahar 2015a). Through a temporal abstraction process various forms of temporal variables,
whether sampled regularly or irregularly, are transformed
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4098

