The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combining Machine Learning & Reasoning for Biodiversity Data Intelligence
Atriya Sen,1 Beckett Sterner,2 Nico Franz,2 Caleb Powel,2 Nathan Upham2
1

University of New Orleans
2
Arizona State University
atriya@atriyasen.com
beckett.sterner@asu.edu, nico.franz@asu.edu, cpowel21@asu.edu, nathan.upham@asu.edu

Abstract
The current crisis in global natural resource management
makes it imperative that we better leverage the vast data
sources associated with taxonomic entities (such as recognized species of plants and animals), which are known collectively as biodiversity data. However, these data pose considerable challenges for artificial intelligence: while growing
rapidly in volume, they remain highly incomplete for many
taxonomic groups, often show conflicting signals from different sources, and are multi-modal and therefore constantly
changing in structure. In this paper, we motivate, describe,
and present a novel workflow combining machine learning
and automated reasoning, to discover patterns of taxonomic
identity and change – i.e. “taxonomic intelligence” – leading
to scalable and broadly impactful AI solutions within the biodata realm.

Introduction
Many of the challenges society faces are being addressed
through interdisciplinary collaboration supported by interoperable information resources. A common expectation is
that scientists will be able to agree on a shared, stable vocabulary, but consensus classifications are frequently absent
in the biodiversity domain and in fact may not be necessary (Sterner, Witteveen, and Franz 2020). Geographic distribution, genetic, and phenotypic traits, as well as ecological interactions of biological entities are collectively known
as biodiversity data. The recognized species names (i.e., taxonomic names) as well as the associated criteria that circumscribe them (i.e., taxonomic concepts) are the standard methods of classifying these data (Franz and Peet 2009). Biodiversity data are integral components for addressing many
contemporary challenges society faces, including: natural
resource management, climate change modeling, biodiversity conservation, food security measures, and international
treaty enforcement. Unfortunately, there is widespread and
persistent variation in the ways that scientists represent biodiversity data, e.g. using hierarchical taxonomies, phylogenies reconstructing evolutionary history, and computer ontologies of terms and their relationships (Franz and Sterner
2018; Vaidya, LePage, and Guralnick 2018; Franz, Musher

Figure 1: Biodiversity AI “Landscape”

et al. 2019; Hardisty, Michener et al. 2019; Jeliazkov, Mijatovic et al. 2020). This variation poses major obstacles to
robust inter-operability across an increasingly decentralized
(Blagoderov et al. 2012) ecosystem of primary biodiversity
data sources.
Realizing the societal value of biodiversity data science
will require data integration techniques that are aware of the
context sensitive variations associated with conflicting taxonomic concepts. Accurate and scalable data intelligence –
logically relating data classification terms to their intended
yet often implicit meanings – is essential to overcoming
these data integration challenges. Artificial intelligence (AI)
has an essential role to play in generating the knowledge
needed for generating and translating information across
conflicting biodiversity data classifications.
Figure 1 illustrates the many roles that AI must play in
this domain.
With biodiversity data rapidly expanding in volume, so
too is the scope and frequency of its use in research (Nelson
and Ellis 2019) causing increasing demand for aggregated,
well integrated, inter-operable biodiversity data. In meeting
this demand, biodiversity science is ripe for an AI-fueled

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14911

