The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Understanding Deformable Alignment in Video Super-Resolution
Kelvin C.K. Chan,1∗ Xintao Wang,2∗† Ke Yu,3 Chao Dong,4,5 Chen Change Loy1‡
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG
3
CUHK – SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{chan0899, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg, xintao.wang@outlook.com, yk017@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn
Abstract

2019a,b) perform alignment implicitly via deformable convolution and show superior performance. For instance, the
winner of NTIRE 2019 video restoration challenges (Nah
et al. 2019a,b), EDVR (Wang et al. 2019b), significantly outperforms previous methods with coarse-to-fine deformable
convolutions.
These two kinds of methods are generally regarded as orthogonal approaches and are developed independently. It is
of great interest to know (1) the relationship between explicit and implicit alignments, and (2) the source of improvement brought by implicit modeling. As there are no related
works, we bridge the gap by exploring the intrinsic connections of two representative methods – flow-based alignment (explicit alignment with optical flow) and deformable
alignment (implicit alignment with deformable convolution). Studying their relation not only helps us understand
the working mechanism of deformable alignment, but also
inspires a more general design of video SR approaches.
Deformable convolution (Dai et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2019)
(DCN) is originally designed for spatial adaption in object
detection. The key idea is to displace the sampling locations of standard convolution by some learned offsets. When
DCN is applied in temporal alignment, the displaced kernels on neighboring frames will be used to align intermediate features. On the face of it, this procedure is different from flow-based methods, which align adjacent frames
by flow-warping. To reveal their relationship, we show that
deformable alignment can be formulated as a combination
of feature-level flow-warping and convolution. This intuitive decomposition indicates that these two kinds of alignment intrinsically share the same formulation but differ in
their offset diversity. Specifically, flow-based alignment only
learns one offset at each feature location, while deformable
alignment introduces multiple offsets, the number of which
is in proportion to the kernel size of DCN.
Under this relation, we systematically investigate the effects of offset diversity and gain two interesting insights.
First, the learned offsets in deformable alignment have similar patterns as optical flow, suggesting that deformable and
flow-based alignments are strongly correlated in both concepts and behaviors. Second, diverse offsets achieve better
restoration quality than a single offset. As different offsets
are complementary to each other, they can effectively allevi-

Deformable convolution, originally proposed for the adaptation to geometric variations of objects, has recently shown
compelling performance in aligning multiple frames and is
increasingly adopted for video super-resolution. Despite its
remarkable performance, its underlying mechanism for alignment remains unclear. In this study, we carefully investigate
the relation between deformable alignment and the classic
flow-based alignment. We show that deformable convolution
can be decomposed into a combination of spatial warping and
convolution. This decomposition reveals the commonality of
deformable alignment and flow-based alignment in formulation, but with a key difference in their offset diversity. We
further demonstrate through experiments that the increased
diversity in deformable alignment yields better-aligned features, and hence significantly improves the quality of video
super-resolution output. Based on our observations, we propose an offset-fidelity loss that guides the offset learning
with optical flow. Experiments show that our loss successfully avoids the overflow of offsets and alleviates the instability problem of deformable alignment. Aside from the contributions to deformable alignment, our formulation inspires a
more flexible approach to introduce offset diversity to flowbased alignment, improving its performance.

Introduction
Video super-resolution (SR) aims at recovering highresolution consecutive frames from their low-resolution
counterparts. The key challenge of video SR lies in the effective use of complementary details from adjacent frames,
which can be misaligned due to camera and object motions.
To establish inter-frame correspondence, early methods (Caballero et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017; Sajjadi, Vemulapalli,
and Brown 2018; Tao et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2019) employ optical flow for explicit frame alignment. They warp
neighboring frames to the reference one and pass these images to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for superresolution. Recent studies (Tian et al. 2020; Wang et al.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
This work was done during his study in CUHK.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

973

