The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-Supervised Knowledge Amalgamation for Sequence Classification
Jidapa Thadajarassiri, Thomas Hartvigsen, Xiangnan Kong, Elke A Rundensteiner
Data Science Program and Computer Science Department, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
100 Institute Road, Worcester MA, USA 01609
{jthadajarassiri, twhartvigsen, xkong, rundenst}@wpi.edu

Abstract
Sequence classification is essential for domains from medical
diagnosis to online advertising. In these settings, data are typically proprietary and annotations are expensive to acquire.
Often times, so few annotations are available that training a
robust model from scratch is impractical. Recently, knowledge amalgamation (KA) has emerged as a promising strategy for training models without this hard-to-come-by labeled
training dataset. To achieve this, KA methods combine the
knowledge of multiple pre-trained teacher models (trained
on different classification tasks and proprietary datasets) into
one student model that becomes an expert on the union of all
teachers’ classes. However, we demonstrate that the state-ofthe-art solutions fail in the presence of overconfident teachers,
which make confident but incorrect predictions for instances
from classes upon which they were not trained. Additionally, to-date no work has explored KA for sequence models.
Therefore, we propose and then solve the open problem of
semi-supervised KA for sequence classification (SKA). Our
SKA approach first learns to estimate how trustworthy each
teacher is for a given instance, then rescales the predicted
probabilities from all teachers to supervise a student model.
Our solution overcomes overconfident teachers through careful use of a very small amount of labeled instances. We
demonstrate that this approach beats eight state-of-the-art alternatives on four real-world datasets by on average 15% in
accuracy with as little as 2% of training data being annotated.

Figure 1: Semi-supervised knowledge amalgamation (SKA)
for sequence classification. Given sequence data, a tiny subset of which is labeled, and a set of pre-trained models
(teachers), the goal is to train a student model that can amalgamate the teachers’ knowledge, learning to predict any of
the classes in which the teachers specialize.

stead of releasing the training data to support reuse by other
researchers or practitioners (Harutyunyan et al. 2019).
However, these pre-trained models may not be directly
usable because (1) they may be too large to fit within the
resources of some applications (e.g., sequence classification
in mobile devices), or (2) there may be differences in the
classification tasks of the teacher and student models (e.g.,
disease prediction with more disease classes than the pretrained model). Many works have studied these two issues
for image classification (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Shen et al. 2019a) while no works have yet studied such
problems for sequence classification.
In image classification, Knowledge Distillation (KD)
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) methods address problem
(1) by training a small target model (the “student” model)
that learns from one pre-trained, and possibly complex,
model (the “teacher” model) with a set of unlabeled data. To
address problem (2), Knowledge Amalgamation (KA) (Shen
et al. 2019a) methods have been proposed to train a student
model from multiple pre-trained teacher models, where dif-

Introduction
Motivation. Sequence classification has a wide range of
real-world applications. Examples include disease prediction (Razavian, Marcus, and Sontag 2016), activity recognition (Yang et al. 2020), and speech recognition (Graves,
Jaitly, and Mohamed 2013). Conventional approaches to sequence classification mainly focus on supervised settings,
which require a large amount of labeled data to train a
model. Unfortunately, large datasets, such as health records
or customer activities, are not always available to the public due to privacy concerns. Often too few annotations are
available to train a robust model from scratch. Fortunately,
some research groups may train a model on their private data
(e.g., medical records) and release the pre-trained models inCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9859

