The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Post-training Quantization with Multiple Points:
Mixed Precision without Mixed Precision
Xinghcao Liu1 , Mao Ye1 , Dengyong Zhou2 , Qiang Liu 1
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Google Brain

Abstract

full-precision network, without accessing the original training data (e.g., Sung, Shin, and Hwang 2015; Krishnamoorthi
2018; Zhao et al. 2019; Meller et al. 2019; Banner, Nahshan,
and Soudry 2019; Nagel et al. 2019; Choukroun, Kravchik,
and Kisilev 2019). This scenario appears widely in practice.
For example, when a client wants to deploy a full-precision
model provided by a machine learning service provider in
low-precision, the client may have no access to the original
training data due to privacy policy. In addition, compared
with training QNNs from scratch, prost-training quantization is much more efficient computationally.
Mixed precision is a recent advanced technology to boost
the performance of QNNs (Wang et al. 2019; Banner,
Nahshan, and Soudry 2019; Gong et al. 2019; Dong et al.
2019). The idea is to assign more bits to important layers
(or channels) and less bits to unimportant layers/channels
to better control the overall quantization error and balance
the accuracy and cost more efficiently. The difficulty, however, is that current mixed precision methods require specialized hardware (e.g., Wang et al. 2019). Most commodity
hardware do not support efficient mixed precision computation (e.g. due to chip area constraints (Horowitz 2014)). This
makes it difficult to implement mixed precision in practice,
despite that it is highly desirable.
In this paper, we propose multipoint quantization for posttraining quantization, which can achieve the flexibility similar to mixed precision, but uses only a single precision level.
The idea is to approximate a full-precision weight vector by
a linear combination of multiple low-bit vectors. This allows us to use a larger number of low-bit vectors to approximate the weights of more important channels, while use less
points to approximate the insensitive channels. It enables a
flexible trade-off between accuracy and cost at a per-channel
basis, while using only a single precision level. Because it
does not require physical mixed precision implementation,
our method can be easily deployed on commodity hardware
by common operands.
We propose a greedy algorithm to iteratively find the
optimal low-bit vectors to minimize the approximation error. The algorithm sequentially adds the low-bit vector that
yields largest improvement on the error, until a stopping criterion is met. We develop a theoretical analysis, showing that
the error decays exponentially with the number of low-bit
vectors used. The fast decay of the greedy algorithm ensures

We consider the post-training quantization problem, which
discretizes the weights of pre-trained deep neural networks
without re-training the model. We propose multipoint quantization, a quantization method that approximates a fullprecision weight vector using a linear combination of multiple vectors of low-bit numbers; this is in contrast to typical
quantization methods that approximate each weight using a
single low precision number. Computationally, we construct
the multipoint quantization with an efficient greedy selection
procedure, and adaptively decides the number of low precision points on each quantized weight vector based on the error of its output. This allows us to achieve higher precision
levels for important weights that greatly influence the outputs,
yielding an “effect of mixed precision” but without physical
mixed precision implementations (which requires specialized
hardware accelerators (Wang et al. 2019)). Empirically, our
method can be implemented by common operands, bringing
almost no memory and computation overhead. We show that
our method outperforms a range of state-of-the-art methods
on ImageNet classification and it can be generalized to more
challenging tasks like PASCAL VOC object detection.

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the great success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many fields. Nonetheless, DNNs require expensive computational resources and enormous storage space, making it difficult for deployment on resourceconstrained devices, such as devices for Internet of Things
(IoT), processors on smart phones, and embeded controllers
in mobile robots (Howard et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018).
Quantization is a promising method for creating more
energy-efficient deep learning systems (Han, Mao, and
Dally 2015; Hubara et al. 2017; Zmora et al. 2018; Cheng
et al. 2018). By approximating real-valued weights and activations using low-bit numbers, quantized neural networks
(QNNs) trained with state-of-the-art algorithms (e.g., Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Rastegari et al. 2016;
Louizos et al. 2018; Li, Dong, and Wang 2019) can be shown
to perform similarly as their full-precision counterparts (e.g.,
Jung et al. 2019; Li, Dong, and Wang 2019).
This work focuses on the problem of post-training quantization, which aims to generate a QNN from a pretrained
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8697

