The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PTN: A Poisson Transfer Network for Semi-supervised Few-shot Learning
Huaxi Huang1 , Junjie Zhang2 , Jian Zhang1 , Qiang Wu1 , Chang Xu 3
1

University of Technology Sydney, Sydney NSW 2007, Australia
2
Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
The University of Sydney, Sydney NSW 2006, Australia
{Huaxi.Huang.student., Jian.Zhang, Qiang.Wu}@uts.edu.au, junjie.zhang.avalon@gmail.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

on learning a decent classifier by transferring the domain
knowledge from a model pre-trained on the large base-class
set (Chen et al. 2018; Qiao et al. 2018). This paradigm decouples the few-shot learning progress into representation
learning and classification, and has shown favorable performance against meta-learning methods in recent works (Tian
et al. 2020; Ziko et al. 2020). Our method shares somewhat
similar motivation with transfer-learning based methods and
proposes to utilize the extra unlabeled novel-class data and
a pre-trained embedding to tackle the few-shot problem.
Compared with collecting labeled novel-class data, it is
much easier to obtain abundant unlabeled data from these
classes. Therefore, semi-supervised few-shot learning (SSFSL) (Ren et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; Yu
et al. 2020) is proposed to combine the auxiliary information from labeled base-class data and extra unlabeled novelclass data to enhance the performance of few-shot learners.
The core challenge in SSFSL is how to fully explore the
auxiliary information from these unlabeled. Previous SSFSL
works indicate that graph-based models (Liu et al. 2018;
Ziko et al. 2020) can learn a better classifier than inductive
ones (Ren et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; Yu et al. 2020), since
these methods directly model the relationship between the
labeled and unlabeled samples during the inference. However, current graph-based models adopt the Laplace learning (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003) to conduct label
propagation, the solutions of Laplace learning develop localized spikes near the labeled samples but are almost constant
far from the labeled samples, i.e., label values are not propagated well, especially with few labeled samples. Therefore, these models suffer from the underdeveloped messagepassing capacity for the labels. On the other hand, most SSFSL methods adapt the feature embedding pre-trained on
base-class data (meta- or transfer- pre-trained) as the novelclass embedding. This may lead to the embedding degeneration problem, as the pre-trained model is designed for the
base-class recognition, it tends to learn the embedding that
represents only base-class information, and lose information
that might be useful outside base classes.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel transferlearning based SSFSL method, named Poisson Transfer Network (PTN). Specifically, to improve the capacity of graphbased SSFSL models in message passing, we propose to
revise the Poisson model tailored for few-shot problems by

The predicament in semi-supervised few-shot learning (SSFSL) is to maximize the value of the extra unlabeled data
to boost the few-shot learner. In this paper, we propose a
Poisson Transfer Network (PTN) to mine the unlabeled information for SSFSL from two aspects. First, the Poisson
Merriman–Bence–Osher (MBO) model builds a bridge for
the communications between labeled and unlabeled examples. This model serves as a more stable and informative
classifier than traditional graph-based SSFSL methods in the
message-passing process of the labels. Second, the extra unlabeled samples are employed to transfer the knowledge from
base classes to novel classes through contrastive learning.
Specifically, we force the augmented positive pairs close
while push the negative ones distant. Our contrastive transfer
scheme implicitly learns the novel-class embeddings to alleviate the over-fitting problem on the few labeled data. Thus,
we can mitigate the degeneration of embedding generality in
novel classes. Extensive experiments indicate that PTN outperforms the state-of-the-art few-shot and SSFSL models on
miniImageNet and tieredImageNet benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Few-shot learning (Miller, Matsakis, and Viola 2000; FeiFei, Fergus, and Pietro 2006; Vinyals et al. 2016) aims to
learn a model that generalizes well with a few instances
of each novel class. In general, a few-shot learner is firstly
trained on a substantial annotated dataset, also noted as the
base-class set, and then adapted to unseen novel classes with
a few labeled instances. During the evaluation, a set of fewshot tasks are fed to the learner, where each task consists
of a few support (labeled) samples and a certain number of
query (unlabeled) data. This research topic has been proved
immensely appealing in the past few years, as a large number of few-shot learning methods are proposed from various
perspectives. Mainstream methods can be roughly grouped
into two categories. The first one is learning from episodes
(Vinyals et al. 2016), also known as meta-learning, which
adopts the base-class data to create a set of episodes. Each
episode is a few-shot learning task, with support and query
samples that simulate the evaluation procedure. The second
type is the transfer-learning based method, which focuses
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1602

