The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Loop Estimator for Discounted Values in Markov Reward Processes
Falcon Z. Dai, Matthew R. Walter
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA 60637
{dai, mwalter}@ttic.edu

Abstract

sekas and Tsitsiklis 1996). We call this the model-based estimator in the sequel. This approach is recently proved to
be minimax-optimal given a generative model (Pananjady
and Wainwright 2019) and it provides excellent estimates of
discounted values in the single sample path setting as well,
as our numerical experiments show (Section 5). However,
model-based
estimators suffer from a space complexity of
 
2
O S , where S is the number of states in the MRP. In contrast, model-free methods enjoy a lower space complexity of
O(S ) by not explicitly estimating the model parameters (Sutton 1988) but tend to exhibit a greater estimation error.
A popular class of estimators, k-step bootstrapping temporal difference or TD(k)1 estimates a state’s value based
on the estimated values of other states. Like the modelbased estimator, TD(k) is based on the classic Bellman equation (5). The key property of the Bellman equation (5) is that
the estimate of a state’s value is tied to the estimates of other
states which makes it hard to study the convergence of a
specific state’s value estimate in isolation and motivates the
traditional approach of generative model in the literature.
Traditionally, prior works (Kearns and Singh 1999; EvenDar and Mansour 2003; Gheshlaghi Azar, Munos, and Kappen 2013; Pananjady and Wainwright 2019) first show efficient estimation of all state values under the assumption that
we can generate a sample of next states and rewards starting in each states, and then invoke an argument that such a
batch of samples can be obtained over a single sample path
when all states are visited for at least once, i.e., over cover
times. In this work, we break with the traditional approach
by directly studying the convergence of the value estimate
of a single state over the sample path. The convergence over
all states is obtained as a simple consequence of the union
bound. Our key insight is that it is possible to circumvent
the general difficulties of non-independent samples in the
single sample path setting by recognizing the embedded regenerative structure of an MRP. We alleviate the reliance on
estimates of other states by studying segments of the sample path that start and end in the same state, i.e., loops. This

At the working heart of policy iteration algorithms commonly
used and studied in the discounted setting of reinforcement
learning, the policy evaluation step estimates the value of
states with samples from a Markov reward process induced
by following a Markov policy in a Markov decision process.
We propose a simple and efficient estimator called loop estimator that exploits the regenerative structure of Markov reward processes without explicitly estimating a full model.
Our method enjoys a space complexity of O(1) when estimating the value of a single positive recurrent state
 s unlike TD
with O(S ) or model-based methods with O S 2 . Moreover,
the regenerative structure enables us to show, without relying
on the generative model approach, that the
has an
 √estimator

e τ s /T over steps
instance-dependent convergence rate of O
T on a single sample path, where τ s is the maximal expected
hitting time to state s. In preliminary numerical experiments,
the loop estimator outperforms model-free methods, such as
TD(k), and is competitive with the model-based estimator.

1

Introduction

The problem of policy evaluation arises naturally in the context of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018)
when one wants to evaluate the (action) values of a policy in
a Markov decision process (MDP). In particular, policy iteration (Howard 1960) is a classic algorithmic framework
for solving MDPs that poses and solves a policy evaluation problem during each iteration. Being motivated by the
setting of reinforcement learning, i.e., the underlying MDP
parameters are unknown and samples are obtained interactively, we focus on solving the policy evaluation problem
given only a single sample path.
Following a stationary Markov policy in an MDP, i.e., actions are determined based solely on the current state, gives
rise to a Markov reward process (MRP) (Puterman 1994).
For the rest of the article, we focus on MRPs and consider
the problem of estimating the infinite-horizon discounted
state values of an unknown MRP.
A straightforward approach to policy evaluation is to estimate the parameters of the MRP and then the value by
plugging them into the classic Bellman equation (5) (Bert-

1

An important variant is TD(λ), but we do not include it in our
experiments since there is not a canonical implementation of the
idea of estimating λ-return (Sutton and Barto 2018). However, any
implementation is expected to exhibit similar behaviors as TD(k)
with large k corresponding to large λ (Kearns and Singh 2000).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7169

