The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combining Reinforcement Learning with Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun Algorithm
for the Traveling Salesman Problem
Jiongzhi Zheng 1,2 , Kun He1 * , Jianrong Zhou1 , Yan Jin1 ,Chu-Min Li 1,3
1

2

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
3
MIS, University of Picardie Jules Verne, France
brooklet60@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

solve the TSP. However, DRL methods are hard to scale to
large instances with thousands of cities, indicating that current DRL methods still have a gap to the competitive heuristic algorithms.
Heuristic algorithms are currently the most efficient
and effective approaches for solving the TSP, including
real-world TSPs with millions of cities. The LKH algorithm (Helsgaun 2000), which improves the Lin-Kernighan
(LK) heuristic (Lin and Kernighan 1973), is one of the most
famous heuristics. LKH improves the route through the kopt heuristic optimization method (Lin 1965), which replaces at most k edges of the current tour at each search
step. The most critical part of LKH is to make choice at
each search step. In the k-opt process, it has to select edges
to be removed and to be added. Differs to its predecessor LK
heuristic of which each city has its own candidate set recording five (default value) nearest cities, LKH used an α-value
defined based on the minimum spanning tree (Held and Karp
1970) as a metric in selecting and sorting cities in the candidate set. The effect of candidate sets greatly improves the
iteration speed and the search speed of both LK and LKH.
However, when selecting edges to be added in the k-opt
process, LKH traverses the candidate set of the current city
in ascending order of the α-value until the constraint conditions are met, which is inflexible and may limit its potential
to find the optimal solution. In this work, we address the
challenge of improving the LKH, and introduce a creative
and distinctive method to combine reinforcement learning
with the LKH heuristic. The proposed algorithm could learn
to choose the appropriate edges to be added in the k-opt process by means of a reinforcement learning strategy.
Concretely, we first use three reinforcement learning
methods, namely Q-learning, Sarsa and Monte Carlo (Sutton
and Barto 1998), to replace the inflexible traversal operation
of LKH. The performance of the reinforced LKH algorithm
by any one of the three methods has been greatly improved.
Besides, we found that the three methods are complementary
in reinforcing the LKH. For example, some TSP instances
can be solved well by Q-learning, but not by Sarsa, and vice
versa. Therefore, we propose a variable strategy reinforced
approach, called VSR-LKH, that combines the above three
algorithms to further improve the performance. The idea of
variable strategy is inspired from Variable Neighborhood
Search (VNS) (Mladenovic and Hansen 1997), which lever-

We address the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), a famous NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem. And we
propose a variable strategy reinforced approach, denoted
as VSR-LKH, which combines three reinforcement learning methods (Q-learning, Sarsa and Monte Carlo) with the
well-known TSP algorithm, called Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun
(LKH). VSR-LKH replaces the inflexible traversal operation
in LKH, and lets the program learn to make choice at each
search step by reinforcement learning. Experimental results
on 111 TSP benchmarks from the TSPLIB with up to 85,900
cities demonstrate the excellent performance of the proposed
method.

Introduction
Given a set of cities with certain locations, the Traveling
Salesman Problem (TSP) is to find the shortest route, along
which a salesman travels from a city to visit all the cities
exactly once and finally returns to the starting point. An
algorithm designed for TSP can also be applied to many
other practical problems, such as the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) (Nazari et al. 2018), tool path optimization of
Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machining (Fok et al.
2019), etc. As one of the most famous NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems, TSP has become a touchstone
for the algorithm design.
Numerous approaches have been proposed for solving
the TSP. Traditional methods are mainly exact algorithms
and heuristic algorithms, such as the exact solver Corconde
1
and the Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun (LKH) heuristic (Helsgaun 2000; Helsgaun 2009; Taillard and Helsgaun 2019;
Tinós, Helsgaun, and Whitley 2018). With the development
of artificial intelligence, there are some studies combining reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998) with
(meta) heuristics to solve the TSP (de O. da Costa et al.
2020; Liu and Zeng 2009), and attaining good results on
instances with up to 2,400 cities. More recently, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods (Khalil et al. 2017;
Shoma, Daisuke, and Hiroyuki 2018; Xing, Tu, and Xu
2020; de O. da Costa et al. 2020) have also been used to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/concorde/index.html

12445

