The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning an Effective Context-Response Matching Model
with Self-Supervised Tasks for Retrieval-based Dialogues
1

2

2

1

1

Ruijian Xu , Chongyang Tao , Daxin Jiang , Xueliang Zhao , Dongyan Zhao , Rui Yan

1,3

1

Peking University, Beijing, China
Microsoft Corporation, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{xurj,xl.zhao,zhaody,ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn,{chongyang.tao,djiang}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

that are superior in providing informative responses and
have been widely applied in many commercial products.

Building an intelligent dialogue system with the ability to select a proper response according to a multi-turn context is a
great challenging task. Existing studies focus on building a
context-response matching model with various neural architectures or pretrained language models (PLMs) and typically
learning with a single response prediction task. These approaches overlook many potential training signals contained
in dialogue data, which might be beneficial for context understanding and produce better features for response prediction. Besides, the response retrieved from existing dialogue
systems supervised by the conventional way still faces some
critical challenges, including incoherence and inconsistency.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose learning a context-response matching model with auxiliary selfsupervised tasks designed for the dialogue data based on pretrained language models. Specifically, we introduce four selfsupervised tasks including next session prediction, utterance
restoration, incoherence detection and consistency discrimination, and jointly train the PLM-based response selection
model with these auxiliary tasks in a multi-task manner. By
this means, the auxiliary tasks can guide the learning of the
matching model to achieve a better local optimum and select
a more proper response. Experiment results on two benchmarks indicate that the proposed auxiliary self-supervised
tasks bring significant improvement for multi-turn response
selection in retrieval-based dialogues, and our model achieves
new state-of-the-art results on both datasets.

We consider the response selection task in multi-turn dialogues, where the retrieval model ought to select a proper response by measuring the matching degree between a multiturn dialogue context and a number of response candidates. Earlier studies (Wang et al. 2013; Lowe et al. 2015)
concatenate the context to a single utterance and calculate
the matching score with the utterance-level representations.
Later, most response selection models (Zhou et al. 2016; Wu
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018) perform context-response
matching within the representation-matching-aggregation
paradigm, where each turn of utterance is represented individually and sequential information is aggregated among
a sequence of utterance-response matching features. To
further improve the performance, some recent approaches
consider multiple granularities (or layers) of representations (Zhou et al. 2018; Tao et al. 2019a) for matching or
propose more complicated interaction mechanisms between
the context and the response (Tao et al. 2019b).
Recently, a wide range of studies have shown that PLMs,
such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019), on the large corpus can learn universal language representations, which are helpful for various downstream natural language processing tasks and can get rid of training
a new model from scratch. To adapt pre-trained models for
multi-turn response selection, Whang et al. (2020) and Gu
et al. (2020) make the first attempt to utilize BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) to learn a matching model, where context and the candidate response are first concatenated and
then fed into the PLMs for calculating the final matching
score. These pre-trained language models can well capture
the interaction information among inter-utterance and intrautterance through multiple transformer layers. Although
PLM-based response selection models demonstrate superior
performance due to its strong representation ability, it is still
challenging to effectively learn task-related knowledge during the training process, especially when the size of training corpora is limited. Naturally, these studies typically learn
the response selection model with only the context-response
matching task and overlook many potential training signals
contained in dialogue data. Such training signals might be
beneficial for context understanding and produce better fea-

Introduction
Building a dialogue system that can converse with people
naturally and meaningfully is one of the most challenging problems towards high-level artificial intelligence, and
has been drawing increasing interests from both academia
and industry area. Most existing dialogue systems are either
generation-based (Vinyals and Le 2015; Serban et al. 2016)
or retrieval-based (Wang et al. 2013; Lowe et al. 2015; Wu
et al. 2017; Tao et al. 2019a). Given the dialogue context,
generation-based approaches synthesize a response word by
word with a conditional language model, while retrievalbased methods select a proper response from a candidate
pool. In this paper, we focus on retrieval-based approaches
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14158

