The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MLE-Guided Parameter Search for Task Loss Minimization in Neural Sequence
Modeling
Sean Welleck,∗ Kyunghyun Cho
New York University

Abstract
Neural autoregressive sequence models are used to generate
sequences in a variety of natural language processing (NLP)
tasks, where they are evaluated according to sequence-level
task losses. These models are typically trained with maximum likelihood estimation, which ignores the task loss, yet
empirically performs well as a surrogate objective. Typical
approaches to directly optimizing the task loss such as policy
gradient and minimum risk training are based around sampling
in the sequence space to obtain candidate update directions
that are scored based on the loss of a single sequence. In this
paper, we develop an alternative method based on random
search in the parameter space that leverages access to the maximum likelihood gradient. We propose maximum likelihood
guided parameter search (MGS), which samples from a distribution over update directions that is a mixture of random
search around the current parameters and around the maximum likelihood gradient, with each direction weighted by
its improvement in the task loss. MGS shifts sampling to the
parameter space, and scores candidates using losses that are
pooled from multiple sequences. Our experiments show that
MGS is capable of optimizing sequence-level losses, with
substantial reductions in repetition and non-termination in
sequence completion, and similar improvements to those of
minimum risk training in machine translation.

1

Introduction

Neural autoregressive sequence models are used in a variety
of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as machine
translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015), dialogue modeling
(Vinyals, Quoc, and Le 2015), and text completion (Sutskever,
Martens, and Hinton 2011; Radford et al. 2018; Holtzman
et al. 2019; Welleck et al. 2020b). In these tasks, a decoding
algorithm is used to produce sequences that are evaluated
according to a sequence (or corpus) level task loss such as
B LEU (Papineni et al. 2002), M ETEOR (Banerjee and Lavie
2005), or alternative n-gram based metrics.
The conventional training approach, maximum likelihood,
optimizes a token-level surrogate to the 0-1 loss, and only
leverages sequences drawn from the ground-truth distribution.
The resulting mismatch between the training and evaluation
∗

Correspondence to: wellecks@nyu.edu.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14032

loss functions, and the discrepancy between the sequence distributions used for training and the distribution encountered
at evaluation time has prompted alternative sequence-level
training algorithms (e.g. (Daumé, Langford, and Marcu 2009;
Ranzato et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2016)). Nevertheless, maximizing the likelihood has empirically performed well as a
surrogate to minimizing the task loss, achieving strong performance on the aforementioned tasks. In this paper, we develop
a sequence-level training procedure that addresses the downsides of maximum likelihood by leveraging its strengths as a
surrogate objective.
It is challenging to optimize a task loss, as the loss is typically non-differentiable with respect to the model parameters,
and optimization is done over a high-dimensional parameter
space. Typical approaches to this problem in natural language
processing are based around the policy gradient estimator
(Williams 1992), such as Shen et al. (2016); Ranzato et al.
(2016); Bahdanau et al. (2017); Yu et al. (2017). This estimator is used to optimize an arbitrary task loss by introducing
stochasticity via autoregressive sampling in the action space,
which is a critical downside in NLP, where the action space
(vocabulary) is large and the sequence-level reward is sparse.
The estimator’s variance grows with the sequence length, necessitating a parameterized baseline or a heuristic sampling
schedule in practice, while requiring initialization from a pretrained model. Recently, the effectiveness of these methods
in NLP has been called into question (Caccia et al. 2020;
Choshen et al. 2020).
An alternative class of methods optimize a black-box
function without requiring gradient information. Of these,
estimation-of-distribution algorithms, including the crossentropy method (Rubinstein 1999), evolutionary strategies
(Rechenberg 1978), and their variants (Hansen and Ostermeier 2001; Salimans et al. 2017), operate by maintaining a
search distribution from which a set of random perturbations
are sampled. The function value (i.e. task loss) at each of the
perturbed points is used to update the search distribution. Because stochasticity is introduced in the parameter space rather
than the action space, rewards associated with each search
candidate are pooled over multiple examples, ‘densifying’ the
sparse reward. This parameter-space exploration (Rückstieß
et al. 2010) is attractive for NLP since the same decoding
algorithm can be used for training and evaluation, and the
variance is independent of the action space size or the se-

