The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neighborhood Consensus Networks for Unsupervised
Multi-view Outlier Detection
Li Cheng, Yijie Wang∗ , Xinwang Liu
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{chengli09, wangyijie, xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view outlier detection recently attracted rapidly growing attention with the development of multi-view learning.
Although promising performance demonstrated, we observe
that identifying outliers in multi-view data is still a challenging task due to the complicated characteristics of multi-view
data. Specifically, an effective multi-view outlier detection
method should be able to handle (1) different types of outliers; (2) two or more views; (3) samples without clusters; (4)
high dimensional data. Unfortunately, little is known about
how these four issues can be handled simultaneously. In this
paper, we propose an unsupervised multi-view outlier detection method to address these issues. Our method is based on
the proposed novel neighborhood consensus networks termed
NC-Nets, which automatically encodes intrinsic information
into a comprehensive latent space for each view (for issue
(4)) and uniforms the neighborhood structures among different views (for issue (2)). Accordingly, we propose an outlier
score measurement which consists of two parts: the withinview reconstruction score and the cross-view neighborhood
consensus score. The measurement is designed based on the
characteristics of the different outlier types (for issue (1)) and
no cluster assumption is needed (for issue (3)). Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods. On average, our method achieves
11.2% ∼ 96.2% improvement in term of AUC and 33.5% ∼
352.7% improvement in term of F1-Score.

Figure 1: Illustration of three types of outliers: (i) attribute
outlier (the red triangle): outlier that exhibits consistent abnormal behaviors in each view; (ii) class outlier(the red
diamond): outlier that exhibits inconsistent characteristics
(e.g., cluster membership) across different views; (iii) classattribute outlier(the red square): outlier that exhibits consistent abnormal behaviors in some views, while exhibits inconsistent characteristics across some other views.

a particular view. Multi-view learning approaches can utilize
the complementary information across various views and explore the consensus property to get better performance than
their single-view counterparts (Xu, Wang, and Lai 2016;
Tang et al. 2020; Sheng et al. 2019; Ji et al. 2019; Zhao et al.
2017). Although promising performance has been demonstrated in existing methods, detecting outliers from multiview data is still a challenging problem due to the complicated distribution and inconsistent behavior of samples
across different views. Specifically, based on the characteristics of multi-view data and existing literature, we argue that
there are four important issues that need to be addressed:
• I1 handle different types of outliers: there are three types
of outliers, i.e., attribute outlier, class outlier and classattribute outlier, as illustrated in Figure 1;
• I2 handle two or more views: there are usually more than
two data sources, which indicates that the detection process could not be conducted in a pairwise manner and
should be easily extended to multiple views;
• I3 handle samples without clusters: there may exist no
clusters in complex data, thus the commonly used cluster
membership is no longer effective;
• I4 handle high dimensional data: there are quite a number of features that could be extracted in practical applications. Such data may contain a few abundant features,
leading to unsatisfying detection performance.

Introduction
Unsupervised outlier detection aims at identifying outliers
in a given dataset without labels, which has been intensively
studied and widely used in various applications, such as
medical diagnosis (Wang et al. 2019), fraud detection (Wang
et al. 2018), and information security (Kang et al. 2019;
Wang and Ma 2014), to name just a few. In recent decades,
a number of outlier detection methods have been proposed
including distance-based methods, density-based methods,
and clustering-based methods (Aggarwal 2015; Wang et al.
2013). These outlier detection algorithms are designed for
data from one source, i.e., single-view data.
Nowadays, data are usually collected from diverse
sources and features from a particular source are regarded as
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7099

