The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Teacher Perspectives on How To Train Your Robot
A Middle School AI and Ethics Curriculum
Randi Williams, Stephen P. Kaputsos, Cynthia Breazeal
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA 02142
{randiw12, kaputsos, cynthiab}@media.mit.edu

Background

Abstract

AI Education

To enable a diverse citizenry to fully participate in future society, we must prepare all students to construct and critique
emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI). Classrooms are important spaces to teach students these skills,
however there are few AI curricula that have been developed for and used by K-12 teachers. We developed the How
to Train Your Robot: AI and Ethics Curriculum for middle
school teachers who want to introduce AI to their students.
This paper describes the curriculum and professional development we used to prepare teachers to run a five-day AI
course. Before and after they ran the curriculum, we interviewed teachers to understand their opinions on pedagogical approaches to teaching AI, meeting students’ needs, and
the feasibility of doing the activities in the classroom. Our
results indicate that, with appropriate training, even teachers
who were new to computer science felt prepared and successfully engaged their students in the topic. We hope our insights
will inform future efforts to realize AI education in primary
and secondary classrooms.

Published studies on AI curricula in K-12 classrooms date
back to at least 2010, with the majority of the work being published in the past 3 years (Heinze, Haase, and Higgins 2010; Long and Magerko 2020). In the United States
of America, the AI4K12 initiative outlined national guidelines on what every K-12 student should understand about
AI. The guidelines describe the Five Big Ideas of AI: how AI
enables computers to perceive their environment, represent
and reason about knowledge, learn from data, interact naturally, and impact society (Touretzky et al. 2019). Our curriculum focuses on Big Ideas #3: that computers can learn
from data and #5 that AI can impact society in both positive
and negative ways (Touretzky et al. 2019). Lao and Long et
al. expand on this work by providing AI competency frameworks (Lao 2020; Long and Magerko 2020). With regard to
these frameworks, we also teach competencies 1 and 2, how
to define intelligence and recognize AI (Long and Magerko
2020), and skills 2 and 3, how to plan a project and create
machine learning artifacts (Lao 2020).

Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) impacts multiple areas of today’s
society, including how people work, learn, govern, and entertain themselves. A lack of skills in emerging technologies
could limit a person’s ability to actively participate as a citizen and compete for the highest paying jobs (Tuomi 2018).
Thus, many arguments in support of AI education in primary
and secondary school have come forth in recent years (Zimmerman 2018; Touretzky et al. 2019). Going one step further, we believe that AI education efforts must target K-12
classrooms at public schools to make knowledge AI accessible to the most diverse group of students.
We developed the How to Train Your Robot curriculum
for teachers who want to explore AI and ethics with their
middle school students (ages 11-14). We conducted two
rounds of classroom studies with in-service middle school
teachers to get teachers’ feedback on the activities. The first
round of studies occurred in classrooms over five full school
days. Then, due to the health emergency caused by an outbreak of SARS-Cov-2, we converted the curriculum and ran
it as a synchronous, online course for five, 2.5-hour sessions.

Machine Learning and Robotics in K-12 AI
Education
Many AI interventions use programming activities enable
students to learn about AI by tinkering (Lane 2021; Druga
2018; Hitron et al. 2018; Kahn et al. 2018; Hitron et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2019; Zimmermann-Niefield et al. 2019; Bhatia
and Lao 2020; Carney et al. 2020). Our curriculum leverages
tools from the Machine Learning for Kids and Teachable
Machine projects so that students can learn through making (Long and Magerko 2020). Interventions also use nonprogramming activities to help students engage with AI in a
variety of contexts (TechGirlz 2018; Vahrenhold, Cutts, and
Falkner 2019; DiPaola, Payne, and Breazeal 2020; Payne
2020). We used Payne’s metaphors, such as comparing algorithms to recipes, and non-programming activities, such
as building a biased cat-dog classifier, to help students gain
new perspectives on AI before they programmed it (Payne
2019).
Although robotics education is not our focus, we integrated a physical robot into the course to promote student engagement through embodied interaction (McConnell

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15678

