The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Terrace-based Food Counting and Segmentation
Huu-Thanh Nguyen,1 Chong-Wah Ngo, 2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
tnguyenhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cwngo@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper represents object instance as a terrace, where the
height of terrace corresponds to object attention while the
evolution of layers from peak to sea level represents the complexity in drawing the finer boundary of an object. A multitask neural network is presented to learn the terrace representation. The attention of terrace is leveraged for instance counting, and the layers provide prior for easy-to-hard pathway of
progressive instance segmentation. We study the model for
counting and segmentation for a variety of food instances,
ranging from Chinese, Japanese to Western food. This paper
presents how the terrace model deals with arbitrary shape,
size, obscure boundary and occlusion of instances, where
other techniques are currently short of.

Introduction
Panoptic segmentation has recently been studied in (Kirillov
et al. 2019), aiming to combine the strength of object detection (He et al. 2017) and semantic segmentation (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). Specifically, the goal is to
pixel-wise extract arbitrary shapes of semantic units, where
the shape is beyond bounding box and the unit-of-interest is
not only object category but also instance. Panoptic segmentation naturally supports applications like instance counting,
which is often achieved by glance-based regression without
having to know the object locations (Chattopadhyay et al.
2017). This paper studies panoptic segmentation for food instances on a plate as shown in Fig. 1. Food segmentation is
a fundamental step towards portion size estimation for nutrition estimation (Myers et al. 2015). As studied in nutritional
science (Khanna et al. 2010), there is correlation between the
area and density of food. Under the situation where the scale
of food can be estimated, for example by fiducial marker (He
et al. 2013), counting the number of pixels per food item already provides basic information for calorie estimation.
Nevertheless, counting and segmenting food instances, as
shown in Fig. 1, is difficult. First, instance occlusion is a
common phenomenon in food presentation. When the instances occlude or touch each others, the boundaries might
not be distinguishable, as shown in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1e. Second, food items are often decorated and topped with different ingredients (Fig. 1b and Fig. 1d). Regularization is

(a) occlusion

(b) decoration

(c) viewpoint variation

(d) topping

(e) obscure boundary

(f) multiple dishes

Figure 1: Challenges of counting and segmentation.

required to constrain over-segmentation of toppings as instances. Third, as food images are usually captured in close
distance, distortion of size and shape can always be observed
due to perspective difference (Fig. 1c). Fourth, the unit of
items can be a piece, slice or even a scoop of dish as shown
in Fig. 1f. A combination of these factors in general results
in a variety of visual appearance in terms of shape and size.
To the best of our knowledge, there is yet to have any study
in the context of food instance segmentation to address these
challenges.
The contribution of this paper is proposal of a novel terrace based instance segmentation technique. The method
represents instance as a multi-layer terrace (see Fig. 3 for example), where different layers signify the level of difficulty
in segmentation. Each layer provides prior to the shape as
well as size of an instance. An instance is segmented layerwise in progressive manner to preserve the shape and size.
To regularize instance segmentation to alleviate the adverse
effect such as due to food decoration, the height of terrace
is estimated as attention for glance-based counting. To this
end, terrace is end-to-end learnt as a multi-task neural network for joint segmentation and counting. Last but not least,
terrace is class agnostic. The terrace can be clustered into
high-quality instance segmentation map as in (Kirillov et al.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2364

