The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Generating Plausible Counterfactual and
Semi-Factual Explanations for Deep Learning
Eoin M. Kenny* , Mark T. Keane
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, UCD, Dublin, Ireland
VistaMilk SFI Research Centre
eoin.kenny@insight-centre.org, mark.keane@ucd.ie
Abstract
There is a growing concern that the recent progress made in
AI, especially regarding the predictive competence of deep
learning models, will be undermined by a failure to properly
explain their operation and outputs. In response to this disquiet, counterfactual explanations have become very popular
in eXplainable AI (XAI) due to their asserted computational,
psychological, and legal benefits. In contrast however, semifactuals (which appear to be equally useful) have surprisingly received no attention. Most counterfactual methods address tabular rather than image data, partly because the nondiscrete nature of images makes good counterfactuals difficult to define; indeed, generating plausible counterfactual images which lie on the data manifold is also problematic. This
paper advances a novel method for generating plausible counterfactuals and semi-factuals for black-box CNN classifiers
doing computer vision. The present method, called PlausIble Exceptionality-based Contrastive Explanations (PIECE),
modifies all “exceptional” features in a test image to be “normal” from the perspective of the counterfactual class, to generate plausible counterfactual images. Two controlled experiments compare this method to others in the literature, showing that PIECE generates highly plausible counterfactuals
(and the best semi-factuals) on several benchmark measures.

Decision
Boundary

Counterfactual

Semi-Factual

Test Image
Figure 1: Alternative Explanations: From a given sample
test image, PIECE can generate synthetic counterfactual (in
a different class) and semi-factual images (within the same
class) that are meaningful modifications in the pixel-space,
and fall within the data distribution.

Introduction
In the last few years, emerging issues around the the interpretability of machine learning models have elicited a major, on-going response from government (Gunning 2017),
industry (Pichai 2018), and academia (Miller 2019) on eXplainable AI (XAI) (Guidotti et al. 2018; Adadi and Berrada
2018). As opaque, black-box deep learning models are increasingly being used in the “real world” for high-stakes decision making (e.g., medicine and law), there is a pressing
need to give end-users some insight into how these models
achieve their predictions. In this paper, we advance a new
technique for XAI using counterfactual and semi-factual explanations, applied to deep learning models [i.e., convolutional neural networks (CNNs)]. Recently, the topic of “contrastive explanations” has received considerable interest in
AI (Miller 2018; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017),

but it tends to focus on counterfactual rather than semifactual explanation strategies. Counterfactuals have received
this attention because they appear to offer computational,
psychological, and legal advantages over other explanation
strategies; advantages that also appear to accrue to semifactual explanations (see next section for a review). The
code needed to reproduce our algorithm may be found at
https://github.com/EoinKenny/AAAI-2021.

Contrastive Explanation
Clarifying what constitutes an “explanation” has been an
issue for AI, as much as it has been for philosophy and
psychology. Here, we follow the proposal that explanations
are “contrastive” to convey important causal information
about the to-be-explained item (Miller 2019). Contrastive
explanation is often identified with counterfactual explanation (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), where features that change the original outcome are used to explain

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11575

