The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distributed Ranking with Communications: Approximation Analysis and
Applications
Hong Chen,1 Yingjie Wang,2 Yulong Wang,2∗ Feng Zheng3∗
1

College of Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn, yjaywang@126.com, wangyulong6251@gmail.com, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn
2

Abstract

least squared loss. It is natural and important to further investigate theory foundations of distributed pairwise learning with communication, e.g., learning under MEE principle
(Hu et al. 2013), pairwise ranking (Cortes, Mohri, and Rastogi 2007; Agarwal and Niyogi 2009; Chen 2012; Kriukova,
Pereverzyev, and Tkachenko 2016; Kriukova et al. 2016).
Indeed, there are some efforts to characterize the generalization bounds of MEE-based distributed algorithms in (Hu,
Wu, and Zhou 2020; Guo, Hu, and Wu 2020) and the distributed least square ranking (DLSRank) (Chen, Li, and Pan
2019). However, both of them do not consider the communication strategy among local processors and the weighted
average can not improve the approximation ability of each
local machine (Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020). To improve
the approximation of distributed pairwise learning, we introduce an efficient communication strategy and synthesization
method to the ranking problem.

Learning theory of distributed algorithms has recently attracted enormous attention in the machine learning community. However, most of existing works focus on learning problem with pointwise loss and does not consider the communication among local processors. In this paper, we propose a
new distributed pairwise ranking with communication (called
DLSRank-C) based on the Newton-Raphson iteration, and establish its learning rate analysis in probability. Theoretical
and empirical assessments demonstrate the effectiveness of
DLSRank-C under mild conditions.

Introduction
Distributed learning under divide and conquer strategy has
attracted increasing attention recently, since data are often
stored in multiple servers for many applications (Zhang,
Duchi, and Wainwright 2015; Hsieh, Si, and Dhillon 2014;
Xu et al. 2016; Guo, Lin, and Shi 2019). In kernel methods,
the distributed learning system depends on three key ingredients including local kernel machines, communication, and
synthesization (Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020). Each local kernel machine tackles the data subset with the computation
feasibility. The communication strategy aims to exchange
some important information among subsets, e.g., gradients
(Zeng and Yin 2018) and local predictor (Huang and Huo
2019). Based on the above building blocks, the global machine is constructed by the average over local estimators
(Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020; Li, Liu, and Wang 2019).
Usually, the communication strategy for distributed learning systems is useful to enlarge the number of local machines to reach fast learning rate (i.e., the speed of convergence in the generalization errors). In particular, the communication strategy based on Newton-Raphson iteration is
incorporated into the framework of distributed algorithms,
e.g., linear ridge regression (Huang and Huo 2019) and kernel ridge regression (Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020; Li, Liu,
and Wang 2019). However, the existing works are limited
to the regression problem with the pointwise loss, e.g., the

Following the operator representation of ranking in
(Chen 2012; Chen et al. 2013; Kriukova, Pereverzyev, and
Tkachenko 2016) and the communication strategy in (Lin,
Wang, and Zhou 2020; Li, Liu, and Wang 2019), we formulate a distributed ranking algorithm, called distributed least
square ranking with communication (DLSRank-C). Under
this communication strategy, the proposed distributed algorithm can better utilize the exchangeable information of local machines to improve the approximation stability of final predictor. Learning theory analysis supports the motivation of algorithmic design, where the faster learning rates
can be obtained with the help of communication strategy
than the previous distributed ranking in (Chen, Li, and Pan
2019). Our main tools to achieve this goal are the operator representation for the solution of distributed least square
ranking (Chen 2012; Kriukova, Pereverzyev, and Tkachenko
2016), the operator decomposition and approximation strategy (Lin, Guo, and Zhou 2017; Chang, Lin, and Zhou 2017;
Guo, Shi, and Wu 2017), and the Newton-Raphson iteration
(Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020). Furthermore, this paper establish the learning rates of DLSRank-C in probability, which
is different from the related result in expectation (Chen,
Li, and Pan 2019). The probability version usually is desirable crucial to characterize the generalization performance
of DLSRank-C in a single trial (Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020).

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7037

