The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AnchorFace: An Anchor-based Facial Landmark Detector Across Large Poses
Zixuan Xu,1 * Banghuai Li,2 * Ye Yuan2 and Miao Geng3
1

Peking University
Megvii Research
3
Beihang University
zixuanxu@pku.edu.cn, {libanghuai,yuanye}@megvii.com, geng m@buaa.edu.cn
2

Direct
regression

Abstract
Facial landmark localization aims to detect the predefined
points of human faces, and the topic has been rapidly improved with the recent development of neural network based
methods. However, it remains a challenging task when dealing with faces in unconstrained scenarios, especially with
large pose variations. In this paper, we target the problem of
facial landmark localization across large poses and address
this task based on a split-and-aggregate strategy. To split the
search space, we propose a set of anchor templates as references for regression, which well addresses the large variations of face poses. Based on the prediction of each anchor
template, we propose to aggregate the results, which can reduce the landmark uncertainty due to the large poses. Overall, our proposed approach, named AnchorFace, obtains stateof-the-art results with extremely efficient inference speed on
four challenging benchmarks, i.e. AFLW, 300W, Menpo, and
WFLW dataset. Code will be available soon.

Regression on an
anchor template

Aggregated
result

Ground-truth
landmarks

Anchor template

Figure 1: A comparison between direct regression and
anchor-based regression (AnchorFace). Our AnchorFace includes two steps. The first step is to introduce the anchor
templates and regress the offsets based on each anchor template (Second Column). The second step is to aggregate
the prediction results from multiple anchor templates (Third
Column)

Introduction
other hand, there usually exists a large probability of uncertainty due to the self-occlusion and noisy annotations. For
example, occlusion will usually lead to invisible landmarks,
which will increase the uncertainty for the landmark prediction. Besides, the faces with a large pose will also cause
difficulty during the data annotation process.
To address the above two challenges, we propose a novel
pipeline for facial landmark localization based on an anchorbased design. The new pipeline includes two steps: split
and aggregate. An overview of our pipeline can be found
in Fig. 2. To deal with the first challenge with large pose
variations, we adopt the divide-and-conquer way following
an anchor-based design. We propose to use the anchor templates to split the search space, and each anchor will serve as
a reference for regression. This can significantly reduce the
pose variations for each anchor. To address the second issue
with pose uncertainty, we propose to aggregate each anchor
result weighted by the predicted confidence.
In summary, we propose AnchorFace to implement the
split-and-aggregate strategy. There are three contributions in
our paper.

Facial landmark localization, or face alignment, refers to
detect a set of predefined landmarks on the human face. It is
a fundamental step for many facial related applications, e.g.
face verification/recognition, expression recognition, and facial attribute analysis.
With the recent development of convolutional neural network based methods (Ma et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020), the
performance for facial landmark localization in constrained
scenarios has been greatly improved (Dong et al. 2018; Zhu
et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2018). However, unconstrained scenarios, for example, faces with large pose, still limit the wide
application of the existing landmark algorithms. In this paper, we target to address the problem of facial landmark localization across large poses.
There are two challenges for facial landmark detection
across large poses. On one hand, faces with large poses will
significantly increase the difficulty for landmark localization
due to the large variations among different poses. As shown
in Fig. 1, directly regressing the point coordinates may not
be able to localize every landmark point precisely. On the
* These authors contributed equally
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel pipeline with a split-and-aggregate
strategy which can well address the challenges for face
3092

