The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Constraint Logic Programming for Real-World Test Laboratory Scheduling
Tobias Geibinger, Florian Mischek, Nysret Musliu
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling
DBAI, TU Wien, Karlsplatz 13, 1040 Vienna, Austria
{tgeibing,fmischek,musliu}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

These aspects include heterogeneous resources, where only a
subset of all units may be assigned to a job for each resource,
linked jobs, which must be performed by the same employees,
and non-standard objectives.
Solution methods that have been applied to TLSP-S include Simulated Annealing (Mischek and Musliu 2019), Constraint Programming (CP) (Geibinger, Mischek, and Musliu 2019b), and a hybrid Very Large Neighborhood Search
(VLNS) based on the CP model (Geibinger, Mischek, and
Musliu 2019a). Although these approaches provide good solutions for existing benchmark instances, for many instances
the optimal solutions are still not known.
In this paper, we investigate Constraint Answer-set Programming (CASP) for solving TLSP-S. We introduce and
describe a new CASP model for the problem and investigate/evaluate different formulations for the resource overlap
constraint. Additionally, we incorporate this CASP model
into a robust framework that is based on Very Large Neighborhood Search.
In our experiments, we show that CASP is very successful at providing good solutions for this large-scale project
scheduling problem and even outperforms established solution approaches for project scheduling problems, such as
CP, in some instances. These improvements extend to the
Very Large Neighborhood Search framework, enabling us to
find new upper bounds for multiple benchmark instances and
prove the optimality of several solutions for the first time.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In the next
Section we give an overview of related work, including other
(C)ASP approaches to scheduling. We then provide a summary of the TLSP-S problem. A constraint model is given in
the following section. Experimental results are presented and
discussed next and the last section gives conclusions.

The Test Laboratory Scheduling Problem (TLSP) and its subproblem TLSP-S are real-world industrial scheduling problems that are extensions of the Resource-Constrained Project
Scheduling Problem (RCPSP). Besides several additional constraints, TLSP includes a grouping phase where the jobs to
be scheduled have to be assembled from smaller tasks and
derive their properties from this grouping. For TLSP-S such a
grouping is already part of the input.
In this work, we show how TLSP-S can be solved by Answerset Programming extended with ideas from other constraint
solving paradigms. We propose a novel and efficient encoding
and apply an answer-set solver for constraint logic programs
called clingcon. Additionally, we utilize our encoding in a
Very Large Neighborhood Search framework and compare our
methods with the state of the art approaches. Our approach
provides new upper bounds and optimality proofs for several
existing benchmark instances in the literature.

Introduction
In project scheduling problems, a large number of activities
must be fit into a schedule and assigned resources, subject to
several restrictions, such as precedence constraints or time
windows. Such problems are highly relevant in practice and
different variants appear in many real-world settings.
One such setting is that of an industrial test laboratory,
where standardised tests of components have to be performed
by qualified employees using diverse equipment. The Test
Laboratory Scheduling Problem was first described in (Mischek and Musliu 2018b,a). In addition to several complex
scheduling constraints, it also features a grouping phase,
where activities (jobs) need to be assembled from smaller
units (tasks) and derive their properties from them. In this
work, we deal with a subproblem of TLSP, called TLSP-S,
where the grouping of tasks into jobs is already provided as
part of the input, in order to concentrate on the scheduling
part of the problem.
TLSP(-S) is an extension to the well-known ResourceConstrained Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP). Besides
several additional features that are also included in many
other variants of RCPSP in the literature, TLSP(-S) also
contains new aspects that arise from the real-world situation.

Literature Overview
Numerous project scheduling problems exist in the literature.
Probably the most studied of those problems is the ResourceConstrained Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP) (Brucker
et al. 1999; Hartmann and Briskorn 2010; Mika, Waligóra,
and We˛ glarz 2015) and its variants. Of those variants the
ones of particular relevance for TLSP(-S) are the Multi-Mode
RCPSP (MRCPSP) (Elmaghraby 1977; We˛ glarz et al. 2011;
Hartmann and Briskorn 2010; Szeredi and Schutt 2016) and
the Multi-Skill RCPSP (MSPSP) (Bellenguez and Néron

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6358

