The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Correlation-Aware Heuristic Search for Intelligent Virtual Machine Provisioning
in Cloud Systems
Chuan Luo,1 Bo Qiao,1 Wenqian Xing,1,2 Xin Chen,1,2 Pu Zhao,1 Chao Du,1 Randolph Yao,3
Hongyu Zhang,4 Wei Wu,5 Shaowei Cai,6 Bing He,1 Saravanakumar Rajmohan,2 Qingwei Lin1, *
4

1
2
3
Microsoft Research, China
Microsoft 365, United States
Microsoft Azure, United States
5
The University of Newcastle, Australia
L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany
6
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{chuan.luo, boqiao, v-wexin, v-xich15, puzhao, chaodu, ranyao, v-hebi, saravar, qlin}@microsoft.com,
hongyu.zhang@newcastle.edu.au, william.third.wu@gmail.com, caisw@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

In order to manage large cloud systems effectively, advanced algorithms are needed to guide the creation, scheduling, allocation and maintenance of the large number of VMs.
Among all those different tasks, VM provisioning, as a core
problem in cloud computing, has attracted considerable attention in both academia and industry (Zhang et al. 2014;
Zhao et al. 2018). In practice, a cloud system not only has to
provision an enormous quantity of VMs each day, but also
needs to provision VMs rapidly upon customers’ requests
since provisioning VMs from scratch could take a fairly long
time (Mao and Humphrey 2012). In order to overcome these
challenges, recent literature formulates the above scenario as
the predictive VM provisioning (PreVMP) problem, where
the future demands are predicted first and then the VM provisioning plan is optimized based on the predicted demands
(Luo et al. 2020).
Similar to many other problems arsing from the study
of cloud systems such as Microsoft Azure and AzSC, the
PreVMP problem can be formulated as a typical prediction and optimization (Prediction+Optimization) problem
(Balghiti et al. 2019). Still, as the objective in PreVMP
problem depends on unknown parameters (i.e., actual demands), common optimization approaches are inapplicable here (Demirović et al. 2019a). Unfortunately, existing
PreVMP approaches (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019;
Demirović et al. 2019a; Luo et al. 2020) assume that the
demands for different VM types are independent, and do not
explore demand correlation. This limitation prevents the existing approaches from forming truly optimized VM provisioning plans, since ignoring demand correlation would result in inaccurate modeling of prediction uncertainty and incur performance degradation in optimization.
In this paper, we are devoted to proposing a novel, effective Prediction+Optimization approach called CorrelationAware Heuristic Search (CAHS), which leverages the correlation among demands to improve the practical performance.
While we focus on the application of CAHS on solving
PreVMP problem, this approach is applicable to the general
Prediction+Optimization problem, including other problems
emerging from the intelligent management of cloud systems.
The ideas used in this method, such as correlation exploration, uncertainty modeling and heuristic search, have also

The optimization of resource is crucial for the operation
of public cloud systems such as Microsoft Azure, as well
as servers dedicated to the workloads of large customers
such as Microsoft 365. Those optimization tasks often need
to take unknown parameters into consideration and can be
formulated as Prediction+Optimization problems. This paper proposes a new Prediction+Optimization method named
Correlation-Aware Heuristic Search (CAHS) that is capable
of accounting for the uncertainty in unknown parameters and
delivering effective solutions to difficult optimization problems. We apply this method to solving the predictive virtual
machine (VM) provisioning (PreVMP) problem, where the
VM provisioning plans are optimized based on the predicted
demands of different VM types, to ensure rapid provisions
upon customers’ requests and to pursue high resource utilization. Unlike the current state-of-the-art PreVMP approaches
that assume independence among the demands for different
VM types, CAHS incorporates demand correlation when conducting prediction and optimization in a novel and effective
way. Our experiments on two public benchmarks and one industrial benchmark demonstrate that CAHS can achieve better
performance than its nine state-of-the-art competitors. CAHS
has been successfully deployed in Microsoft Azure and significantly improved its performance. The main ideas of CAHS
have also been leveraged to improve the efficiency and the reliability of the cloud services provided by Microsoft 365.

Introduction
Cloud computing has become a popular and powerful computing paradigm. Virtualization is one of the key technologies used in cloud systems. A physical machine (PM) can
host multiple virtual machines (VMs) and a cloud system
manages a large pool of configurable VM resources (Cortez
et al. 2017). For instance, Microsoft Azure provides public
cloud services to host VMs from general customers and also
maintains dedicated AzSC (Azure on Substrate Compute)
servers for the large number of Office workloads owned by
Microsoft 365.
* Qingwei Lin is the corresponding author of this work.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12363

