The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalized Relation Learning with Semantic Correlation Awareness
for Link Prediction
Yao Zhang1 , Xu Zhang1 , Jun Wang2 , Hongru Liang1 ,
Wenqiang Lei3∗ , Zhe Sun4 , Adam Jatowt5 , Zhenglu Yang1∗
1

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University, China
Ludong University, China 3 National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Computational Engineering Applications Unit, RIKEN, Japan 5 University of Innsbruck, Austria
{ yaozhang, xuzhang, lianghr, junwang }@mail.nankai.edu.cn, wenqianglei@gmail.com,
zhe.sun.vk@riken.jp, adam.jatowt@uibk.ac.at, yangzl@nankai.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Developing link prediction models to automatically complete
knowledge graphs has recently been the focus of significant
research interest. The current methods for the link prediction
task have two natural problems: 1) the relation distributions in
KGs are usually unbalanced, and 2) there are many unseen relations that occur in practical situations. These two problems
limit the training effectiveness and practical applications of
the existing link prediction models. We advocate a holistic
understanding of KGs and we propose in this work a unified
Generalized Relation Learning framework GRL to address
the above two problems, which can be plugged into existing
link prediction models. GRL conducts a generalized relation
learning, which is aware of semantic correlations between relations that serve as a bridge to connect semantically similar
relations. After training with GRL, the closeness of semantically similar relations in vector space and the discrimination
of dissimilar relations are improved. We perform comprehensive experiments on six benchmarks to demonstrate the superior capability of GRL in the link prediction task. In particular, GRL is found to enhance the existing link prediction
models making them insensitive to unbalanced relation distributions and capable of learning unseen relations.

Figure 1: (a) The unbalanced relation distribution in the
FB15K-237 dataset where relations are sorted according to
their frequency. (b) Lots of unseen relations. Three filmrelated relations are respectively categorized into the manyshot class, few-shot class, and zero-shot class as marked.

tion to estimate the validity of triples. However, we believe
using the embedding learning for mainstream link prediction
models results in two key problems:

Introduction

As shown in Figure 1, the relation distribution in an off-the-shelf KG
learning resource (i.e., FB15K-237 (Toutanova and Chen
2015)) is quite unbalanced. For example, the frequencies of the two relations /film/film/language and
/film/film/edited differ greatly. Mainstream link
prediction models assume enough training instances for
all relations and pay less attention to few-shot relations,
disregarding the fact that few-shot relation learning may
influence the learning performance to a high degree.

• Unbalanced relation distribution.

Knowledge graphs (KGs), representing facts in semantic graph structures, have been applied to multiple artificial intelligence tasks, e.g., recommendation (Lei et al.
2020a; Wang et al. 2021), dialogue generation (Moon
et al. 2019; Lei et al. 2020b), and question answering (Christmann et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2021). In KGs, facts
are formed as triples, (head entity, relation,
tail entity), where the head entity is linked to the
tail entity via the relation. New knowledge emerges continuously, and hence the issue of incompleteness of KGs
has triggered wide research interests in link prediction task,
which requires predicting the missing links in KGs (Seyed
and David 2018). The mainstream link prediction models (Bordes et al. 2013; Dettmers et al. 2018) learn the embeddings of entities and relations, and then use a score func-

• Existence of unseen relations. Real-world KGs tend to

be open and evolve quickly, and accordingly there is a
large number of zero-shot relations unseen in the offthe-shelf learning resources, for example, the relation
/film/film/sequel in Figure 1. The unseen relations are beyond the capacity of mainstream link prediction models, as there are no training instances to learn
their embeddings. This problem may restrict the use of
these models in downstream tasks.

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4679

