The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Estimating Recommendation Evaluation Metrics under Sampling
Ruoming Jin,1 Dong Li, 1 Benjamin Mudrak,1

Jing Gao, 2 Zhi Liu2

1

Kent State University
2
iLambda
{rjin1,dli12,bmudrak1}@kent.edu {jgao,zliu}@ilambda.com

Abstract

Instead of ranking all available items (whose number can be
very large) for each user, a fairly common practice in academics, as well as in industry, is to sample a smaller set of
(irrelevant) items, and rank the relevant items against the sampled items (Koren 2008; Cremonesi, Koren, and Turrin 2010;
He et al. 2017; Ebesu, Shen, and Fang 2018; Hu et al. 2018;
Krichene et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2018a,b).
Rendel (Rendle 2019) together with Krichene (Krichene and
Rendle 2020) argued that commonly used (top-k) evaluation
metrics, such as Recall (Hit-Ratio)/Precision, Average Precision (AP) and NDCG, (other than AUC), are all “inconsistent”
with respect to the global metrics (even in expectation). They
suggest the cautionary use (avoiding if possible) of the sampled metrics for recommendation evaluation, and they also
propose a few approaches to help correct the sampled metrics
to be closer to their global counterparts.
In the meantime, the latest work by Li et. al. (Li et al. 2020)
studies the problem of aligning sampling top-k (SHR@k)
and global top-K (HR@K) Hit-Ratios (Recalls) through a
mapping function f (mapping the k in the sampling to the
global top f (k)), so that SHR@k ≈ HR@f (k). Basically,
the sampling- based top k Hit-Ratio, SHR@k, corresponds
to the global top-f (k) Hit-Ratio. They develop methods to
approximate the function f , and they show that it is approximately linear (the “sampling” location of the global top-K
curve is almost equally intervaled). However, their methods
are limited to only the Recall/Hit-Ratio metric and cannot
be generalized to more complex metrics, such as AP and
NDCG.
Despite these latest works (Li et al. 2020; Krichene and
Rendle 2020), the very question as to if and how sampling
can be used for recommendation evaluation remains unsolved
and under heavy debate. The proposed approaches to estimate
the global evaluation metrics based on sampling either are
rather uninformative (Krichene and Rendle 2020) or can only
work on simple metrics (Li et al. 2020). They also provide
little insight into how sampled recommendation ranking results can relate to their global counterparts. Particularly, even
though methods such as MLE and/or Bayesian approaches
are widely used for sampling-based parameter and distribution inference in statistics (Lehmann and Casella 2006), it
remains an open problem if and how they can be leveraged
to develop sampling-based estimators for recommendation
evaluation metrics.

Since the recent study done by Krichene and Rendle on the
sampling-based top-k evaluation metric for recommendation,
there has been a lot of debates on the validity of using sampling to evaluate recommendation algorithms. Though their
work and the recent work done by Li et al. have proposed some
basic approaches for mapping the sampling-based metrics to
their global counterparts which rank the entire set of items,
there is still a lack of understanding and consensus on how
sampling should be used for recommendation evaluation. The
proposed approaches either are rather uninformative (linking
sampling to metric evaluation) or can only work on simple
metrics, such as Recall/Precision. In this paper, we introduce
a new research problem on learning the empirical rank distribution, and a new approach based on the estimated rank
distribution, to estimate the top-k metrics. Since this question
is closely related to the underlying mechanism of sampling
for recommendation, tackling it can help better understand the
power of sampling and can help resolve the questions of if
and how should we use sampling for evaluating recommendation. We introduce two approaches based on MLE (Maximal
Likelihood Estimation) and its weighted variants, and ME
(Maximal Entropy) principals to recover the empirical rank
distribution, and then utilize them for metrics estimation. The
experimental results show the advantages of using the new
approaches for evaluating recommendation algorithms based
on top-k metrics.

Introduction
Recommendation and personalization continue to play important roles in the deep learning area. Recent studies report
that in big enterprises, such as Facebook, Google, Alibaba,
etc., deep learning- based recommendation takes the majority
of the AI-inference cycle in their production cloud (Gupta
et al. 2020). However, several recent studies (Dacrema, Cremonesi, and Jannach 2019; Rendle, Zhang, and Koren 2019)
have called the validity of some recent (mostly deep learningbased) recommendation results into question, particularly
highlighting the ad-hoc nature of evaluation protocols, including selective (likely weak) baselines and evaluation metrics.
Those factors may lead to false signals of improvements.
One of the latest controversies comes from the validity
of using sampling for evaluating recommendation models:
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

