The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation through Dual-task Consistency
Xiangde Luo1,2 , Jieneng Chen3 , Tao Song2 , Guotai Wang1*
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
SenseTime Research, Shanghai, China
3
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
xiangde.luo@std.uestc.edu.cn, chenjn@tongji.edu.cn, songtao@sensetime.com, guotai.wang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

with less labeled data. For example, combining user interaction with deep neural network to perform image segmentation interactively can reduce the labeling efforts (Wang
et al. 2018a,b). Self-supervised learning approaches utilize
unlabeled data to train models in a supervised manner to
learn fundamental knowledge for knowledge transfer (Zhu
et al. 2020). Semi-supervised learning framework obtains
high-quality segmentation results by learning from a limited
amount of labeled data and a large set of unlabeled data directly (Li et al. 2020; Qiao et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019b;
Xia et al. 2020; Masood et al. 2019). Weakly supervised
learning methods learn from bounding boxes, scribbles or
image-level tags for image segmentation rather than using
pixel-wise annotation, which reduces the burden of annotation (Dai, He, and Sun 2015; Lin et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2019).
In this work, we focus on the semi-supervised segmentation
methods, as it is more practical to acquire a small set of fully
annotated images with a large set of unannotated images.
Many recent successful SSL methods (Yu et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2020; Nie et al. 2018; Li, Zhang, and He 2020) incorporate unlabeled data by performing unsupervised consistency regularization. To be specific, they can either add small
perturbations to the unlabeled samples and enforce the consistency between the model predictions on the original data
and the perturbed data (Yu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020), or
just directly enforce the similar prediction distributions on
the entire unlabeled dataset with an adversarial regularization (Nie et al. 2018; Li, Zhang, and He 2020). Thus, we
have learned that the essence of the discussed SSL works is
to enforce the consistency on predictions of unlabeled data
via a regularization term in loss function.
Among the aforementioned SSL works, it is delighted to
see Li, Zhang, and He (2020) developed a multi-task network containing the pixel-wise and the shape-aware prediction branches, similar to previous fully supervised works
(Wang et al. 2020; Xue et al. 2020). And for SSL, they
consider only the shape branch to build the consistent constraints via an adversarial regularization to make prediction distributions on the entire unlabeled dataset be smooth,
which still belongs to data-level regularization. We observe that various levels of information from different task
branches can complement each other during training, while
different focuses can lead to inherent prediction perturbation. For example, if the predictions from pixel-wise branch

Deep learning-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms have led to promising results in medical images segmentation and can alleviate doctors’ expensive annotations
by leveraging unlabeled data. However, most of the existing
SSL algorithms in the literature tend to regularize the model
training by perturbing networks and/or data. Observing that
multi/dual-task learning attends to various levels of information which have inherent prediction perturbation, we ask
the question in this work: can we explicitly build task-level
regularization rather than implicitly constructing networksand/or data-level perturbation and then regularization for
SSL? To answer this question, we propose a novel dual-taskconsistency semi-supervised framework for the first time.
Concretely, we use a dual-task deep network that jointly predicts a pixel-wise segmentation map and a geometry-aware
level set representation of the target. The level set representation is converted to an approximated segmentation map
through a differentiable task transform layer. Simultaneously,
we introduce a dual-task consistency regularization between
the level set-derived segmentation maps and directly predicted segmentation maps for both labeled and unlabeled
data. Extensive experiments on two public datasets show that
our method can largely improve the performance by incorporating the unlabeled data. Meanwhile, our framework outperforms the state-of-the-art semi-supervised learning methods.
Code is available at: https://github.com/HiLab-git/DTC

Introduction
Accurate and robust segmentation of organs or lesions from
medical images plays an essential role in many clinical applications such as diagnosis and treatment planning (Masood
et al. 2015). With a large amount of labeled data, deep learning has achieved the state-of-the-art performance on automatic image analysis (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Chen et al. 2018; Song et al. 2020). For medical image,
however, annotations are often expensive to acquire as both
expertise and time are needed to produce accurate annotations, especially in 3D volumetric images. To reduce the labeling cost, recently, many methods are proposed to develop
a high-performance model for medical image segmentation
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8801

