The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computational Visual Ceramicology:
Matching Image Outlines to Catalog Sketches
Barak Itkin, Lior Wolf, Nachum Dershowitz
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
barak.itkin@gmail.com, wolf@tau.ac.il, nachum@tau.ac.il

Abstract
Field archeologists are called upon to identify potsherds, for
which they rely on their professional experience and on reference works. We have developed a recognition method starting from images captured on site, which relies on the shape of
the sherd’s fracture outline. The method sets up a new target
for deep-learning, integrating information from points along
inner and outer surfaces to learn about shapes. Training the
classifiers required tackling multiple challenges that arose on
account of our working with real-world archeological data:
paucity of labeled data; extreme imbalance between instances
of different categories; and the need to avoid neglecting rare
classes and to take note of minute distinguishing features of
some classes. The scarcity of training data was overcome by
using synthetically-produced virtual potsherds and by employing multiple data-augmentation techniques. A novel form
of training loss allowed us to overcome classification problems caused by under-populated classes and inhomogeneous
distribution of discriminative features.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Illustration of the archeological data. (a) An image
of a sherd, positioned to show the fracture surface, with a
reference scale ruler in the background. (b) A traced fracture
outline, overlaid on the source image: green for the outer
profile; red for the inner profile; black is for break lines that
are ignored by the algorithm. (c) An archeological sketch as
it appears in a catalog. One or more sketches define a class
of pottery. (d) A 3D computer graphics vessel obtained by
rotating the catalog sketch. (e) A synthetic sherd obtained
by breaking the 3D vessel. (f) A fracture outline obtained
directly from the sketch, skipping the 3D reconstruction and
shattering processes.

Introduction
Pottery is the most common type of excavated artifact. Its
identification permits the understanding of the chronology,
function, and importance of an archeological site. Identification is based on the archeologist’s domain knowledge and is
usually achieved by matching unearthed potsherds to exemplars recorded in catalogs of semi-standardized archeological typologies. These catalogs typically contain—for each
type—a standardized sketch of the complete vessel and occasionally a few photos of excavated instances.
In the most common case, the pottery is undecorated, either because it was manufactured that way or because any
decorations have been lost to the ravages of time. We tackle
the task of classifying the shape of a potsherd based on a
single image of it, as depicted in Fig 1(a). Our prior attempts to apply standard image-based classification to undecorated pottery produced poor results, thus we turned to
identification relying on the geometry of the sherd. Since
our work is aimed toward aiding archaeologists in the field,
we forwent complex methods of extracting 3D geometry—
as these are impractical in field conditions, and relied instead
on the 2D outline of the sherd’s fracture surface as the sole

source of shape information. After marking the outline in a
semi-automatic way and determining the scale using a ruler
(Fig 1(b)), our AI-powered mobile app supplies the identification in the form of a list of archaeological types, ranked
by their computed relevance to the photographed potsherd.
A major challenge in training the AI tool is that one cannot obtain sufficient training samples that are similar to those
used to test or those evaluated in the field, as only a handful
of sherds per class have ever been digitized. Furthermore,
even if all extant sherds were to be digitized, the variability in the dataset would still cover only a small fraction of
the space of possible sherds. Instead, we define each class
by one or more 2D sketches of the profile of the complete
vessel; see Fig 1(c). Note that the catalog sketch describes
the geometry of the profile of the entire vessel, while the

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14822

