The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient On-Chip Learning for Optical Neural Networks Through Power-Aware
Sparse Zeroth-Order Optimization
Jiaqi Gu1 , Chenghao Feng 1 , Zheng Zhao 2 , Zhoufeng Ying 3 , Ray T. Chen 1 , David Z. Pan 1
1

University of Texas at Austin
2
Synopsys, Inc.
3
Alpine Optoelectronics, Inc.
{jqgu, fengchenghao1996, zhengzhao, zfying}@utexas.edu, {chen, dpan}@ece.utexas.edu
Abstract

performance bound. Shen, et al. (Shen et al. 2017) demonstrated an integrated fully-optical neural chip to implement
a multi-layer perceptron based on singular value decomposition (SVD) (Reck et al. 1994; Ribeiro et al. 2016). The
weight matrices are mapped onto cascaded Mach-Zehnder
interferometer (MZI) meshes to realize ultra-fast neural computing with over 100 GHz photo-detection rate and near-zero
energy consumption (Shen et al. 2017; Vivien et al. 2012).
However, training methodologies for integrated ONNs still
lack a scalable and efficient solution so far. The mainstream
approach offloads the training and simulation process to electrical computers using classical back-propagation (BP) (Shen
et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2019b), which is inefficient in circuit
simulation and inaccurate in device noise modeling. Hence,
there exist great potentials to offload the learning process on
photonic circuits. Back-propagation is technically challenging to be implemented on a chip given the expensive hardware
overhead and time-consuming gradient computation.
A brute-force phase tuning algorithm is proposed and
adopted in (Shen et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2020) to perform
ONN on-chip training via sequential device tuning, which is
intractable as circuits scale up. To mitigate the inefficiency
issue of the above brute-force algorithm, an in situ adjoint
variable method (AVM) (Hughes et al. 2018) is applied to
directly compute the gradient w.r.t. MZI phases via inverse design. However, it is challenging to be scaled to larger systems
as the fully-observable circuits is a technically impractical
assumption. Evolutionary algorithms, e.g., genetic algorithm
(GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO), are introduced
to train ONNs by population evolution (Zhang et al. 2019). A
stochastic zeroth-order optimization framework FLOPS (Gu
et al. 2020a) has been proposed to improve the ONN learning
efficiency by 3-5 times via random-sampling-based zerothorder gradient estimation.
However, previous works have the following disadvantages: 1) nontrivial Gaussian sampling cost, 2) divergence
issues due to high variance, 3) high energy consumption, and
4) hardware-unfriendly weight update step size. In this work,
we propose a novel mixed-training framework that enables
scalable on-chip optimization with more stable convergence,
higher training efficiency, and much lower power consumption under non-ideal environment. Compared with previous
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods, our mixed-training framework has the following advantages.

Optical neural networks (ONNs) have demonstrated recordbreaking potential in high-performance neuromorphic computing due to their ultra-high execution speed and low energy consumption. However, current learning protocols fail
to provide scalable and efficient solutions to photonic circuit
optimization in practical applications. In this work, we propose a novel on-chip learning framework to release the full
potential of ONNs for power-efficient in situ training. Instead
of deploying implementation-costly back-propagation, we directly optimize the device configurations with computation
budgets and power constraints. We are the first to model the
ONN on-chip learning as a resource-constrained stochastic
noisy zeroth-order optimization problem, and propose a novel
mixed-training strategy with two-level sparsity and poweraware dynamic pruning to offer a scalable on-chip training
solution in practical ONN deployment. Compared with previous methods, we are the first to optimize over 2,500 optical
components on chip. We can achieve much better optimization
stability, 3.7×-7.6× higher efficiency, and save >90% power
under practical device variations and thermal crosstalk.

Introduction
As Moore’s Law slows down, it becomes challenging for
traditional electronics to further satisfy the escalating computational demands of machine learning tasks given clock
frequency limitation and power density constraints. Recently, the emerging optical neural network (ONN) has attracted increasing attention due to its ultra-high execution
speed and order-of-magnitude higher energy efficiency compared to electronics. In resource-constrained applications,
ONNs become a promising alternative to accelerate machine
learning workloads (Shen et al. 2017; Ramey et al. 2020;
Ying et al. 2020a; Feng et al. 2020a; Ying et al. 2020b).
Computationally-intensive operations in neural networks,
e.g., matrix multiplication, can be finished within the light
propagation delay in one shot (Shen et al. 2017; Zhao et al.
2019b; Gu et al. 2020c,d; Feng et al. 2020c; Miscuglio and
Sorger 2020; Liu et al. 2019; Zokaee et al. 2020; Zhao et al.
2019a). With optical interconnects to reduce communication
and memory transaction cost, a fully-optical neural engine
provides a fundamental solution to break through the NN
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7583

