The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Simple and Effective Stochastic Neural Networks
Tianyuan Yu1 , Yongxin Yang1 , Da Li2,3 , Timothy Hospedales2,3 , Tao Xiang1
1

Center for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
3
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge
{tianyuan.yu, yongxin.yang, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk, da.li1@samsung.com, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Pereira, and Bialek 1999) to learn a hidden representation that
carries maximum information about the output and minimum
information about the input. Evaluating the required mutual
information terms requires modeling probability distributions
over activations rather than weights. Deep VIB (Alemi et al.
2017) leads to improved generalization, adversarial robustness and model compression algorithms (Dai et al. 2018).
Furthermore, modeling noisy stochastic activations is often
practically useful for improving exploration and local minima
escape during optimization, generalization and adversarial
robustness (You et al. 2019; Noh et al. 2017; Bishop 1995;
Gulcehre et al. 2016), and in some cases can be linked back
to Bayesian neural nets (Noh et al. 2017; Gal and Ghahramani 2016) when the noise added at each activation can be
considered as a result of sampling from the weight posterior.

Stochastic neural networks (SNNs) are currently topical,
with several paradigms being actively investigated including
dropout, Bayesian neural networks, variational information
bottleneck (VIB) and noise regularized learning. These neural
network variants impact several major considerations, including generalization, network compression, robustness against
adversarial attack and label noise, and model calibration. However, many existing networks are complicated and expensive
to train, and/or only address one or two of these practical considerations. In this paper we propose a simple and effective
stochastic neural network (SE-SNN) architecture for discriminative learning by directly modeling activation uncertainty and
encouraging high activation variability. Compared to existing
SNNs, our SE-SNN is simpler to implement and faster to train,
and produces state of the art results on network compression
by pruning, adversarial defense, learning with label noise, and
model calibration.

In this paper we propose a simple and effective stochastic
neural network (SE-SNN) that models activation uncertainty
through predicting a Gaussian mean and variance at each
layer, which is then sampled during the forward pass. This is
similar to the strategy used to model activation distributions
in VAE (Kingma and Welling 2014) and VIB (Alemi et al.
2017). Differently, we then place a non-informative prior on
the activation distribution and derive an activation regularizer that encourages high activation variability via preferring
high-entropy activations. In conjunction with a discriminative
learning loss, this means that the network is optimized for
activation patterns that have high uncertainty while simultaneously being predictive of the target label. The interplay
between these two objectives leads to several appealing capabilities in pruning, adversarial defense, learning with label
noise, and improving model calibration. Pruning: Pruning
aims to reduce the number of parameters in neural networks
(NNs) while maintaining accuracy. Simultaneously optimizing for high per-activation variability/uncertainty and predictive accuracy leads to the network packing more entropy into
the least significant neurons – so that the most crucial neurons
are free to operate unperturbed. This leads to a simple pruning
criterion based on each neuron’s entropy value. Adversarial
defense: Adversarial defense methods aim to increase NNs
resilience to adversarial attack. By optimizing for both peractivation uncertainty and the network’s predictive accuracy,
a representation-level data augmentation policy is trained that
perturbs the internal features during training for increased
robustness (Alemi et al. 2017; You et al. 2019). Label noise:

Introduction
Stochastic neural networks (SNNs) have a long history. Recently various stochastic neural network instantiations have
been topical in their applications to reducing overfitting (Gal
and Ghahramani 2016; Neelakantan et al. 2016) and training
data requirements (Garnelo et al. 2018), providing confidence estimates on predictions (Gal and Ghahramani 2016),
enabling network compression (Dai et al. 2018), improving
robustness to adversarial attack (Alemi et al. 2017), improving optimization (Neelakantan et al. 2016), generative modeling (Kingma and Welling 2014), and inputting or producing
probability distributions (de Bie, Peyré, and Cuturi 2019;
Frogner, Farzaneh, and Solomon 2019).
One of the most theoretically appealing stochastic neural
network formulations is Bayesian neural networks, which
place a prior distribution on the network weights (Graves
2011; Blundell et al. 2015; Ritter, Botev, and Barber 2018).
However this usually leads to more complex learning and
inference procedures that rely on variational approximations
or sampling. Another line of work instead focuses on modeling uncertainty in neural network activations. Notably the
variational information bottleneck (VIB) (Alemi et al. 2017)
is motivated by information theoretic considerations (Tishby,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3252

