The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mining ELK Bases with Adaptable Role Depth
Ricardo Guimarães,1 Ana Ozaki,1 Cosimo Persia,1 Baris Sertkaya2
1

Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
2
Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Ricardo.Guimaraes@uib.no, Ana.Ozaki@uib.no, Cosimo.Persia@uib.no, Sertkaya@fb2.fra-uas.de

Abstract

To mine CIs that hold in a dataset, we combine notions
of Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) (Ganter and Wille 1999)
and DLs. FCA is a subfield of lattice theory that provides
methods for analysing datasets and identifying the dependencies in them. In FCA a dataset, also called a formal context, is a table showing which objects have which attributes.
Given a formal context, FCA methods are used to extract
the dependencies between the attributes, also called implications (Figure 1). A base is a set of implications that entails
every valid implication of the dataset and only those (soundness and completeness). It can be used for detecting erroneous or missing items in the dataset (Baader et al. 2007).
In the DL setting, a base is a set of CIs (an ontology) which
can serve as a starting point for ontology engineers to build
an ontology in a domain of interest.

In Formal Concept Analysis, a base for a finite structure is
a set of implications that characterizes all valid implications
of the structure. This notion can be adapted to the context of
Description Logic, where the base consists of a set of concept
inclusions instead of implications. In this setting, concept expressions can be arbitrarily large. Thus, it is not clear whether
a finite base exists and, if so, how large concept expressions
may need to be. We first revisit results in the literature for
mining ELK bases from finite interpretations. Those mainly
focus on finding a finite base or on fixing the role depth but
potentially losing some of the valid concept inclusions with
higher role depth. We then present a new strategy for mining
ELK bases which is adaptable in the sense that it can bound
the role depth of concepts depending on the local structure of
the interpretation. Our strategy guarantees to capture all ELK
concept inclusions holding in the interpretation, not only the
ones up to a fixed role depth.

1

However, for some DLs and datasets, it may happen that
no finite base exists. Cyclic relationships are common in
knowledge graphs and they are the main challenge for finding a finite DL base. With only one cyclic relationship,
we already have that infinitely many concepts hold in the
dataset. Strategies for limiting the size of concepts in the
presence of cyclic dependencies have already been investigated in the literature. Baader and Distel (2008) and Distel (2011) propose a way of mining DL finite bases expressible in the DL ELK
gf p which is the addition of greatest fixpoint semantics to the DL language ELK . The semantics offered by ELK
gf p elegantly solves the difficulty of mining CIs
from cyclic relationships in the data. However, this semantics comes with two drawbacks. Firstly, ELK
gf p concepts may
be difficult to understand, and learned CIs may be too complex to validate by domain experts. Secondly, there is no efficient implementation of a reasoner for ELK
gf p , even though
the reasoning complexity is tractable, like for ELK . The authors also show how to transform an ELK
gf p base into an EL
base. However, it is far from being trivial to avoid the step
of creating an ELK
gf p base in their approach.

Introduction

Among its many applications in artificial intelligence, logic
is used to formally represent knowledge. Such knowledge,
often in the form of facts and rules, enables machines to process complex relational data, deduce new knowledge from
it, and extract hidden relationships in a specific domain.
A well-studied formalism for knowledge representation is
given by a family of logics known as description logics
(DLs) (Baader et al. 2017). DL is the logical formalism
behind the design of many knowledge-based applications.
However, it is often difficult and time-consuming to manually model in a formal language rules and constraints that
hold in a domain of knowledge.
In this work, we consider an automatic method to extract rules (concept inclusions (CIs)) formulated in DL from
data. This data can be, for instance, a collection of facts in a
database or a knowledge graph. For instance, in the DBpedia
knowledge graph (Lehmann et al. 2015), one can represent
the relationship between a city ‘a’ and the region ‘b’ it belongs to with the facts citypaq, regionpbq, partofpa, bq, and
capitalpb, aq. From this data, one can mine a CI expressing
that a capital is a city that is part of a region.

A simplification of the mentioned work has been proposed by Borchmann, Distel, and Kriegel (2016) where they
show how to mine ELK finite bases with a predefined and
fixed role depth for concept expressions. As a consequence,
the base is sound and complete only w.r.t. CIs containing
concepts with bounded role depth. Their approach avoids

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6367

