The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Learning for Inverse Landscape Genetics
Prathamesh Dharangutte, Christopher Musco
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, New York
prathamesh.d, cmusco@nyu.edu

Abstract
The problem of inferring unknown graph edges from numerical data at a graph’s nodes appears in many forms across
machine learning. We study a version of this problem that
arises in the field of landscape genetics, where genetic similarity between organisms living in a heterogeneous landscape
is explained by a weighted graph that encodes the ease of
dispersal through that landscape. Our main contribution is an
efficient algorithm for inverse landscape genetics, which is
the task of inferring this graph from measurements of genetic
similarity at different locations (graph nodes).
Inverse landscape genetics is important in discovering impediments to species dispersal that threaten biodiversity and
long-term species survival. In particular, it is widely used to
study the effects of climate change and human development.
Drawing on influential work that models organism dispersal
using graph effective resistances (McRae 2006), we reduce the
inverse landscape genetics problem to that of inferring graph
edges from noisy measurements of these resistances, which
can be obtained from genetic similarity data.
Building on the NeurIPS 2018 work of Hoskins et al. (2018) on
learning edges in social networks, we develop an efficient firstorder optimization method for solving this problem. Despite
its non-convex nature, experiments on synthetic and real genetic data establish that our method provides fast and reliable
convergence, significantly outperforming existing heuristics
used in the field. By providing researchers with a powerful,
general purpose algorithmic tool, we hope our work will have
a positive impact on accelerating work on landscape genetics.

Introduction
Many datasets can be modeled as a weighted, undirected
graph: G = (V, E) with nodes V = {v1 , . . . , vn } and additional numerical data vectors x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd at each node.
For example, in social networks, each node is a user, each
edge is a connection or interaction between users, and xi
might contain demographic information about user i like age,
gender, or expressed political party.
Often, node data is correlated with G’s connectivity structure: if vi and vj are strongly connected, xi and xj tend to
be more similar than for poorly connected nodes (Kalofolias
2016; Ortega et al. 2018). Formally, connectivity between
two nodes can be quantified in many of ways, from simple
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14739

statistics like shortest path distance or number of common
neighbors, to more advanced metrics like personalized PageRank (Page et al. 1999; Jeh and Widom 2003), SimRank (Jeh
and Widom 2002), or DeepWalk distance (Perozzi, Al-Rfou,
and Skiena 2014). While these measures depend solely on
G’s structure (i.e. edges and their weights), they often align
with measured similarities between x1 , . . . , xn .
This observation leads to an interesting possibility: even
when edges in G are unknown, node data can be useful in
inferring edges and weights, or at least in inferring a graph
whose connectivity structure is consistent with the observed
data. This possibility has been explored across statistics,
machine learning, and network science (Raskutti et al. 2009;
Cai, Liu, and Luo 2011; Egilmez, Pavez, and Ortega 2017;
Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007; Hoskins et al. 2018). In
many cases, pairwise measures of connectivity can reveal
a striking amount of information about G, and by proxy,
so can similarity information between x1 , . . . , xn (Hoskins
et al. 2018). Applications of graph inference from node data
include understanding structured statistical correlation, link
prediction, and phylogeny reconstruction.
In this work, we examine an application of graph inference
in landscape genetics, a field at the intersection of landscape
ecology, spatial statistics, and population genetics (Manel
et al. 2003; Sanderson 2020). Landscape genetics seeks to
explain genetic differences between populations of the same
species that live at different geographic locations. The goal
is to understand how ease of movement between these geographic locations (i.e., through the landscape) affects population genetics. Geographically isolated populations tend
to differ genetically, whereas ease of travel and intermixing
between populations leads to genetic similarity.
Early methods in landscape genetics correlate genetic similarity with simple measures of geographic isolation, like the
Euclidean distance between populations (Wright 1943; Sokal
and Oden 1978), or distance along an oriented direction or
curve, leading to concepts like clines and ring species (Endler
1977; Huggett 2004). These tried-and-true approaches have
been successfully applied to understanding genetic variation in a variety of species, including humans (Novembre
et al. 2008). More recently, however, work in landscape genetics considers finer-grained measures of landscape-driven
isolation, largely based on modeling the landscape as an undirected graph (the landscape graph). Each location (spatial

