The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Continual Learning for Named Entity Recognition
Natawut Monaikul∗ ,1 Giuseppe Castellucci,2 Simone Filice,2 Oleg Rokhlenko2
1

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
2
Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA
monaiku1@uic.edu, {giusecas, filicesf, olegro}@amazon.com

Abstract

on the modified data. This procedure is both expensive and
time-consuming. Furthermore, the original training material
may no longer be available due to storage constraints or privacy concerns. Finally, the original training data may not
necessarily contain enough examples of the additional types.
A possible solution would be to annotate a new dataset
for all the entities that the model should recognize. However,
this can easily become impractical and error-prone when the
number of entities is large. Another option is to annotate a
new dataset only for the new entity types and use this data
to update the model in a Continual Learning (CL) setting
(Lange et al. 2019). However, this approach is vulnerable to
the catastrophic forgetting of previous entity types, a welldocumented concern in CL (Chen et al. 2018). We instead
seek to have the existing NER model impart knowledge
about the entities it already supports to a new model. One
way to do so would be a self-training approach, in which the
existing model is used to annotate the new dataset, i.e., filling in the gaps from the manual annotation of only the new
entity types. This dataset can then be used to train the new
model to recognize the new and old entity types.
One disadvantage of self-training is that the errors of the
old model are propagated to the new model without taking into account the uncertainty of the old model’s predictions. We argue that the old model uncertainty can help the
new one to better learn about the old entity types. In order
to leverage such information, in this paper, we investigate
applying Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015) to the CL problem for NER. This technique involves incorporating the predictions of a “teacher”
model into the objective function of a “student” model being
trained to perform a similar but slightly modified task. The
student is encouraged to behave similarly to the teacher by
learning about its output probability distribution, rather than
just the labels. Though KD has traditionally been used for
the purpose of model compression, i.e., teaching a smaller
and simpler model to make similar but faster predictions
than a large, complex model, more recent works have applied KD in a CL setting, such as incrementally learning
multiple computer vision tasks (Li and Hoiem 2018).
For the task of NER in a CL setting, we treat a trained
NER model as the teacher and a new model that supports
additional entity types as the student. We conduct an extensive empirical investigation using BERT-based models on

Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a vital task in various
NLP applications. However, in many real-world scenarios
(e.g., voice-enabled assistants) new named entity types are
frequently introduced, entailing re-training NER models to
support these new entity types. Re-annotating the original
training data for the new entity types could be costly or even
impossible when storage limitations or security concerns restrict access to that data, and annotating a new dataset for
all of the entities becomes impractical and error-prone as the
number of types increases. To tackle this problem, we introduce a novel Continual Learning approach for NER, which
requires new training material to be annotated only for the
new entity types. To preserve the existing knowledge previously learned by the model, we exploit the Knowledge Distillation (KD) framework, where the existing NER model acts
as the teacher for a new NER model (i.e., the student), which
learns the new entity types by using the new training material and retains knowledge of old entities by imitating the
teacher’s outputs on this new training set. Our experiments
show that this approach allows the student model to “progressively” learn to identify new entity types without forgetting the previously learned ones. We also present a comparison with multiple strong baselines to demonstrate that our
approach is superior for continually updating an NER model.

1

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER) or Slot Filling are common NLP tasks that require extracting entities from unstructured text. In the standard setting, an NLU system is trained
to recognize a fixed set of entity types (e.g., Person, Organization, Protein, or Law). However, in real scenarios,
NLU systems are continually evolving to support new functionalities and this typically implies that new entity types
must be recognized. For instance, voice assistants like Siri
or Alexa continually introduce new intents to their capabilities and consequently new entity types are often added to
their slot filling models. The simplest solution for accommodating new entity types consists of (i) updating the annotation guidelines to cover the new types and re-annotating
the training material; (ii) restructuring the model to support
the new types; and (iii) re-training the model from scratch
∗

Work done during an internship in Amazon.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13570

