The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Preclinical Stage Alzheimer’s Disease Detection Using Magnetic Resonance Image
Scans
Fatih Altay 1 ∗ , Guillermo Ramón Sánchez 1 ∗ , Yanli James 2 , Stephen V. Faraone 2 , Senem
Velipasalar 1 , Asif Salekin 1 †
1
Syracuse University
SUNY Upstate Medical University
faltay@syr.edu, grsanche@syr.edu, zhangy@upstate.edu, sfaraone@childpsychresearch.org, svelipas@syr.edu,
asalekin@syr.edu
2

Abstract

older people. AD accounts for 60-80% of the total dementia cases (Manzano et al. 2009). AD significantly reduces
the quality of life (Logsdon et al. 1999) and life expectancy
(Rice et al. 2001) of patients, and is considered as the most
expensive disease in USA (Hurd et al. 2013). When the economic impact of this disease is considered, just in 2019, the
total combined payments from all AD patients are estimated
at $290 billion 1 .
While there is no cure for Alzheimer’s disease or a way to
stop its progression after diagnosis, and the treatment of AD
is still an open research question, there are drug and nondrug options that may help treat symptoms. Studies have
demonstrated that early stage intervention of AD can significantly impact the degeneration process, and treatment of
symptoms (Kang et al. 2019; Golde, DeKosky, and Galasko
2018; Crous-Bou et al. 2017). The early detection of AD
through conventional MRI scanning will facilitate effective
and in-time interventions/treatments, that would expand the
life expectancy and quality of life of patients.
National Institute on Aging has defined three stages of
AD: (1) Preclinical, when the patients do not exhibit any
symptoms, but brain neuronal structure has started to deteriorate; (2) Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), when patients
start to exhibit cognitive impairments, but still can perform
all activities of daily living (ADL); and (3) Alzheimer’s dementia, when symptoms of dementia are severe enough to
interfere with ADLs.
With the advancement of MRI technology (Lohrke et al.
2016), and the recent development of deep learning based
computer vision approaches, several studies have addressed
the detection of AD in MCI and dementia stages (stage 2
and 3) from MRI brain scans (Cheng et al. 2017; Böhle et al.
2019). While these studies have improved our understanding
of Alzheimer’s disease, they do not contribute in early stage
interventions, since stage 2 and 3 are accurately identifiable
through clinical diagnosis. Accurate detection or indication
of preclinical AD is a major interest in the medical community (Schindler et al. 2017; Perneczky 2018). However,
to the best of our knowledge, existing studies have not ad-

Alzheimer’s disease is one of the diseases that mostly affects
older people without being a part of aging. The most common symptoms include problems with communicating and
abstract thinking, as well as disorientation. It is important
to detect Alzheimer’s disease in early stages so that cognitive functioning would be improved by medication and training. In this paper, we propose two attention model networks
for detecting Alzheimer’s disease from MRI images to help
early detection efforts at the preclinical stage. We also compare the performance of these two attention network models
with a baseline model. Recently available OASIS-3 Longitudinal Neuroimaging, Clinical, and Cognitive Dataset is used
to train, evaluate and compare our models. The novelty of this
research resides in the fact that we aim to detect Alzheimer’s
disease when all the parameters, physical assessments, and
clinical data state that the patient is healthy and showing no
symptoms.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a type of brain disease, which is
degenerative, and its symptoms worsen over the years. According to the Alzheimer’s Association 1 , 5.8 million Americans are living with AD. Statistics have also shown that annual AD related death rates by age are increasing every year
(vital statistics system 2019). According to (Reiman et al.
2012), AD could begin twenty years or more before symptoms are perceptible, and between one and six years with
changes in the brain that are unnoticeable to the person affected. As the disease evolves, more and more brain neurons
stop functioning, lose connection, even die. At first, AD affects the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus brain regions
that are involved in memory (Zott et al. 2018). Eventually,
it affects the cerebral cortex, which is responsible for language, reasoning, and social behavior, and many other areas
of the brain.
This pathology, according to the Alzheimer’s Association
1
, is the most common cause of dementia, especially among
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
https://www.alz.org/media/documents/alzheimers-facts-andfigures-2019-r.pdf

15088

