The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Branch and Price for Bus Driver Scheduling with Complex Break Constraints
Lucas Kletzander,1 Nysret Musliu,1 Pascal Van Hentenryck2
1

Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and Optimization for Planning and Scheduling
DBAI, TU Wien, Karlsplatz 13, 1040 Vienna, Austria
2
Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
{lkletzan,musliu}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, pascal.vanhentenryck@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract

50 instances, resulting in an optimality gap of less than 1%
for more than half the instances. It also provides a lower
bound for the quality of existing metaheuristic approaches
which are mostly within 4% of the optimum.

This paper presents a Branch and Price approach for a reallife Bus Driver Scheduling problem with a complex set of
break constraints. The column generation uses a set partitioning model as master problem and a resource constrained
shortest path problem as subproblem. Due to the complex
constraints, the branch and price algorithm adopts several
novel ideas to improve the column generation in the presence of a high-dimensional subproblem, including exponential arc throttling and a dedicated two-stage dominance algorithm. Evaluation on a publicly available set of benchmark
instances shows that the approach provides the first provably
optimal solutions for small instances, improving best-known
solutions or proving them optimal for 48 out of 50 instances,
and yielding an optimality gap of less than 1% for more than
half the instances.

Related Work
There are many versions of employee scheduling problems
and surveys by Ernst et al. (2004); Van den Bergh et al.
(2013) provide a good overview of this line of work. Driver
scheduling, as a part of crew scheduling, resides between
vehicle scheduling and driver rostering in the process of operating bus transport systems (Ibarra-Rojas et al. 2015).
Research on bus driver scheduling problems has a long
history (Wren and Rousseau 1995) and uses a variety of solution methods. Exact methods mostly use column generation with a set covering or set partitioning master problem
and a resource constrained shortest path subproblem (Smith
and Wren 1988; Desrochers and Soumis 1989; Portugal,
Lourenço, and Paixão 2009; Lin and Hsu 2016). Heuristic
methods like greedy (Martello and Toth 1986; De Leone,
Festa, and Marchitto 2011; Tóth and Krész 2013) or exhaustive (Chen et al. 2013) search, tabu search (Lourenço,
Paixão, and Portugal 2001; Shen and Kwan 2001), genetic
algorithms (Lourenço, Paixão, and Portugal 2001; Li and
Kwan 2003), or iterated assignment problems (Constantino
et al. 2017) are used in different variations.
However, most work so far focuses mainly on cost, rarely
minimizing idle time and vehicle changes (Ibarra-Rojas
et al. 2015; Constantino et al. 2017). Break constraints are
mostly simple, often including just one meal break. Complex break scheduling within shifts has been considered
by authors in different contexts (Beer et al. 2008, 2010;
Widl and Musliu 2014). There is not much work on multiobjective bus driver scheduling (Lourenço, Paixão, and Portugal 2001), but multi-objective approaches are used in other
bus operation problems (Respı́cio, Moz, and Vaz Pato 2013).
This paper investigates a complex real-life Bus Driver
Scheduling Problem that was recently introduced by Kletzander and Musliu (2020). Previous work explains the need
for a combined objective function that goes beyond cost. The
published instances were solved with simulated annealing
and a hill climbing heuristic. Although these methods provide good results, they cannot guarantee optimality or provide lower bounds.

Introduction
Scheduling employees for public transport requires to incorporate a variety of complex constraints, particularly for
breaks, time schedules, spatial requirements, and conflicting objectives, giving rise to difficult optimization problems.
Companies require cost-efficient schedules, while drivers
and labor unions request employee-friendly schedules to reduce stress and increase compatibility of the required shift
work with the private life of the drivers.
This paper presents a Branch and Price approach for a
complex real-life Bus Driver Scheduling (BDS) problem
based on an Austrian collective agreement. The column
generation uses set partitioning as the master problem and
the resource constrained shortest path problem (RCSPP) as
the subproblem. However, due to the complex set of constraints, the RCSPP has to deal with a large number of highdimensional labels. This paper proposes several novel contributions to improve the generation of new columns for high
dimensional pricing problems, including the splitting of the
subproblem, a throttling scheme, and the use of k-d trees and
bounding boxes in a two stage dominance algorithm.
The new method is evaluated on a publicly available set
of benchmark instances. It provides the first provably optimal solutions for small instances and improves previous
best-known solutions or proves them optimal for 48 out of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11853

