The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GraphMSE: Efficient Meta-path Selection in Semantically Aligned Feature Space
for Graph Neural Networks
Yi Li1 , Yilun Jin2 , Guojie Song3 * , Zihao Zhu4 , Chuan Shi4 , Yiming Wang1
1

Peking University, Beijing, China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education), Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{liyi2015, gjsong, wangyiming17}@pku.edu.cn, yilun.jin@connect.ust.hk, {zhuzihao,shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Yet, the majority of existing works leveraging meta-path
based GCNs assume that an indicative set of meta-paths
have been given a priori upon which the GCNs are built,
which is clearly not the case in reality. Specifically, realworld data are notoriously diverse, and it is not even remotely possible to manually select informative meta-paths
for every type of HIN. What is more, even on a fixed HIN,
selecting optimal meta-paths may require trials and errors,
which takes significant effort and also domain expertise.
Consequently, it would be highly appreciated if algorithms
are developed that can automatically detect important metapaths from HINs, such that the manual “meta-path engineering” can be alleviated.
Up till now, to the best of our knowledge, GTN (Yun et al.
2019) is the only work that combines automatic meta-path
selection with semi-supervised heterogeneous GCNs. However, we identify several drawbacks which cast doubts on
GTN. On one hand, GTN leverages matrix multiplications
for the selection of meta-paths, which is equivalent to enumerating all meta-path instances starting from all nodes,
which may incur high computational cost. On the other
hand, GTN assumes homogeneous features even for heterogeneous nodes, i.e. different types of nodes possess identical
feature semantics, which is clearly unlikely in reality.
In this paper, we propose GraphMSE, combining semisupervised graph neural networks with automatic meta-path
selection, and simultaneously address both aforementioned
drawbacks. Specifically, first, instead of taking |V | × |V |
matrix multiplications to enumerate all meta-paths from all
nodes, we resort to sampling, both on meta-paths and nodes,
which drastically reduces the effort of meta-path enumeration. In addition, we tackle the problem of feature heterogeneity (i.e. different types of nodes possess heterogeneous
features) by injectively projecting all meta-path features into
the same length, and apply a novel semantic feature space
alignment technique to mitigate their heterogeneity, which
can be viewed as an analogue of disentangled representation
(Ma et al. 2019) and further facilitates stable selection. Finally, we utilize an attention layer for meta-path selection.
We carry out extensive experiments on real-world HINs,
where GraphMSE outperforms state-of-the-art counterparts,
while being dramatically more efficient.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows;

Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) are ideal for describing real-world data with different types of entities and
relationships. To carry out machine learning on HINs, metapaths are widely utilized to extract semantics with pre-defined
patterns, and models such as graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) are thus enabled. However, previous works generally assume a fixed set of meta-paths, which is unrealistic as real-world data are overwhelmingly diverse. Therefore, it is appealing if meta-paths can be automatically selected given an HIN, yet existing works aiming at such problem possess drawbacks, such as poor efficiency and ignoring
feature heterogeneity. To address these drawbacks, we propose GraphMSE, an efficient heterogeneous GCN combined
with automatic meta-path selection. Specifically, we design
highly efficient meta-path sampling techniques, and then injectively project sampled meta-path instances to vectors. We
then design a novel semantic feature space alignment, aiming to align the meta-path instance vectors and hence facilitate meta-path selection. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate that GraphMSE outperforms state-ofthe-art counterparts, figures out important meta-paths, and is
dramatically (e.g. 200 times) more efficient.

Introduction
Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) (Sun and Han
2012) effectively extend the notion of networks by allowing their nodes and edges to be of different types. Such
heterogeneity makes HINs ideal for describing real-world
data with complex entities and relations, such as academic
data (with authors, papers, conferences, and journals) and
e-commerce data (with customers, items, and businesses).
However, along with the versatility of HINs comes with
intractability, where the heterogeneity of nodes and edges
bear intricate semantics that cannot be extracted in an ordinary manner. Fortunately, researchers propose meta-paths
(Sun et al. 2011), paths with pre-defined patterns to extract corresponding semantics from HINs. Based upon metapaths, numerous HIN mining models have been enabled, including the popular Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs)
(Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose GraphMSE, an efficient and effective frame4206

