The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Integrated Optimization of Bipartite Matching and Its Stochastic Behavior:
New Formulation and Approximation Algorithm via Min-cost Flow Optimization
Yuya Hikima,1 Yasunori Akagi,1 Hideaki Kim,1 Masahiro Kohjima,1 Takeshi Kurashima,1
Hiroyuki Toda1
1
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories, NTT Corporation,
1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka-Shi, Kanagawa, 239-0847, Japan
{yuuya.hikima.ys, yasunori.akagi.cu, hideaki.kin.cn, masahiro.kohjima.ev, takeshi.kurashima.uf,
hiroyuki.toda.xb}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

In most stochastic matching problems, the probability distributions inherent in the nodes and edges are assumed to be
given a priori and so are not controllable. However, many of
the matching services often have options, which we call control variables, that affect the probability distributions and the
resulting optimum matching. Finding the control variables
that maximize the business profit is one of the central topics for the service providers. For example, a crowd-sourcing
servicer can manage worker participation rates for a task
by increasing or decreasing the wage (Horton and Chilton
2010), where a small wage causes a lack of participants
to assign tasks, while a large one might harm the business
profit. Therefore, we tackle the problem of optimizing the
control variables with the consideration of the resulting bipartite graph matching, given the effect of control variables
on the probabilistic uncertainty in the graph.
In this paper, we focus on a problem setting where the
existence of nodes on one side of the bipartite graph follows a probability distribution of which shape is determined
by control variables. This problem setting appears in various applications such as taxi-requester matching in taxi dispatching and worker-task matching in crowd-sourcing. If the
given graph is a complete bipartite graph with equal edge
weights, we can use an existing method (Babaioff et al.
2015), which is proposed as a pricing scheme for single item
markets. It optimizes control variables so as to adjust the
expected number of the stochastic nodes to the number of
nodes on the other side. Because the method requires strong
assumptions on graph structures, the applicability is limited.
A more sophisticated optimization method, along with its
approximation ratio, has recently been proposed by (Tong
et al. 2018). It optimizes the control variables so as to maximize the expected weight of the resulting matching. However, this method has limited application because the setting
of the edge weights is restricted. Also, the approximation
ratio of this method gets worse as the number of nodes on
one side increases. This could lead to poor performance in
large-scale settings.
To address the limitations, we propose a new optimization
problem, which is called Integrated Stochastic Problem for
Control variables and Bipartite matching (ISPCB). ISPCB
is the problem of determining the values of the control variables to maximize the expected value of weights of bipartite

The research field of stochastic matching has yielded many
developments for various applications. In most stochastic
matching problems, the probability distributions inherent in
the nodes and edges are set a priori, and are not controllable.
However, many matching services have options, which we
call control variables, that affect the probability distributions
and thus what constitutes an optimum matching. Although
several methods for optimizing the values of the control variables have been developed, their optimization in consideration of the matching problem is still in its infancy. In this
paper, we formulate an optimization problem for determining the values of the control variables so as to maximize the
expected value of matching weights. Since this problem involves hard to evaluate objective values and is non-convex,
we construct an approximation algorithm via a minimumcost flow algorithm that can find 3-approximation solutions
rapidly. Simulations on real data from a ride-hailing platform
and a crowd-sourcing market show that the proposed method
can find solutions with high profits of the service provider in
practical time.

1.

Introduction

Bipartite graph matching has received a great deal of attention as a fundamental discrete optimization problem that
has a wide ranging list of applications such as matching of
workers to jobs, residents to hospitals, and jobs to machines
in cloud computing (Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin 1993).
Among the variants of bipartite graph matching, stochastic
matching techniques have been recently developed because
they handle the probabilistic uncertainty of instances; that
is, the optimum matching is determined under a set of probability distributions associated with the nodes and edges.
In the kidney exchange (Chen et al. 2009), for example,
the expected number of patient-donor matching has been
maximized through the exchangeable probabilities between
patients and donors. In internet advertising (Mehta 2012),
advertisements are allocated optimally to website visitors
based on the probability distribution over types of visitors,
which is estimated from past traffic data from websites.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3796

