The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BAYES -T R E X: a Bayesian Sampling Approach to
Model Transparency by Example
Serena Booth* , Yilun Zhou* , Ankit Shah, Julie Shah
*

Equal Contribution
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{serenabooth, yilun, ajshah, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Post-hoc explanation methods are gaining popularity for interpreting, understanding, and debugging neural networks.
Most analyses using such methods explain decisions in response to inputs drawn from the test set. However, the test set
may have few examples that trigger some model behaviors,
such as high-conﬁdence failures or ambiguous classiﬁcations.
To address these challenges, we introduce a ﬂexible model
inspection framework: BAYES -T R E X. Given a data distribution, BAYES -T R E X ﬁnds in-distribution examples which trigger a speciﬁed prediction conﬁdence. We demonstrate several
use cases of BAYES -T R E X, including revealing highly conﬁdent (mis)classiﬁcations, visualizing class boundaries via
ambiguous examples, understanding novel-class extrapolation behavior, and exposing neural network overconﬁdence.
We use BAYES -T R E X to study classiﬁers trained on CLEVR,
MNIST, and Fashion-MNIST, and we show that this framework enables more ﬂexible holistic model analysis than just
inspecting the test set. Code and supplemental material are
available at https://github.com/serenabooth/Bayes-TrEx.

1

Introduction
Figure 1: Given a Corgi/Bread classiﬁer, we generate prediction level sets, or sets of examples which trigger a target prediction conﬁdence (e.g., pCorgi = pBread = 0.5). Perturbing
an arbitrary image to trigger the target conﬁdence is one way
of ﬁnding such examples, as shown in (A). However, such
examples give little insight into the typical model behavior
because they are unrealistic and unlikely. For more insight,
BAYES -T R E X explicitly considers a data distribution (gray
shading on the bottom plots) and ﬁnds in-distribution examples in a particular level set (e.g., likely Corgi (B), likely
Bread (D), or ambiguous between Corgi and Bread (C)).
Bottom left: the classiﬁer level set of pCorgi = pBread = 0.5
overlaid on the data distribution. Example (A) is unlikely to
be sampled by BAYES -T R E X due to near-zero density under the distribution, while example (C) is likely to be sampled. Bottom right: Sampling directly from the true posterior is infeasible, so we relax the formulation by “widening”
the level set. By using different data distributions and conﬁdences, BAYES -T R E X can uncover examples that invoke
various model behaviors to improve model transparency.

Debugging, interpreting, and understanding neural networks
can be challenging (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Lipton
2018; Odena et al. 2019). Existing interpretability methods
include visualizing ﬁlters (Zeiler and Fergus 2014), saliency
maps (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013), input perturbations (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg
and Lee 2017), prototype anchoring (Li et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2019), tracing with inﬂuence functions (Koh and Liang
2017), and concept quantiﬁcation (Ghorbani, Wexler, and
Kim 2019). While some methods analyze intermediary network components such as convolutional layers (Bau et al.
2017; Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017), most methods instead explain decisions based on speciﬁc inputs. These
inputs are typically selected from the test set, which may
lack examples that lead to highly conﬁdent misclassiﬁcations or ambiguous predictions. Thus, it may be challenging
to extract meaningful insights and attain a holistic understanding of model behaviors by using only test set inputs.
Finding and analyzing inputs that invoke the gamut of model
behaviours would improve model transparency by example.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11423

