The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards a Unifying Framework for Formal Theories of Novelty
T. E. Boult1 , P. A. Grabowicz5 , D. S. Prijatelj2 , R. Stern6 , L. Holder4 , J. Alspector3 , M. Jafarzadeh1 ,
T. Ahmad1 , A. R. Dhamija1 , C. Li1 , S. Cruz1 , A. Shrivastava7 , C. Vondrick8 , W. J. Scheirer2
U. Col. Col. Springs, 2 U. Notre Dame, 3 IDA/ITSD, 4 Wash. State U., 5 U. Mass., 6 PARC, BGU, 7 U. Maryland, 8 Columbia U.
{tboult | mjafarzadeh | tahmad | adhamija}@vast.uccs.edu, grabowicz@cs.umass.edu, derek.prijatelj@nd.edu, rstern@parc.com,
jalspect@ida.org, holder@wsu.edu, abhinav@cs.umd.edu, vondrick@cs.columbia.edu, walter.scheirer@nd.edu

1

Abstract
Managing inputs that are novel, unknown, or out-ofdistribution is critical as an agent moves from the lab to the
open world. Novelty-related problems include being tolerant
to novel perturbations of the normal input, detecting when
the input includes novel items, and adapting to novel inputs.
While significant research has been undertaken in these areas,
a noticeable gap exists in the lack of a formalized definition
of novelty that transcends problem domains. As a team of
researchers spanning multiple research groups and different
domains, we have seen, first hand, the difficulties that arise
from ill-specified novelty problems, as well as inconsistent
definitions and terminology. Therefore, we present the first
unified framework for formal theories of novelty and use the
framework to formally define a family of novelty types. Our
framework can be applied across a wide range of domains,
from symbolic AI to reinforcement learning, and beyond to
open world image recognition. Thus, it can be used to help
kick-start new research efforts and accelerate ongoing work
on these important novelty-related problems.

Introduction
“What is novel?” is an important AI research question that
informs the design of agents tolerant to novel inputs. Is a
noticeable change in the world that does not impact an agent’s
task performance a novelty? How about a change that impacts
performance but is not directly perceptible? If the world has
not changed but the agent senses a random error that produces
an input that leads to an unexpected state, is that novel?
With decades of work and thousands of papers covering
novelty detection and related research in anomaly detection,
out-of-distribution detection, open set recognition, and open
world recognition, one would think that a consistent unified
definition of novelty would have been developed. Unfortunately, that is not the case. Instead, we find a plethora of
variations on this theme, as well as ad hoc use and inconsistent reuse of terminology, all of which injects confusion as
researchers discuss these topics.
This paper introduces a unifying formal framework of novelty. The framework seeks to formalize what it means for
an input to be a novelty in the context of agents in artificial intelligence or in other learning-based systems. Using
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15047

the proposed framework, we formally define multiple types
of novelty an agent can encounter. The goal of these definitions is to be broad enough to encompass and unify the
full range of novelty models that have been proposed in the
literature (Pimentel et al. 2014; Markou and Singh 2003a,b;
Scheirer et al. 2013; Bendale and Boult 2015; Langley 2020).
An important generalization beyond prior work is that we consider novelty in the world, observed space, and agent space
(see Fig. 1), with dissimilarity and regret operators critical
to our definitions. The overarching goal is a framework such
that researchers have clear definitions for the development of
agents that must handle novelty, including support for agents
/ algorithms that incrementally learn from novel inputs. A
longer version of this theory with example applications to
three different domains can be found at (Boult et al. 2020).
Our framework supports implicit theories of novelty, meaning the definitions use functions to implicitly specify if something is novel. The framework does not require a way to
generate novelties, but rather it provides functions that can
be used to evaluate if a given input is novel. This is similar
to how any 2D shape can be implicitly defined by a function
f (x, y) = 0, whether or not there is a procedure for generating the shape. We contend any constructive or generative
theory of novelty (Langley 2020) must be incomplete because the construction or generation of defined worlds, states,
and any enumerable set of transformations between them
form, by definition, a closed world. We note, however, that a
constructive model can be consistent with our definition, but
we do not require a constructive model.

Formalizing Novelty
We present frameworks for formalizing novelty for static or
learning-based agents, operating in a setting where handling
unknown items is required. Fig. 1 shows the main elements
of a novelty problem for task T . The formulation can support a wide range of novelty problems including being robust
to novelties, detecting novelties, learning from novelties or
generating novelties. The paper’s formalization is about theories, rather than “a theory,” because when the definition’s
set of items and associated functions are provided, a different
theory of novelty is defined. There are infinitely many such
theories of novelty for any given task.
For simplicity of presentation, our world and observation
space are d0 and d dimensional spaces of real numbers. Let

