The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Generative Moment Matching Networks
with Distribution Partition
Yong Ren,1 Yucen Luo, 1 Jun Zhu 1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University
reny11@foxmail.com, luoyc15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

have high variance because of the high sample complexity.
Therefore, the vanilla GMMN can only generate data with
low-dimensional latent representations, such as the samples
from the MNIST dataset. For those complex datasets such as
CelebA and CIFAR-10, a small batch size (i.e. 64 or 128) in
practice cannot meet the sample complexity requirements to
converge (Li, Swersky, and Zemel 2015).
There are some attempts towards lowering the sample complexity required to perform stochastic training for GMMN.
These methods usually construct new kernels with a stronger
statistic testing power, involving a function that extracts
meaningful features from data and then combines it with
some other kernels. For example, MMD-GAN (Li et al. 2017)
uses adversarial training to learn a target-specific feature extractor z, and to keep the characteristic property, z is required
to be injective and is learned approximately by special constraints. Sutherland et al. (2017) get z from a pre-defined set
of injective functions by directly maximizing the test power
objective.
In this paper, we present a new approach to improving
the performance of GMMN. The most striking difference is
that instead of constructing data-specific kernels, we use a
fixed one, preventing the notorious problem of instability in
training several networks alternately (Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017), i.e., the generator and the kernel networks. We
process the data distribution to adapt the fixed kernel such
that stochastic training algorithms with a small mini-batch
size can give an accurate estimator involved in the objective
function.When the kernel is characteristic, our method enjoys
the theoretical advantages of moment matching. Specifically,
the main contributions of this work lie in three folds:

Generative moment matching networks (GMMN) present a
theoretically sound approach to learning deep generative models. However, such methods are typically limited by the high
sample complexity, thereby impractical in generating complex
data. In this paper, we present a new strategy to train GMMN
with a low sample complexity while retaining the theoretical
soundness. Our method introduces some auxiliary variables,
whose values are provided by a pre-trained model such as
an encoder network in practice. Conditioned on these variables, we partition the distribution into a set of conditional
distributions, which can be effectively matched with a low
sample complexity. We instantiate this strategy by presenting
an amortized network called GMMN-DP with shared auxiliary variable information for the data generation task, as
well as developing an efficient stochastic training algorithm.
The experimental results show that GMMN-DP can generate
complex samples on datasets such as CelebA and CIFAR-10,
where the vanilla GMMN fails.

Introduction
Deep generative models have achieved great success on tasks
with uncertainty modeling, such as image generation (Ledig
et al. 2017), missing data imputation (Li et al. 2018b) and
transfer learning (Isola et al. 2017). Among various models,
generative moment matching networks (GMMN) (Li, Swersky, and Zemel 2015) present an attractive choice. GMMN
adopts the maximum mean criterion (MMD) (Gretton et al.
2008) as the objective, which is simple and theoretically
sound — when the underlying kernel is characteristic (Sriperumbudur, Fukumizu, and Lanckriet 2011), MMD is capable
of distinguishing any two different distributions. This approach has been extended for conditional generation and
classification tasks (Ren et al. 2016).
One challenge that limits the wide application of GMMN
is that the involved kernel embedding of distributions in
MMD are global statistics requiring a high sample complexity in general. In practice, due to the computational
cost and memory constraints, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with reasonably small-sized mini-batches is the most
effective choice to train GMMN, which however is likely to

• We analyze the difficulty of the vanilla GMMN and propose an alternative training strategy which requires a lower
sample complexity intrinsically. Such method is based on
the distribution partition, where we introduce additional
auxiliary random variables Y and a pre-training step to
transform the data generating process X ∼ Pd (X) into
a two-stage one (i.e. Y ∼ P (Y ), X|Y ∼ P (X|Y ) ) with
additional requirements that the marginal P (X) = Pd (X)
and the randomness in P (X|Y ) can be covered by small
data sizes. Instead of matching Pd (X) directly, we match
P (X|Y = y) for each y separately via moment based
criterion and finally recover the target distribution with
guarantees.

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9403

