The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Faster Deep Collaborative Filtering via Hierarchical Decision Networks
Yu Chen1 and Sinno Jialin Pan 1
1

Nanyang Technological University
{chenyu, sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

the embeddings of users and items are learned through a deep
neural network. After the representations are learned, the
inner product between the embeddings of users and items
is used to compute the user-item relevant score for recommendation. In this way, computation in the inference (i.e.,
recommendation) phase is efficient, but the interactions between the embeddings of users and items are modeled linearly
as the inner product is a linear operation.

For personalized recommendations, collaborative filtering
(CF) methods aim to recommend items to users based on
data of historical user-item interactions. Deep learning has
indicated success in improving performance of CF methods in
recent works. However, to generate an item recommendation
list for each user, a lot of deep learning-based CF methods
require every pair of users and items to be passed through
multiple neural layers. This requires intensive computation
and makes real-time end-to-end neural recommendations very
costly. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a new
deep learning-based hierarchical decision network to filter
out irrelevant items to save computation cost while maintaining good recommendation accuracy of deep CF methods. We
also develop a distillation-based training algorithm, which
uses a well-trained CF model as a teacher network to guide
the training of the decision network. We conducted extensive
experiments on real-world benchmark datasets to verify the
effectiveness and the efficiency of our decision network for
making recommendations. The experimental results indicate
that the proposed decision network is able to maintain or even
improve the recommendation quality in terms of various metrics and meanwhile enjoy lower computational cost.

To address the limitation of representation learning CF
approaches, matching function learning has been proposed
to capture nonlinear interactions between the embeddings
hu and hv beyond the inner product by designing a deep architecture. The Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) framework (He et al. 2017) is a representative in the direction of
matching function learning. In NCF, a deep neural network
of multiple Generalized Matrix Factorization (GMF) layers
and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) layers is used as a blackbox to capture the underlying interactions between users and
items. Later, various neural network architectures have been
proposed to model user-item interactions (He et al. 2018; Xue
et al. 2019). Recently, a unified framework that integrates
the two approaches of representation learning and matching
function learning is proposed (Deng et al. 2019).

Introduction
In personalized recommendation, users’ preferences are usually modeled from historical user-item interactions. Specifically, factor-based collaborative filtering (CF) methods model
each user and each item as latent factors hu and hv , respectively, to capture the characteristics of users and items, and
the outcome of their dot product is considered as a relevance
score between the item and the user for recommendation.
In the past decade, deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015) has been widely applied in various application
domains, from computer vision and speech recognition to natural language processing and cybersecurity. Recently, deep
learning has also raised attention in recommender systems,
especially for CF methods. In general, deep learning-based
CF has been explored in mainly two directions: representation learning and matching function learning. In the direction
of representation learning (Xue et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019),

Intuitively, if the deep neural network has a deeper architecture, it is able to capture deeper interactions between users
and items. Empirically, it has also been shown in previous
work that the depth of the deep architecture has a proportional effect on the recommendation quality (He et al. 2017).
However, the depth of the architecture is a double-edged
sword. On one hand, a deeper architecture makes capturing
deeper interactions between users and items for more accurate recommendation possible, on the other hand, a deeper
architecture causes higher computation cost in real-time inference, which makes it less practical in real time. To be
specific, to recommend items to a target user, most state-ofthe-art deep learning-based methods require a full forward
pass to retrieve a rating score for every pair of the user and all
the items. When the item set is very large, this inference or
recommendation process is highly time intensive, especially
when the recommender system runs on a server with limited
computational resources.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4001

