The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Vector Quantized Bayesian Neural Network Inference for Data Streams
Namuk Park, Taekyu Lee, Songkuk Kim
Yonsei University
{namuk.park, taekyulee, songkuk}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Despite these merits, BNNs have a major disadvantage
that make it difficult to use as a practical tool; the predictive
inference speed of BNNs is dozens of times slower than that
of deterministic NNs. It has held back BNNs from wide applications. Particularly, this problem is a significant barrier
for processing data streams with low-latency. This will be
further elaborated below.

Bayesian neural networks (BNN) can estimate the uncertainty
in predictions, as opposed to non-Bayesian neural networks
(NNs). However, BNNs have been far less widely used than
non-Bayesian NNs in practice since they need iterative NN
executions to predict a result for one data, and it gives rise
to prohibitive computational cost. This computational burden is a critical problem when processing data streams with
low-latency. To address this problem, we propose a novel
model VQ-BNN, which approximates BNN inference for
data streams. In order to reduce the computational burden,
VQ-BNN inference predicts NN only once and compensates
the result with previously memorized predictions. To be specific, VQ-BNN inference for data streams is given by temporal exponential smoothing of recent predictions. The computational cost of this model is almost the same as that of
non-Bayesian NNs. Experiments including semantic segmentation on real-world data show that this model performs significantly faster than BNNs while estimating predictive results comparable to or superior to the results of BNNs.

1

BNN inference. Let p(w|D) be a posterior probability
of NN weights w with respect to training dataset D, and
p(y|x, w) be a probability distribution parameterized by
NN’s result for an input data vector x and a weight w. Then,
the inference result of BNN is a predictive distribution:
Z
p(y|x0 , D) = p(y|x0 , w) p(w|D)dw
(1)
where x0 is observed input data vector and y is output vector. Since this equation cannot be solved analytically, we use
the MC estimator to approximate it:
X 1
p(y|x0 , D) ≃
p(y|x0 , wi )
(2)
Nw
w

Introduction

i

While deterministic neural networks show high accuracy in
many areas, they cannot estimate reliable uncertainty. Predictions cannot be perfect and some incorrect predictions
might bring about fatal consequences in areas such as medical analysis and autonomous vehicles control. Therefore, estimating uncertainty as well as predictions is crucial for the
safer application of machine learning based systems.
Bayesian neural network (BNN) uses probability distributions to model neural network (NN) weights and estimates
not only predictive results but also uncertainties. This allows
computer systems to make better decisions by combining
prediction with uncertainty. Moreover, BNNs can achieve
high performance in a variety of fields, e.g. image recognition (Kendall, Badrinarayanan, and Cipolla 2015; Kendall
and Gal 2017), language modeling (Fortunato, Blundell,
and Vinyals 2017), reinforcement learning (Kahn et al.
2017; Osband, Aslanides, and Cassirer 2018), meta-learning
(Yoon et al. 2018; Finn, Xu, and Levine 2018), and multitask learning (Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla 2018).

where wi ∼ p(w|D) and Nw is the number of the samples. The MC estimator implies that NN needs to be executed iteratively to calculate the predictive distribution. As
many real-world data is large and practical NNs are deep,
multiple NN execution cannot be fully parallelized (Kendall
and Gal 2017). Consequently, the computation speed is significantly decreased. For example, according to Appendix B
and (Kendall and Gal 2017), BNN requires up to fifty predictions to obtain high predictive performance in computer
vision tasks, which means that the data processing speed of
BNN could be fifty times lower than that of deterministic
NN.
VQ-BNN inference. Suppose we have access to memorized input dataset {x0 , x1 , · · · } consisting of similar
data and corresponding predictions with different weights
{p(y|x0 , w0 ), p(y|x1 , w1 ), · · · } in the process of inference. Then, the predictive distribution of BNN can be approximated by combining these predictions. Based on this
idea, we propose novel predictive distribution called vector quantized BNN (VQ-BNN) inference that approximates

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9322

