The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Identification of Abnormal States in Videos of Ants Undergoing Social Phase
Change
Taeyeong Choi1,2 , Benjamin Pyenson3 , Juergen Liebig3 , Theodore P. Pavlic2,3,4
1 Lincoln Institute for Agri-food Technology, University of Lincoln, Riseholme Park, Lincoln, UK
2 School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
3 School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
4 School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA

tchoi@lincoln.ac.uk, {bpyenson, jliebig, tpavlic}@asu.edu
Abstract
Biology is both an important application area and a source
of motivation for development of advanced machine learning techniques. Although much attention has been paid to
large and complex data sets resulting from high-throughput
sequencing, advances in high-quality video recording technology have begun to generate similarly rich data sets requiring sophisticated techniques from both computer vision
and time-series analysis. Moreover, just as studying gene expression patterns in one organism can reveal general principles that apply to other organisms, the study of complex social interactions in an experimentally tractable model system,
such as a laboratory ant colony, can provide general principles about the dynamics of other social groups. Here, we focus on one such example from the study of reproductive regulation in small laboratory colonies of more than 50 Harpegnathos ants. These ants can be artificially induced to begin a
∼20 day process of hierarchy reformation. Although the conclusion of this process is conspicuous to a human observer,
it remains unclear which behaviors during the transient period are contributing to the process. To address this issue,
we explore the potential application of One-class Classification (OC) to the detection of abnormal states in ant colonies
for which behavioral data is only available for the normal societal conditions during training. Specifically, we build upon
the Deep Support Vector Data Description (DSVDD) and introduce the Inner-Outlier Generator (IO-GEN) that synthesizes fake “inner outlier” observations during training that are
near the center of the DSVDD data description. We show that
IO-GEN increases the reliability of the final OC classifier relative to other DSVDD baselines. This method can be used to
screen video frames for which additional human observation
is needed. Although we focus on an application with laboratory colonies of social insects, this approach may be applied
to video data from other social systems to either better understand the causal factors behind social phase transitions or
even to predict the onset of future transitions.

Figure 1: Proposed scenario in which observational data
from an ant colony are accessible during its stable state,
while the trained predictive model is to classify behaviors
from unseen, unstable states.

ants, even “superorganisms” where the collective can be described as a single monolithic entity. Some ant species have
colonies sufficiently small to be observed in their entirety
with state-of-the-art video-recording technologies and sufficiently large to have rich, multi-scale behaviors. Whereas
the dynamical processes underlying the non-trivial interactions between ants are cryptic to human observers, there
is potential for machine-learning and artificial-intelligence
techniques to identify social interaction patterns that warrant further study. For example, in species of ants where
new reproductive individuals emerge after the previous reproductive dies naturally or is artificially removed (Heinze,
Hölldobler, and Peeters 1994; Sasaki et al. 2016), machine
learning could in principle help to identify abnormal patterns that only occur during this conflict resolution. However, such a behavioral classifier for underappreciated abnormal patterns would necessarily be limited to training data
from videos of behaviors under known normal conditions.
Here, we propose an alternative application of Oneclass Classification (OC) to solve the abnormal state detection problem for video data of social systems in transition from disordered to ordered states. In these systems,
behavioral data for training the classifier is only available
for the system’s typical state, but the classifier must be
able to classify abnormal samples presented to it after training. For OC problems, Support-Vector-Machine–inspired
approaches have widely been used with the combination of

Introduction
In natural social systems, complex interactions among large
numbers of individuals can give rise to phenomena such
as “collective minds” (Couzin 2007) and, as in colonies of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15286

