The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SIMPLE: SIngle-network with Mimicking and Point Learning for
Bottom-up Human Pose Estimation
Jiabin Zhang,1 * Zheng Zhu,2 * † Jiwen Lu,2 Junjie Huang,3 Guan Huang,3 Jie Zhou2
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
XForwardAI Technology Co.,Ltd, Beijing, China
zhangjiabin2016@ia.ac.cn, {zhengzhu, junjie.huang}@ieee.org, {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
guan.huang@xforwardai.com
Method
OpenPose
AE
PersonLab
MultiPoseNet
PPN
HigherHRNet
Ours

Abstract
The practical application requests both accuracy and efficiency on multi-person pose estimation algorithms. But the
high accuracy and fast inference speed are dominated by
top-down methods and bottom-up methods respectively. To
make a better trade-off between accuracy and efficiency,
we propose a novel multi-person pose estimation framework, SIngle-network with Mimicking and Point Learning
for Bottom-up Human Pose Estimation (SIMPLE). Specifically, in the training process, we enable SIMPLE to mimic
the pose knowledge from the high-performance top-down
pipeline, which significantly promotes SIMPLE’s accuracy
while maintaining its high efficiency during inference. Besides, SIMPLE formulates human detection and pose estimation as a unified point learning framework to complement
each other in single-network. This is quite different from previous works where the two tasks may interfere with each
other. To the best of our knowledge, both mimicking strategy between different method types and unified point learning are firstly proposed in pose estimation. In experiments,
our approach achieves the new state-of-the-art performance
among bottom-up methods on the COCO, MPII and PoseTrack datasets. Compared with the top-down approaches,
SIMPLE has comparable accuracy and faster inference speed.

1

AP on COCO
61.8
65.5
68.7
69.6
70.5
71.1

mAP on MPII
75.6
79.6
77.0
85.1

Table 1: The multi-person pose estimation performance for
existing bottom-up methods and SIMPLE. Our approach obtains leading performance among bottom-up methods, with
AP of 71.1 and mAP of 85.1 on COCO test-dev and
MPII Human Pose testing sets respectively.

methods. Bottom-up methods firstly detect body joints without information of the number and locations of people. Then
detected joints are grouped to form individual poses for person instances. However, the pose estimation of multi-people
with different scales is difficult, so there is a noticeable performance gap between bottom-up and top-down methods.
In this paper, we propose SIMPLE framework to address
the problem mentioned above, i.e., there is not a satisfactory trade-off between accuracy and speed among the previous pose estimation methods. For narrowing the performance gap between bottom-up and top-down methods, SIMPLE forces the estimated pose heatmaps (student) to mimic
the output heatmaps of the high-performance top-down approach (teacher) in the training process. Specifically, an extra human detection branch extracts the heatmap patches
of each person in the student model, which is semantically
aligned with the heatmaps of the teacher model. Then a convolutional adapter is utilized to align the high-level feature
and the mimicking loss is optimized to perform knowledge
transfer. For unifying human detection and pose estimation
to complement each other, SIMPLE treats these two tasks
both as point learning problems. In particular, it consists of a
shared backbone and two parallel point learning-based head
branches. Moreover, benefit from human detection results,
SIMPLE has a CNN-based grouping module that can intuitively and graciously solve the grouping problem.
Benefit from the network mimicking strategy, SIMPLE is
supervised by both ground-truth and high-level knowledge

Introduction

Human pose estimation in images (Wei et al. 2016; Newell,
Yang, and Deng 2016) is of importance for visual understanding tasks (Hattori et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Wang,
Zhao, and Ji 2018). Research community has witnessed
a significant advance from single person to multi-person
pose estimation, which can be generally categorized into
top-down (Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018; Sun et al. 2019) and
bottom-up (Pishchulin et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2019) approaches. Top-down methods achieve multi-person pose estimation by the two-stages process, including obtaining person bounding boxes by a person detector and predicting
keypoint locations separately within these boxes. This timeconsuming pipeline makes it much slower than bottom-up
* contributed equally
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3342

