The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Universal 2-state n-action Adaptive Management Solver
Luz Valerie Pascal,1 Marianne Akian,1 Sam Nicol,2 Iadine Chades2
1

INRIA and CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Route de Saclay, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France
2
CSIRO, Ecosciences Precinct, 41 Boggo Rd, Dutton Park QLD 4102, Australia
luz.pascal96@gmail.com, marianne.akian@inria.fr, sam.nicol@csiro.au, iadine.chades@csiro.au

Abstract

selected to achieve a management objective while simultaneously gaining information to improve future management
success (Holling 1978; McCarthy, Armstrong, and Runge
2012; Walters 1986).
Several approaches have been developed to solve AM
problems (Chadès et al. 2017). Here, we focus on the class
of problems characterised by model uncertainty. AM under
model uncertainty assumes that the unknown true dynamics
of the system are close enough to a set of pre-defined models
that specify how the system dynamics function. AM tools to
reduce model uncertainty were first proposed in the fisheries
literature (Silvert 1978).
The key prerequisite for an optimal AM system designed
to reduce model uncertainty is that plausible alternative hypotheses about system function dynamics can be articulated.
Chadès et al. (2012) have shown that model uncertainty
AM problems can be cast as Mixed Observability MDPs
(MOMDPs), and under stationary assumptions as hidden
model MDPs (hmMDPs). This approach was used to inform conservation of migratory shorebirds under sea level
rise (Nicol et al. 2013, 2015) and is now being tested by the
New South Wales Saving our Species Program in Australia
(Potoroo case study in this paper).
A drawback of model uncertainty approaches is the assumption that the real model is contained within the model
set. As well as making this strong assumption, current methods often rely on asking experts to parameterize the model
set, which is both time consuming and prone to human error
and biases (Martin et al. 2012). Point-based POMDP solvers
help us overcome the technical challenge of solving the hmMDP for a large set of models so that we have a greater likelihood of including the real model. However, in data-poor
systems, including many models makes it difficult to distinguish the real model as observations are few. Problems in
AM application domains often have limited observations. In
these situations, it is critical to only include a small model
set. We postulate the existence of a parsimonious set of models that spans the set of possible optimal solutions for AM
problems using as few models as possible. Finding this minimum, yet universal set of models is the objective of our
manuscript. We will focus on 2-state problems, where we
rely on statements of relativity (i.e. “good” and “bad” states)
to generate universal output.
Our approach explores the parameter space of the un-

In poor data and urgent decision-making applications, managers need to make decisions without complete knowledge of
the system dynamics. In biodiversity conservation, adaptive
management (AM) is the principal tool for decision-making
under uncertainty. AM can be solved using simplified Mixed
Observable Markov Decision Processes called hidden model
MDPs (hmMDPs) when the unknown dynamics are assumed
stationary. hmMDPs provide optimal policies to AM problems by augmenting the MDP state space with an unobservable state variable representing a finite set of predefined models. A drawback in formalising an AM problem is that experts
are often solicited to provide this predefined set of models by
specifying the transition matrices. Expert elicitation is a challenging and time-consuming process that is prone to biases,
and a strong assumption of hmMDPs is that the true transition
matrix will be included in the candidate model set. We propose an original approach to build a hmMDP with a universal
set of predefined models that is capable of solving any 2-state
n-action AM problem. Our approach uses properties of the
transition matrices to build the model set and is independent
of expert input, removing the potential for expert error in the
optimal solution. We provide analytical formulations to derive the minimum set of models to include into an hmMDP to
solve any AM problems with 2 states and n actions. We assess
our universal AM algorithm on two species conservation case
studies from Australia and randomly generated problems.

Introduction
In many computational sustainability domains such as conservation of biodiversity, epidemiology or natural resource
management, managers must adapt their decisions to the
state of the systems and account for future events. When
the dynamics are Markovian and the state-transition matrices are known, Markov decision processes (Bellman 1957)
are a suitable model to help managers making sequentialdecisions under uncertainty (Marescot et al. 2013). Unfortunately, for some of the most pressing problems in conservation, health and biosecurity, data is scarce and transition matrices are rarely available (Chadès and Nicol 2016).
In such situations, Adaptive Management (AM) or learning while doing is the recommended management practice
(Walters and Hilborn 1978; Keith et al. 2011). Decisions are
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14884

