The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Geodesic-HOF: 3D Reconstruction Without Cutting Corners
Ziyun Wang, Eric A. Mitchell, Volkan Isler, Daniel D. Lee
Samsung AI Center, New York, NY 10011
saicny@samsung.com

Abstract

on the surface, can be difficult. In particular, naively computing a neighborhood of a point using a Euclidean ball or
Euclidean nearest neighbors can give incorrect results if the
object has regions of high curvature. Such mistakes can in
turn degrade performance on downstream tasks such as unsupervised part detection or surface normal estimation. We
thus propose a new method for single-view 3D reconstruction
based on the idea of explicitly learning surface geodesics.

Single-view 3D object reconstruction is a challenging fundamental problem in machine perception, largely due to the
morphological diversity of objects in the natural world. In
particular, high curvature regions are not always represented
accurately by methods trained with common set-based loss
functions such as Chamfer Distance, resulting in reconstructions short-circuiting the surface or “cutting corners.” To address this issue, we propose an approach to 3D reconstruction
that embeds points on the surface of an object into a higherdimensional space that captures both the original 3D surface as
well as geodesic distances between points on the surface of the
object. The precise specification of these additional “lifted” coordinates ultimately yields useful surface information without
requiring excessive additional computation during either training or testing, in comparison with existing approaches. Our
experiments show that taking advantage of these learned lifted
coordinates yields better performance for estimating surface
normals and generating surfaces than using point cloud reconstructions alone. Further, we find that this learned geodesic
embedding space provides useful information for applications
such as unsupervised object decomposition.

The key insight of our approach is to embed points sampled from the surface of a 3-dimensional object into a higherdimensional space such that geodesic distances on the surface
of the object can be computed as Euclidean distance in this
‘lifted’ space. This embedding space is constrained such that
the 3D surface of the object lies in its first 3 dimensions
(Figure 1-left shows a 2D example of this constraint). The
remaining embedding dimensions can thus be interpreted as
a quantification of curvature. To test the efficacy of this approach, we present a neural network architecture and training
regime that is able to effectively learn this representation,
and our experiments demonstrate that using the learned surface geodesics yields meaningful improvements in surface
normal estimation. Further, we find that this embedding enables unsupervised decomposition of an object’s surface into
non-overlapping 2D sub-manifolds (i.e., charts), which can
be useful for texture mapping and surface triangulation (see
Figure 1-right).

Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D model of an object from a single image is a central problem in computer vision, with many applications. For example, in computer graphics, surface models
such as triangle meshes are used for computing object appearance. In robotics, surface normal vectors are used for grasp
planning, and in computer aided design and manufacturing,
complete object models are needed for production. Motivated
by such use cases, recent deep learning-based approaches
to 3D reconstruction have shown exciting progress by using powerful function approximators to represent a mapping
from the space of images to the space of 3D geometries. It
has been shown that deep learning architectures, once trained
on large datasets such as ShapeNet (Chang et al. 2015), are
capable of outputting accurate object models in various representations including discrete voxelizations, unordered point
sets, or implicit functions.
These representations can generally produce aesthetically
pleasing reconstructions, but extracting topological information from them, such as computing neighborhoods of a point

Our contributions: We present Geodesic Higher Order
Function Networks (Geodesic-HOF) for surface generation
and provide several experimental evaluations to assess its
performance. In the Single View Reconstruction section, we
show that Geodesic-HOF exhibits reconstruction quality on
par with state-of-the-art surface reconstruction methods. Further, we find that using the learned surface geodesics meaningfully improves surface normal estimation. Finally, we
show how the learned representation can be used for decomposing the object surface into non-overlapping charts which
can be used for generating triangulation or explicit function
representations of surfaces. We hope that our results will
provide an effective method for reconstructing surfaces and
unfold new research directions for incorporating higher-order
surface properties for shape reconstruction.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2844

