The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Successor Feature Sets: Generalizing Successor Representations Across Policies
Kianté Brantley,1 Soroush Mehri, 2 Geoffrey J. Gordon 2
1

University of Maryland College Park
2
Microsoft Research
kdbrant@umd.edu, somehri@microsoft.com, ggordon@microsoft.com

Abstract

efficiently about many policies at once; value functions assume a fixed reward function, while our goal is to reason
efficiently about many reward functions at once.
Roughly, the successor feature set tells us how features of
our future observations and actions depend on our current
state and our choice of policy. More specifically, the successor feature set is a convex set of matrices; each matrix corresponds to a policy π, and describes how the features we will
observe in the future depend on the current state under π.
The successor feature set provides a number of useful capabilities. These include reading off the optimal value function or policy for a new reward function, predicting the range
of outcomes that we can achieve starting from a given state,
and reading off a policy that imitates a desired state-action
visitation distribution.
We describe a convergent dynamic programming algorithm for computing the successor feature set, generalizing
the value iteration algorithm for POMDPs or PSRs. We also
give algorithms for reading off the above-mentioned optimal policies and feature-matching policies from the successor feature set. Since the exact dynamic programming algorithm can be prohibitively expensive, we also experiment
with randomized numerical approximations.
In this paper we focus on model-based reasoning about
successor feature sets — that is, we assume access to an accurate world model. We also focus on algorithms that are
exact in the limit of increasing computation. Successor-style
representations are of course also extremely useful for approximate reasoning about large, unknown environments,
and we believe that many of the ideas discussed here can
inform that case as well, but we leave that direction for future work.
To summarize, our contributions are: a new successorstyle representation that allows information to flow among
different states, policies, and reward functions; algorithms
for working with this new representation in small, known environments, including a convergent dynamic programming
algorithm and ways to read off optimal policies and featurematching policies; and computational experiments that evaluate the strengths and limitations of our new representation
and algorithms.

Successor-style representations have many advantages for reinforcement learning: for example, they can help an agent
generalize from past experience to new goals, and they have
been proposed as explanations of behavioral and neural data
from human and animal learners. They also form a natural
bridge between model-based and model-free RL methods:
like the former they make predictions about future experiences, and like the latter they allow efficient prediction of
total discounted rewards. However, successor-style representations are not optimized to generalize across policies: typically, we maintain a limited-length list of policies, and share
information among them by representation learning or GPI.
Successor-style representations also typically make no provision for gathering information or reasoning about latent variables. To address these limitations, we bring together ideas
from predictive state representations, belief space value iteration, successor features, and convex analysis: we develop
a new, general successor-style representation, together with
a Bellman equation that connects multiple sources of information within this representation, including different latent
states, policies, and reward functions. The new representation
is highly expressive: for example, it lets us efficiently read off
an optimal policy for a new reward function, or a policy that
imitates a new demonstration. For this paper, we focus on exact computation of the new representation in small, known
environments, since even this restricted setting offers plenty
of interesting questions. Our implementation does not scale to
large, unknown environments — nor would we expect it to,
since it generalizes POMDP value iteration, which is difficult
to scale. However, we believe that future work will allow us to
extend our ideas to approximate reasoning in large, unknown
environments. We conduct experiments to explore which of
the potential barriers to scaling are most pressing.

Introduction
We describe a new representation for decision-theoretic
planning, reinforcement learning, and imitation learning: the
successor feature set. This representation generalizes a number of previous ideas in the literature, including successor
features and POMDP/PSR value functions. Comparing to
these previous representations: successor features assume a
fixed policy or list of policies, while our goal is to reason
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11774

