The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Going Deeper With Directly-Trained Larger Spiking Neural Networks
Hanle Zheng 1 , Yujie Wu 1 , Lei Deng 1,3 , Yifan Hu 1 and Guoqi Li 1,2∗
1

Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China
2
Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chip, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara
{zhenghl18, wu-yj16, huyf19}mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, leideng@ucsb.edu, liguoqi@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

consumption and better robustness(Stromatias et al. 2015).
Moreover, SNNs can be easily applied on some specialized
neuromorphic hardware (Merolla et al. 2014; Davies et al.
2018), which may be seen as the next generation of neural
networks.
There are two main approaches to train an SNN with
high performance. One is to convert a pre-trained ANN to
an SNN model, which usually needs hundreds of timesteps(Sengupta et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2018). So, even though
these SNNs achieve comparable accuracy to ANNs with
similar structures, the large number of timesteps causes serious signal latency and increase the amount of computation. The other is to train SNNs directly based on gradient descent method, which is independent of pre-trained
ANNs and can lessen the number of timesteps. A recent
work (Wu et al. 2018), which proposes a learning algorithm
called “Spatio-temporal backpropagation” (STBP) with an
approach to training SNNs directly on ANN-oriented programming frameworks (e.g. Pytorch), provides us with a
chance to explore deeper and larger directly-trained SNNs.
However, SNNs trained by this algorithm are restricted to
shallow architectures and cannot achieve satisfactory performance on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet. So under
above algorithm, we clarify two problems to be solved for
training deeper SNNs directly.
The first problem is gradient vanishing or explosion. Because of special mechanism of spatio-temporal information
processing and non-differentiable spiking signal, the gradient propagation behaves much unstable and tends to vanish in most cases when training SNNs directly, which prevents SNNs from going deeper. So far, there isn’t an effective method to handle this problem well in directly-trained
SNNs. Famous works (Lee et al. 2020; Lee, Delbruck, and
Pfeiffer 2016; Wu et al. 2019) before us fail to train deep
SNNs directly and all of their models are less than 10 layers,
which seriously influences the performances of their methods.
The other problem is that we need to balance the threshold and input on each neuron to get appropriate firing rates
in SNNs. When the input is too small compared with the
threshold, the neuron fires few spikes and the neuronal membrane potential remains so the information handled by the
neuron cannot be expressed enough. When the input is too
large, the neuron fires all the time and is insensitive to

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising in a bioplausible coding for spatio-temporal information and eventdriven signal processing, which is very suited for energyefficient implementation in neuromorphic hardware. However, the unique working mode of SNNs makes them more difficult to train than traditional networks. Currently, there are two
main routes to explore the training of deep SNNs with high
performance. The first is to convert a pre-trained ANN model
to its SNN version, which usually requires a long coding window for convergence and cannot exploit the spatio-temporal
features during training for solving temporal tasks. The other
is to directly train SNNs in the spatio-temporal domain. But
due to the binary spike activity of the firing function and the
problem of gradient vanishing or explosion, current methods
are restricted to shallow architectures and thereby difficult in
harnessing large-scale datasets (e.g. ImageNet). To this end,
we propose a threshold-dependent batch normalization (tdBN) method based on the emerging spatio-temporal backpropagation, termed “STBP-tdBN”, enabling direct training of a
very deep SNN and the efficient implementation of its inference on neuromorphic hardware. With the proposed method
and elaborated shortcut connection, we significantly extend
directly-trained SNNs from a shallow structure (<10 layer)
to a very deep structure (50 layers). Furthermore, we theoretically analyze the effectiveness of our method based on
“Block Dynamical Isometry” theory. Finally, we report superior accuracy results including 93.15% on CIFAR-10, 67.8%
on DVS-CIFAR10, and 67.05% on ImageNet with very few
timesteps. To our best knowledge, it’s the first time to explore
the directly-trained deep SNNs with high performance on ImageNet. We believe this work shall pave the way of fully exploiting the advantages of SNNs and attract more researchers
to contribute in this field.

Introduction
Inspired by human neurons’ working patterns, spiking neural networks (SNNs) have been considered as a promising model in artificial intelligence and theoretical neuroscience (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019). Benefited from intrinsic neuronal dynamics and event-driven spike communication paradigms, SNNs show great potential in continuous
spatio-temporal information processing with lower energy
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11062

