The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semantics Altering Modifications
for Evaluating Comprehension in Machine Reading
Viktor Schlegel, Goran Nenadic and Riza Batista-Navarro
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
{viktor.schlegel, gnenadic, riza.batista}@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract

P: 1 After the kickoff Naomi Daniel...
(B) Original: curled in
(I1) Modal negation: couldn’t curl in
(I2) Adverbial Modification: almost curled in
(I3) Implicit Negation: was prevented from curling in
(I4) Explicit Negation: didn’t succeed in curling in
(I5) Polarity Reversing: lacked the nerve to curl in
(I6) Negated Polarity Preserving: wouldn’t find the
opportunity to curl in
...a goal from 26 metres away following a decisive counter-attack. 2 Then Amanda Collins added more insult to
the injury when she slotted in from 23 metres after Linda
Burger’s soft clearance. [...]

Advances in NLP have yielded impressive results for the task
of machine reading comprehension (MRC), with approaches
having been reported to achieve performance comparable to
that of humans. In this paper, we investigate whether stateof-the-art MRC models are able to correctly process Semantics Altering Modifications (SAM): linguistically-motivated
phenomena that alter the semantics of a sentence while preserving most of its lexical surface form. We present a method
to automatically generate and align challenge sets featuring
original and altered examples. We further propose a novel
evaluation methodology to correctly assess the capability of
MRC systems to process these examples independent of the
data they were optimised on, by discounting for effects introduced by domain shift. In a large-scale empirical study, we
apply the methodology in order to evaluate extractive MRC
models with regard to their capability to correctly process
SAM-enriched data. We comprehensively cover 12 different state-of-the-art neural architecture configurations and four
training datasets and find that – despite their well-known remarkable performance – optimised models consistently struggle to correctly process semantically altered data.

Q: Who scored the farthest goal?
A: Naomi Daniel
A with SAM: Amanda Collins
Figure 1: Categories of SAM used in this paper with
their implications on answering the given question. Modifying the original “Baseline” passage (B) by selecting
any “Intervention” category (I1)−(I6), or removing the
first sentence (“Control”) changes the correct answer from
“Naomi Daniel” located in sentence 1 to “Amanda Collins”
located in sentence 2 .

Introduction
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC), also commonly
referred to as Question Answering, is defined as finding the
answer to a natural language question given an accompanying textual context. State-of-the-art approaches build upon
large transformer-based language models (Vaswani et al.
2017) that are optimised on large corpora in an unsupervised manner (Devlin et al. 2019) and further fine-tuned on
large crowd-sourced task-specific MRC datasets (Rajpurkar
et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018; Trischler et al. 2017). They
achieve remarkable performance, consistently outperforming human baselines on multiple reading comprehension and
language understanding benchmarks (Lan et al. 2020; Raffel
et al. 2020).
More recently, however, research on “data biases” in NLP
suggests that these task-specific datasets exhibit various cues
and spurious correlations between input and expected output (Gururangan et al. 2018; Poliak et al. 2018; Schlegel,
Nenadic, and Batista-Navarro 2020). Indeed, data-driven

approaches such as the state-of-the-art models (described
above) that are optimised on these datasets learn to exploit
these (Jia and Liang 2017; McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen
2019), thus circumventing the actual requirement to perform
comprehension and understanding.
For a (simplified) example, consider the question “Who
scored the farthest goal?” illustrated in Figure 1. If a model
is only exposed to examples where the accompanying passage contains sentences similar to “X scored a goal from
Y metres” during training, a valid approximating decision
based on this information could be similar to “select the
name next to the largest number and the word goal” without
actually fully reading the passage.
Alarmingly, conventional evaluation methodology where
the dataset is split randomly into training and test data
would not solve this issue. As both splits still stem from
the same generative process (typically crowd-sourcing), the

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13762

