The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Relationship for Complex-scene Image Generation
Tianyu Hua1 , Hongdong Zheng1 , Yalong Bai1 , Wei Zhang1 * , Xiao-Ping Zhang2 , Tao Mei1
1

JD AI Research
Ryerson University
patrickhua.ty@gmail.com, {hongdongzheng, ylbai}@outlook.com, wzhang.cu@gmail.com
xzhang@ee.ryerson.ca, tmei@live.com
2

Abstract

Triplet

The significant progress on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) has facilitated realistic single-object image generation based on language input. However, complex-scene generation (with various interactions among multiple objects) still
suffers from messy layouts and object distortions, due to diverse configurations in layouts and appearances. Prior methods are mostly object-driven and ignore their inter-relations
that play a significant role in complex-scene images. This
work explores relationship-aware complex-scene image generation, where multiple objects are inter-related as a scene
graph. With the help of relationships, we propose three major
updates in the generation framework. First, reasonable spatial layouts are inferred by jointly considering the semantics
and relationships among objects. Compared to standard location regression, we show relative scales and distances serve
a more reliable target. Second, since the relations between
objects significantly influence an object’s appearance, we design a relation-guided generator to generate objects reflecting
their relationships. Third, a novel scene graph discriminator
is proposed to guarantee the consistency between the generated image and the input scene graph. Our method tends to
synthesize plausible layouts and objects, respecting the interplay of multiple objects in an image. Experimental results on
Visual Genome and HICO-DET datasets show that our proposed method significantly outperforms prior arts in terms of
IS and FID metrics. Based on our user study and visual inspection, our method is more effective in generating logical
layout and appearance for complex-scenes.

man

Shape

Layout

Image

standing on
board

man

board

man

board

man

holding
board
man

man

Figure 1: Relationship matters for complex-scene image
riding
holding
generation.
The same object pair
(e.g., man and board)
could horse
show different object shapes,
horsescene layouts and appearances under different relationships.

son, Gupta, and Fei-Fei 2018; Xu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019;
Hinz, Heinrich, and Wermter 2019).
Scene graph, a structured language representation, captures objects and their relationships described in the sentence (Xu et al. 2017). Such representation is proven effective for image-text cross-modal tasks, such as structural
image retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015; Schuster et al. 2015;
Johnson, Gupta, and Fei-Fei 2018), image captioning (Yang
et al. 2019; Li and Jiang 2019; Li et al. 2018) and visual
question answering (Teney, Liu, and van Den Hengel 2017;
Norcliffe-Brown, Vafeias, and Parisot 2018). In this work,
we focus on complex-scene image generation from scene
graphs. Although extensive works have been done in scene
graph generation from image (Xu et al. 2017; Zellers et al.
2018; Li et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017a) (i.e. image→scene
graph), reversely generating a complex-scene image from a
scene graph remains challenging, due to the polymorphism
nature of one-to-many mapping from a given scene graph to
multiple reasonable images with different scene layouts.
A general pipeline for scene graph based image generation usually consists of two stages (Johnson, Gupta, and FeiFei 2018). The first one learns to synthesize a rough layout
prediction from the scene-graph input. Usually, the object
features are encoded with a graph module (Johnson, Gupta,
and Fei-Fei 2018; Ashual and Wolf 2019), followed by a
direct regression of bounding-box locations. At the second
stage, a position-aware feature tensor, that combines object

Introduction
In the past few years, text-to-image generation has drawn
extensive research attention for its potential applications in
art generation, computer-aided design, image manipulation,
etc. However, such success is only restricted to simple image
generation, which only contains a single object in a small domain, such as flowers, birds, and faces (Reed et al. 2016; Bao
et al. 2017). Complex-scene generation, on the other hand,
targets for synthesizing realistic scene images out of complex sentences depicting multiple objects as well as their interactions. Nevertheless, generating complex-scenes on demand is still far from mature based on recent studies (John* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1584

