The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Opponent Hand Estimation in the Game of Gin Rummy
Peter E. Francis, Hoang A. Just, Todd W. Neller
Gettysburg College
{franpe02, justho01, tneller}@gettysburg.edu

Abstract

can make a difference in a game play strategy. We conclude
with a demonstration of a simple deterministic application of
our hand estimation that produces a statistically significant
advantage for a player.

In this article, we describe various approaches to opponent hand estimation in the card game Gin Rummy. We
use an application of Bayes’ rule, as well as both simple and convolutional neural networks, to recognize patterns in simulated game play and predict the opponent’s
hand. We also present a new minimal-sized construction
for using arrays to pre-populate hand representation images. Finally, we define various metrics for evaluating
estimations, and evaluate the strengths of our different
estimations at different stages of the game.

Gin Rummy
Gin Rummy is one of the most popular 2-player card games
played with a standard (a.k.a. French) 52-card deck. Ranks
run from aces low to kings high. The object of the game is to
be the first player to score 100 or more points accumulated
through the scoring of individual hands.
The play of Gin Rummy, as with other games in the
Rummy family, is to collect sets of cards called melds.
There are two types of melds: “sets” and “runs”. A set
is 3 or 4 cards of the same rank, e.g. {3♣, 3♥, 3♠},
or {K♣, K♥, K♠, K♦}. A run is 3 or more cards
of the same suit in sequence, e.g. {5♣, 6♣, 7♣}, or
{9♥, T ♥, J♥, Q♥, K♥}. Melds are disjoint, i.e. do not
share cards.
Cards not in melds are referred to as deadwood. Cards
have associated point values with aces being 1 point, face
cards being 10 points, and other number cards having points
according to their number. Deadwood points are the sum of
card points from all deadwood cards. Players play so as to
reduce their deadwood points.
For each hand of a game, the dealer deals 10 cards to each
player. (There are different systems for deciding the next
dealer; we will simply start with a random dealer and alternate players as dealer across the entire game.) After the
deal, the remaining 32 cards are placed face down to form a
draw pile, and the top card is turned face-up next to the draw
pile to form the discard pile. The top of the discard pile is
called the upcard.
In a normal turn, a player draws a card, either the upcard
or the top of the draw pile, and then discards a card. The
player may not discard a drawn upcard but may discard a
card drawn face down. For the first turn, play starts with the
non-dealer having the option to take the first turn by drawing
the upcard. If the non-dealer declines this option, the dealer
is given the option. If both decline, the non-dealer must take
the first turn drawing from the draw pile.
In the event that the hand has not ended after a turn with
only 2 cards remaining in the draw pile, nothing is scored,

Introduction
In this work, we focus on different computational strategies to estimate the opponent’s hand in the card game Gin
Rummy, i.e. to evolve probabilistic beliefs about an opponent’s hidden cards. Hand estimation in Gin Rummy is particularly challenging because of the little information available, the unknown strategy of the opponent, and the stochastic nature of the game.
The origins of the melding card game Gin Rummy
(McLeod 2020) are debated: some believe the game
stemmed from 19th -century whiskey poker, while others disagree and say the game Conquian makes more sense as its
ancestor. Although Gin Rummy was one of the most popular card games of the 1930’s and 1940’s (Parlett 2008, 2020)
and remains one of the most popular standard deck card
games (Ranker 2020; BoardGameGeek.com 2020), it has
received relatively little Artificial Intelligence (AI) research
attention.
We explore variations of previous strategies used on other
games, as well as develop some new approaches. These algorithms differ in the way simulated game data was abstracted to make future predictions. The application of
Bayes’ rule and the use of simple and convolutional neural networks allows us to see how different constructions
lead to different estimation powers. In the process of developing a useful image for convolution-based deep learning
and pattern recognition, we introduce the idea of an ambisuperpermutation, as well as prove minimal length properties. We also introduce various metrics of evaluating the success of a hand estimation, and show one way this estimation
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15496

