The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing Audio-Visual Association with Self-Supervised Curriculum Learning
Jingran Zhang1 , Xing Xu1 * , Fumin Shen1 , Huimin Lu2 , Xin Liu3 , Heng Tao Shen1
1

Center for Future Multimedia and School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, China
2
Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan
3
Huaqiao University, China
{jrzhang339, fumin.shen}@gmail.com, xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn, shenhengtao@hotmail.com, dr.huimin.lu@ieee.org,
xliu@hqu.edu.cn
Abstract

audio-visual messages. Additionally, in contrast to expensive human-annotation, the concurrent audiovisual message
provides free and pervasive supervised signal for exploring
self-supervision learning and co-training a multi-modality
network on large-scale unlabeled data.

The recent success of audio-visual representations learning
can be largely attributed to their pervasive concurrency property, which can be used as a self-supervision signal and extract correlation information. While most recent works focus on capturing the shared associations between the audio and visual modalities, they rarely consider multiple audio and video pairs at once and pay little attention to exploiting the valuable information within each modality. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel audio-visual representation learning method dubbed self-supervised curriculum
learning (SSCL) under the teacher-student learning manner.
Specifically, taking advantage of contrastive learning, a twostage scheme is exploited, which transfers the cross-modal
information between teacher and student model as a phased
process. The proposed SSCL approach regards the pervasive
property of audiovisual concurrency as latent supervision and
mutually distills the structure knowledge of visual to audio
data. Notably, the SSCL method can learn discriminative audio and visual representations for various downstream applications. Extensive experiments conducted on both action
video recognition and audio sound recognition tasks show the
remarkably improved performance of the SSCL method compared with the state-of-the-art self-supervised audio-visual
representation learning methods.

The recent studies on audio-visual representations learning can be generally categorized into two types: AudioVisual Correspondence (AVC) (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017) and Audio-Visual Synchronization (AVS) (Chung,
Chung, and Kang 2019). The two types are mainly about setting up a verification task that predicts whether an input pair
of an audio and an video clip is matched or not. The positive
audio and video pairs are typically sampled from the same
video. The main difference between AVC and AVS is how
to treat the negative audio and video pair, i.e., the negative
pair in AVC is mostly constructed by audio and video from
different videos while in AVS is to detect the misalignments
between negative audio and video pair from the same video.
To escape from the relying on stronger supervision signal,
existing studies attempt to address those problems on the
aspect of cross-modal knowledge transfer (Aytar, Vondrick,
and Torralba 2016; Owens et al. 2018) to directly predict
the correspondence of the audio-visual messages. Typically,
a two-stream audio-visual model is trained in (Arandjelovic
and Zisserman 2017; Korbar, Tran, and Torresani 2018a) to
judge the pair just with the given audio-visual correspondence. Nevertheless, those works mainly consider the information shared between two modalities for semantic representations learning, but neglect the important cues of multiple audio and video pairs at once. Besides, they also rarely
consider exploiting the useful information underlying the
same modality to model the data distribution.

Introduction
The co-occurrence of acoustic signal and visual appearance
provides potential cues for humans experiencing the world.
For example, while hearing ball bouncing, we can match it
to the scenario of basketball games from numerous visual
scene candidates. The concurrency is an inherent property
that sound is a kind of vibration generated by surrounding objects (Hu, Nie, and Li 2019), and exists through our
daily life, such as the crowd cheering and laughing, announcer speaking, whistling, and ball bouncing, etc. For
machine models, these inherent and pervasive correspondences raise the possibility to possess similar abilities like
humans by investigating audio-visual representation learning and discovering their complex correlations with different

To address the above issues, we consider to learn the correspondence between audio and visual from the pipeline of
teacher-student learning. Specifically, a teacher network will
teach the student network to obtain semantic audio and visual representations in unlabeled video with the contrastive
learning manner. Previous works (Aytar, Vondrick, and Torralba 2016; Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017) on teacher
and student knowledge transfer mainly focus on mimicking the intermediate representations or logits of teacher
networks in a pairwise manner. However, the concurrency
knowledge of audio and video derived from the same video

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3351

