The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

VSQL: Variational Shadow Quantum Learning for Classification
Guangxi Li,1,2 Zhixin Song,1 Xin Wang1∗
1

2

Institute for Quantum Computing, Baidu Research, Beijing 100193, China
Centre for Quantum Software and Information, University of Technology Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
guangxi.li@student.uts.edu.au, zhixinsong0524@gmail.com, wangxin73@baidu.com

Abstract

with discrete variable where the processing unit is provided
with a labeled training set D(train) = {(ρ(m) , y (m) )} in
order to find the convoluted mapping F between each set
element ρ(m) and its corresponding label y (m) . Once the
training process is complete, we would expect the classifier F not only learns the map F(ρ(m) ) = y (m) precisely,
but also generalizes its capacity of discrimination to discover some hidden features shared with similar test data
F(ρ(new) ) = y (new) (i.e. recognize an unseen cat as a cat).
This ability of generalization is valuable to all classification
tasks, and hence it is frequently used to benchmark the performance of a classifier.
In classical machine learning, various approaches have
been proposed to implement classification tasks, including
perceptron-based algorithms, support vector machines, and
the most prevalent neural network (NN) framework (Lecun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015). With the quantum computing
community growing in the NISQ era (Preskill 2018), similar
ideas have been developed respectively, including the quantum perceptron model (Kapoor, Wiebe, and Svore 2016),
kernel-based method (Li, Chakrabarti, and Wu 2019), and
the quantum neural network (QNN) framework (Havlı́ček
et al. 2019; Mitarai et al. 2018; Schuld et al. 2020; Grant
et al. 2018; Farhi and Neven 2018; Schuld and Killoran
2019; Schuld and Petruccione 2018; Bhatia et al. 2019).
This paper focuses on the QNN-based algorithms, also referred to as Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQA) or hybrid quantum-classical algorithms since they are regarded
as well-suited for execution on NISQ devices by combining
quantum computers with classical computers. The main idea
of VQA is employing parametrized quantum circuits (as a
unitary neural network architecture) to search the Hilbert
space and combining classical optimization methods like
gradient descent (GD) to find the best parameters (Peruzzo
et al. 2014; Kandala et al. 2017; Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann 2014; Farhi and Harrow 2016). VQA has been applied
to many topics such as quantum eigensolver (Peruzzo et al.
2014), quantum simulation (Yuan et al. 2019), quantum state
distance estimation (Cerezo et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2020)
and quantum matrix decomposition (Wang, Song, and Wang
2020). So far, most proposals for variational quantum classification process information in the global sense such that
the quantum circuit always acts on the whole Hilbert space
fulfilling high-dimensional transformation. And the classi-

Classification of quantum data is essential for quantum machine learning and near-term quantum technologies. In this
paper, we propose a new hybrid quantum-classical framework
for supervised quantum learning, which we call Variational
Shadow Quantum Learning (VSQL). Our method in particular utilizes the classical shadows of quantum data, which fundamentally represent the side information of quantum data
with respect to certain physical observables. Specifically, we
first use variational shadow quantum circuits to extract classical features in a convolution way and then utilize a fullyconnected neural network to complete the classification task.
We show that this method could sharply reduce the number
of parameters and thus better facilitate quantum circuit training. Simultaneously, less noise will be introduced since fewer
quantum gates are employed in such shadow circuits. Moreover, we show that the Barren Plateau issue, a significant gradient vanishing problem in quantum machine learning, could
be avoided in VSQL. Finally, we demonstrate the efficiency
of VSQL in quantum classification via numerical experiments
on the classification of quantum states and the recognition of
multi-labeled handwritten digits. In particular, our VSQL approach outperforms existing variational quantum classifiers
in the test accuracy in the binary case of handwritten digit
recognition and notably requires much fewer parameters.

Introduction
Quantum computers are expected to have significant applications in solving challenging problems in information processing. Inspired by the powerful capacity of classical supervised learning and its growing community (Lecun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016), it is natural to develop their quantum counterparts
and explore the emerging field of quantum machine learning (QML) (Biamonte et al. 2017; Schuld, Sinayskiy, and
Petruccione 2015; Ciliberto et al. 2018; Lloyd, Mohseni, and
Rebentrost 2013). Among many topics in this area, classification is one of the most important tasks, e.g., distinguishing
quantum states (Bae and Kwek 2015; Chen et al. 2018; Patterson et al. 2019) or recognizing classical data (Havlı́ček
et al. 2019; Benedetti et al. 2019; Schuld et al. 2020). Classification is usually described as a decision making process
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8357

