The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Simple is not Easy: A Simple Strong Baseline for TextVQA and TextCaps
Qi Zhu,1 Chenyu Gao,1 Peng Wang∗ ,1 Qi Wu2
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
University of Adelaide, Australia
{zhu qi happy ,chenyugao}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Texts appearing in daily scenes that can be recognized by
OCR (Optical Character Recognition) tools contain significant information, such as street name, product brand and
prices. Two tasks – text-based visual question answering and
text-based image captioning, with a text extension from existing vision-language applications, are catching on rapidly. To
address these problems, many sophisticated multi-modality
encoding frameworks (such as heterogeneous graph structure) are being used. In this paper, we argue that a simple
attention mechanism can do the same or even better job without any bells and whistles. Under this mechanism, we simply
split OCR token features into separate visual- and linguisticattention branches, and send them to a popular Transformer
decoder to generate answers or captions. Surprisingly, we find
this simple baseline model is rather strong – it consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) models on two popular
benchmarks, TextVQA and all three tasks of ST-VQA, although these SOTA models use far more complex encoding mechanisms. Transferring it to text-based image captioning, we also surpass the TextCaps Challenge 2020 winner. We wish this work to set the new baseline for these
two OCR text related applications and to inspire new thinking of multi-modality encoder design. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZephyrZhuQi/ssbaseline

TextVQA:

Q: what is the name of the store?
A: tellus mater inc.

TextCaps: a store front with the words tellus mater inc.
on it.

Figure 1: An example of TextVQA and TextCaps tasks. The
answer and description are generated by our model. Our
simple baseline is able to read texts and answer related questions. Besides, it can also observe the image and generate a
description with texts embedded in it.

Introduction
To automatically answer a question or generate a description for images that require scene text understanding and
reasoning has broad prospects for commercial applications,
such as assisted driving and online shopping. Equipped with
these abilities, a model can help drivers decide distance to
the next street or help customers get more details about a
product. Two kinds of tasks that focus on text in images have
recently been introduced, which are text-based visual question answering (TextVQA) (Singh et al. 2019; Biten et al.
2019) and text-based image captioning (TextCaps) (Sidorov
et al. 2020). For example, in Figure 1, a model is required to
answer a question or generate a description by reading and
reasoning the texts “tellus mater inc.” in the image. These
two tasks pose a challenge to current VQA or image captioning models as they explicitly require understanding of

a new modality – Optical Character Recognition (OCR). A
model must efficiently utilize text-related features to solve
these problems.
For TextVQA task, the current state-of-the-art model
M4C (Hu et al. 2019) handles all modalities (questions, visual objects and OCR tokens) over a joint embedding space.
Although this homogeneous method is easy to implement,
fast to train and has made great headway, it considers that
texts and visual objects contribute indiscriminately to this
problem and uses text features as a whole. For TextCaps
problem, the only difference is that it only has two modalities: visual objects and OCR tokens. However, these limitations remain.
Some other works proposed even more complex structures to encode and fuse multi-modality features of this
task, i.e., questions, OCR tokens and images. For example,

∗

Peng Wang is corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3608

