The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Integrating Static and Dynamic Data for Improved Prediction of Cognitive
Declines Using Augmented Genotype-Phenotype Representations
Hoon Seo1 , Lodewijk Brand1 , Hua Wang1 * , Feiping Nie2
1

Department of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, U.S.A.
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
seohoon@mymail.mines.edu, lbrand@mymail.mines.edu, huawangcs@gmail.com, feipingnie@gmail.com
2

Abstract

of AD to assist in the development of treatments that can be
used to provide relief for patients suffering from the disease.
Public-private partnerships such as the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (Petersen et al. 2010)
have provided a comprehensive dataset consisting of genetic (e.g., static) biomarkers, such as Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNPs), and neuroimaging (e.g., dynamic)
biomarkers derived from brain imaging modalities. Recent
algorithmic improvements (Wang et al. 2012d; Brand et al.
2020a) have shown promise in identifying AD from phenotypic changes. Although effective, they have modeled the
longitudinal biomarkers as tensors, which inevitably complicates the problem. Other recent works (Lu et al. 2018; Brand
et al. 2019), have leveraged longitudinal modalities to identify temporal relationships across the modalities. However,
these approaches can only utilize longitudinal data that is
consistent across all participants. This reliance on complete
data is a major limitation and well-known critique (Caruana
et al. 2015) of longitudinal studies. Thus, incorporating multimodal longitudinal data, especially when the participants
have incomplete records, is a critical challenge.
In this work, we propose a novel framework to predict the
cognitive outcomes of participants within the ADNI cohort.
The design of our objective function is motivated by the following four key points. First, we aim to handle the participants within the ADNI that contain a varying number brain
scans; we handle this through a per-participant application
of principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe 2011) which
is used to augment the most recent available data. Second,
we employ a multimodal factorization approach to combine
the dynamic and static modalities. Third, to guide the multimodal factorization, with any available labeled data, we
align the factorization task with a multitask regression to
predict the cognitive assessment scores of ADNI participants. Finally, we incorporate structured regularizations to
capture the inter-modality relationships across the dynamic
modalities and intra-modality relationships within the static
modalities. In summary, the primary contributions of this
work are:
• A dynamic-static augmentation approach that integrates
the most recent neuroimaging data to generate a fixedlength representation, which can be readily fed into
conventional machine learning models. This allows our

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative
disease that causes severe problems in patients’ thinking,
memory, and behavior. An early diagnosis is crucial to prevent AD progression; to this end, many algorithmic approaches have recently been proposed to predict cognitive
decline. However, these predictive models often fail to integrate heterogeneous genetic and neuroimaging biomarkers
and struggle to handle missing data. In this work we propose
a novel objective function and an associated optimization algorithm to identify cognitive decline related to AD. Our approach is designed to incorporate dynamic neuroimaging data
by way of a participant-specific augmentation combined with
multimodal data integration aligned via a regression task. Our
approach, in order to incorporate additional side-information,
utilizes structured regularization techniques popularized in
recent AD literature. Armed with the fixed-length vector representation learned from the multimodal dynamic and static
modalities, conventional machine learning methods can be
used to predict the clinical outcomes associated with AD.
Our experimental results show that the proposed augmentation model improves the prediction performance on cognitive
assessment scores for a collection of popular machine learning algorithms. The results of our approach are interpreted to
validate existing genetic and neuroimaging biomarkers that
have been shown to be predictive of cognitive decline.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a serious neurodegenerative
condition that destroys brain cells and causes progressive
decline in the behavioral and social skills necessary for independent function. A 2017 report (World Health Organization 2017) from the World Health Organization (WHO)
estimates that 47 million people suffered from some form of
dementia, of which approximately 60-70% is caused by AD.
The WHO projects that by 2030, the number of individuals
suffering from AD-related dementia will increase to 75 million people. In order to combat this public health crisis it is
important that the greater research community develop tools
that can (1) predict the cognitive decline in it’s early stage to
prevent the progression of AD and (2) identify risk factors
* To whom all correspondence should be addressed.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

522

