The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Defence by Diversified Simultaneous Training of Deep Ensembles
Bo Huang1 * , Zhiwei Ke1,2 ∗ , Yi Wang1 † , Wei Wang3 , Linlin Shen2,4 , Feng Liu2
1

Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, China
Computer Vision Institute, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
4
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Society
huangbo1024@gmail.com, kezhiwei2018@email.szu.edu.cn,
wangyi@dgut.edu.cn, weiw@unsw.edu.au, {llshen, fengliu}@szu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the target information but attempting attacks by either transferrable examples built on a surrogate (Demontis et al. 2019)
(a.k.a. transfer-based attacks) or probing decision boundaries via numeral classification queries (Brendel, Rauber,
and Bethge 2018). Thus, a main paradigm of defence is to
prevent the gathering of useful information (e.g., the loss
gradients) from generating adversarial examples (Athalye,
Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017).
Existing defence methods mainly focus on improving the
performance of individual models where there is often an
inherent trade-off between classification accuracy and adversarial robustness (Su et al. 2018). Defences deployed on
a single model are often circumvented by adaptive attacks
in the white-box setting. In such circumstances, the defence
mechanism itself can be exploited to launch more intelligent attacks under only restrictions of the threat model. For
instance, (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018) proposed to
overcome the defence of randomization by introducing Expectation Over Transformation (EOT) and that of gradient
shattering by Backward Pass Differentiable Approximation.
By contrast, it is intuitively more difficult to compromise
an ensemble of models rather than a single one. Ensemble
models are widely used to improve model generalizability
over the prediction accuracy. In many cases, DNNs are no
longer weak classifiers and thus the conventional ensemble
methods are no longer effective. Recently, deep ensembles
are studied for predictive uncertainties (Lakshminarayanan,
Pritzel, and Blundell 2017) and against network deceptions
(Liu et al. 2019; Pang et al. 2019; Zhang, Cheng, and Hsieh
2019). In particular, (Pang et al. 2019) proposed a so-called
ADP training to improve adversarial robustness of deep ensembles by facilitating the output diversity on non-maximal
predictive scores of the base models over those less-likely
class labels. The gain of adversarial robustness, however, diminishes quickly when the dataset has increased class labels
or more complex data scenes. The other limitation of this
approach is that the resulting ensemble model is still fairly
vulnerable to strong attacks 1 .
In this paper, we promote ensemble diversity on highlevel feature representation learning. It was shown that fea-

Learning-based classifiers are susceptible to adversarial examples. Existing defence methods are mostly devised on individual classifiers. Recent studies showed that it is viable to
increase adversarial robustness by promoting diversity over
an ensemble of models. In this paper, we propose adversarial defence by encouraging ensemble diversity on learning high-level feature representations and gradient dispersion in simultaneous training of deep ensemble networks. We
perform extensive evaluations under white-box and blackbox attacks including transferred examples and adaptive attacks. Our approach achieves a significant gain of up to
52% in adversarial robustness, compared with the baseline
and the state-of-the-art method on image benchmarks with
complex data scenes. The proposed approach complements
the defence paradigm of adversarial training, and can further boost the performance. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ALIS-Lab/AAAI2021-PDD.

Introduction
In many security applications, learning-based classifiers are
posed in an adversarial environment and susceptible to intelligent attackers (Biggio et al. 2013; Dalvi et al. 2004; Kurakin et al. 2018). In particular, adversarial examples can be
generated by adversarial learning of image perturbations that
are imperceptible to human eyes (Carlini and Wagner 2017b;
Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Kurakin et al. 2018). Such adversarial examples can induce wrong decisions by systems and often not easily detected (Carlini and Wagner 2017a) nor prevented (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018).
Depending on adversarial knowledge, the attack scenarios
can be roughly classified into two categories of white-box
and black-box accesses. In the white-box setting, an attacker
can access target model details, typically the loss function,
to build adversarial examples via gradient descent (Carlini
and Wagner 2017b; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
In the black-box setting, an attacker cannot directly access
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author (OrcID: 0000-0002-8448-8570)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1

7823

c.f., Tables 2 and 3

