The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Efficient Selection of Activity Trajectories Based on Diversity and
Coverage
Chengcheng Yang1 , Lisi Chen2 , Hao Wang∗3 , Shuo Shang∗2
1

East China Normal University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
ychengc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chenlisi.cs, haowang.paper, jedi.shang}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

activity patterns based on data visualization functions. They
would prefer receiving a small set of representative trajectories rather than being overwhelmed by a great many ones.
Based on above applications, we consider the problem
of Diversity-aware Activity Trajectory Selection (DaATS),
which aims to select a small set (denoted as k) of representative and diverse trajectories from the region that satisfies
user-specified conditions. The trajectories in the result set
are dissimilar to each other and should cover a maximum
number of other ones that locate in the region. Result diversification has been considered as a good way to increase
users’ satisfaction in web search and recommendation systems [Vee et al. 2008; He et al. 2012; Ashkan et al. 2015;
Parambath, Usunier, and Grandvalet 2016]. However, most
of previous approaches pick objects based on scoring functions that are designed specifically for the underlying applications, and therefore do not apply to the DaATS problem.
In this paper, we propose to address diversity and coverage
in the perspective of similarity threshold. We consider two
trajectories τ1 and τ2 to be dissimilar if their similarity is
lower than a threshold θ. On the contrary, τ1 covers τ2 (and
vice versa) if their similarity exceeds θ.
Solving the DaATS problem faces two challenges. The
first is the high computation cost of trajectory similarity. Existing similarity measures [Shang et al. 2017; Chen et al.
2020] usually utilize a scan-and-align method to match the
sampled points in two trajectories, which incurs quadratic
time complexity. The second challenge is the efficiency of
the subset selection. One naive idea is to enumerate all their
subsets of size k and take the subset with maximum coverage as the result. However, there is a huge number of subsets
and it is prohibitively expensive to exhaustively compute the
coverage of each subset.
In this paper, we present a novel solution for the DaATS
problem. To address the first challenge, we leverage deep
metric learning to embed arbitrary-length trajectories into
fixed-size vectors, which is capable of computing the similarity in linear time complexity. We propose to adopt the
bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTM) with mean-pooling and
inter-trajectory attention (ITA) module to produce highquality embeddings. Specifically, the BiLSTM structure
captures the dependencies between adjacent points in each
trajectory. The ITA module utilizes the memory network,
trajectory clustering and attention mechanisms to acquire

With the prevalence of location based services, activity trajectories are being generated at a rapid pace. The activity trajectory data enriches traditional trajectory data with semantic
activities of users, which not only shows where the users have
been, but also the preference of users. However, the large volume of data is expensive for people to explore. To address
this issue, we study the problem of Diversity-aware Activity Trajectory Selection (DaATS). Given a region of interest
for a user, it finds a small number of representative activity
trajectories that can provide the user with a broad coverage
of different aspects of the region. The problem is challenging in both the efficiency of trajectory similarity computation
and subset selection. To tackle the two challenges, we propose a novel solution by: (1) exploiting a deep metric learning
method to speedup the similarity computation; and (2) proving that DaATS is an NP-hard problem, and developing an
efficient approximation algorithm with performance guarantees. Experiments on two real-world datasets show that our
proposal significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Numerous applications continuously generate massive
amounts of activity trajectory data [Zheng 2015; Zhang et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2020], which augments traditional trajectory data with “activity” features. In this kind of data, each
location point is associated with a keyword that semantically describes the venue of a performed activity, e.g., shop,
restaurant, bank. From activity trajectory data, we can know
not only where users have been, but also the main preferences of users by looking over the semantic descriptions.
However, the availability of such large scale data makes
the information prohibitively expensive to explore. In many
real-world applications, it is of great significance to provide
support for users to perform data exploration on their interested regions. For instance, users would like to browse a
small number of representative tourist routes when planning
trips to some tourism attractions.
Another example is the online map system [Ward, Grinstein, and Keim 2010]. For specified geographical area,
users want to get intuitive information on various type of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Hao Wang and Shuo Shang are corresponding authors.

689

