The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HARGAN: Heterogeneous Argument Attention Network for
Persuasiveness Prediction
Kuo-Yu Huang1 , Hen-Hsen Huang2,3 , Hsin-Hsi Chen1,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
kyhuang@nlg.csie.ntu.edu.tw, hhhuang@nccu.edu.tw, hhchen@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract

sider the sentence-level attention between the paragraphs in
the original post and in the root reply. However, their model
limits the argumentation process into a single turn so that
it cannot deal with multi-turn debates. Hidey and McKeown
(2018) and Zeng et al. (2020) use the attention mechanism to
encode paragraph-level information. We point out that none
of these models consider the sentence-level relation across
several paragraphs in the conversation data and these models might only encode local information. To consider the
sentence-level attention across whole the conversation, argument structure, which is a tree structure defining the relation among claims and premise, is used in our model. In
summary, our model leverages the information of argument
structure to predict the persuasiveness in the conversation.
This paper presents a new graph neural network (GNN)
based model called Heterogeneous Argument Attention
Network (HARGAN) that jointly learns persuasiveness prediction and stance prediction in multi-turn conversation. The
advantage of our model is that it utilizes a GNN module to
exploit argument structure information. The argument structure is a tree structure defining the relation among argumentative discourse units (ADUs). In argument mining, an ADU,
an elementary unit expressing a point, might be a claim or a
premise. Participants in the debate often use claims/premises
to support their viewpoints or attack other’s viewpoints, thus
the argument structure reveals the structure of a debate.
Since an argument structure constitutes a tree, which is a
special kind of graph, it can be modeled with a GNN that
learns the relation between nodes in a graph. In addition, by
using stance prediction as an auxiliary task, our model can
better recognize the stance of each anonymous online user
and make better decisions. Experimental results show that
our methodology achieves the state-of-the-art performance
in persuasiveness prediction on the ChangeMyView dataset.
Our contributions are threefold listed as follows:

Argument structure elaborates the relation among claims and
premises. Previous works in persuasiveness prediction seldom consider this relation in their architectures. To take argument structure information into account, this paper proposes
an approach to persuasiveness prediction with a novel graphbased neural network model, called heterogeneous argument
attention network (HARGAN). By jointly training on the persuasiveness and stance of the replies, our model achieves the
state-of-the-art performance on the ChangeMyView (CMV)
dataset for the persuasiveness prediction task. Experimental
results show that the graph setting enables our model to aggregate information across multiple paragraphs effectively. In
the meanwhile, our stance prediction auxiliary task enables
our model to identify the viewpoint of each party, and helps
our model perform better on the persuasiveness prediction.

Introduction
Argument mining is an attractive topic where nearly
all aspects of natural language processing tasks are explored, including sequence labeling (argumentative discourse unit detection), structure parsing (argument structure parsing), knowledge retrieval (claim/premise retrieval),
paragraph generation (argument generation), and text classification (persuasiveness prediction). Although the above
tasks seem very different, they all share an ultimate goal—
persuasiveness. For example, the main purpose behind the
claim/premise retrieval is to find a persuasive resource. The
goal of argument generation is to generate more persuasive text. A model for persuasiveness prediction cannot only
measure the persuasiveness, but also serve as an auxiliary
task for other tasks in the argument mining. However, the
state-of-the-art persuasiveness prediction model still leaves
much room to be improved.
Several research has been conducted on persuasiveness
prediction. Tan et al. (2016) use a set of handcrafted features
to predict persuasiveness. Toledo et al. (2019) and Gleize
et al. (2019) predict persuasiveness in a single sentence.
However, the argumentation process in real world is usually
involved with more than one sentence. The relation among
multiple sentences should be a more important factor that affects persuasiveness. Jo et al. (2018) and Ji et al. (2018) con-

• We propose a novel hierarchical graph setting to represent
argument structure and show the advantage of incorporating the argument structure into persuasiveness prediction.
• We introduce the stance prediction as an auxiliary task to
help our model recognize the viewpoint of each party.
• We showcase our idea with a system that parses the argument structure from raw data and then leverages its information to predict the persuasiveness.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13045

