The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Maximum Roaming Multi-Task Learning
Lucas Pascal,1,2 Pietro Michiardi,1 Xavier Bost,2 Benoit Huet,3 Maria A. Zuluaga 1
1

EURECOM, France
2
Orkis, France
3
Median Technologies, France
{Pascal, Michiardi, Zuluaga}@eurecom.fr, Xbost@orkis.com, Benoit.Huet@mediantechnologies.com

Abstract
Multi-task learning has gained popularity due to the advantages it provides with respect to resource usage and performance. Nonetheless, the joint optimization of parameters with
respect to multiple tasks remains an active research topic. Subpartitioning the parameters between different tasks has proven
to be an efficient way to relax the optimization constraints
over the shared weights, may the partitions be disjoint or overlapping. However, one drawback of this approach is that it can
weaken the inductive bias generally set up by the joint task optimization. In this work, we present a novel way to partition the
parameter space without weakening the inductive bias. Specifically, we propose Maximum Roaming, a method inspired by
dropout that randomly varies the parameter partitioning, while
forcing them to visit as many tasks as possible at a regulated
frequency, so that the network fully adapts to each update. We
study the properties of our method through experiments on
a variety of visual multi-task data sets. Experimental results
suggest that the regularization brought by roaming has more
impact on performance than usual partitioning optimization
strategies. The overall method is flexible, easily applicable,
provides superior regularization and consistently achieves improved performances compared to recent multi-task learning
formulations.

Figure 1: Maximum Roaming task partitions update process
illustrated for two tasks in a layer containing 10 parameters.
The partitions are initialized with a sharing ratio p = 0.6.
After four update steps, every parameter has been used by
both the tasks for at least ∆ iterations.

the plurality of tasks optimizing the same set of parameters
can lead to cases where the improvement imposed by one
task is to the detriment of another task. This phenomenon is
called task interference, and can be explained by the fact that
different tasks need a certain degree of specificity in their
representation to avoid under-fitting.
To address this problem, several works have proposed to
enlarge deep networks with task specific parameters (Gao
et al. 2019; He et al. 2017; Kokkinos 2017; Liu, Johns, and
Davison 2019; Lu et al. 2017; Misra et al. 2016; Mordan
et al. 2018), giving tasks more room for specialization, and
thus achieving better results. Other works adopt architectural
adaptations to fit a specific set of tasks (Xu et al. 2018; Zhang,
Wei, and Yang 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Vandenhende, Georgoulis, and Van Gool 2020). These approaches, however, do
not solve the problem of task interference in the shared portions of the networks. Furthermore, they generally do not
scale well with the number of tasks. A more recent stream of
works address task interference by constructing task-specific
partitioning of the parameters (Bragman et al. 2019; Maninis, Radosavovic, and Kokkinos 2019; Strezoski, Noord, and

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) consists in jointly learning different tasks, rather than treating them individually, to improve
generalization performance. This is done by training tasks
while using a shared representation (Caruana 1997). This
approach has gained much popularity in recent years with the
breakthrough of deep networks in many vision tasks. Deep
networks are quite demanding in terms of data, memory and
speed, thus making sharing strategies between tasks attractive.
MTL exploits the plurality of the domain-specific information contained in training signals issued from different
related tasks. The plurality of signals serves as an inductive
bias (Baxter 2000) and has a regularizing effect during training, similar to the one observed in transfer learning (Yosinski
et al. 2014). This allows us to build task-specific models
that generalize better within their specific domains. However,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9331

