The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Expected Value of Communication
for Planning in Ad Hoc Teamworks
William Macke,1 Reuth Mirsky, 1 Peter Stone 1,2
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Sony AI
{wmacke,reuth,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

the goals and plans of the ego agent. Inferring these goals
is not trivial, as the teammates may not provide any information about their policies, and the execution of their plan
might be ambiguous. Hence, it is up to the ego agent to disambiguate between potential goals. The first contribution of
this paper is a metric to evaluate ambiguity between two
potential teammate policies by quantifying the number of
steps a teammate will take (in expectation) until it executes
an action that is consistent with only one of the two policies.
We show how this EDP metric can be computed in practice
using a Bellman update.
In addition to applying a reasoning process to independently infer the goal of its teammate, the ego agent can also
directly communicate with that teammate to gain information faster than it would get by just observing. However, if
such a communication channel is available, it can come with
a cost, and the ego agent should appropriately decide when
and what to communicate. For example, if the previously described medical robot can fetch different tools for a physician in a hospital, the physician would generally prefer to
avoid the additional cognitive load of communicating with
the robot, but may be willing to answer an occasional question so that it can be a better collaborator. We refer to this
setting where the ego agent can leverage communication to
collaborate with little to no knowledge about its teammate as
Communication in Ad hoc Teamwork, or CAT (Mirsky et al.
2020). The second contribution of this paper is using EDP in
a novel planning algorithm for ad hoc teamwork that reasons about the value of querying and chooses when and what
to query about in the presence of previously unmet teammates.
Lastly, this paper presents empirical results showing the
performance of the new EDP-based algorithm in these complex settings, showing that it outperforms existing heuristics in terms of total number of steps required for the team
to reach its goal. Moreover, the additional computations required of the EDP-based algorithm can mostly take place
prior to the execution, and hence its online execution time
does not differ significantly from simpler heuristics.

A desirable goal for autonomous agents is to be able
to coordinate on the fly with previously unknown teammates. Known as “ad hoc teamwork”, enabling such a
capability has been receiving increasing attention in the
research community. One of the central challenges in ad
hoc teamwork is quickly recognizing the current plans
of other agents and planning accordingly. In this paper,
we focus on the scenario in which teammates can communicate with one another, but only at a cost. Thus, they
must carefully balance plan recognition based on observations vs. that based on communication.
This paper proposes a new metric for evaluating how
similar are two policies that a teammate may be following - the Expected Divergence Point (EDP). We then
present a novel planning algorithm for ad hoc teamwork, determining which query to ask and planning accordingly. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this algorithm in a range of increasingly general communication in ad hoc teamwork problems.

Introduction
Modern autonomous agents are often required to solve complex tasks in challenging settings, and to do so as part of
a team. For example, service robots have been deployed
in hospitals to assist medical teams in the recent pandemic
outbreak. The coordination strategy of such robots cannot
always be fixed a priori, as it may involve previously unmet teammates that can have a variety of behaviors. These
robots will only be effective if they are able to work together with other teammates without the need for coordination strategies provided in advance (Cakmak and Thomaz
2012). This motivation is the basis for ad hoc teamwork,
which is defined from the perspective of a single agent,
the Ego Agent1 , that needs to collaborate with teammates
without any pre-coordination (Stone et al. 2010; Albrecht
and Stone 2018). Without pre-coordination, only very limited knowledge about any teammate, such as that they have
limited rationality or what their potential goals are, is available. An important capability of ad hoc teamwork is plan
recognition of teammates, as their goals and plans can affect

Related Work
There is a vast literature on reasoning about teammates
with unknown goals (Fern et al. 2007; Albrecht and Stone
2018) and on communication between artificial agents (Co-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Also referred to as the Ad Hoc Agent

11290

