The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Model Adaptation for Continual Semantic Segmentation
Serban Stan,1 Mohammad Rostami 1,2
1

University of Southern California
2
Information Sciences Institute
sstan@usc.edu, rostamim@usc.edu

Abstract

image of the current benchmark datasets (Cordts et al. 2016;
Rostami, Huber, and Lu 2018). A practical alternative is to
adapt the trained model using only unannotated data.
The problem of model adaptation for image segmentation
has been studied extensively in the unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) framework. The goal in UDA is to train
a model for an unannotated target domain by transferring
knowledge from a secondary related source domain in which
annotated data is accessible or easier to generate, e.g., a
synthetically generated domain. Knowledge transfer can be
achieved by extracting domain-invariant features from the
source and the target domains to address domain discrepancy.
As a result, if we train a classifier using the source domain
features as its input, the classifier will generalize on the target
domain since the distributions of features are indistinguishable. Distributional alignment can be achieved by matching
the distributions at different levels of abstraction, including
appearance (Hoffman et al. 2018a; Sankaranarayanan et al.
2018), feature (Hoffman et al. 2018a; Murez et al. 2018),
output (Zhang, David, and Gong 2017) levels.
A large group of the existing UDA algorithms for image
segmentation use adversarial learning for extracting domaininvariant features (Luc et al. 2016; Bousmalis et al. 2017;
Hoffman et al. 2018b; Murez et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018;
Sankaranarayanan et al. 2018; Dhouib, Redko, and Lartizien
2020). Broadly speaking, a domain discriminator network can
be trained to distinguish whether an input data point comes
from the source or the target domain. This network is fooled
by a feature generator network which is trained to make the
domains similar at its output. Adversarial training (Goodfellow et al. 2014) of these two networks leads to learning a
domain-agnostic embedding space. A second class of UDA
algorithms directly minimize suitable loss functions that enforce domain alignment (Wu et al. 2018; Zhang, David, and
Gong 2017; Gabourie et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Lee et al.
2019; Yang and Soatto 2020). Adversarial learning requires
delicate optimization initialization, architecture engineering,
and careful selection of hyper-parameters to be stable (Roth
et al. 2017). In contrast, defining a suitable loss function for
direct domain alignment may not be trivial.
A major limitation of existing UDA algorithms is that
domain alignment can be performed only if the source and
the target domain data are accessible concurrently. However,
the source annotated data may not be necessarily accessible

We develop an algorithm for adapting a semantic segmentation
model that is trained using a labeled source domain to generalize well in an unlabeled target domain. A similar problem
has been studied extensively in the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) literature, but existing UDA algorithms require
access to both the source domain labeled data and the target
domain unlabeled data for training a domain agnostic semantic
segmentation model. Relaxing this constraint enables a user
to adapt pretrained models to generalize in a target domain,
without requiring access to source data. To this end, we learn a
prototypical distribution for the source domain in an intermediate embedding space. This distribution encodes the abstract
knowledge that is learned from the source domain. We then
use this distribution for aligning the target domain distribution
with the source domain distribution in the embedding space.
We provide theoretical analysis and explain conditions under
which our algorithm is effective. Experiments on benchmark
adaptation tasks demonstrate our method achieves competitive
performance even compared with joint UDA approaches.

Introduction
Image segmentation is an essential computer vision ability for delivering technologies such as autonomous driving (Zhang, Fidler, and Urtasun 2016) and automatic object
tracking (Wang et al. 2019). Advances in deep learning have
led to the development of image segmentation algorithms
with close to human-level performance (Zeng, Wu, and Ji
2017). However, this success is conditioned on the availability of large and high-quality manually annotated datasets to
satisfy the required sample complexity bounds for training
deep neural networks. As a result, data annotation is a major
bottleneck to address the problem of domain shift, where domain discrepancy exists between the distributions of training
and testing domains (Luo et al. 2019) and the trained model
needs to be adapted to generalize again after being fielded.
This is particularly important in continual learning, where
the goal is to enable a learning agent to learn new domains
autonomously. Retraining the model from scratch is not a
feasible solution for continual learning because manual data
annotation is an expensive and time-consuming process for
image segmentation, e.g., as much as 1.5 hours for a single
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2593

