The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Single View Point Cloud Generation via Unified 3D Prototype
Yu Lin, Yigong Wang, Yi-fan Li, Zhuoyi Wang, Yang Gao, Latifur Khan
The University of Texas at Dallas, USA
yxl163430, yxw158830, yli, zxw151030, yxg122530, lkhan@utdallas.edu

Abstract
As 3D point clouds become the representation of choice
for multiple vision and graphics applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics, etc., the generation of them by
deep neural networks has attracted increasing attention in
the research community. Despite the recent success of deep
learning models in classification and segmentation, synthesizing point clouds remains challenging, especially from a
single image. State-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches can generate a point cloud from a hidden vector, however, they treat
2D and 3D features equally and disregard the rich shape information within the 3D data. In this paper, we address this
problem by integrating image features with 3D prototype features. Specifically, we propose to learn a set of 3D prototype
features from a real point cloud dataset and dynamically adjust them through the training. These prototypes are then integrated with incoming image features to guide the point cloud
generation process. Experimental results show that our proposed method outperforms SOTA methods on single image
based 3D reconstruction tasks.

Figure 1: The intuition of our framework: Combining 2D
image feature and 3D prototype knowledges.

et al. 2016) utilizes a 3D LSTM to generate the voxel representation, given one or multiple views of an object. HoloGAN (Nguyen-Phuoc et al. 2019) separates the shape and
appearance of an object, then generate its 2D projection
from an unseen angle. Despite such great success, these approaches mainly focus on the regularly sampled data, which
limits their usage in practice.
As a flexible and powerful representation, the point cloud
receives more and more attention from the research community. For instance, PointSetNet (Fan, Su, and Guibas 2017)
generates a point cloud from one image, with the help from
a two-branch network architecture and MoN loss function.
FoldingNet (Yang et al. 2018) is proposed to reconstruct a
point set by deforming a canonical 2D grid onto the underlying 3D object surface. Furthermore, AtlasNet (Groueix et al.
2018) takes one more step in this direction, which deforms
multiple 2D configurations onto the target surface. Although
significant progresses has been made, previous methods either focus on the self-reconstruction task tremendously, or
overlook the handy shape information concealed in the point
clouds themselves.
Motivated by these aforementioned limitations and recent advances of the 3D shape representation learning, we
believe that model performance could be significantly improved using the strong shape prior introduced by a point
cloud dataset.
In this paper, we focus on designing a novel architec-

Introduction
Fueled by recent development in 3D acquisitions, 3D sensors are becoming increasingly available in various applications, such as LiDARs and RGB-D cameras. In contrast to a
simple RGB image, 3D data offers much richer geometric,
shape, and scale information, which is proven advantageous
for numerous applications. Among the 3D data representations, point clouds are becoming more and more popular as
they can capture a much higher resolution than the voxel
grids, and show more sophisticated representations such as
meshes. It would be extremely valuable if we can construct
a point cloud merely from one single image. For instance,
since 3D sensors are still much more extravagant comparing
to traditional cameras, generating point clouds from RGB
images can significantly reduce the data acquisition budget. Also, self-driving may benefit from this technique since
complete 3D shapes can provide more information regarding
surroundings of the object.
Numerous methods have been proposed to solve this 3D
representation synthesis task. For example, 3D-R2N2 (Choy
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2064

