The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving the Efficiency and Effectiveness for BERT-based Entity Resolution
Bing Li1 , Yukai Miao1 , Yaoshu Wang2 , Yifang Sun3 , Wei Wang4,1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
2
Shenzhen Institute of Computing Sciences, Shenzhen University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
4
Dongguan University of Technology, China
{bing.li, yukai.miao, weiw}@unsw.edu.au, sunyifang@cse.neu.edu.cn, yaoshuw@sics.ac.cn
Google Products
ID
TITLE
587 microsoft word 2007 version upgrade
1213 money home&business 2007 win32

Abstract
BERT has set a new state-of-the-art performance on entity resolution (ER) task, largely owed to fine-tuning pretrained language models and the deep pair-wise interaction.
Albeit being remarkably effective, it comes with a steep increase in computational cost, as the deep-interaction requires
to exhaustively compute every tuple pair to search for coreferences. For ER task, it is often prohibitively expensive
due to the large cardinality to be matched. To tackle this,
we introduce a siamese network structure that independently
encodes tuples using BERT but delays the pair-wise interaction via an enhanced alignment network. This siamese structure enables a dedicated blocking module to quickly filter out
obviously dissimilar tuple pairs, and thus drastically reduces
the cardinality of fine-grained matching. Further, the blocking
and entity matching are integrated into a multi-task learning
framework for facilitating both tasks. Extensive experiments
on multiple datasets demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art models (including BERT) in
both efficiency and effectiveness.

√×√

MANUFACTURER
microsoft
microsoft

PRICE
109.95
139.43

Amazon Products
ID
TITLE
MANUFACTURER
2837 money 2007 home and business (pc)
microsoft
2816 microsoft word 2007 upgrade (pc)

PRICE
89.99
109.95

Figure 1: An example of entity resolution: identifying coreferent tuples from two tables.

ly, encode each individual tuple (or attribute) into a semantic representation using deep neural networks (e.g., RNN,
LSTM, and GCN); then, make an interaction by comparing the representations of two tuples via similarity functions
(e.g., cosine, dot-product) or learnable classifiers (e.g., MLP,
SVM) to make final ER decision.
Recently, deep pre-trained language models, e.g., ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019),
are promoting fast-paced advances for many NLP tasks,
of course, no exception for entity resolution: BERT gains significant improvements and has set new state-of-the-art
performances on many ER benchmarks. In contrast to the
shallow and asynchronous interaction of the prior DL-based
models, BERT makes a deep and synchronous interaction:
the representation and interaction are performed simultaneously on a packed tuple pair (instead of on an individual
tuple) to yield deeply-contextualized cross-encodings of the
two input tuples. The deep-interaction is more effective in
bridging the pervasive vocabulary mismatch (Khattab and
Zaharia 2020), and accounts for its superior performances.
Despite being remarkably effective, such a deepinteraction comes with a poor scalability that become a
formidable impediment for applying BERT in real ER scenario. This is mainly caused by the quadratic searching
space as the deep-interaction requires to be fed with every tuple pairs. Even worse, it cannot integrate blocking
techniques (e.g., product quantization (Ge et al. 2013), local sensitive hash (LSH) (Ebraheem et al. 2018)) to effectively reduce the search space, since there is no representation for individual tuple on which the blocking relies. Thus,
BERT has to exhaustively search all quadratic pairs for coreferences, which is prohibitively expensive due to the large
cardinality. To tackle this problem, some attempts (Reimer-

Introduction
The task of entity resolution aims at identifying co-referent
tuples that refer to the same real-world entity from different
data sources. Consider the two tables in Fig. 1, each table is a
set of tuples about products gathered from Google and Amazon, respectively. Entity resolution identifies pairs of tuples
that refer to the same product, e.g., tuples 587 from Google
and 2816 from Amazon are identified as a co-reference, and
the same goes for tuples 1213 and 2837.
As a fundamental essence for data cleaning and data integration (Dong and Srivastava 2013), entity resolution has
been widely applied in knowledge graph construction (Chen
et al. 2015), e-commerce (Gokhale et al. 2014), etc. It has
been extensively studied by means of various methodologies such as declarative rules (Hernández and Stolfo 1995),
crowd-sourcing (Wang et al. 2012), and machine learning (Faruqui et al. 2015). Over the past few years, deep
learning (DL) based ER models (Mudgal et al. 2018; Fu
et al. 2019) have become the de-facto standard. They typically present a representation-then-interaction scheme: first∗

W. Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13226

