The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Extreme k-Center Clustering
MohammadHossein Bateni,1 Hossein Esfandiari,1 Manuela Fischer,2 Vahab Mirrokni1
1

Google Research, NYC, New York, USA
2
ETH, Zurich, Switzerland
bateni@google.com, esfandiari@google.com, manuela.fischer@inf.ethz.ch, mirrokni@google.com

paper, we will slightly abuse the notation by using C ∈ C not
only for the center but also for the corresponding cluster. The
cluster of a center is a subset of V consisting of the center
as well as all the points that have this center as their closest
center.
We aim to select centers such that any point is close to
at least one center. This can be seen as compressing n data
points into k points.

Abstract
Metric clustering is a fundamental primitive in machine learning with several applications for mining massive datasets. An
important example of metric clustering is the k-center problem. While this problem has been extensively studied in distributed settings, all previous algorithms use Ω(k) space per
machine and Ω(nk) total work. In this paper, we develop the
first highly scalable approximation algorithm for k-center clusO(nε ) space per machine and e
O(n1+ ) total work,
tering, with e
for arbitrary small constant ε. It produces an O(log log log n)approximate solution with k(1+o(1)) centers in O(log log n)
rounds of computation.

1

Approximation Algorithms: The k-center problem is NPhard (Gonzalez 1985), hence the quest for approximation
algorithms. A set S ⊆ V of size k is an α-approximate solution if the maximum distance of any point in V to a point
in S is at most α OPT. Gonzalez (1985) shows that a simple
O(kn)-time greedy algorithm produces a 2-approximate solution, which is best possible unless P = NP. The running
time of this algorithm, however, might be prohibitively slow.

Introduction

Designing scalable algorithms has become increasingly critical in the new era of massive datasets. Many of the classic
efficient algorithms developed over decades are not effective
anymore in handling very large datasets. For example, the
simplest sequential greedy algorithms fail to work when they
need to make millions of iterations over billions of data points.
It is inevitable to resort to distributed algorithms. These, however, often come with a slightly worse solution quality. The
design of scalable algorithms is all about balancing the feasibility of running the algorithm versus the accuracy of the
solution. The two main dimensions to scale an algorithm are
to improve its total work, or to distribute the work among
several machines.
In this paper, we develop scalable approximation algorithms for metric clustering, where the high-level goal is to
identify k groups for given data points based on their proximity in a metric space. The k-center problem is an important
and well-studied formulation for metric clustering (Gonzalez
1985).

Scalable Distributed Algorithms: Recent work has focused on developing distributed approximation algorithms,
in particular in the Massively Parallel Computation (MPC)
model. Although inspired by MapReduce (Dean and Ghemawat 2008), this model is also relevant for other distributed
computation frameworks, e.g., Spark, Hadoop, Pregel, and
Giraph. The aim is to design distributed algorithms that employ machines with sublinear space, and also run in a sublinear (and hopefully sublogarithmic) number of rounds of
computation. In addition to round and memory complexity,
this model takes into account the total work (including total
communication) as an important factor for the quality of the
algorithm.
In the MPC model, initially, Ene, Im, and Moseley (2011)
presented a constant-round
10-approximation algorithm for k√
center with Ω( nε k 2 ) space per machine. Later, Malkomes
et al. (2015) gave
√ a two-round 4-approximation MPC algorithm with O( nk) space per machine and O(nk) total
work. Very recently in a surprising work, Ceccarello, Pietracaprina, and Pucci (2018) improved this result to a two-round
(2 + ε)-approximation MPC algorithm for the k-center prob√
d 
lem using O nk 4ε
space per machine and O(nk) total
work, where d indicates the dimension of the Euclidean space.
Indeed, this result is useful for low-dimensional spaces.

Problem Statement: In this problem, we are given a parameter k ≥ 1 and a set V of n points in a metric space. The
goal is to find a subset S ⊆ V of size k, called centers, such
that the maximum distance of any point in V to S is minimized. This maximum distance (or radius) is called the value
or the cost of the solution. Let OPT denote the optimal cost
and C be a corresponding set of k centers. Throughout the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3941

