The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Model Uncertainty Guides Visual Object Tracking∗
Lijun Zhou1,2,3,4 , Antoine Ledent4 , Qintao Hu2,3 , Ting Liu1† , Jianlin Zhang2† , Marius Kloft4
1

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
{zhoulijun16,huqintao16}@mails.ucas.edu.cn, {ledent,kloft}@cs.uni-kl.de, brooks.lt@alibaba-inc.com, jlin@ioe.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Wrong
Sample

Model object trackers largely rely on the online learning of
a discriminative classifier from potentially diverse sample
frames. However, noisy or insufficient amounts of samples
can deteriorate the classifiers’ performance and cause tracking drift. Furthermore, alterations such as occlusion and blurring can cause the target to be lost. In this paper, we make
several improvements aimed at tackling uncertainty and improving robustness in object tracking. Our first and most important contribution is to propose a sampling method for the
online learning of object trackers based on uncertainty adjustment: our method effectively selects representative sample frames to feed the discriminative branch of the tracker,
while filtering out noise samples. Furthermore, to improve
the robustness of the tracker to various challenging scenarios, we propose a novel data augmentation procedure, together with a specific improved backbone architecture. All
our improvements fit together in one model, which we refer to as the Uncertainty Adjusted Tracker (UATracker), and
can be trained in a joint and end-to-end fashion. Experiments
on the LaSOT, UAV123, OTB100 and VOT2018 benchmarks
demonstrate that our UATracker outperforms state-of-the-art
real-time trackers by significant margins.1

10

25

40

Frames

55

70

10

25

40

Frames

55

70

Figure 1: Illustrative comparison of the sample selection
strategies by the state-of-the-art Dimp50 (left) and our proposed UATracker (right). The y axis is the feature dimension, which represents (a feature representation of) the image frames. The samples’ colours represent the time intervals they belong to. The dashed line circles represent which
frames are chosen by the tracker to be fed into the online
learner. On the right, samples marked with black are selected.
Thus, the success of a tracker heavily depends on the design
of a sensible strategy to select the most relevant frames.
Many classical trackers are based on correlation filters (Danelljan et al. 2015; Henriques et al. 2015; Danelljan
et al. 2016, 2017; Liu, Wang, and Yang 2015) and update the
learning model based on the previous frame. On the other
hand, the more recent Siamese trackers (Bertinetto et al.
2016b; Guo et al. 2017; Tao, Gavves, and Smeulders 2016;
Wang et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018, 2019) typically use the first frame to provide a reasonable initialization
to the model. Meanwhile, CFNet (Valmadre et al. 2017) uses
a running average with a constant learning rate. This means
the influence of past frames to the model is decreasing exponentially fast. Recently, trackers such as ATOM (Danelljan
et al. 2019) and Dimp (Bhat et al. 2019) were able to combine features from earlier frames via an optimisation process
to predict the location of the target. However, the sample selection is ad hoc and rudimentary: they simply include samples from the first frame and the last few frames.
We argue that these existing sampling strategies may not
select compact and representative samples. For one thing,
they tend to select clumps of samples from the same periods.

Introduction
Visual tracking aims to estimate the trajectory of a target
in a video sequence. It has wide applications ranging from
human motion analysis, human-computer interaction, to autonomous driving. Modern CNN-based object trackers typically aim to learn a classifier that can quickly adapt to object
and background variations. In this so-called online learning
framework, earlier image frames together with the target location are fed to an online learning classifier branch of the
tracker architecture. A serious issue is that due to limitations
in computing and memory resources, a tracker can only include a small number of frames for learning the classifier.
∗

This work was supported by the funding of ”Leading Innovation Team of the Zhejiang Province”(2018R01017). AL and MK
acknowledge support by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
award KL 2698/2-1 and by the Federal Ministry of Science and
Education (BMBF) awards 01IS18051A and 031B0770E.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code is available at. github.com/TrackerLB/UATracker

3581

