The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MFES-HB: Efficient Hyperband with Multi-Fidelity Quality Measurements
Yang Li,1,4 Yu Shen,1,4 Jiawei Jiang,2 Jinyang Gao,5 Ce Zhang,2 Bin Cui1,3
1

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Systems Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China
4
AI Platform, Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
5
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{liyang.cs,shenyu,bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn, {jiawei.jiang, ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch, jinyang.gjy@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

ter configurations iteratively, and evaluate each configuration by training and validating the corresponding ML model.
However, for ML models that are computationally expensive to train (e.g., deep learning models or models trained on
large datasets), vanilla Bayesian optimization (BO) (Hutter,
Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011; Bergstra et al. 2011; Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012), one of the most prevailing
frameworks in solving the HPO problem, suffers from the
low-efficiency issue due to insufficient configuration evaluations within a limited budget.
Instead, Hyperband (HB) (Li et al. 2018) is a popular alternative, which uses the early stopping strategy to speed
up configuration evaluation. In HB, the system dynamically
allocates resources to a set of configurations drawn from a
uniform distribution, and uses successive halving (Jamieson
and Talwalkar 2016) to early stop the poorly-performing
configurations after measuring their quality periodically.
Among many efforts to improve Hyperband (Klein et al.
2017b; Falkner, Klein, and Hutter 2018), BOHB (Falkner,
Klein, and Hutter 2018) combines the benefits from both
Hyperband and traditional BO. It replaces the configuration
sampling procedure in HB from the uniform distribution to
a BO surrogate model —TPE (Bergstra et al. 2011), which
is fitted on those quality measurements obtained from the
evaluations without being early stopped.
Due to the successive halving strategy of HB, most
configuration evaluations end up being early stopped by
the system, thus creating two kinds of quality measurements: (1) many low-fidelity quality measurements of these
early-stopped configurations, and (2) few high-fidelity quality measurements of configurations that are evaluated with
complete training resources. One fundamental limitation of
BOHB lies in the fact that the BO component only utilizes the few high-fidelity measurements to sample configurations, which are insufficient to train a BO surrogate that
models the objective function in HPO well. Consequently,
like vanilla BO, sampling configurations in BOHB also suffers from the low-efficiency issue. Can we also take advantage of the low-fidelity quality measurements, which are
ignored by the existing methods, to further speed up the
Hyperband-style methods? In this paper, our goal is to investigate a new Hyperband-style method, which is capable
of utilizing the multi-fidelity quality measurements: both the
high-fidelity measurements and the low-fidelity measure-

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is a fundamental problem in automatic machine learning (AutoML). However, due
to the expensive evaluation cost of models (e.g., training
deep learning models or training models on large datasets),
vanilla Bayesian optimization (BO) is typically computationally infeasible. To alleviate this issue, Hyperband (HB) utilizes the early stopping mechanism to speed up configuration
evaluations by terminating those badly-performing configurations in advance. This leads to two kinds of quality measurements: (1) many low-fidelity measurements for configurations that get early-stopped, and (2) few high-fidelity measurements for configurations that are evaluated without being
early stopped. The state-of-the-art HB-style method, BOHB,
aims to combine the benefits of both BO and HB. Instead
of sampling configurations randomly in HB, BOHB samples
configurations based on a BO surrogate model, which is constructed with the high-fidelity measurements only. However,
the scarcity of high-fidelity measurements greatly hampers
the efficiency of BO to guide the configuration search.
In this paper, we present MFES-HB, an efficient Hyperband
method that is capable of utilizing both the high-fidelity and
low-fidelity measurements to accelerate the convergence of
HPO tasks. Designing MFES-HB is not trivial as the lowfidelity measurements can be biased yet informative to guide
the configuration search. Thus we propose to build a MultiFidelity Ensemble Surrogate (MFES) based on the generalized Product of Experts framework, which can integrate
useful information from multi-fidelity measurements effectively. The empirical studies on the real-world AutoML tasks
demonstrate that MFES-HB can achieve 3.3−8.9× speedups
over the state-of-the-art approach — BOHB.

Introduction
The performance of Machine Learning (ML) models heavily depends on the specific choice of hyperparameter configurations. As a result, automatically tuning the hyperparameters has attracted lots of interest from both academia
and industry, and has become an indispensable component in
modern AutoML systems (Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren
2018; Yao et al. 2018; Zöller and Huber 2019). Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is often a computationallyintensive process as one often needs to try hyperparameCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8491

