The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

User Driven Model Adjustment via Boolean Rule Explanations
Elizabeth M. Daly, Massimiliano Mattetti, Öznur Alkan, Rahul Nair
IBM Research
Dublin, Ireland

Abstract

must be retrained after the data has been updated. These approaches can result in a lack of data for some instances’ coverage and may be time consuming making it less appropriate
for applications where decision processes or policies may
change.

AI solutions are heavily dependant on the quality and accuracy of the input training data, however the training data may
not always fully reflect the most up-to-date policy landscape
or may be missing business logic. The advances in explainability have opened the possibility of allowing users to interact with interpretable explanations of ML predictions in order
to inject modifications or constraints that more accurately reflect current realities of the system. In this paper, we present
a solution which leverages the predictive power of ML models while allowing the user to specify modifications to decision boundaries. Our interactive overlay approach achieves
this goal without requiring model retraining, making it appropriate for systems that need to apply instant changes to their
decision making. We demonstrate that user feedback rules
can be layered with the ML predictions to provide immediate changes which in turn supports learning with less data.

AI is increasingly integral in many real world tasks from
loan approval to forecasting organizational revenue. While
supervised ML tasks such as classification perform well
with appropriate historical data, they can not be updated
quickly to support more dynamic situations. Retraining can
be costly, and more challenging still is obtaining labeled
data that accurately reflects the current decision landscape.
Consider a loans approval application where there exists a
business policy that a loan request should be accepted for
any user with age > 30 ∧ income > 50k ∧ education =
“M asters” and a machine learning model has been trained
based on historical data to predict if a user will be approved
or not by leveraging many other features other than the three
mentioned in the business logic. Now consider a new policy comes into place where the rule changes from age>30
to age>26. Based on historical data the machine learning
model may incorrectly reject users between the ages 26-30.
Options include relabelling historical data in order to accurately reflect the new decision boundary which is labour intensive. Alternatively, the solution must wait for new data to
be collected with the correct labels. In both cases, the model

In this paper, we investigate the scenario where the data
used to train an existing ML model may not reflect the current decision criteria. Additionally, the data may be lacking
external knowledge such as policies or policy changes. In order to tackle this challenge, we present a solution that leverages the predictive power of an ML model with user contributed decision rules to enable adjustments online acting
as a “patch” or “bandaid” taking immediate affect. Figure
1 illustrates how current ML solutions cope with changing
decision boundaries in a simplified linear scenario: the solution is either to relabel existing data, or wait until sufficient
new data is available. Active learning has shown promise in
reducing the amount of newly labelled data needed, however model retraining is still required and in practise users
may need to label many data instances in order to impact
the model, which can prove frustrating for the user (Cakmak, Chao, and Thomaz 2010; Guillory and Bilmes 2011).
In an online scenario where policies need to have an immediate effect, for example in a spam detection setting, waiting
for relabelling and retraining to update the model may not
be possible. Our solution attempts to harness the underlying
ML model by storing a series of user adjustments in the form
of decision rules that can be applied to push future instances
to the appropriate decision boundary in order to reflect the
user constraints. We present this solution as a user modifiable layer that can support immediate changes and influence
over an existing model. Our goal is to use an existing ML
model, while permitting users to provide rule based modifications that adjust the final decision making criteria allowing
them to adjust the predictions for specified parameters. This
is achieved without modifying or updating the underlying
ML model but by post-processing the model output through
a combination of interpretable Boolean rules and inferred
transformation functions which modify the input request to
reflect the user feedback.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

One question might arise: why not either use a complete
rule based system or simply create a post processing filter-

Introduction

5896

