The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Bayesian Quadrature Policy Optimization
Ravi Tej Akella1 , Kamyar Azizzadenesheli1 , Mohammad Ghavamzadeh2 ,
Anima Anandkumar3 and Yisong Yue3
1

Purdue University
Google Research
3
Caltech
{rakella,kamyar}@purdue.edu, ghavamza@google.com, {anima,yyue}@caltech.edu
2

Abstract

An alternate approach to approximate integrals in probabilistic numerics is Bayesian Quadrature (BQ) (O’Hagan
1991). Under mild regularity assumptions, BQ offers impressive empirical advances and strictly faster convergence
rates (Kanagawa, Sriperumbudur, and Fukumizu 2016).
Typically, the integrand in BQ is modeled using a Gaussian
process (GP), such that the linearity of the integral operator
provides a Gaussian posterior over the integral. In addition
to a point estimate of the integral, BQ also quantifies the uncertainty in its estimation, a missing piece in MC methods.
In RL, the BQ machinery can be used to obtain a Gaussian approximation of the PG integral, by placing a GP prior
over the action-value function. However, estimating the moments of this Gaussian approximation, i.e., the PG mean and
covariance, requires the integration of GP’s kernel function,
which, in general, does not have an analytical solution. Interestingly, Ghavamzadeh and Engel (2007) showed that the
PG integral can be solved analytically when the GP kernel
is an additive combination of an arbitrary state kernel and a
fixed Fisher kernel. While the authors demonstrate a superior performance of BQ over MC using a small policy network on simple environments, their approach does not scale
to large non-linear policies (> 1000 trainable parameters)
and high-dimensional domains.
Contribution 1: We propose deep Bayesian quadrature policy gradient (DBQPG), a BQ-based PG framework that extends Ghavamzadeh and Engel (2007) to highdimensional settings, thus placing it in the context of contemporary deep PG algorithms. The proposed framework
uses a GP to implicitly model the action-value function, and
without explicitly constructing the action-value function, returns a Gaussian approximation of the policy gradient, represented by a mean vector (gradient estimate) and covariance
(gradient uncertainty). Consequently, this framework can be
used with an explicit critic network (different from implicit
GP critic1 ) to leverage the orthogonal benefits of actor-critic
frameworks (Schulman et al. 2016).
The statistical efficiency of BQ, relative to MC estimation, depends on the compatibility between the GP kernel
and the MDP’s action-value function. To make DBQPG robust to a diverse range of target MDPs, we choose a base

We study the problem of obtaining accurate policy gradient estimates using a finite number of samples. Monte-Carlo
methods have been the default choice for policy gradient estimation, despite suffering from high variance in the gradient estimates. On the other hand, more sample efficient alternatives like Bayesian quadrature methods have received little attention due to their high computational complexity. In
this work, we propose deep Bayesian quadrature policy gradient (DBQPG), a computationally efficient high-dimensional
generalization of Bayesian quadrature, for policy gradient estimation. We show that DBQPG can substitute Monte-Carlo
estimation in policy gradient methods, and demonstrate its
effectiveness on a set of continuous control benchmarks. In
comparison to Monte-Carlo estimation, DBQPG provides (i)
more accurate gradient estimates with a significantly lower
variance, (ii) a consistent improvement in the sample complexity and average return for several deep policy gradient algorithms, and, (iii) the uncertainty in gradient estimation that
can be incorporated to further improve the performance.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient (PG) is a reinforcement learning (RL) approach that directly optimizes the agent’s policies by operating on the gradient of their expected return (Sutton et al.
2000; Baxter and Bartlett 2000). The use of deep neural networks for the policy class has recently demonstrated a series
of success for PG methods (Lillicrap et al. 2015; Schulman
et al. 2015) on high-dimensional continuous control benchmarks, such as MuJoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012).
However, the derivation and analysis of the aforementioned
methods mainly rely on access to the expected return and
its true gradient. In general, RL agents do not have access
to the true gradient of the expected return, i.e., the gradient
of integration over returns; instead, they have access to its
empirical estimate from sampled trajectories. Monte-Carlo
(MC) sampling (Metropolis and Ulam 1949) is a widely
used point estimation method for approximating this integration (Williams 1992). However, MC estimation returns
high variance gradient estimates that are undesirably inaccurate, imposing a high sample complexity requirement for
PG methods (Rubinstein 1969; Ilyas et al. 2018).

1
The GP critic in BQ is implicit because it is used to solve PG
integral analytically rather than explicitly predicting the Q-values.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6600

