The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Abstractive Dialogue Summarization for Tete-a-Tetes
Xinyuan Zhang,1 Ruiyi Zhang, 2 Manzil Zaheer, 3 Amr Ahmed 3
1

ASAPP
Duke University
3
Google Research
xzhang@asapp.com, ryzhang@cs.duke.edu, manzilzaheer@google.com, amra@google.com
2

Abstract

Customer: I am looking for the Hamilton Lodge in Cambridge.
Agent:
Sure, it is at 156 Chesterton Road, postcode cb41da.
Customer: Please book it for 2 people, 5 nights beginning on
Tuesday.
Agent:
Done. Your reference number is qnvdz4rt.
Customer: Thank you, I will be there on Tuesday!
Is there anything more I can assist you with today?
Agent:
Customer: Thank you! That’s everything I needed.
Agent:
You are welcome. Any time.

High-quality dialogue-summary paired data is expensive to
produce and domain-sensitive, making abstractive dialogue
summarization a challenging task. In this work, we propose the
first unsupervised abstractive dialogue summarization model
for tete-a-tetes (SuTaT). Unlike standard text summarization,
a dialogue summarization method should consider the multispeaker scenario where the speakers have different roles, goals,
and language styles. In a tete-a-tete, such as a customer-agent
conversation, SuTaT aims to summarize for each speaker by
modeling the customer utterances and the agent utterances
separately while retaining their correlations. SuTaT consists of
a conditional generative module and two unsupervised summarization modules. The conditional generative module contains
two encoders and two decoders in a variational autoencoder
framework where the dependencies between two latent spaces
are captured. With the same encoders and decoders, two unsupervised summarization modules equipped with sentencelevel self-attention mechanisms generate summaries without
using any annotations. Experimental results show that SuTaT
is superior on unsupervised dialogue summarization for both
automatic and human evaluations, and is capable of dialogue
classification and single-turn conversation generation.

Customer
Summary:
Agent
Summary:

i would like to book a hotel in cambridge on tuesday
.
i have booked you a hotel . the reference number is
qnvdz4rt . can i help you with anything else ?

Table 1: An example of SuTaT generated summaries.

Introduction
Tete-a-tetes, conversations between two participants, have
been widely studied as an importance component of dialogue
analysis. For instance, tete-a-tetes between customers and
agents contain information for contact centers to understand
the problems of customers and improve the solutions by
agents. However, it is time-consuming for others to track the
progress by going through long and sometimes uninformative
utterances. Automatically summarizing a tete-a-tete into a
shorter version while retaining its main points can save a vast
amount of human resources and has a number of potential
real-world applications.
Summarization models can be categorized into two classes:
extractive and abstractive. Extractive methods select sentences or phrases from the input text, while abstractive methods attempt to generate novel expressions which requires
an advanced ability to paraphrase and condense information. Despite being easier, extractive summarization is often
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14489

not preferred in dialogues for its limited capability to capture
highly dependent conversation histories and produce coherent
discourses. Therefore, abstractively summarizing dialogues
has attracted recent research interest (Goo and Chen 2018;
Pan et al. 2018; Yuan and Yu 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
However, existing abstractive dialogue summarization approaches fail to address two main problems. First, a dialogue
is carried out between multiple speakers and each of them has
different roles, goals, and language styles. Taking the example of a contact center, customers aim to propose problems
while agents aim to provide solutions, which leads them to
have different semantic contents and choices of vocabularies.
Most existing methods process dialogue utterances as in text
summarization without accommodating the multi-speaker
scenario. Second, high-quality annotated data is not readily
available in the dialogue summarization domain and can be
very expensive to produce. Topic descriptions or instructions
are commonly used as gold references which are too general and lack any information about the speakers. Moreover,
some methods use auxiliary information such as dialogue acts
(Goo and Chen 2018), semantic scaffolds (Yuan and Yu 2019)
and key point sequences (Liu et al. 2019) to help with summarization, adding more burden on data annotation. To our
knowledge, no previous work has focused on unsupervised
deep learning for abstractive dialogue summarization.
We propose SuTaT, an unsupervised abstractive dialogue
summarization approach specifically for tete-a-tetes. In this

