The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Social-DPF: Socially Acceptable Distribution Prediction of Futures
Xiaodan Shi1 , Xiaowei Shao1,2 , Guangming Wu1 , Haoran Zhang1 , Zhiling Guo1 ,
Renhe Jiang3 ,Ryosuke Shibasaki1
1

2

Center for Spatial Information Science, the University of Tokyo
Earth Observation Data Integration and Fusion Research Initiative, the University of Tokyo
3
Information Technology Center, the University of Tokyo
{shixiaodan, jiangrh, zhang ronan, guozhilingcc, huster-wgm, shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
{shaoxw}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

We consider long-term path forecasting problems in crowds,
where future sequence trajectories are generated given a short
observation. Recent methods for this problem have focused
on modeling social interactions and predicting multi-modal
futures. However, it is not easy for machines to successfully consider social interactions, such as avoiding collisions while considering the uncertainty of futures under a
highly interactive and dynamic scenario. In this paper, we
propose a model that incorporates multiple interacting motion sequences jointly and predicts multi-modal socially acceptable distributions of futures. Specifically, we introduce
a new aggregation mechanism for social interactions, which
selectively models long-term inter-related dynamics between
movements in a shared environment through a message passing mechanism. Moreover, we propose a loss function that not
only accesses how accurate the estimated distributions of the
futures are but also considers collision avoidance. We further
utilize mixture density functions to describe the trajectories
and learn multi-modality of future paths. Extensive experiments over several trajectory prediction benchmarks demonstrate that our method is able to forecast socially acceptable
distributions in complex scenarios.

①
②
③

(a)

collision !

(b)

Figure 1: Objective of this study is to forecast socially acceptable distributions of futures. There are multiple plausible forthcoming paths in an interactive and dynamic scenario
( for example, the boy walks to 1 and the girl walks to 2 or
3). The result of (b) is not socially acceptable owing to the
collisions between them.

which introduces social pooling to calculate the global representations for interactions by aggregating the latent states
of spatially proximal pedestrians, is an important development for real-world paths forecasting (Alahi et al. 2016).
The existing research follow the way of Social LSTM but
with improvements. The research (Huang et al. 2019; Mohamed et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) utilize spatio-temporal
graph representations to describe motion dynamics over
time and space. By modeling the topography of graphs,
the models can naturally model social interactions and the
movement of people. By contrast, generative adversarial network (GAN)-based models are investigated to model the uncertainty of futures (Gupta et al. 2018; Sadeghian et al. 2019;
Kosaraju et al. 2019). GAN-based models usually contains
social mechanisms in the generators and forecast multiple
plausible trajectories instead of a single future path. The distributions of futures can be plotted through samples from
the generators. The existing methods usually predict a single future path or distributions of the futures by minimizing
(or a combination of ) L2 loss, adversarial loss or maximizing the lower bound of the log-likelihood function between
the distributions of estimated futures and the distributions of
ground truth.
However, predicting socially acceptable trajectories still
remains as an issue. First, the existing research usually use
”pooling” as an aggregation mechanism which is limited to

Introduction
The ability to predict long-term futures accurately lies at
the heart of autonomous driving and social robots navigation(Kitani et al. 2012; Karasev et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016;
Lee et al. 2017; Su et al. 2017; Liang et al. 2019) where
autonomous driving cars and social robots share the same
ecosystem with humans. They adjust their paths by anticipating human movements, specifically, avoiding collisions
or maintaining a safe distance from other people. Modeling
human interactions is a challenging aspect of trajectory prediction task. Although humans can intuitively know how to
interact with other people in crowds, it is not easy for machines to learn those interaction rules owing to the complexities and uncertainties of human crowds.
Since the success of recurrent neural network (RNN)
on sequence modeling, RNN-based models have been well
developed for use in trajectory prediction. Social LSTM,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2550

