The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Context-Guided Adaptive Network for Efficient Human Pose Estimation
Lei Zhao1,2 , Jun Wen1,2 , Pengfei Wang1,2 , Nenggan Zheng1,2,3,4 *
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
College of Computer Science and Techology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center for Artificial Intelligence by MOE and Zhejiang Provincial Government (ZJU)
4
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{zlchn, junwen, pfei}@zju.edu.cn, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

72

Although recent work has achieved great progress in human
pose estimation (HPE), most methods show limitations in either inference speed or accuracy. In this paper, we propose a
fast and accurate end-to-end HPE method, which is specifically designed to overcome the commonly encountered jitter box, defective box and ambiguous box problems of boxbased methods, e.g. Mask R-CNN. Concretely, 1) we propose
the ROIGuider to aggregate box instance features from all
feature levels under the guidance of global context instance
information. Further, 2) the proposed Center Line Branch
is equipped with a Dichotomy Extended Area algorithm to
adaptively expand each instance box area, and Ambiguity
Alleviation strategy to eliminate duplicated keypoints. Finally, 3) to achieve efficient multi-scale feature fusion and
real-time inference, we design a novel Trapezoidal Network
(TNet) backbone. Experimenting on the COCO dataset, our
method achieves 68.1 AP at 25.4 fps, and outperforms MaskRCNN by 8.9 AP at a similar speed. The competitive performance on the HPE and person instance segmentation tasks
over the state-of-the-art models show the promise of the proposed method. The source code will be made available at
https://github.com/zlcnup/CGANet.

68

70
66
AP

64
62
60

Ours (maxDets=20)
HigherHRNet
Mask-RCNN
PifPaf
CMU-Pose

58
56
54
52

0

(a)

5

10

(b)

15

FPS

20

(c)

25

30

35

(d)

Figure 1: Top: The speed-accuracy trade-off of single-model
methods on the COCO (Lin et al. 2014) val2017 set. The
green line is the speed with fixed input size (such as video),
which can better reflect the actual speed. But for testing
convenience and fair comparisons, we also test the average
speed (blue line) on the whole COCO val2017 set (used in
the experiments). The inference details please refer to section Experiments. In particular, the result of CMU-Pose is
achieved on test-dev set with refinement. Bottom: (a) The
ambiguous center point heatmap predicted by the original
CenterNet, which has two Gaussian peaks with the same
score for one target (red and green dotted circle). (b) Illustrate the ambiguous box (blue and red boxes) caused by (a),
and the defective box (blue box) that excludes the keypoints
of eyes. (c) The center point heatmap after alleviating ambiguity by center line heatmap. (d) The visualization after
Dichotomy Extended Area algorithm based on center line
heatmap.

Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) is a challenging yet fundamental computer vision problem whose goal is to determine the location of each body keypoint (e.g. eyes, shoulders, knees and so on). The provided informative knowledge
is critical for tasks such as intelligent video surveillance,
human-computer interaction, virtual reality, etc.
There are generally two HPE approaches: bottom-up or
top-down. The bottom-up approach firstly regresses all keypoints of an image, and then assigns them to each person
instances (Insafutdinov et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2017; Kreiss,
Bertoni, and Alahi 2019; Cheng et al. 2020). Because of
the global regressing manner of keypoints, it is difficult to
adaptively handle scale variation of each instance and obtain
high accuracy. Meanwhile, it typically adopts complicated
post processing that could significantly reduce the inference

speed (as shown in Fig. 1 and Table 4). In contrast, the topdown approach firstly detects all person instances using the
detection model, and then runs the HPE model to regress the

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3492

