The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Complex Coordinate-Based Meta-Analysis with Probabilistic Programming
Valentin Iovene, Gaston E Zanitti, Demian Wassermann
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Palaiseau, France
tgy@inria.fr, gaston.zanitti@inria.fr, demian.wassermann@inria.fr

Abstract

corpora of neuroimaging studies, can we derive new knowledge about the brain’s mechanics? Can we study consensus
within the cognitive neuroscience community? The lack of
power of neuroimaging studies undermines the reproducibility of their findings (Poldrack et al. 2017; Botvinik-Nezer
et al. 2020). Can we build consensus by aggregating results from several underpowered studies into more robust
findings supported by past literature? Neuroimaging studies traditionally report peak activation coordinates in a standard stereotactic coordinate system. This makes it possible
to compare them from one study to another. These coordinates result from statistical hypothesis testing and represent
a condensed synthesis of which regions of the brain are reported as activated by a given study. Directly meta-analysing
whole-brain unthresholded statistical maps (i.e. image-based
meta-analysis) is known to yield statistically more powerful results (Salimi-Khorshidi et al. 2009); and the field is
moving in that direction (Gorgolewski et al. 2015). However, most meta-analyses have resorted to coordinate-based
meta-analysis (CBMA): the meta-analysis of these peak activation coordinates. In the past ten years, an ecosystem of
CBMA databases and tools was brought to life (e.g. Laird,
Lancaster, and Fox 2005; Yarkoni et al. 2011), becoming an
integral part of brain mapping research. Automatic CBMA
databases, like Neurosynth, extract both natural language
processing features and peak activation coordinates from
neuroimaging studies. These tools are used to derive activation patterns (e.g. Wager et al. 2013; Cole et al. 2012) or
reveal meaningful cognitive processes through reverse inference (e.g. Smallwood and Schooler 2015; Seghier 2013;
Chang et al. 2013; Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, and Spreng
2014). With them, researchers can define more robust regions of interest supported by past literature.

With the growing number of published functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies, meta-analysis databases
and models have become an integral part of brain mapping
research. Coordinate-based meta-analysis (CBMA) databases
are built by extracting both coordinates of reported peak activations and term associations using natural language processing techniques from neuroimaging studies. Solving termbased queries on these databases makes it possible to obtain
statistical maps of the brain related to specific cognitive processes. However, existing tools for analysing CBMA data are
limited in their expressivity to propositional logic, restricting
the variety of their queries. Moreover, with tools like Neurosynth, term-based queries on multiple terms often lead to
power failure, because too few studies from the database contribute to the statistical estimations. We design a probabilistic
domain-specific language (DSL) standing on Datalog and one
of its probabilistic extensions, CP-Logic, for expressing and
solving complex logic-based queries. We show how CBMA
databases can be encoded as probabilistic programs. Using
the joint distribution of their Bayesian network translation,
we show that solutions of queries on these programs compute
the right probability distributions of voxel activations. We
explain how recent lifted query processing algorithms make
it possible to scale to the size of large neuroimaging data,
where knowledge compilation techniques fail to solve queries
fast enough for practical applications. Finally, we introduce a
method for relating studies to terms probabilistically, leading
to better solutions for two-term conjunctive queries (CQs) on
smaller databases. We demonstrate results for two-term CQs,
both on simulated meta-analysis databases and on the widely
used Neurosynth database.

Introduction
The non-invasivity of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) led it to dominate brain mapping research since
the early 1990s (Huettel, Song, and McCarthy 2008). In the
past three decades, tens of thousands of published studies
acquired and analysed fMRI signals, producing new understanding of the human brain and the cognitive function of its
different components. Quickly, the idea of meta-analysing
this ever-growing amount of neuroimaging studies flourished. By gathering and synthesising the findings of a large

Nonetheless, currently available tools are limited in the
complexity of queries that they can express and solve on
CBMA data. Neurosynth (Yarkoni et al. 2011) presents brain
map for single-term queries. Although technically feasible,
term-based conjunctive queries (CQs) lead to underpowered
meta-analyses due to the small number of studies matching the queries. Methods for exploiting CBMA data have
recently been proposed, but they concern themselves with
either developing new procedures for thresholding statistical brain maps, or integrating spatial priors into probabilistic
models by correlating nearby voxel activations (Montagna

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

223

