The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DPM: A Novel Training Method for Physics-Informed Neural Networks in
Extrapolation
Jungeun Kim1 , Kookjin Lee2 , Dongeun Lee3 , Sheo Yon Jhin1 , Noseong Park4
1

Department of AI, Yonsei University
Extreme Scale Data Science & Analytics Department, Sandia National Laboratory
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Texas A&M University at Commerce
4
Department of AI & CS, Yonsei University
jekim5418@yonsei.ac.kr, koolee@sandia.gov, dongeun.lee@tamuc.edu, {sheoyonj, noseong}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Abstract

Recently, with the advancements in deep learning, many
data-centric approaches, which heavily rely on the universal
approximation theorem (Hornik et al. 1989), have been proposed. Most approaches formulate the problem as a rather
simple (semi-)supervised learning problem for constructing
surrogate models for solution functions (Geist et al. 2020;
Khoo, Lu, and Ying 2017; Ling, Kurzawski, and Templeton 2016; Ling and Templeton 2015; Tripathy and Bilionis
2018; Vlachas et al. 2018; Holl, Thuerey, and Koltun 2020).
Although the formulation itself is simple, this approach requires costly evaluations or existence of solutions and also
suffers from lack of ways to enforce a priori information of
the problem such as physical laws described by the governing
equation. There are also more “physics-aware” approaches
such as methods based on learning latent-dynamics of physical processes (Erichson, Muehlebach, and Mahoney 2019;
Fulton et al. 2019; Lee and Carlberg 2019, 2020; Wiewel,
Becher, and Thuerey 2019). These approaches, however, still
require computations of solutions to collect training dataset.
Among those data-centric approaches, a method called
physics-informed neural network (PINN) (Raissi, Perdikaris,
and Karniadakis 2019) has brought attention to the community because of its simple, but effective way of approximating
time-dependent nonlinear PDEs with neural networks, while
preserving important physical properties described by the
governing equations. PINN achieves these by parameterizing
the solution and the governing equation simultaneously with
a set of shared network parameters, which we will elaborate
in the next section. After the great success of the seminal paper (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019), many sequels
have applied PINN to solve various PDE applications, e.g.
(Cosmin Anitescu 2019; Yang, Meng, and Karniadakis 2020;
Zhang et al. 2019; Doan, Polifke, and Magri 2019).
Nearly all these studies, however, demonstrated the performances of their methods evaluated at a set of testing points
sampled within a pre-specified range, i.e., {(xitest , titest )} ⊂
Ω × [0, Ttrain ] \ {(xitrain , titrain )}, which we denote by interpolation. In this paper, however, we are more interested in
assessing the capability of PINN as a tool for learning the
dynamics of physical processes. In particular, we would like
to assess the performance of PINN on a testing set sampled
beyond the final training time Ttrain of the pre-specified range,
i.e., {(xitest , titest )} ⊂ Ω × (Ttrain , T ], where T > Ttrain , and we
denote this task by extrapolation. In principle, PINN is ex-

We present a method for learning dynamics of complex physical processes described by time-dependent nonlinear partial
differential equations (PDEs). Our particular interest lies in
extrapolating solutions in time beyond the range of temporal
domain used in training. Our choice for a baseline method is
physics-informed neural network (PINN) because the method
parameterizes not only the solutions, but also the equations
that describe the dynamics of physical processes. We demonstrate that PINN performs poorly on extrapolation tasks in
many benchmark problems. To address this, we propose a
novel method for better training PINN and demonstrate that
our newly enhanced PINNs can accurately extrapolate solutions in time. Our method shows up to 72% smaller errors than
existing methods in terms of the standard L2-norm metric.

1

Introduction

Understanding dynamics of complex real-world physical processes is essential in many applications (e.g., fluid dynamics
(Anderson, Tannehill, and Pletcher 2016; Hirsch 2007)). Such
dynamics are often modeled as time-dependent partial deferential equations (PDEs), where we seek a solution function
u(x, t) satisfying a governing equation,
def

f (x, t) = ut + N (u) = 0, x ∈ Ω, t ∈ [0, T ],

(1)

def
where ut = ∂u
∂t denotes the partial derivative of u w.r.t. t,
d

N denotes a nonlinear differential operator, Ω ⊂ R (d =
1, 2, 3) denotes a spatial domain, and T denotes the final time.
Moreover, there are two more types of conditions imposed on
the solution function u(x, t): i) an initial condition u(x, 0) =
u0 (x), ∀x ∈ Ω and ii) a set of boundary conditions specifying
the behaviors of the solution function on the boundaries of
Ω. Solving such problem becomes particularly challenging
when the nonlinear differential operator is highly nonlinear.
Traditionally, classical numerical methods (e.g., (Iserles
2009; LeVeque et al. 2002; Stoer and Bulirsch 2013)) have
been dominant choices for solving such nonlinear timedependent PDEs, as they have demonstrated their effectiveness in solving complex nonlinear PDEs and provide sound
theoretical analyses. However, they are often based on techniques that require complex, problem-specific knowledge
such as sophisticated spatio-temporal discretization schemes.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8146

