The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling the Momentum Spillover Effect for Stock Prediction via
Attribute-Driven Graph Attention Networks
Rui Cheng, Qing Li*
Fintech Innovation Center, School of Economic Information Engineering
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
rcheng swufe@foxmail.com, liqing@swufe.edu.cn

Abstract

Feng et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020b). In these studies, each firm
is treated as a node in the graph, and the edge between two
nodes is determined by a predefined firm relation. To capture the momentum spillovers of listed firms, each node is
represented by its relational embedding that is the aggregation of the attributes of its neighbors in the graph. However,
traditional GNNs transfer and aggregate the peer influences
without considering the states of both connected firms once
a connection is built. In real stock markets, the influence
propagation of linked firms is attribute-sensitive. For example, the abnormal price drop of one firm may not spill over
if the trade volume of this decreasing price is small, or the
prices of the linked firms are undervalued.
In addition, these studies rely on a set of predefined relations, such as shareholders (Chen, Wei, and Huang 2018),
industry (Feng et al. 2019), or price comovement (Li et al.
2020b). However, the momentum spillover effect is led by
a variety of inter-firm linkages of which the bridging importance varies with time. It is hard to assume one certain type of known firm relation is superior to others when
they are applied for studying the momentum spillover effect. An alternative approach is to combine various predefined relations to form a dominant relation to study the momentum spillover effect. Even though many financial studies have been devoted to discovering the relations of listed
firms, there are still a number of important relations to be explored (Ali and Hirshleifer 2020). Apparently, studying the
momentum spillovers of listed firms with explicit relations
is limited by the undiscovered relations and the efficient way
to leverage the predefined relations. To solve both problems,
we model the attribute-sensitive momentum spillover effect
and estimate the latent relation of listed firms via a novel
attribute-driven graph attention network (AD-GAT). Three
unique contributions are proposed as follows:

In finance, the momentum spillovers of listed firms is well
acknowledged. Only few studies predicted the trend of one
firm in terms of its relevant firms. A common strategy of the
pilot work is to adopt graph convolution networks (GCNs)
with some predefined firm relations. However, momentum
spillovers are propagated via a variety of firm relations, of
which the bridging importance varies with time. Restricting to several predefined relations inevitably makes noise
and thus misleads stock predictions. In addition, traditional
GCNs transfer and aggregate the peer influences without considering the states of both connected firms once a connection is built. Such non-attribute sensibility makes traditional
GCNs inappropriate to deal with the attribute-sensitive momentum spillovers of listed firms wherein the abnormal price
drop of one firm may not spill over if the trade volume of this
decreasing price is small or the prices of the linked firms are
undervalued. In this study, we propose an attribute-driven
graph attention network (AD-GAT) to address both problems in modeling momentum spillovers. This is achieved
by element-wisely multiplying the nonlinear transformation
of the attributes of the connected firms with the attributes of
the source firm to consider its attribute-sensitive momentum
spillovers, and applying the unmasked attention mechanism
to infer the general dynamic firm relation from observed market signals fused by a novel tensor-based feature extractor.
Experiments on the three-year data of the S&P 500 demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework over stateof-the-art algorithms, including GCN, eLSTM, and TGC.

Introduction
In stock markets, there are momentum spillovers among the
relevant firms, wherein the past returns of one firm can predict the returns of firms that are linked to it (Ali and Hirshleifer 2020). Unfortunately, most studies on stock predictions in machine learning ignored the interferences from
other firms with an assumption that the historical information of a stock determines its future (Li et al. 2018). With the
advancement of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli
et al. 2009), few researchers have been exploring the momentum spillover effect on stock prediction with graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Chen, Wei, and Huang 2018;

• An attribute-mattered aggregator is proposed to capture the attribute-sensitive momentum spillovers of listed
firms. This is achieved by element-wisely multiplying
the nonlinear transformation of the connected firms’ attributes with the attributes of the source firm.
• To discover the dominant relation for the momentum
spillovers of listed firms, an unmasked attention mechanism is applied to infer the general dynamic firm relation
from observed market signals.

* Corresponding author: liqing@swufe.edu.cn

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

55

