The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Empower Distantly Supervised Relation Extraction with Collaborative
Adversarial Training
Tao Chen1 , Haochen Shi1 , Liyuan Liu2 , Siliang Tang1 * , Jian Shao1 ,
Zhigang Chen3 , Yueting Zhuang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign 3 iFLYTEK Research
{ttc, hcshi, siliang, jshao, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, llychinalz@gmail.com, zgchen@iflytek.com

Abstract
17.5

With recent advances in distantly supervised (DS) relation extraction (RE), considerable attention is attracted to leverage
multi-instance learning (MIL) to distill high-quality supervision from the noisy DS. Here, we go beyond label noise and
identify the key bottleneck of DS-MIL to be its low data utilization: as high-quality supervision being refined by MIL,
MIL abandons a large amount of training instances, which
leads to a low data utilization and hinders model training from
having abundant supervision. In this paper, we propose collaborative adversarial training to improve the data utilization,
which coordinates virtual adversarial training (VAT) and adversarial training (AT) at different levels. Specifically, since
VAT is label-free, we employ the instance-level VAT to recycle instances abandoned by MIL. Besides, we deploy AT at
the bag-level to unleash the full potential of the high-quality
supervision got by MIL. Our proposed method brings consistent improvements (∼ 5 absolute AUC score) to the previous
state of the art, which verifies the importance of the data utilization issue and the effectiveness of our method.

density

15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

sentence attention score

Figure 1: Sentence attention score distribution inside the bag
during training process: Most instances are with low scores,
instances with high attention scores (not including 1.0) only
dominate a small part of data.

on a few representative instances (with high attention scores)
and abandons a large proportion of low-score instances. As
in Figure 1, except the situation that one bag only contains
one instance (with attention scores of 1.0), most of the instances are assigned with low attention scores (0.0∼0.2) and
abandoned during the training process. Specifically, as in Table 2, control experiments show that even if some low-score
instances are removed, the newly trained model has a limited performance change. In other words, although DS leads
to abundant training instances, MIL fails to unleash the full
potential of DS, since it abandons the majority of training
instances.
Here, we propose MULTICAST (MULTi-Instance
Collaborative AdverSarial Training) to improve the data utilization. It coordinates adversarial training (AT) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) and virtual adversarial training (VAT) (Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2016) at different
levels. In detail, as the MIL framework intrinsically splits
training data into two classes (i.e., high-quality instances for
constructing bag-level representations and low-quality instances abandoned by MIL), we use different strategies on
them. For low-quality instances, although their associated
labels are not very reliable, they can still provide valuable
information for label-free regularization objectives. Thus,
we apply instance-level virtual adversarial training (IVAT)

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims at identifying the relation between entities within a specific context and provides essential support for many downstream tasks. As the performance
of RE systems is generally limited by the amount of training
data, recent RE systems typically resort to distant supervision (DS) to fetch abundant training data by aligning knowledge bases (KBs) and texts. Since this strategy inevitably
introduces label noise to model training, how to neutralize
the label noise has been viewed as the major problem of DS.
Multi-instance learning (MIL) was introduced to handle
label noise (Zeng et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2016) and has received a significant amount of attention. Specifically, MIL
clusters training instances into bags. For each bag, MIL demotes its low-quality instances to eliminate label noise and
refines high-quality instances as the bag-level representation
for model training.
Here, we go beyond label noise and identify the key bottleneck of DS-MIL to be its low data utilization. In order to
distill high-quality supervision from DS, MIL only focuses
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12675

