The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Universal Adversarial Perturbations Through the Lens of Deep Steganography:
Towards a Fourier Perspective
Chaoning Zhang∗ , Philipp Benz∗ , Adil Karjauv, In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com, pbenz@kaist.ac.kr, mikolez@gmail.com, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

image. In this work, for consistency, a small change to an image is termed perturbation (P ) for both DS and AA. In both
tasks, the original image I and perturbed image I + P are
nearly indistinguishable for the human vision system, given
||P ||  ||I|| (see Figure 1). However, for a DNN, M (I +P )
is more similar to M (P ) than M (I) where M indicates the
model of interest as a function. For AA and DS, the DNN of
interest is the target DNN and decoder network, respectively.
For an instance-dependent perturbation (IDP) case, taking
AA for example, this misalignment is relatively less surprising. We focus on the misalignment in “universal” scenario,
with conflicting features in I and P , while I is dominated
by P when they are summed, i.e. I + P , as the M input.
For both AA and DS, the misalignment constitutes the
most fundamental concern, thus we deem it insightful to
explore them together. We first attempt explaining its misalignment based on our adopted universal secret perturbation (USP) generation framework introduced in (Zhang et al.
2020c), where a secret image is hidden in a cover-agnostic
manner. The success of DS has been attributed to the discrepancy between C and the encoded secret image (Zhang
et al. 2020c). Inspired by the success of explaining the USP
induced misalignment from the Fourier perspective, we explore the UAP induced misalignment in a similar manner.
Our analysis shows that the influence of each input on
the combined DNN output is determined by both frequency
and magnitude, but mainly by the frequency. To quantitatively analyze the influence of image frequency on the performance of the two tasks, we propose a new metric for
quantifying the frequency that involves no hyperparameter
choices. Overall, our task-specific and cross-task analysis
suggest that image frequency is a key factor for both tasks.
Contrary to prior findings regarding IDP in (Yin et al.
2019), we find that UAPs, which attack most images are
a strictly high-frequency (HF) phenomenon. Moreover, we
perform a feature layer analysis to provide insight on model
generalization and robustness. With the frequency understanding, we propose two novel universal attack methods.

The booming interest in adversarial attacks stems from a misalignment between human vision and a deep neural network
(DNN), i.e. a human imperceptible perturbation fools the
DNN. Moreover, a single perturbation, often called universal
adversarial perturbation (UAP), can be generated to fool the
DNN for most images. A similar misalignment phenomenon
has also been observed in the deep steganography task, where
a decoder network can retrieve a secret image back from a
slightly perturbed cover image. We attempt explaining the
success of both in a unified manner from the Fourier perspective. We perform task-specific and joint analysis and reveal
that (a) frequency is a key factor that influences their performance based on the proposed entropy metric for quantifying
the frequency distribution; (b) their success can be attributed
to a DNN being highly sensitive to high-frequency content.
We also perform feature layer analysis for providing deep insight on model generalization and robustness. Additionally,
we propose two new variants of universal perturbations: (1)
high-pass UAP (HP-UAP) being less visible to the human
eye; (2) Universal Secret Adversarial Perturbation (USAP)
that simultaneously achieves attack and hiding.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved large success in a wide range
of vision applications, such as recognition (Zhang et al.
2019, 2021a), segmentation (Vania, Mureja, and Lee 2019;
Kim et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020) as well as scene understanding (Lee et al. 2019b,a; Zhang et al. 2020d; Argaw et al. 2021b,a). Nonetheless, the vulnerability of deep
neural networks (DNNs) to adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al. 2013) has attracted significant attention in recent years.
In machine learning, there is a surging interest in understanding the reason for the success of the adversarial attack
(AA) (Szegedy et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2020b). The root
reason for this booming interest lies in the misalignment between human vision and DNN perception (see Figure 1). A
similar misalignment phenomenon has also been observed in
deep steganography (DS) (Baluja 2017; Zhang et al. 2020c),
where a decoder network retrieves a secret image from a
slightly perturbed cover image, often referred to as container

Related Work
Fourier Perspective on DNN. The behavior of DNNs has
been explored from the Fourier perspective in multiple prior
arts. Some works (Jo and Bengio 2017; Wang et al. 2020)
analyze why the DNN has good generalization while be-

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3296

