The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Case Study of the Shortcut Effects in Visual Commonsense Reasoning
Keren Ye, Adriana Kovashka
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA 15260, USA
{yekeren,kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

To solve visual question answering tasks, studies used
feature fusion (Antol et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2015), attention (Lu et al. 2016; Fukui et al. 2016; Anderson et al.
2018), or question-related modular structures (Andreas et al.
2016b,a). Recently, transformers modeling cross-modal attention (Alberti et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2019a;
Li et al. 2019; Su et al. 2020) have also been applied. These
methods are trained with supervision i.e. the correct answers
are provided by human annotators on the training set. The
nature of supervised training means methods are rewarded
for finding any connection between inputs (image-question)
and outputs (answer options). In other words, methods can
do well without performing complex reasoning, if they can
find enough “shallow” matches between input and output.
We refer to such shallow matches as “shortcuts”.
Shortcut effects: Example and definition. Consider the
example in Fig. 1 from the VCR dataset (Zellers et al. 2019).
In the figure, [person1] (male) is on the right and [person2]
(female) is on the left. The correct option has the most
overlap with the question: the “[person1]” and “[person2]”
tags, and the word “dress”. Thus, to answer this question,
the model need not perform reasoning or even look at the
image. Examples in VCR vary: not all contain shortcuts of
this nature, yet others contain even more severe shortcuts.
For example, some incorrect answer choices mention entities entirely unrelated to question and image, which are thus
easy to eliminate.
We define “shortcuts” as a way of achieving the correct answer by simply matching repeated references to the
same entities in the question and answer options. We find
that in 67.8% samples for the Q→A task in VCR, and 65.2%
samples for the QA→R task, the correct choices have the
most overlapped referring tags among the candidates. Further, state of the art methods’ performance drops signifi-

Visual reasoning and question-answering have gathered attention in recent years. Many datasets and evaluation protocols have been proposed; some have been shown to contain
bias that allows models to “cheat” without performing true,
generalizable reasoning. A well-known bias is dependence
on language priors (frequency of answers) resulting in the
model not looking at the image. We discover a new type of
bias in the Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) dataset.
In particular we show that most state-of-the-art models exploit co-occurring text between input (question) and output
(answer options), and rely on only a few pieces of information in the candidate options, to make a decision. Unfortunately, relying on such superficial evidence causes models to
be very fragile. To measure fragility, we propose two ways
to modify the validation data, in which a few words in the
answer choices are modified without significant changes in
meaning. We find such insignificant changes cause models’
performance to degrade significantly. To resolve the issue, we
propose a curriculum-based masking approach, as a mechanism to perform more robust training. Our method improves
the baseline by requiring it to pay attention to the answers as
a whole, and is more effective than prior masking strategies.

Introduction
Models for vision-and-language (VL) tasks, such as visual
question answering (VQA) and visual commonsense reasoning (VCR), perceive the features of an image and provide natural language responses regarding the visual contents. The comprehensiveness of the VQA process seems to
require complete human-like intelligence, and has inspired
great interest. Unfortunately, in practice, models have many
opportunities to bypass “reasoning” and instead find shallow patterns in the data in order to match answers to imagequestion pairs. By “reasoning” we mean a generalizable process that analyzes the structure of the world as demonstrated
by training data, pays attention to links between participants
in the scene as well as between entities and their semantic
properties, and analyzes how these correspond to the entities or events indicated in the question. Such a process ideally persists when small changes are made to the potential
answer options without changing their meaning, because the
entities represented by these options remain the same.

Person1
Person2

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Question: What does [person1] think of [person2]'s dress?
Correct answer: [person1] thinks [person2] looks
stunning in her dress.
Incorrect #1: She does not approve.
Incorrect #2: [person2] is a girl and girls like to
wear makeup.
Incorrect #3: [person1] is confused and annoyed by
[person2] following her in the store.

Figure 1: Shortcut effects: An example.

3181

