The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Oral-3D: Reconstructing the 3D Structure of Oral Cavity from Panoramic X-ray
Weinan Song * , Yuan Liang * , Jiawei Yang, Kun Wang, Lei He
Design Automation Laboratory, University of California, Los Angeles
wsong@ucla.edu, lhe@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Panoramic X-ray (PX) provides a 2D picture of the patient’s
mouth in a panoramic view to help dentists observe the invisible disease inside the gum. However, it provides limited
2D information compared with cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), another dental imaging method that generates a 3D picture of the oral cavity but with more radiation
dose and a higher price. Consequently, it is of great interest
to reconstruct the 3D structure from a 2D X-ray image, which
can greatly explore the application of X-ray imaging in dental surgeries. In this paper, we propose a framework, named
Oral-3D, to reconstruct the 3D oral cavity from a single PX
image and prior information of the dental arch. Specifically,
we first train a generative model to learn the cross-dimension
transformation from 2D to 3D. Then we restore the shape of
the oral cavity with a deformation module with the dental arch
curve, which can be obtained simply by taking a photo of
the patient’s mouth. To be noted, Oral-3D can restore both
the density of bony tissues and the curved mandible surface.
Experimental results show that Oral-3D can efficiently and
effectively reconstruct the 3D oral structure and show critical information in clinical applications, e.g., tooth pulling and
dental implants. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to explore this domain transformation problem between these
two imaging methods.

Figure 1: An overview of Oral-3D. We first back-project the
panoramic image into a flattened 3D image of the oral cavity
with a generative network, then deform the generation result
into a curved plane according to the dental arch.

information in clinical applications (Momin et al. 2009), it
generates 39.4× radiation (Brooks 2009) and takes 3.7× of
the price (Petersen et al. 2014) on average than PX. This
problem is especially evident for those sensitive to the radiation dose and the developing countries where people are
unwilling to invest much in dental healthcare. Therefore, it
is of great interest to directly reconstruct the 3D structure of
the oral cavity from a PX image.
However, it is of great challenge to reconstruct a 3D object
from a single 2D image due to the lack of spatial information
in the rendering direction. Most works rely on additional information, such as shadow or prior shape of the object, to
regularize the reconstruction result. Furthermore, this problem is more difficult for the oral cavity due to the complicated shape of the mandible and detailed density information of the teeth. To overcome such challenges, we propose
a two-stage framework, named Oral-3D, to generate a highresolution 3D structure of the oral cavity by decoupling the
reconstruction process of shape and density. We first train
a generation model to extract detailed density information
from the 2D space, then restore the mandible shape with the
prior knowledge of the dental arch. Although our method
can not fully replace CBCT in the dental examination, we
provide a compromise solution to obtain the 3D oral structure when only the PX is available.

Introduction
Extra-oral imaging techniques such as PX and CBCT are
widely used in dental offices as examination methods before
the treatment. Both methods can show detailed bone information, including the tooth, mandible, and maxilla, of the
entire oral cavity. However, during the imaging process of
PX, the X-ray tube moves around the patient’s head and can
only take a 2D panoramic picture. This has limited its application in the cases when the disease needs to be located.
In comparison, CBCT can reconstruct the whole 3D structure of the lower head with divergent X-rays and provide
abundant information about the health condition of the oral
cavity. Nevertheless, the patient needs to take more radiation
dose and pay a higher price during a CBCT scan. We summarize the characteristics of these two imaging methods in
Table 1. We can see that although CBCT can provide more
* Equal Contributions
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

566

