The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Complexity of Sum-of-Products Problems over Semirings
Thomas Eiter and Rafael Kiesel
Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstrasse 9-11
Vienna 1040
{thomas.eiter,rafael.kiesel}@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

2011). Some of them, such as Semiring-based Constraint
Satisfaction Problems (SCSP) (Bistarelli et al. 1999), Algebraic Model Counting (AMC) (Kimmig, Van den Broeck,
and De Raedt 2017) and Weighted First-Order Formula
Evaluation (Eiter and Kiesel 2020), can be seen as instances
of S UM P ROD.
Due to their widespread presence in AI, solving
S UM P ROD-instances efficiently is of interest. Thus, compilability classes (Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and De Raedt
2017; Friesen and Domingos 2016) and fixed parameter
tractability (Ganian et al. 2018) were considered, leading to
efficiently solvable fragments. Apart from that, generalizations of BDDs and DPLL were considered (Wilson 2005;
Dudek, Phan, and Vardi 2020; Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi
2009), in order to obtain better algorithms for S UM P ROD.
The computational complexity of S UM P ROD, however,
remained largely unconsidered. It is known that for every non-trivial, idempotent semiring the problem is NPhard (Bistarelli et al. 1999). Furthermore, there are some results for specific semirings like the natural number semiring N = (N, +, ·, 0, 1) and the Boolean semiring B =
({0, 1}, ∨, ∧, 0, 1). Here, S UM P ROD is #P-complete and
NP-complete, respectively (Stearns and Hunt III 1996). We
observe that there are significant deficiencies: there is no
general lower-bound and the gap between NP and #P seems
very large, given that one oracle call to #P already suffices to
solve any problem in the polynomial hierarchy (Toda 1989).
Further, we are left without upper bounds as there are semirings that are even “harder” than N, like the rational numbers
Q or polynomials N[x]. Therefore, a more detailed study of
the computational complexity of S UM P ROD is necessary in
order to better understand the problem and the influence of
the semiring parameter on its complexity.
When approaching the complexity analysis of S UM P ROD
over general semirings, we face a representational issue.
For semirings over an infinite set R, its elements need to
be encoded using a finite alphabet. Naturally, the time and
space required to solve S UM P ROD varies with different encodings (cf. Knapsack, which is polynomial for the unary
encoding of the integers). In order to characterize the intrinsic complexity independently of the encoding, we introduce Semiring Turing Machines (SRTMs) that can have unencoded semiring values on their tape. Based on SRTMs we
introduce NP(R), the class of problems solvable by SRTMs

Many important problems in AI, among them SAT, #SAT, and
probabilistic inference, amount to Sum-of-Products Problems, i.e. evaluating a sum of products of values from some
semiring R. While efficiently solvable cases are known, a
systematic study of the complexity of this problem is missing. We characterize the latter by NP(R), a novel generalization of NP over semiring R, and link it to well-known complexity classes. While NP(R) is unlikely to be contained in
FPS PACE ( POLY ) in general, for a wide range of commutative
(resp. in addition idempotent) semirings, there are reductions
to #P (resp. NP) and solutions are thus only mildly harder
to compute. We finally discuss NP(R)-complete reasoning
problems in well-known semiring formalisms, among them
Semiring-based Constraint Satisfaction Problems, obtaining
new insights into their computational properties.

Introduction
The Sum-of-Products Problem (S UM P ROD) (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi 2009) is as follows. Given a finite domain
D and functions fi : Dji → R, i = 1, . . . , n compute
P
Qn
~
(1)
X1 ,...,Xm ∈D
i=1 fi (Yi ),
where Y~i is a vector of variables from {X1 , . . . , Xm }. To
solve the problem, we need to compute the sum of the products of the functions fi for all assignments of the variables
Xi . The “sum” and the “product” do not need to be the
usual addition and multiplication over the reals, but can
be any addition ⊕ and multiplication ⊗ from a semiring
R = (R, ⊕, ⊗, e⊕ , e⊗ ).
Sum-of-Products Problems, over different semirings, are
present in many areas. On the one hand, many well known
problems, like SAT, #SAT, MAX-SAT and Most Probable
Explanation-inference are all S UM P ROD-instances, when
(⊕, ⊗) are (∧, ∨), (+, ·), (max, +) and (max, ·), respectively (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi 2009; Friesen and
Domingos 2016). On the other hand, in many works, definitions are parameterised with semirings (Bistarelli et al. 1999;
Green, Karvounarakis, and Tannen 2007; Goodman 1999;
Aji and McEliece 2000; Bistarelli and Santini 2010; Eiter
and Kiesel 2020; Kimmig, Van den Broeck, and De Raedt
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6304

