The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

End-to-End Differentiable Learning to HDR Image Synthesis for Multi-exposure
Images
Jung Hee Kim∗1 , Siyeong Lee∗2 , Suk-Ju Kang1
1

Department of Electronic Engineering Sogang University, Seoul, Korea
2
NAVER LABS, Bundang, Korea
kjhe129@sogang.ac.kr, siyeong.lee@naverlabs.com, sjkang@sogang.ac.kr

Abstract

Deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), have shown their significant role in reconstructing the HDR image. Two primary approaches exist in reconstructing the HDR image: direct reconstruction
methods (Eilertsen et al. 2017; Marnerides et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2020) and multi-exposure stack-based synthesis methods (Endo, Kanamori, and Mitani 2017; Lee, An, and Kang
2018a,b). Direct reconstruction aims to recover a HDR image (32bits/pixel) from a given single low dynamic range
(LDR) image (8bits/pixel). In this case, a large number
of LDR-HDR image pair data is required to train a deep
neural network (Endo, Kanamori, and Mitani 2017). There
have been many attempts to solve the data quantity problem
by crawling image pairs from the internet (Kim, Oh, and
Kim 2019) or generating synthetic image pairs (Liu et al.
2020). On the other hand, HDR synthesis with the multiexposure stack focuses on transferring exposures to generate the multi-exposure stack accurately. These approaches
alleviate the dataset quantity problem as they require much
fewer scenes with multi-exposure stack (Lee, An, and Kang
2018a,b). However, they suffer from severe local inversion
artifacts due to the limitations of networks being trained
only with the ground truth multi-exposure stack’s supervision. Therefore, the conventional approaches had difficulties
training the network in an end-to-end manner to reflect the
whole HDRI process.
We propose the differentiable HDR synthesis process,
which enables the end-to-end training procedure and alleviates the generation of the local inversion artifacts. We also
incorporate the image decomposition approach to disentangle an exposure transfer task and the recurrent network to
gradually increase or decrease the exposure level to reconstruct a multi-exposure stack from a single exposure image.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold as follows:

Recently, high dynamic range (HDR) image reconstruction
based on the multiple exposure stack from a given single exposure utilizes a deep learning framework to generate highquality HDR images. These conventional networks focus on
the exposure transfer task to reconstruct the multi-exposure
stack. Therefore, they often fail to fuse the multi-exposure
stack into a perceptually pleasant HDR image as the inversion
artifacts occur. We tackle the problem in stack reconstructionbased methods by proposing a novel framework with a fully
differentiable high dynamic range imaging (HDRI) process.
By explicitly using the loss, which compares the network’s
output with the ground truth HDR image, our framework enables a neural network that generates the multiple exposure
stack for HDRI to train stably. In other words, our differentiable HDR synthesis layer helps the deep neural network to
train to create multi-exposure stacks while reflecting the precise correlations between multi-exposure images in the HDRI
process. In addition, our network uses the image decomposition and the recursive process to facilitate the exposure transfer task and to adaptively respond to recursion frequency. The
experimental results show that the proposed network outperforms the state-of-the-art quantitative and qualitative results
in terms of both the exposure transfer tasks and the whole
HDRI process.

Introduction
Recently, various applications use high dynamic range imaging (HDRI) technique because it provides better aesthetic
appreciation than ordinary imaging techniques with a limited dynamic range (Sen and Aguerrebere 2016). Moreover,
HDRI aims to restore under-exposed and over-exposed regions, so that the reconstructed high dynamic range (HDR)
images convey much information such as image details, irrespective of the illuminance change. Especially, recent vision
systems have used HDRI to improve their performance in
terms of robustness and consistency (e.g., passing through
the tunnel). In this context, many approaches such as fusing
the multi-exposure stack (Debevec and Malik 2008), implementing the event cameras (Wang et al. 2019) have been
introduced to generate high-quality images with gamings
(Khaldieh et al. 2018) and sports (Weber 2015).

• We propose a novel framework with a differentiable
HDRI synthesis method. To overcome the conventional
limitations of multi-exposure stack-based HDR synthesis,
we applied the differentiable CRF function, which converts discrete pixel intensity values into luminance values
in the standard HDRI. By back-propagating the gradient
of the loss between the network’s outputs and ground truth
HDR images explicitly, the networks can escape the local optimum which only focuses on the exposure transfer
task, so that generates high-quality HDR images without

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1780

