The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computing an Efficient Exploration Basis for Learning with Univariate
Polynomial Features
Chaitanya Amballa,1 Manu K. Gupta,2∗ Sanjay P. Bhat 1
1

2

TCS Research, Hyderabad, India
Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India
{chaitanya.amballa, sanjay.bhat}@tcs.com, manu.gupta@ms.iitr.ac.in

Abstract

Online linear optimization problems form a special class
of online optimization problems where the decision set D
is a subset (usually compact and convex) of a d-dimensional
real vector space, and the costs are linear functions on Rd . In
the case of full-information or transparent feedback, the entire cost function is revealed to the learner after each round.
In contrast, only the cost of the last decision made by the
learner is revealed after each round in case of the bandit version of the problem.
While the well known strategy Follow-the-PerturbedLeader (FPL) yields a simple and efficient low-regret algorithm for adversarial online linear optimization under full
information (Hannan 1957; Kalai and Vempala 2005), the
harder bandit version requires more elaborate algorithms
that strike a delicate balance between 1) exploration aimed at
learning the unknown cost functions, and 2) exploitation that
uses a full-information algorithm like FPL on the cost function estimates obtained during exploration (Awerbuch and
Kleinberg 2008; McMahan and Blum 2004; Dani and Hayes
2006; Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi, and Kakade 2012; Abernethy,
Hazan, and Rakhlin 2012; Hazan and Karnin 2016).

Barycentric spanners have been used as an efficient exploration basis in online linear optimization problems in a bandit framework. We characterise the barycentric spanner for
decision problems in which the cost (or reward) is a polynomial in a single decision variable. Our characterisation of the
barycentric spanner is two-fold: we show that the barycentric
spanner under a polynomial cost function is the unique solution to a set of nonlinear algebraic equations, as well as the solution to a convex optimization problem. We provide numerical results to show that our method computes the barycentric
spanner for the polynomial case significantly faster than the
only other known algorithm for the purpose. As an application, we consider a dynamic pricing problem in which the
revenue is an unknown polynomial function of the price. We
then empirically show that the use of a barycentric spanner to
initialise the prior distribution in a Thompson sampling setting leads to lower cumulative regret as compared to standard
initialisations. We also illustrate the importance of barycentric spanners in adversarial settings by showing, both theoretically and empirically, that a barycentric spanner achieves the
minimax value in a static adversarial linear regression problem where the learner selects the training points while an adversary selects the testing points and controls the variance of
the noise corrupting the training samples.

Exploration Basis
The exploration in many of the algorithms cited above is
based on the intuitive idea that the value of a linear function
at any point can be predicted if the values of the function are
known at a set of basis elements. The exploration steps in all
these algorithms therefore involve sampling decisions from
a carefully chosen subset of the decision set called an exploration basis. The choice of the exploration basis is crucial,
as a wrong choice can “amplify” the effect of errors or noise
that might be present in the function values observed at the
basis elements.
To understand this, suppose we wish to estimate a linear function x 7→ µT x based on noisy measurements yi =
µT xi + i , i = 1, . . . , d, of the linear function on elements
of an exploration basis {x1 , . . . , xd } ⊂ Rd , with i being
the noise sample at the ith measurement. Assuming the basis elements to be linearly independent, a simple estimate of
µ is given by µ̂ = (X −1 )T y, where X is the matrix having
x1 , . . . , xd as its columns. The error that results if we use
our estimate µ̂ to predict the value of the function at a “test”
point z ∈ Rd is easily seen to be µ̂T z − µT z = T c(z),
where c(z) = X −1 z is the vector of coefficients required

Introduction
Background
Many sequential decision-making problems can be cast as
an online optimization problem, where a decision-maker, or
learner, chooses an action from a decision space D at each
round, and receives feedback in the form of a cost from the
environment. Well known examples include online routing
(Awerbuch and Kleinberg 2008) and dynamic pricing (Keskin and Zeevi 2014). The goal of the decision-maker, or
learner, is to learn the best decision over multiple rounds,
where “best” is defined in terms of a suitable notion of regret. In the stochastic version of such a problem, the costs
are assumed to be generated by a stochastic model, while in
the adversarial version, one allows for the possibility that the
cost functions may be chosen by an adversary.
∗
The second author was with TCS Research when this work
was performed.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6636

