The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PASSLEAF: A Pool-bAsed Semi-Supervised LEArning Framework for Uncertain
Knowledge Graph Embedding
Zhu-Mu Chen,1 Mi-Yen Yeh, 2 Tei-Wei Kuo 1,3,4
1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
4
Graduate Institute of Networking and Multimedia, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
Abstract

will randomly draw samples from the unseen (head, relation, tail) triplets and treat them as negative samples, i.e.,
triplets with zero confidence score. In fact, there can be lots
of triplets with various confidence scores outside the training set. For instance, the following two triplets (elephant,
has a, black eye) and (October, has property, cold) may not
exist in the training data sets but their existence, in reality,
is possible and the corresponding confidence scores should
not be zero. We call this a false-negative problem for training and aim to solve it. Second, UKGE is specifically tailored for the score function of DisMult (Yang et al. 2015), a
kind of semantic-based embedding method. It is not trivial
to extend UKGE for other types of embedding methods such
as translational-distance methods, some of which are proven
to have a surpassing performance on embedding knowledge
graphs. Third, UKGE boosts its performance by applying
probabilistic soft logic to create extra training samples based
on predefined rules, which requires human labor and domain
knowledge. We aim to design a training framework with no
human intervention while having the same or better performance.
In response to the above issues, we propose PASSLEAF,
a Pool-bAsed Semi-Supervised LEArning Framework for
the uncertain knowledge graph embedding, completely freed
from additional human labor. It consists of two parts, a confidence score prediction model that can adopt different types
of existing embedding score functions for a given triplet, and
the semi-supervised learning with both in-dataset positive
samples and automatically generated negative samples with
estimated confidence scores. PASSLEAF further maintains
a sample pool to gather the information learned at different
time steps.
Extensive experiment results on three open uncertain
knowledge graph data sets show that, when compared
with various existing knowledge graph embedding methods, PASSLEAF significantly reduces the impact of falsenegative samples. We further justify the efficacy of the sample pool to accumulate past experiences acquired from different data. Also, we validate the advantage of an uncertain
KG embedding method over a deterministic one in terms of
preserving an uncertain graph structure. In the task of tail
entity prediction, our model demonstrates up to 50 % reduction in weighted mean rank on CN15K compared to UKGE
and about 4% improvement in nDCG on NL27K.

In this paper, we study the problem of embedding uncertain
knowledge graphs, where each relation between entities is associated with a confidence score. Observing the existing embedding methods may discard the uncertainty information,
only incorporate a specific type of score function, or cause
many false-negative samples in the training, we propose the
PASSLEAF framework to solve the above issues. PASSLEAF
consists of two parts, one is a model that can incorporate different types of scoring functions to predict the relation confidence scores and the other is the semi-supervised learning
model by exploiting both positive and negative samples associated with the estimated confidence scores. Furthermore,
PASSLEAF leverages a sample pool as a relay of generated
samples to further augment the semi-supervised learning. Experiment results show that our proposed framework can learn
better embedding in terms of having higher accuracy in both
the confidence score prediction and tail entity prediction.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) embedding has drawn plenty of attention in the past decade because the low dimensional representation makes various machine learning models working on the structural knowledge possible. As the emergence
of uncertain knowledge graphs, which reflect the plausibility of knowledge facts in practice by associating an entityrelation-entity triplet with a confidence score, existing embedding approaches are not suitable because they naively neglect such plausibility information.
To our knowledge, UKGE (Chen et al. 2019) is the first
and the only embedding method designed for uncertain
knowledge graphs. The main idea is to map the score function, which originally measures the plausibility of a (head,
relation, tail) triplet in the vector space, to a scalar predicting the corresponding confidence score and make the loss
function the mean square error of the exact and the estimated
confidence score.
In light of the success of UKGE, we further find several
important issues to be solved so that we can significantly
improve the embedding quality of uncertain KG. First, during the training process, all the existing embedding methods
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4019

