The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Recurrent Belief Propagation Network for POMDPs
Yuhui Wang, Xiaoyang Tan
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{y.wang, x.tan}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

The incomplete and noisy data may lack information
which is critical for an agent to make the right decision.
However, in practice, the agents often have to take actions
continuously even when their perception is not perfect. For
example, a running automatic driving car or robot cannot
suddenly stop itself and then move again simply due to that
one or two frames from its radar perception sensors are missing or partially occluded. In such cases, traditional methods
addressing this issue (e.g., simply ignore the imperfect state
information or set a default action when that happens) are
not appropriate and could even bring disaster to the system.
Consequently, there is a great need to tackle such problems.
Such incomplete and noisy observation problem in continuous control can be formalized as a case of partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). The recent
most successful scheme for POMDPs is to aggregate the
history data over time. There are mainly two types of approaches to achieve this goal. The first type is to remember
the features of the past, e.g., by employing Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Hausknecht and Stone 2015; Zhu,
Li, and Poupart 2017; Karkus, Hsu, and Lee 2017). These
RNN-based methods are computational efficient and can be
trained end-to-end. However, these methods remember past
by deterministic feature computation and do not explicitly
incorporate the knowledge of the learned environment models. The second type are probabilistic methods which infer
the distribution of the latent state (called belief ) from history
of partially observable data. Compared to the first type, this
type of methods is able to characterize the uncertainty of the
knowledge about the current state. However, this is achieved
at the cost of requiring both the transition and observation
model, which are either assumed to be known (McAllester
and Singh 1999; Ross et al. 2008; Roijers, Whiteson, and
Oliehoek 2015) or learned. Previous methods usually make
strong assumption on the generative model to allow tractable
belief updating (Doshi-Velez et al. 2015; Katt, Oliehoek,
and Amato 2017; Azizzadenesheli, Lazaric, and Anandkumar 2016).
In this paper, we propose a new method for POMDPs
with incomplete and noisy observation, named Deep Recurrent Belief Propagation Network (DRBPN). The DRBPN
combines the strength of both previous two types of approaches, i.e., it is computationally efficient but preserves
the uncertainty for belief description as well. In particu-

In many real-world sequential decision-making tasks, especially in continuous control like robotic control, it is rare that
the observations are perfect, that is, the sensory data could
be incomplete, noisy or even dynamically polluted due to the
unexpected malfunctions or intrinsic low quality of the sensors. Previous methods handle these issues in the framework
of POMDPs and are either deterministic by feature memorization or stochastic by belief inference. In this paper, we
present a new method that lies somewhere in the middle of
the spectrum of research methodology identified above and
combines the strength of both approaches. In particular, the
proposed method, named Deep Recurrent Belief Propagation
Network (DRBPN), takes a hybrid style belief updating procedure − an RNN-type feature extraction step followed by an
analytical belief inference, significantly reducing the computational cost while faithfully capturing the complex dynamics
and maintaining the necessary uncertainty for generalization.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified on a collection of benchmark tasks, showing that our approach outperforms several state-of-the-art methods under various challenging scenarios.

Introduction
Significant progress has been made in reinforcement learning (RL) to solve a large number of tasks, such as Atari
games, board games and robotic control (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2017; Schulman et al. 2016). These methods
usually assume the states of the environment are fully observable. However, in realistic control tasks, the observation
data could be incomplete and noisy. Especially, we refer incomplete to that the the observation is dynamically missing,
which means that the missing components are changing over
timestep. This problem is very common in realistic continuous control task. Take robotic control as an example. The
agent perceives information of environment through sensors,
e.g., position sensor and velocity sensor. The incompleteness
could result from any malfunction in the sensor, too much
time of preprocessing, or intrinsically, the sensors’ different sampling frequency from each other (Randlv and Alstrm
1997). In addition, due to the low quality of sensors, the observation could also be contaminated with noise.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10236

