The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Controllable Model of Grounded Response Generation
Zeqiu Wu,1 Michel Galley,2 Chris Brockett,2 Yizhe Zhang,2 Xiang Gao,2 Chris Quirk,2
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski,1 Jianfeng Gao,2 Hannaneh Hajishirzi,1, 3 Mari Ostendorf,1 Bill Dolan 2
1

University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
3
Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA, USA
zeqiuwu1@uw.edu, mgalley@microsoft.com

Abstract

A: You should check out the movie La La Land.
B: Tell me more about it.

Current end-to-end neural conversation models inherently
lack the flexibility to impose semantic control in the response
generation process, often resulting in uninteresting responses.
Attempts to boost informativeness alone come at the expense
of factual accuracy, as attested by pretrained language models’ propensity to “hallucinate” facts. While this may be mitigated by access to background knowledge, there is scant
guarantee of relevance and informativeness in generated responses. We propose a framework that we call controllable
grounded response generation (CGRG), in which lexical control phrases are either provided by a user or automatically
extracted by a control phrase predictor from dialogue context and grounding knowledge. Quantitative and qualitative
results show that, using this framework, a transformer based
model with a novel inductive attention mechanism, trained on
a conversation-like Reddit dataset, outperforms strong generation baselines.

1

A: I’m not sure
… Might be a
superhero
movie ...
I: No control,
No grounding

La La Land is a 2016 American romantic comedy-drama
musical film written and directed by Damien Chazelle. It
stars Ryan Gosling as a jazz pianist and Emma Stone as
an aspiring actress, who meet and fall in love while
pursuing their dreams in Los Angeles. Having been fond
of musicals during his time as a drummer, Chazelle first
conceptualized the film alongside Justin Hurwitz while
attending Harvard University together. Moving to Los
Angeles in 2010, Chazelle wrote the screenplay but did
not find a studio willing to finance the production without
changes to his design. Following the success of his 2014
film Whiplash, the project was picked up by Summit
Entertainment. Filming took place in Los Angeles from
August to September 2015, with the film's score
composed by Hurwitz and the dance choreography by
Mandy Moore. La La Land premiered at the
73rd………………….

II: Grounding only

IV: Both Control
III: Control only
and Grounding

Damien
Chazelle

A: It … stars
Damien
Chazelle.

A: It is a 2016
movie ...

… musical film
directed by
Damien Chazelle
… Ryan Gosling
as a jazz pianist ...

A: It is a
musical film
directed by
Damien
Chazelle and
Ryan Gosling
is also in it!

Figure 1: Generated responses tend to be generic or factually incorrect without grounding or control. Adding grounding improves information reliability but may lead to vague
responses. Adding control boosts response specificity, but
using both leads to contentful and reliable responses.

Introduction

End-to-end neural models for open-domain response generation (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015; Vinyals
and Le 2015; Gao, Galley, and Li 2019) are capable of generating conversational responses that are both fluent and contextually appropriate. Although the earliest neural generation models were characterized by bland and evasive responses (Li et al. 2016a), surprisingly human-like conversations can be generated using recent diversity-enhancing
strategies (Holtzman et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2019a) and massive GPT-2 style models (Radford et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2020).1 While blandness may no longer present a challenge,
the downside has been a propensity towards “hallucinated”
or “fake” output (Zellers et al. 2019) of the kind illustrated
in scenario I in Figure 1.
Grounded response generation (Ghazvininejad et al.
2018; Dinan et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2019) approaches can
inhibit hallucination of facts. Yet grounding alone (e.g, the

Wikipedia page about La La Land in scenario II of Figure 1) without control and semantic targeting may induce
output that is accurate but vague or irrelevant. Controllable
text generation (Hokamp and Liu 2017; Keskar et al. 2019;
Tang et al. 2019; See et al. 2019) provides a level of semantic control that can guide the decoder towards relevant
output, but in the absence of grounding the model is prevented from associating control phrases with correct facts.
We posit that both grounding knowledge and lexical control
are essential to generating reliable information. We therefore introduce a generation framework called controllable
grounded response generation that incorporates both components. Lexical controls not only enforce response specificity,
but filter lengthy, irrelevant or incoherent groundings.
We consider two scenarios for lexical control of conversational text generation. Control can come from a human user,
as in applications where an editorial assistant helps a person
write a message. Figure 2 depicts a person typing keywords
to indicate their semantic intent, while the machine helps
construct the response to be sent out. Alternatively, control
could be predicted in a fully automated system.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For a related task (document creation), 72% of human judges
found GPT-2 credible vs. 83% for New York Times articles: https:
//openai.com/blog/gpt-2-6-month-follow-up/

14085

