The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforced Multi-Teacher Selection for Knowledge Distillation
Fei Yuan1∗ Linjun Shou2 Jian Pei3 Wutao Lin2 Ming Gong2 Yan Fu1 Daxin Jiang2†
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft STCA NLP Group
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
feiyuan@std.uestc.edu.cn, {lisho,wutlin,migon,djiang}@microsoft.com
jpei@cs.sfu.ca, fuyan@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

Teacher

In natural language processing (NLP) tasks, slow inference
speed and huge footprints in GPU usage remain the bottleneck
of applying pre-trained deep models in production. As a popular method for model compression, knowledge distillation
transfers knowledge from one or multiple large (teacher) models to a small (student) model. When multiple teacher models
are available in distillation, the state-of-the-art methods assign
a fixed weight to a teacher model in the whole distillation.
Furthermore, most of the existing methods allocate an equal
weight to every teacher model. In this paper, we observe that,
due to the complexity of training examples and the differences in student model capability, learning differentially from
teacher models can lead to better performance of student models distilled. We systematically develop a reinforced method
to dynamically assign weights to teacher models for different
training instances and optimize the performance of student
model. Our extensive experimental results on several NLP
tasks clearly verify the feasibility and effectiveness of our
approach.

Student

MRPC

MNLI-mm

Acc

Acc

BERT-Base
RoBERTa-Base

N/A
N/A

83.3
88.5

83.8
86.8

BERT-Base
RoBERTa-Base

BERT3
BERT3

74.0
73.0

75.3
71.9

Table 1: RoBERTa-Base performs better than BERT-Base.
However, the student model distilled from BERT-Base, the
weaker model, performs better than the same student model
distilled from RoBERTa-Base, the stronger teacher model.

Introduction
Deep pre-trained models, such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018),
XLNet (Yang et al. 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) and
ALBERT (Lan et al. 2019), have proved effective on many
NLP tasks by establishing record-breaking state-of-the-art
results. However, due to huge amounts of model parameters,
typically at the magnitude of hundreds of millions or even
billions, the bottleneck for applying those pre-trained models
in production is the slow inference speed and the huge footprints in using GPUs. To save the computation cost and speed
up the inference process, knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) as an effective approach to
compress large models into smaller ones stands out and becomes the de facto best choice among other alternatives, such
as pruning (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Han et al. 2015) and
quantization (Gong et al. 2014).
The knowledge distillation approach is based on a teacherstudent learning paradigm, where a teacher model, which
is often large, is taken and the output of the teacher model
∗

Work is done during internship at Microsoft STCA NLP Group.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

14284

is integrated as a soft target in the loss function to train a
student model, which is often small. The teacher-student
learning paradigm demonstrates excellent performance on
various NLP tasks (Kim and Rush 2016; Tang et al. 2019).
Knowledge distillation methods start from a single teacher.
Some recent methods employ multiple teachers and show
great promises in further boosting student model performance
effectively.
Most of the existing methods using multiple teachers simply assign an equal weight to all teacher models during
the whole distillation process. The uniform distribution of
weights among all teachers keeps the coordination, management and implementation of the multi-teacher framework
simple. At the same time, the indifference to strengths and
weaknesses of various teacher models leaves a huge untouched space for better knowledge distillation. To make
a multi-teacher approach work well, teacher models have to
be diverse. Exploiting the diverse strengths of various teacher
models can bring in huge advantages.
Individual teacher models may perform differently on various instances. Different models may vary in hypothesis space,
optimization strategy, parameter initialization and many other
factors, which result in different performance among different
cases. Ideally, we want to assign different weights to different
teacher models for different training instances according to
their performance in individual cases.
Differentiating among teacher models is far from trivial.
Surprisingly, a stronger teacher model may not necessarily
lead to a better student model. As shown in Table 1 (Sun et
al. (2019)), the RoBERTa-Base model performs better than

