The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)
Hash channel 1

Deep Unsupervised Image Hashing by Maximizing Bit Entropy

Hash channel 2

...

Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
{y.li-19, j.c.vangemert}@tudelft.nl

...

...

Yunqiang Li and Jan van Gemert

Distribution over images

N images
Hash channel 1

N

Deep Encoder
to K features

K

Hash channel

Standard hashing

Hash channel

Our Bi-half Net hashing

...

...

...

Unsupervised hashing is important for indexing huge image
or video collections without having expensive annotations
available. Hashing aims to learn short binary codes for compact storage and efficient semantic retrieval. We propose an
unsupervised deep hashing layer called Bi-half
Net
that2maxHash
channel
imizes entropy of the binary codes. Entropy is maximal when
both possible values of the bit are uniformly (half-half) distributed. To maximize bit entropy, we do not add a term to the
loss function as this is difficult to optimize and tune. Instead,
images
we design a new parameter-free networkDistribution
layer toover
explicitly
force continuous image features to approximate the optimal
half-half bit distribution. This layer is shown to minimize
a penalized term of the Wasserstein distance between the
learned continuous image features and the optimal half-half
bit distribution. Experimental results on the image datasets
Flickr25k, Nus-wide, Cifar-10, Mscoco, Mnist and the video
datasets Ucf-101 and Hmdb-51 show that our approach leads
to compact codes and compares favorably to the current stateof-the-art.

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Abstract

Semantically similar images or videos can be found by comparing their output features in the last layer of a deep network. Such features are typically around 1,000 continuous
floating point values (He et al. 2016), which is already too
slow and large for moderately sized datasets of a few million
samples. Speed and storage are greatly improved by replacing the continuous features with just a small number of bits.
Unsupervised hashing aims to learn compact binary codes
that preserves semantic similarity without making use of any
annotated label supervision and is thus of great practical importance for indexing huge visual collections.
In this paper, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we see the transition
from a continuous variable to a discrete binary variable as a
lossy communication channel. The capacity of a hash bit as
measured by the entropy is maximized when it is half-half
distributed: Half of the images are encoded with −1 and the
other half of the images is encoded with +1. We minimize
the information loss in the hash channel by forcing the continuous variable to be half-half distributed. Other methods
have optimized entropy by adding an additional term to the

...

Introduction

...

...

Figure 1: Hashing compresses N images to K bits per image. K continuous features are learned, and thresholded to
K binary values. We see the continuous to binary transition as a lossy communication channel –a hash channel– between a single continuous value u to a single discrete binary
value b. The green histograms (standard hashing) and blue
histograms (our approach) show how a single feature is distributed over the N images. Instead of adding
an additional
Hash channel 2
loss term, we design a Bi-half layer to explicitly maximizes
the bit capacity in the hash channel, leading to more informative hash codes, as measured by the entropy H of the bits
over the images which leads to improved hashing accuracy.
loss (Erin Liong et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2014; Shen et al. 2018;
Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008; Xu et al. 2013) which
adds an additional hyper-parameter to tune and is difficult to
optimize. Instead, we propose Bi-half: A new parameter-free
network layer which is shown to minimize the optimal transport cost as measured by the Wasserstein distance. We here
explicitly design a new layer to maximize the bit capacity in
the hash channel, leading to compact and informative hash
codes which yield excellent hashing similarity accuracy.
We have the following contributions.
• A simple, parameter-free, bi-half layer to maximize hash
channel information capacity;
• A Wasserstein distance is minimized end-to-end to align
continuous features with the optimal discrete distribution;
• We study 2 alternatives to maximizing bit entropy using
an additional term in the loss;
• We show state-of-the-art results for unsupervised hashing
on 5 image datasets, and 2 video datasets, and make our
code available1 .

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2002

https://github.com/liyunqianggyn/Deep-Unsupervised-Image-Hashing

