The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Verification of Neural ODEs with Stochastic Guarantees
Sophie Gruenbacher1 , Ramin Hasani1,2 , Mathias Lechner3 , Jacek Cyranka4 ,
Scott A. Smolka5 , Radu Grosu1
1

Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
3
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (IST Austria)
4
University of Warsaw
5
Stony Brook University
sophie.gruenbacher@tuwien.ac.at, rhasani@mit.edu, mathias.lechner@ist.ac.at, jcyranka@gmail.com,
sas@cs.stonybrook.edu, radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at
2

Neural ODE

Abstract

.$ " = / " , "" = "(1" )

Initial states ℬ)

We show that Neural ODEs, an emerging class of timecontinuous neural networks, can be verified by solving a
set of global-optimization problems. For this purpose, we
introduce Stochastic Lagrangian Reachability (SLR), an
abstraction-based technique for constructing a tight Reachtube (an over-approximation of the set of reachable states
over a given time-horizon), and provide stochastic guarantees
in the form of confidence intervals for the Reachtube bounds.
SLR inherently avoids the infamous wrapping effect (accumulation of over-approximation errors) by performing local
optimization steps to expand safe regions instead of repeatedly forward-propagating them as is done by deterministic
reachability methods. To enable fast local optimizations, we
introduce a novel forward-mode adjoint sensitivity method
to compute gradients without the need for backpropagation.
Finally, we establish asymptotic and non-asymptotic convergence rates for SLR.

"%

"%

"(()
'"

(

$"

$$! ("(())
$"

$$! ("" )

← '# = −- (

""

Reachset ℬ!
"!

"!
t"

t#

Figure 1: The conservative reachset Bj at time tj computed
using Lagrangian reachability and global optimization, for a
Neural ODE starting from the ball B0 at time t0 .
theoretical foundation for the verification of Neural ODE
networks.
In particular, we introduce Stochastic Lagrangian Reachability (SLR), a new analysis technique with provable convergence and conservativeness guarantees for Neural ODEs
∂t x = f , with field f (x, x(0), t, θ), hidden states x(t), and
parameters θ. (SLR works in fact for any nonlinear system
defined by a set of nonlinear differential equations.)
At the core of SLR is the translation of the reachability
problem to a global optimization problem, at every time step
t. The latter is solved globally, by uniformly sampling states
x from an initial ball B0 , and locally, by computing a local
minimum via gradient descent from x. SLR avoids gradient
descent if x is within a spherical-cap around a previously
sampled state or its corresponding local minimum.
The radius of the cap is derived from the interval computation of the local Lipschitz constant of the objective function within the cap. The minimum computed by SLR at time
t stochastically defines an as-tight-as-possible ellipsoid covering all states reached at t by the solution starting in B0 ,
with tolerance µ and confidence 1 − γ, for given values of µ
and γ. See Figure 1.
Since SLR employs interval arithmetic only locally to
compute the spherical-caps (also called safety or tabu regions), it avoids the infamous wrapping effect (Lohner 1992)
of deterministic reachability methods (see Table 1), which

Introduction
Neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) (Chen
et al. 2018), which are analogous to a continuous-depth version of deep residual networks (He et al. 2016), exhibit
considerable computational efficiency on time-series modeling tasks. Although Neural ODEs do not necessarily improve the performance of contemporary deep models, they
enable the rich theory and tools from the field of differential equations to be applied to deep models. Examples include a better characterization of Neural ODEs (Rubanova,
Chen, and Duvenaud 2019; Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019;
Durkan et al. 2019; Jia and Benson 2019), and a better understanding of their robustness (Yan et al. 2020), stability
(Yang et al. 2020), and controllability (Quaglino et al. 2019;
Holl, Koltun, and Thuerey 2020; Kidger et al. 2020).
As the use of Neural ODEs on real-world applications increases (Finlay et al. 2020; Lechner et al. 2020; Erichson
et al. 2020; Lechner and Hasani 2020; Hasani et al. 2020b),
so does the importance of ensuring their safety through the
use of verification techniques. In this paper, we establish a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11525

