The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Justicia: A Stochastic SAT Approach to Formally Verify Fairness *
Bishwamittra Ghosh1 , Debabrota Basu2,3 , Kuldeep S. Meel1
1

2

National University of Singapore, Singapore
Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden
3
Scool, Inria Lille- Nord Europe, France

Abstract

Trained Decision Tree

age

As a technology ML is oblivious to societal good or bad,
and thus, the field of fair machine learning has stepped up to
propose multiple mathematical definitions, algorithms, and
systems to ensure different notions of fairness in ML applications. Given the multitude of propositions, it has become
imperative to formally verify the fairness metrics satisfied by
different algorithms on different datasets. In this paper, we
propose a stochastic satisfiability (SSAT) framework, Justicia,
that formally verifies different fairness measures of supervised
learning algorithms with respect to the underlying data distribution. We instantiate Justicia on multiple classification and
bias mitigation algorithms, and datasets to verify different fairness metrics, such as disparate impact, statistical parity, and
equalized odds. Justicia is scalable, accurate, and operates on
non-Boolean and compound sensitive attributes unlike existing
distribution-based verifiers, such as FairSquare and VeriFair.
Being distribution-based by design, Justicia is more robust
than the verifiers, such as AIF360, that operate on specific test
samples. We also theoretically bound the finite-sample error
of the verified fairness measure.

age < 40

Y

age ≥ 40

fitness income

0

1
income

Ŷ

0

Y

income
≥
0.29

fitness
≥
0.61

N Y

N

income
≥
0.69

N

1
fitness

1

0 1

0

Figure 1: A trained decision tree to learn eligibility for health
insurance using age-dependent fitness and income indicators.

learn to differentiate on the basis of a sensitive attribute, it
discriminates different age groups due to the utilitarian sense
of accuracy that it tries to optimize.
Fair ML. Statistical discriminations caused by ML algorithms have motivated researchers to develop several frameworks to ensure fairness and several algorithms to mitigate
bias. Existing fairness metrics mostly belong to three categories: independence, separation, and sufficiency (Mehrabi
et al. 2019). Independence metrics, such as demographic
parity, statistical parity, and group parity, try and ensure the
outcomes of an algorithm to be independent of the groups
that the individuals belong to (Feldman et al. 2015; Dwork
et al. 2012). Separation metrics, such as equalized odds, define an algorithm to be fair if the probability of getting the
same outcomes for different groups are same (Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016). Sufficiency metrics, such as counterfactual
fairness, constrain the probability of outcomes to be independent of individual’s sensitive data given their identical
non-sensitive data (Kusner et al. 2017).
In Figure 1, independence is satisfied if the probability
of getting insurance is same for both the age groups. Separation is satisfied if the number of ‘actually’ (ground-truth)
ineligible and eligible people getting the insurance are same.
Sufficiency is satisfied if the eligibility is independent of their
age given their attributes are the same. Thus, we see that the
metrics of fairness can be contradictory and complimentary
depending on the application and the data (Corbett-Davies

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is becoming the omnipresent technology of our time. ML algorithms are being used for highstake decisions like college admissions, crime recidivism,
insurance, and loan decisions. Thus, human lives are now
pervasively influenced by data, ML, and their inherent bias.
Example 0.1. Let us consider an example (Figure 1) of deciding eligibility for health insurance depending on the fitness
and income of the individuals of different age groups (2040 and 40-60). Typically, incomes of individuals increase as
their ages increase while their fitness deteriorates. We assume
relation of income and fitness depends on the age as per the
Normal distributions in Figure 1. Now, if we train a decision
tree (Narodytska et al. 2018) on these fitness and income
indicators to decide the eligibility of an individual to get a
health insurance, we observe that the ‘optimal’ decision tree
(ref. Figure 1) selects a person above and below 40 years with
probabilities 0.18 and 0.72 respectively. This simple example
demonstrates that even if an ML algorithm does not explicitly
* Source code: https://github.com/meelgroup/justicia
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7554

