The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evolutionary Game Theory Squared:
Evolving Agents in Endogenously Evolving Zero-Sum Games
Stratis Skoulakis,1 Tanner Fiez,2 Ryann Sim,1 Georgios Piliouras,1∗ Lillian Ratliff 2∗
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
University of Washington
{efstratios, georgios}@sutd.edu.sg, {fiezt, ratliffl}@uw.edu, ryann_sim@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
The predominant paradigm in evolutionary game theory and
more generally online learning in games is based on a clear distinction between a population of dynamic agents that interact
given a fixed, static game. In this paper, we move away from
the artificial divide between dynamic agents and static games,
to introduce and analyze a large class of competitive settings
where both the agents and the games they play evolve strategically over time. We focus on arguably the most archetypal
game-theoretic setting—zero-sum games (as well as network
generalizations)—and the most studied evolutionary learning
dynamic—replicator, the continuous-time analogue of multiplicative weights. Populations of agents compete against each
other in a zero-sum competition that itself evolves adversarially to the current population mixture. Remarkably, despite
the chaotic coevolution of agents and games, we prove that
the system exhibits a number of regularities. First, the system
has conservation laws of an information-theoretic flavor that
couple the behavior of all agents and games. Secondly, the
system is Poincaré recurrent, with effectively all possible initializations of agents and games lying on recurrent orbits that
come arbitrarily close to their initial conditions infinitely often.
Thirdly, the time-average agent behavior and utility converge
to the Nash equilibrium values of the time-average game. Finally, we provide a polynomial time algorithm to efficiently
predict this time-average behavior for any such coevolving
network game.

1

(a) Population y evolution

(b) Environment w evolution

(c) Coevolution of y and w

Figure 1: Poincaré recurrence in a time-evolving generalized
Rock-Paper-Scissors model.

Introduction

The problem of analyzing evolutionary learning dynamics in
games is of fundamental importance in several fields such as
evolutionary game theory (Sandholm 2010), online learning
in games (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006; Nisan et al. 2007),
and multi-agent systems (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008).
The dominant paradigm in each area is that of evolutionary
agents adapting to each others behavior. In other words, the
dynamism of the environment of each agent is driven by the
other agents, whereas the rules of interaction between the
agents, that is, the game, is static. This separation between
evolving agents and a static game is so standard that it typically goes unnoticed, however, this fundamental restriction
does not allow us to capture many applications of interest. In
∗

Joint last authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11343

artificial intelligence (Wang et al. 2019; Garciarena, Santana,
and Mendiburu 2018; Costa et al. 2019; Miikkulainen et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2019; Stanley and Miikkulainen 2002) as well
as biology, sociology, and economics (Stewart and Plotkin
2014; Tilman, Plotkin, and Akçay 2020; Tilman, Watson,
and Levin 2017; Bowles, Choi, and Hopfensitz 2003; Weitz
et al. 2016), the rules of interaction can themselves adapt to
the collective history of the agent behavior. For example, in
adversarial learning and curriculum learning (Huang et al.
2011; Bengio et al. 2009), the difficulty of the game can increase over time by exactly focusing on the settings where
the agent has performed the weakest. Similarly, in biology
or economics, if a particular advantageous strategy is used
exhaustively by agents, then its relative advantages typically
dissipate over time (negative frequency-dependent selection,
see Heino, Metz, and Kaitala 1998), which once again drives
the need for innovation and exploration.
In all these cases, the game itself stops being a passive

