The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamically Grown Generative Adversarial Networks
Lanlan Liu* , 1 Yuting Zhang, 2 Jia Deng, 3 Stefano Soatto 2
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
Amazon Web Services
3
Princeton University
llanlan@umich.edu, yutingzh@amazon.com, jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu, soattos@amazon.com

Abstract

researchers. There is a large space that still remains underexplored. For example, are symmetric generator and discriminator optimal? Are the layer choices optimal? In this
paper, we propose an automatic method to explore this rich
architecture space by dynamically growing a GAN during
training, optimizing the growing strategy together with its
network parameters.
Our Dynamically Grown GAN (DGGAN) method embeds architecture search techniques as an interleaving step
with gradient-based training to periodically seek the optimal
regarding the balancing between the generator and discriminator, choice of network units, and growing strategy. That is,
we alternate between optimizing the generator and discriminator architecture and training the new architecture. More
specifically, when optimizing the generator and discriminator architecture, our method grows layer(s) from previous
architecture, with where to grow (generator or discriminator or both) and how to grow in the automatic framework.
The new architecture is then trained with weight inheritance
from the previous architecture.
Our method enjoys the benefits of both easing the optimization by progressively growing the architecture and
exploring more architecture design space by architecture
search. This combination is beneficial to discover wellperforming GANs, especially with high-resolution images.
Compared to progressively growing GANs (Karras et al.
2018) with a manually-designed growing strategy, our dynamic growing method explores much richer architecture
space and growing strategies. More specifically, our method
allows the generator and the discriminator to grow alone
or together dynamically in the process, creating diverse
and unconventional balance between them. Compared to
prior work AutoGAN (Gong et al. 2019) and AGAN (Wang
and Huan 2019), which combine architecture search with
GANs, we complement progressive growing with architecture search to eases the training of GANs with complicated
architectures and high resolutions. This novel perspective
enables our method to work on higher resolutions while
these prior works only worked on at most 48×48.
Our experiments show that we achieve the new state-ofthe-art on CIFAR-10 and the best performance among non
part-based GANs on LSUN for image generation. With further analysis of the thousands of models in our search procedure, we observe several practical conclusions on the GAN

Recent work introduced progressive network growing as a
promising way to ease the training for large GANs, but the
model design and architecture-growing strategy still remain
under-explored and needs manual design for different image
data. In this paper, we propose a method to dynamically grow
a GAN during training, optimizing the network architecture
and its parameters together with automation. The method embeds architecture search techniques as an interleaving step
with gradient-based training to periodically seek the optimal architecture-growing strategy for the generator and discriminator. It enjoys the benefits of both eased training because of progressive growing and improved performance because of broader architecture design space. Experimental results demonstrate new state-of-the-art of image generation.
Observations in the search procedure also provide constructive insights into the GAN model design such as generatordiscriminator balance and convolutional layer choices.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) have recently advanced in the literature of image generation and editing. However, training a GAN remains difficult for new data domains, especially for largescale GANs. One of the main issues is that training a GAN
can be unstable and difficult (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Heusel et al. 2017)—as a two-player game, generator or discriminator could easily dominate the training and
cause the training signal to vanish or explode. With bigger
networks and higher resolutions, this issue gets worse with
more complex network parameter space.
Recent work introduced the progressive growing of
GANs (Karras et al. 2018) to ease the training for large
GANs. It starts with generating low-resolution images with a
small network and then progressively adds new layers to the
network to generate higher-resolution images. As demonstrated by (Karras et al. 2018), it makes training large GANs
easier and improve the quality of generated images in high
resolutions.
However, in this progressive-growing process for architectures, the layers and growing schedules are predefined by
* Work conducted during internship at Amazon.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8680

