The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Probabilistic Dependency Graphs
Oliver Richardson, Joseph Y. Halpern
Cornell University, Computer Science Department, Ithaca NY 14853
{oli, halpern}@cs.cornell.edu

and g, g), indicating whether floomps and guns are prohibited.
The semantics of a BN offer her two choices: either assume
that F and G to be independent and give (unconditional)
probabilities of F and G, or choose a direction of dependency,
and give one of the two unconditional probabilities and a
conditional probability distribution. As there is no reason to
choose either direction of dependence, the natural choice is
to assume independence, giving her the BN on the left of
Figure 1.

Abstract
We introduce Probabilistic Dependency Graphs (PDGs), a
new class of directed graphical models. PDGs can capture
inconsistent beliefs in a natural way and are more modular
than Bayesian Networks (BNs), in that they make it easier to
incorporate new information and restructure the representation. We show by example how PDGs are an especially natural
modeling tool. We provide three semantics for PDGs, each of
which can be derived from a scoring function (on joint distributions over the variables in the network) that can be viewed
as representing a distribution’s incompatibility with the PDG.
For the PDG corresponding to a BN, this function is uniquely
minimized by the distribution the BN represents, showing that
PDG semantics extend BN semantics. We show further that
factor graphs and their exponential families can also be faithfully represented as PDGs, while there are significant barriers
to modeling a PDG with a factor graph.

1

f

f

g

g

.9

.1

.05

.95

F

Introduction

In this paper we introduce yet another graphical tool for
modeling beliefs, Probabilistic Dependency Graphs (PDGs).
There are already many such models in the literature, including Bayesian networks (BNs) and factor graphs. (For an
overview, see (Koller and Friedman 2009).) Why does the
world need one more?
Our original motivation for introducing PDGs was to be
able capture inconsistency. We want to be able to model
the process of resolving inconsistency; to do so, we have to
model the inconsistency itself. But our approach to modeling
inconsistency has many other advantages. In particular, PDGs
are significantly more modular than other directed graphical
models: operations like restriction and union that are easily
done with PDGs are difficult or impossible to do with other
representations. The following examples motivate PDGs and
illustrate some of their advantages.
Example 1. Grok is visiting a neighboring district. From
prior reading, she thinks it likely (probability .95) that guns
are illegal here. Some brief conversations with locals lead her
to believe that, with probility .1, the law prohibits floomps.
The obvious way to represent this as a BN is to use two
random variables F and G (respectively taking values {f, f }
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12174

G

 f f 
.90 .10 ?
F



11
p0

g

.05

g


.95 ?

p

G

 g g 
.92 .08 f
p = .08 .92 f = (p0 )T

Figure 1: A BN (left) and corresponding PDG (right), which
can include more cpds; p or p0 make it inconsistent.
A traumatic experience a few hours later leaves Grok believing that “floomp” is likely (probability .92) to be another
word for gun. Let p(G | F ) be the conditional probability
distribution (cpd) that describes the belief that if floomps are
legal (resp., illegal), then with probability .92, guns are as
well, and p0 (F | G) be the reverse. Starting with p, Grok’s
first instinct is to simply incorporate the conditional information by adding F as a parent of G, and then associating the
cpd p with G. But then what should she do with the original
probability she had for G? Should she just discard it? It is
easy to check that there is no joint distribution that is consistent with both the two original priors on F and G and also
p. So if she is to represent the information with a BN, which
always represents a consistent distribution, she must resolve
the inconsistency.
However, sorting this out immediately may not be ideal.
For instance, if the inconsistency arises from a conflation
between two definitions of “gun”, a resolution will have
destroyed the original cpds. A better use of computation may
be to notice the inconsistency and look up the actual law.
By way of contrast, consider the corresponding PDG. In
a PDG, the cpds are attached to edges, rather than nodes of
the graph. In order to represent unconditional probabilities,

