The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Endomorphisms of Classical Planning Tasks
Rostislav Horčı́k1 , Daniel Fišer1,2
1

Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Prague, Czech Republic
2
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
xhorcik@fel.cvut.cz, danfis@danfis.cz

Abstract

o2

s1

Detection of redundant operators that can be safely removed
from the planning task is an essential technique allowing to
greatly improve performance of planners. In this paper, we
employ structure-preserving maps on labeled transition systems (LTSs), namely endomorphisms that are well known
from model theory, in order to detect redundancy. Computing endomorphisms of an LTS induced by a planning task
is typically infeasible, so we show how to compute some of
them on concise representations of planning tasks such as finite domain representations and factored LTSs. We formulate
the computation of endomorphisms as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) that can be solved by an off-the-shelf
CSP solver. Finally, we experimentally verify that the proposed method can find a sizable number of redundant operators on the standard benchmark set.

o4

s3

s0

s2

o5

o3
o5

o1
s0

o4
o3

s2

o1

o2
s1

Figure 1: Examples of transition systems with redundant
states. The dashed arrows show where to map redundant
states.
In this paper, we develop a new pruning method allowing
to detect redundant parts of the state space which cannot be
detected by a reachability analysis. Although it can, in some
cases, detect the same redundant operators as the method
based on op-mutexes and symmetries, our method does not
depend on the existence of symmetries.
Consider a simple transition system depicted in Fig. 1
(left) where the cost of o1 and o2 is less than the cost of
o3 and o4 , respectively, and o5 has a unit cost. It is obvious that the plan going through the state s2 is sub-optimal
and we can safely omit the state s2 and operators o3 and
o4 . However, the transition system has no symmetries due
to different costs of actions and the operator o5 . Moreover, all states are reachable and there are no dead-ends.
Our solution to detect such a redundancy is to look for a
structure-preserving self-map on the transition system which
maps plans to (possibly cheaper) plans. In the situation described above, such mapping could map the state s2 to s1 ,
o3 to o1 , o4 to o2 , and fix the remaining states and operators. More precisely, since transition systems can be understood as first-order structures, we just employ standard
structure-preserving maps from model theory, namely homomorphisms (see, e.g., Hodges 1997). In particular, we
are interested in endomorphisms which are homomorphisms
having the same domain and co-domain. It is well known
that homomorphisms preserve existential-positive formulas
(e.g. Hodges 1997, Section 2.4). As the existence of a plan
of a certain length can be expressed by such a formula, it
follows that an endomorphism maps plans to plans. Consequently, if we find an endomorphism whose image is strictly
smaller than the original transition system, then the states
and operators which are not in its image are necessarily redundant.

Introduction
One way to improve performance of classical planners (regardless of the employed planning technique) is by reducing
the size of the input planning task by removing operators
and facts so that at least one (optimal) plan is preserved.
The most commonly used method for the reduction of planning tasks is a reachability analysis in forward and backward
direction using hm heuristics (Haslum and Geffner 2000;
Alcázar and Torralba 2015). This method prunes operators
that are either unreachable or that lead to a dead-end state.
Nevertheless, even if we successfully remove all unreachable and dead-end operators, the remaining planning task
may still be unnecessarily large because of many alternative
plans it may contain.
Recently, Fišer, Torralba, and Shleyfman (2019) proposed a technique combining so-called operator mutexes
(op-mutexes) and symmetries in such a way that allows to
identify operators that are redundant in a sense that removing them still preserves at least one (optimal) plan. The main
idea behind this technique is based on the observation that
if two operators cannot occur simultaneously in an optimal
plan and there is a symmetry mapping one operator to another, then one of the operators can be safely removed. This
method works only on planning tasks exhibiting non-trivial
symmetries.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11835

