The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Toward Realistic Virtual Try-on Through Landmark-Guided Shape Matching
Guoqiang Liu 1 ∗ , Dan Song 2 ∗ , Ruofeng Tong 1 † , Min Tang 1
1

Zhejiang University
Tianjin University
lgqfhwy@zju.edu.cn, dan.song@tju.edu.cn, trf@zju.edu.cn, tang m@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the most recent and appealing kind of virtual try-on method
is based on image synthesis, which is efficient and saves lots
of manual efforts.
Given a customer photo and an in-shop clothes image, the
object of image-based virtual try-on is to synthesize a tryon image with the following requirements: (1) the person in
the result image owns the same identity (such as face and
hair) as the customer photo; (2) the clothes in the result image preserves the characteristics of the in-shop clothes image, such as color, texture, logo and text; and (3) the person in the result image puts on the new clothes seamlessly
and naturally while preserving the other personal characteristics such as exposed skin or pants (when trying on tops).
Although rapid progress (Han et al. 2018; Belongie, Malik,
and Puzicha 2002; Yang et al. 2020) has been made on this
topic, it remains challenging to synthesize a realistic try-on
photo satisfying the above requirements.
Existing methods usually first warp the in-shop clothes
image according to person representation and then synthesize the try-on image using the customer image and warped
clothes. Due to the large geometric variations between the
in-shop clothes and target clothes on person, the clothes
warping stage is the most challenging part in this task, which
also plays a vital role to synthesize realistic try-on image.
VITON (Han et al. 2018) warps the in-shop clothes image
by shape context matching (Belongie, Malik, and Puzicha
2002) with the generated clothing mask, which narrows
the geometry gaps. Instead of hand-crafted shape context
matching, CP-VTON (Wang et al. 2018a) proposes a new
learnable thin-plate spline (TPS) transformation network to
describe the image warping. To make the TPS (Belongie,
Malik, and Puzicha 2002) warping more stable and get rid
of obvious distortions, ACGPN (Yang et al. 2020) uses a
second-order difference constraint. However, as shown in
Fig. 1, the results of previous methods still contain artifacts.
To achieve more realistic results, we propose LM-VTON,
a virtual try-on network based on landmark-guided shape
matching. As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed method consists
of two main steps, where the first step generates the clothes
image consistent to customer’s pose and shape and the second step synthesizes the try-on image with original person seamlessly and naturally putting on the clothes. Specifically, for Step I, we introduce a novel landmark-based constraint to TPS warping(Belongie, Malik, and Puzicha 2002),

Image-based virtual try-on aims to synthesize the customer
image with an in-shop clothes image to acquire seamless and
natural try-on results, which have attracted increasing attentions. The main procedures of image-based virtual try-on usually consist of clothes image generation and try-on image synthesis, whereas prior arts cannot guarantee satisfying clothes
results when facing large geometric changes and complex
clothes patterns, which further deteriorates the afterwards tryon results. To address this issue, we propose a novel virtual try-on network based on landmark-guided shape matching (LM-VTON). Specifically, the clothes image generation
progressively learns the warped clothes and refined clothes
in an end-to-end manner, where we introduce a landmarkbased constraint in Thin-Plate Spline (TPS) warping to inject
finer deformation constraints around the clothes. The try-on
process synthesizes the warped clothes with personal characteristics via a semantic indicator. Qualitative and quantitative
experiments on two public datasets validate the superiority of
the proposed method, especially for challenging cases such as
large geometric changes and complex clothes patterns. Code
will be available at https://github.com/lgqfhwy/LM-VTON.

Introduction
Virtual try-on can greatly improve the efficiency and experience of shopping apparel products online, which will also
reduce the return rate. Due to the huge commercial value, it
has been a hot topic in both academic and industrial communities in recent years. Traditional virtual try-on methods
rely on 3D human body reconstruction and physically-based
cloth simulation to animate the state of clothes on body,
which still faces plenty of difficulties such as massive computations, manual labor and scanning devices that are not
widely available (Song et al. 2019). Another way adopted
by some companies for virtual try-on captures and stores the
apparel appearance on various body shapes with the help of
a shape controllable robot, which is later used for displaying
try-on effects on virtual user bodies. Such kind of virtual tryon method costs tremendous manual labor that most retailers
cannot afford. With the rapid development of deep learning,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding author.

2118

