The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Counting Maximal Satisfiable Subsets
Jaroslav Bendı́k,1 Kuldeep S. Meel 2
1

Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
National University of Singapore, Singapore
xbendik@fi.muni.cz, meel@comp.nus.edu.sg

2

Abstract

and Sakallah 2008; Belov, Lynce, and Marques-Silva 2012;
Reiter 1987). A dual notion to an MSS is that of a Minimal Correction Subset (MCS), which is a minimal subset of
constraints that need to be relaxed. Formally, given a set of
constraints F , a set C ⊆ F is a MSS of F iff F \ C is a
MCS of F .
The design of modern AI systems often encounters overconstrained systems and in such scenarios, MCSes and
MSSes often play a major role (Bailey and Stuckey 2005;
Liffiton and Sakallah 2008). In particular, in the field of diagnosis of systems, an MCS represents the constraints that
need to be relaxed for the system to be conflict-free. Similarly, in the context of a belief update and argumentation,
an MSS plays a key role in the update of belief in the
presence of an incoming contradictory belief. We refer the
reader to (Besnard, Grégoire, and Lagniez 2015) for further discussion. Often, finding a single MSS (resp. MCS)
is not sufficient, and we seek to enumerate all MSSes or
to count the number of MSSes. Especially, the MSS count
serves as a good diagnostic metric (Thimm 2018; Hunter
and Konieczny 2008), or as an indicator of the feasibility of
the complete MSS enumeration.
Our interest in counting the number of MSSes is motivated by the rise of Beyond NP paradigm wherein the
progress in the design of efficient techniques for satisfiability paved the way for interest in the design of efficient techniques for problems such as counting, sampling, optimization, and the like. In particular, the past two decades have
witnessed a proliferation of efficient techniques for model
counting, also denoted as #SAT. It is worth remarking that
initial studies into model counting were motivated by applications in Bayesian inference but the subsequent availability
of efficient model counting techniques have now led to several new applications ranging from neural network verification (Baluta et al. 2019), quantified information flow (Biondi
et al. 2018), computational biology (Sashittal and El-Kebir
2020), network reliability, and the like. In this regard, we
view that given the availability of efficient techniques for
finding an MSS/MCS, it is the right time to pursue an investigation into the design of efficient counting techniques
for MSSes/MCSes, and the availability of efficient counting
techniques for MCSes/MSSes would lead to a discovery of
a diverse set of applications for MSS counting.
Similarly to the early years of research into #SAT, the

Given an unsatisfiable set of constraints F , a maximal satisfiable subset (MSS) is a maximal subset of constraints C ⊆ F
such that C is satisfiable. Over the past two decades, the
steady improvement in runtime performance of algorithms
for finding MSSes has led to increased adoption of MSSbased techniques in a wide variety of domains. Motivated by
the progress in finding an MSS, the past decade has witnessed
a surge of interest in the design of algorithmic techniques to
enumerate all the MSSes, which has subsequently led to a discovery of new applications utilizing enumeration of MSSes.
The development of techniques for finding and enumeration
of MSSes mirrors a similar phenomenon of finding and enumeration of SAT solutions in the early 2000s, which subsequently motivated the design of algorithmic techniques for
model counting. In a similar spirit, we undertake a study to
investigate the feasibility of MSS counting techniques. In
particular, the focus point of our investigation is to answer
whether one can design efficient MSS counting techniques
that do not rely on explicit MSS enumeration. The primary
contribution of this work is an affirmative answer to the above
question in the form of a novel algorithm. The algorithm uses
a novel architecture of a wrapper W and a remainder R such
that the desired MSS count can be expressed as |W|−|R|. To
efficiently compute |W| and |R|, the algorithm relies on the
advances in projected model counting. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that our approach can scale to instances
clearly beyond the reach of enumeration-based techniques.

Introduction
Logical constraints have emerged as a prominent representation language to model environments and agents. A set of
constraints is called satisfiable if there exists an assignment
to variables such that all the constraints are satisfied. Similarly, a set of constraints is unsatisfiable (also referred to as
over-constrained) if there does not exist an assignment that
would satisfy the constraints (Meseguer et al. 2003). If we
are given an unsatisfiable set of constraints, the goal is often to analyze the unsatisfiability. In such cases, two notions
are of particular interest: a Minimal Unsatisfiable Subset
(MUS), which is a minimal subset of constraints that is unsatisfiable, and a Maximal Satisfiable Subset (MSS), which
is a maximal subset of constraints that is satisfiable (Liffiton
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3651

