The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ExGAN: Adversarial Generation of Extreme Samples
Siddharth Bhatia1 * , Arjit Jain2 * , Bryan Hooi1
1

National University of Singapore
2
IIT Bombay
siddharth@comp.nus.edu.sg, arjit@cse.iitb.ac.in, bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

hand, existing GAN-based methods generate typical samples,
i.e. samples that are similar to those drawn from the bulk
of the distribution. Our work seeks to address the question:
how can we design deep learning-based models which can
generate samples that are not just realistic, but also extreme
(with respect to any user-specified measure)? Answering this
question would allow us to generate extreme samples that can
be used by domain experts to assist in their understanding of
the nature of extreme events in a given application. Moreover,
such extreme samples can be used to perform stress-testing
of existing systems, to ensure that the systems remain stable
under a wide range of extreme but realistic scenarios.
Our work relates to the recent surge of interest in making deep learning algorithms reliable even for safety-critical
applications such as medical applications, self-driving cars,
aircraft control, and many others. Toward this goal, our work
explores how deep generative models can be used for understanding and generating the extremes of a distribution, for any
user-specified extremeness probability, rather than just generating typical samples as existing GAN-based approaches
do.
More formally, our problem is as follows: Given a data
distribution and a criterion to measure extremeness of any
sample in this data, can we generate a diverse set of realistic
samples with any given extremeness probability? Consider a
database management setting with queries arriving over time;
users are typically interested in resilience against high query
loads, so they could choose to use the number of queries
per second as a criterion to measure extremeness. Then using this criterion, we aim to simulate extreme (i.e. rapidly
arriving) but realistic query loads for the purpose of stress
testing. Another example is rainfall data over a map, as in
Figure 1. Here, we are interested in flood resilience, so we
can choose to measure extremeness based on total rainfall.
Then, generating realistic extreme samples would mean generating rainfall scenarios with spatially realistic patterns that
resemble rainfall patterns in actual floods, such as in the right
side of Figure 1, which could be used for testing the resilience
of a city’s flood planning infrastructure.
To model extremeness in a principled way, our approach
draws from Extreme Value Theory (EVT), a probabilistic
framework designed for modelling the extreme tails of distributions. However, there are two additional aspects to this
problem which make it challenging. The first issue is the lack

Mitigating the risk arising from extreme events is a fundamental goal with many applications, such as the modelling of
natural disasters, financial crashes, epidemics, and many others. To manage this risk, a vital step is to be able to understand
or generate a wide range of extreme scenarios. Existing approaches based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
excel at generating realistic samples, but seek to generate
typical samples, rather than extreme samples. Hence, in this
work, we propose ExGAN, a GAN-based approach to generate realistic and extreme samples. To model the extremes of
the training distribution in a principled way, our work draws
from Extreme Value Theory (EVT), a probabilistic approach
for modelling the extreme tails of distributions. For practical
utility, our framework allows the user to specify both the desired extremeness measure, as well as the desired extremeness
probability they wish to sample at. Experiments on real US
precipitation data show that our method generates realistic
samples, based on visual inspection and quantitative measures,
in an efficient manner. Moreover, generating increasingly extreme examples using ExGAN can be done in constant time
(with respect to the extremeness probability τ ), as opposed to
the O( τ1 ) time required by the baseline approach.

1

Introduction

Modelling extreme events in order to evaluate and mitigate
their risk is a fundamental goal with a wide range of applications, such as extreme weather events, financial crashes, and
managing unexpectedly high demand for online services. A
vital part of mitigating this risk is to be able to understand or
generate a wide range of extreme scenarios. For example, in
many applications, stress-testing is an important tool, which
typically requires testing a system on a wide range of extreme
but realistic scenarios, to ensure that the system can successfully cope with such scenarios. This leads to the question:
how can we generate a wide range of extreme but realistic
scenarios, for the purpose of understanding or mitigating
their risk?
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and
their variants have led to tremendous interest, due to their
ability to generate highly realistic samples. On the other
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6750

