The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Implicit Kernel Attention
Kyungwoo Song1 , Yohan Jung2 , Dongjun Kim2 , Il-Chul Moon* 2
1

2

Department of AI, University of Seoul
Department of ISysE, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
kyungwoo.song@uos.ac.kr, {becre1776,dongjoun57,icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

between instances and 2) the exponential of L2 norm for each
instance.

Abstract
Attention computes the dependency between representations,
and it encourages the model to focus on the important selective features. Attention-based models, such as Transformer
and graph attention network (GAT), are widely utilized for
sequential data and graph-structured data. This paper suggests
a new interpretation and generalized structure of the attention
in Transformer and GAT. For the attention in Transformer and
GAT, we derive that the attention is a product of two parts: 1)
the RBF kernel to measure the similarity of two instances and
2) the exponential of L2 norm to compute the importance of
individual instances. From this decomposition, we generalize
the attention in three ways. First, we propose implicit kernel
attention with an implicit kernel function instead of manual
kernel selection. Second, we generalize L2 norm as the Lp
norm. Third, we extend our attention to structured multi-head
attention. Our generalized attention shows better performance
on classification, translation, and regression tasks.

This paper proposes an implicit kernel function that generalizes the RBF kernel function, embedded in the attention.
Given that attention uses a kernel implicitly, we note that
the kernel function measures the similarity under the inductive bias embedded in the kernel. Traditionally, the modelers
manually selected kernels with the expert knowledge for a
specific domain or a dataset. We construct an implicit kernel
function instead of an explicit kernel to find a data-adaptive
kernel, which provides better task performances under the
data context. We formulate the implicit kernel function by
constructing the spectral density depending on the dataset because a kernel construction can be interpreted as the spectral
density estimation (Reed and Simon 1975; Yaglom 1987).
This paper further develops the formulation by introducing
multi-head implicit attention with a structured spectral density estimation.

Introduction
The magnitude term is the second component in the decomposition of attention, and the magnitude separately measures
the importance of each instance pair by an exponential of
their L2 norms. As L2 norm in the attention is rigid without
considering the dataset property, we extend L2 as the Lp
norm with a hyper-parameter p to control the scale of magnitude terms and attention weight sparsity. The p controls the
growth rate of the magnitude terms, which are the scale of
individual importance. By treating p as a hyper-parameter,
we can impose an inductive bias to focus on the relative importance between inputs (similarity) on translation tasks; or
the individual importance on each input (magnitude) for the
classification task. Besides, we find that the decrement of p
is eventually related to the sparsity of the attention weights,
empirically and theoretically.

Attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) is widely utilized to improve model performance as well as to explain
the model mechanisms. The attention in Transformer computes the dot-product between query and key, which are the
linear projections of hidden features. The attention in GAT
also utilizes the dot-product between a weight vector and a
concatenation of hidden representations. It is well known that
the dot-product of two vectors is a product of two distinct
terms: 1) the cosine of the angle between two vectors, which
computes the similarity; and 2) the individual norm of two
vectors, which measures the magnitude of each vector. This
opens a question on how to analyze the attention with the
explicitly separated terms of the similarity and the magnitude,
and how to generalize the separation in attentions.
We provide a new interpretation of attention, and this interpretation leads to generalized attention by formalizing the
attention weight into a multiplication of two terms: similarity and magnitude. We derive the explicit separation, so the
derivation reveals that the attention in Transformer and GAT
is a product of 1) the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel

In summary, we derive the decomposition of attention as
a product of similarity and magnitude. Under the decomposition, we generalize the attention with an implicit kernel
function and a Lp norm. Further, we extend our works to
structured multi-head attention with the implicit kernel functions. Our generalized implicit attention is exchangeable with
the attention in Transformer and GAT without increasing the
algorithmic complexity in order.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9713

