The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Simple and Effective Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning Framework
for Aspect Detection
Tian Shi1 , Liuqing Li2 , Ping Wang1 , Chandan K. Reddy1
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
2
Verizon Media
tshi@vt.edu, liuqing.li@verizonmedia.com, ping@vt.edu, reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract

Sentence
Replaced my 27” jvc clunker with this one.
It fits perfectly inside our armoire.
Good picture.
Easy to set up and program.
Descent sound, not great...
We have the 42” version of this set downstairs.
Also a solid set.

Unsupervised aspect detection (UAD) aims at automatically
extracting interpretable aspects and identifying aspect-specific
segments (such as sentences) from online reviews. However,
recent deep learning based topic models, specifically aspectbased autoencoder, suffer from several problems such as extracting noisy aspects and poorly mapping aspects discovered
by models to the aspects of interest. To tackle these challenges,
in this paper, we first propose a self-supervised contrastive
learning framework and an attention-based model equipped
with a novel smooth self-attention (SSA) module for the UAD
task in order to learn better representations for aspects and
review segments. Secondly, we introduce a high-resolution
selective mapping (HRSMap) method to efficiently assign aspects discovered by the model to the aspects of interest. We
also propose using a knowledge distillation technique to further improve the aspect detection performance. Our methods
outperform several recent unsupervised and weakly supervised approaches on publicly available benchmark user review
datasets. Aspect interpretation results show that extracted aspects are meaningful, have a good coverage, and can be easily
mapped to aspects of interest. Ablation studies and attention
weight visualization also demonstrate effectiveness of SSA
and the knowledge distillation method.

Aspect
General
General
Image
Ease of Use
Sound
General
General

Table 1: An example from Amazon product reviews about a
television and aspect annotations for every sentence.

Introduction
Aspect detection, which is a vital component of aspect-based
sentiment analysis (Pontiki et al. 2014, 2015), aims at identifying predefined aspect categories (e.g., Price, Quality)
discussed in segments (e.g., sentences) of online reviews.
Table 1 shows an example review about a television from
several different aspects, such as Image, Sound, and Ease of
Use. With a large number of reviews, automatic aspect detection allows people to efficiently retrieve review segments
of aspects they are interested in. It also benefits many downstream tasks, such as review summarization (Angelidis and
Lapata 2018) and recommendation justification (Ni, Li, and
McAuley 2019).
There are several research directions for aspect detection.
Supervised approaches (Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018) can
leverage annotated labels of aspect categories but suffer from
domain adaptation problems (Rietzler et al. 2020). Another
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13815

research direction consists of unsupervised approaches and
has gained a lot of attention in recent years. Early unsupervised systems are dominated by Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) based topic models (Brody and Elhadad 2010;
Mukherjee and Liu 2012; Garcı́a-Pablos, Cuadros, and Rigau
2018; Rakesh et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019). However, several recent studies have revealed that LDA-based approaches
do not perform well for aspect detection and the extracted
aspects are of poor quality (incoherent and noisy) (He et al.
2017). Compared to LDA-based approaches, deep learning
models, such as aspect-based autoencoder (ABAE) (He et al.
2017; Luo et al. 2019), have shown excellent performance in
extracting coherent aspects and identifying aspect categories
for review segments. However, these models require some
human effort to manually map model discovered aspects to aspects of interest, which may lead to inaccuracies in mapping
especially when model discovered aspects are noisy. Another
research direction is based on weakly supervised approaches
that leverage a small number of aspect representative words
(namely, seed words) for the fine-grained aspect detection
(Angelidis and Lapata 2018; Karamanolakis, Hsu, and Gravano 2019). Although these models outperform unsupervised
approaches, they do make use of human annotated data to
extract high-quality aspect seed words, which may limit their
application. In addition, they are not able to automatically
discover new aspects from review corpus.
We focus on the problem of unsupervised aspect detection
(UAD) since massive amount of reviews are generated every
day and many of them are for newer products. It is difficult
for humans to efficiently capture new aspects and manually
annotate segments for them at scale. Motivated by ABAE, we
learn interpretable aspects by mapping aspect embeddings

