The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Regret Bounds for Batched Bandits
Hossein Esfandiari,1 Amin Karbasi,2 Abbas Mehrabian,3 Vahab Mirrokni1
1

Google Research, New York City, New York, USA
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
3
McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada
esfandiari@google.com, amin.karbasi@yale.edu, abbas.mehrabian@gmail.com, mirrokni@google.com
2

Abstract

intermediate results. Note that a fully sequential policy, in
which exploration is done in a fully sequential manner, and
a fully parallel policy, in which exploration is completely
specified a priori without any information exchange, are
two extremes of the policy spectrum. In fact, carefully calibrating between the information parallelization phase (how
many experiments should be run in parallel) and the information exchange phase (how often information should be
shared) is crucial for applications in which running experiments is costly or time-consuming. Batch policies, which are
the focus of this paper, aim to find the sweet spot between
these two phases. The main challenge is to carefully design
batches of experiments, out of a combinatorially large set of
possibilities, which can be run in parallel and explore the
parameter space efficiently while being able to exploit the
parameter region with the highest utility.
In this paper, we study the problem of batch policies in
the context of multi-armed and linear bandits with the goal
of minimizing regret, the standard benchmark for comparing performance of bandit policies. We advance the theoretical understanding of these problems by designing algorithms along with hardness results. In particular, we prove
bounds for batched stochastic multi-armed bandits that improve and extend the best known regret bounds of Gao et al.
(2019), for any number of batches.

We present simple algorithms for batched stochastic multiarmed bandit and batched stochastic linear bandit problems.
We prove bounds for their expected regrets that improve and
extend the best known regret bounds of Gao, Han, Ren, and
Zhou (NeurIPS 2019), for any number of batches. In particular, our algorithms in both settings achieve the optimal expected regrets by using only a logarithmic number of batches.
We also study the batched adversarial multi-armed bandit
problem for the first time and provide the optimal regret, up
to logarithmic factors, of any algorithm with predetermined
batch sizes.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in optimizing many complex systems,
such as experimental design (Robbins 1952), clinical trials (Perchet et al. 2016), hyperparameter tuning (Snoek et al.
2015), and product marketing (Bertsimas and Mersereau
2007), is to simultaneously explore the unknown parameter
space while at the same time exploit the acquired knowledge
for maximizing the utility. In theory, the most convenient
way is to explore one parameter at a time. However, in practice, it is often possible/desirable, and sometimes the only
way, to explore several parameters in parallel. A notable example is designing clinical trials, where it is impractical to
wait to observe the effect of a drug on a single patient before deciding about the next trial. Instead, groups of patients
with multiple treatments are studied in parallel. Similarly, in
marketing and advertising, the efficacy of a strategy is not
tested on individual subjects one at a time; instead, multiple
strategies are run simultaneously in order to gather information in a timely fashion. Similar issues arise in crowdsourcing platforms, where multiple tasks are distributed among
users (Kittur, Chi, and Suh 2008), and time-consuming numerical simulations, which are prevalent in reinforcement
learning (Le, Voloshin, and Yue 2019; Lange, Gabel, and
Riedmiller 2012).
Parallelizing the exploration of the parameter space has
a clear advantage: more information can be gathered at a
shorter period of time. It also has a clear disadvantage: information cannot be immediately shared across different parallel paths, thus future decisions cannot benefit from the

2

Bandits, Regret, and Batch Policies

A bandit problem is a game between a player/learner and
an environment. The game is played over T rounds, called
the time horizon. In each round, first the player chooses
an action from a set of actions and then the environment
presents a reward. For instance, in clinical trials, the actions
correspond to the available treatments and the rewards correspond to whether the treatment cured the patient or not.
As the player does not know the future, she follows a policy,
a mapping from histories to actions. Similarly, the environment can also be formulated as a mapping from actions to
rewards. Note that both the player and the environment may
randomize their decisions. The standard performance measure for a bandit policy is its regret, defined as the difference
between the total expected reward collected by the policy
and the total expected reward collected by an optimal policy. Many bandit models exist depending on the type of the
environment; next we define those which we will use here.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7340

