The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multidimensional Uncertainty-Aware Evidential Neural Networks
Yibo Hu1 , Yuzhe Ou1 , Xujiang Zhao1 , Jin-Hee Cho2 , Feng Chen1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Falls Church, VA, USA
{yibo.hu, yuzhe.ou, xujiang.zhao}@utdallas.edu, jicho@vt.edu, feng.chen@utdallas.edu

Abstract

aleatoric uncertainty (AU) and epistemic uncertainty (EU),
where AU only considers data uncertainty caused by statistical randomness (e.g., observation noises) while EU refers
to model uncertainty introduced by limited knowledge or
ignorance in collected data. On the other hand, in the belief/evidence theory, Subjective Logic (SL) (Jøsang, Cho,
and Chen 2018) considered vacuity, which is caused by a
lack of evidence, as the key dimension of uncertainty. In addition to vacuity, they also defined other types of uncertainty,
such as dissonance (e.g., uncertainty due to conflicting evidence) or vagueness (e.g., uncertainty due to multiple beliefs
on a same observation).
Although conventional deep NNs (DNNs) have been
commonly used to solve classification tasks, uncertainty associated with classification classes has been significantly
less considered in NNs even if the risk introduced by misclassification may bring disastrous consequence in realworld situations, such as car crash due to the misclassification of objects in roads. Recently, techniques using evidential neural networks (ENNs) (Sensoy, Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018) have been proposed to explicitly model the uncertainty of class probabilities. An ENN uses the predictions of an NN as subjective opinions and learns a function that collects an amount of evidence to form the opinions by a deterministic NN from data. However, the ENN
is trained as a black box without explicitly considering different types of uncertainty in the data (e.g., vacuity or dissonance), which often results in overconfidence when tested
with out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. We measure the extent of confidence in a given classification decision based on
the high class probability of a given class (i.e., a belief in
SL). Overconfidence refers to a high class probability in an
incorrect class prediction. To mitigate the overconfidence issue, regularization methods have proposed to hand-pick auxiliary OOD samples to train the model (Malinin and Gales
2018; Zhao et al. 2019). However, the regularization methods with prior knowledge require a large amount of OOD
samples to ensure the good generalization of a model behaviour to the whole data space.
In this work, we propose a model called WGAN-ENN
(WENN) that combines ENNs with Wasserstein GAN
(WGAN) (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) to jointly
train a model with prior knowledge of a certain class (e.g.,
high vacuity OOD or high dissonance in-class boundary

Traditional deep neural networks (NNs) have significantly
contributed to the state-of-the-art performance in the task of
classification under various application domains. However,
NNs have not considered inherent uncertainty in data associated with the class probabilities where misclassification under
uncertainty may easily introduce high risk in decision making in real-world contexts (e.g., misclassification of objects
in roads leads to serious accidents). Unlike Bayesian NN that
indirectly infer uncertainty through weight uncertainties, evidential NNs (ENNs) have been recently proposed to explicitly
model the uncertainty of class probabilities and use them for
classification tasks. An ENN offers the formulation of the predictions of NNs as subjective opinions and learns the function
by collecting an amount of evidence that can form the subjective opinions by a deterministic NN from data. However, the
ENN is trained as a black box without explicitly considering
inherent uncertainty in data with their different root causes,
such as vacuity (i.e., uncertainty due to a lack of evidence) or
dissonance (i.e., uncertainty due to conflicting evidence). By
considering the multidimensional uncertainty, we proposed
a novel uncertainty-aware evidential NN called WGAN-ENN
(WENN) for solving an out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
problem. We took a hybrid approach that combines Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) with ENNs
to jointly train a model with prior knowledge of a certain
class, which has high vacuity for OOD samples. Via extensive
empirical experiments based on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, we demonstrated that the estimation of uncertainty
by WENN can significantly help distinguish OOD samples
from boundary samples. WENN outperformed in OOD detection when compared with other competitive counterparts.

Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) models have recently gained tremendous attention in the data science community. Despite their
superior performance in various decision making tasks, inherent uncertainty derived from data based on different root
causes has not been sufficiently explored. Predictive uncertainty estimation using Bayesian neural networks (BNNs)
has been explored for classification prediction or regression
in computer vision applications (Kendall and Gal 2017).
They considered well-known uncertainty types, such as
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7815

