The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

YOLObile: Real-Time Object Detection on Mobile Devices via
Compression-Compilation Co-Design
Yuxuan Cai1∗ , Hongjia Li1∗ , Geng Yuan1∗ , Wei Niu2 , Yanyu Li1 ,
Xulong Tang3 , Bin Ren2 , Yanzhi Wang1
1

Northeastern University
2
William & Mary
3
University of Pittsburgh
1
{cai.yuxu, li.hongjia, yuan.geng, li.yanyu, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu,
2
wniu@email.wm.edu, 2 bren@cs.wm.edu, 3 tax6@pitt.edu
Abstract

Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2017) and one-stage detectors
(Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017, 2018;
Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020; Liu et al. 2016; Lin
et al. 2017). Compared with two-stage detectors, one-stage
detectors aim to provide an equitable trade-off between accuracy and speed, and will be mainly discussed in this work.
Despite large efforts devoted, representative works such as
YOLO (Redmon et al. 2016; Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao
2020), SSD (Liu et al. 2016), still require extensive computation to achieve high mean average precision (mAP), result in the main limitation for real-time deployment on mobile devices. Apart from large-scale approaches mentioned
above, lightweight object detection architectures targeted for
mobile devices are investigated (Sandler et al.; Huang, Pedoeem, and Chen; Li et al.). However, the accomplished efficiency leads to non-negligible accuracy drop.
To address this issue in object detection detectors, model
compression techniques have been drawing attention, especially weight pruning methods, which have been proved as
one of the most effective approaches to reduce extensive
computation and memory intensity without sacrificing accuracy (Wen et al. 2016; Guo, Yao, and Chen 2016; Min
et al. 2018; He et al. 2018, 2019). By reducing the vast redundancy in the number of weights, models with structural
sparsity achieve higher memory and power efficiency and
low latency during inference. Generally, unstructured pruning and structured pruning are the two main trendy schemes
of weight pruning. Unstructured pruning eliminates weights
in an irregular manner, which causes the essential drawback
to obstruct hardware accelerations (Han et al. 2015; Guo,
Yao, and Chen 2016; Liu et al. 2018). Structured pruning
is observed with notable accuracy degradation due to the
coarse-grained nature in pruning whole filters/channels (Min
et al. 2018; Zhuang et al. 2018; Zhu, Zhou, and Li 2018; Ma
et al. 2020b; Zhao et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020b). To overcome
these shortcomings, pattern-based pruning is proposed incorporating fine-grained unstructured pruning in a hardware
aware fashion (Ma et al. 2020a; Niu et al. 2020). However,
it is only applicable to convolutional (CONV) layers with
3×3 kernels, significantly limiting its deployment in object
detection tasks.
The goal of this paper is to achieve real-time object de-

The rapid development and wide utilization of object detection techniques have aroused attention on both accuracy and
speed of object detectors. However, the current state-of-theart object detection works are either accuracy-oriented using
a large model but leading to high latency or speed-oriented
using a lightweight model but sacrificing accuracy. In this
work, we propose YOLObile framework, a real-time object
detection on mobile devices via compression-compilation
co-design. A novel block-punched pruning scheme is proposed for any kernel size. To improve computational efficiency on mobile devices, a GPU-CPU collaborative scheme
is adopted along with advanced compiler-assisted optimizations. Experimental results indicate that our pruning scheme
achieves 14× compression rate of YOLOv4 with 49.0 mAP.
Under our YOLObile framework, we achieve 17 FPS inference speed using GPU on Samsung Galaxy S20. By incorporating our proposed GPU-CPU collaborative scheme, the
inference speed is increased to 19.1 FPS, and outperforms
the original YOLOv4 by 5× speedup. Source code is at:
https://github.com/nightsnack/YOLObile.

1

Introduction

Object detection, one of the major tasks in the computer vision field, has been drawing extensive research from both
academia and industry thanks to the breakthrough of deep
neural network (DNN). Object detection is widely adopted
in numerous computer vision tasks, including image annotation, event detection, object tracking, segmentation, and activity recognition, with a wide range of applications, such as
autonomous driving, UAV obstacle avoidance, robot vision,
human-computer interaction, and augmented reality. Considering these application scenarios, it is equivalently important to maintain high accuracy and low latency simultaneously when deploy such applications on resource-limited
platforms, especially mobiles and embedded devices.
In the past decades, promising object detection approaches are proposed, which are mainly categorized into
two-stage detectors (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015;
∗

These Authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

955

