The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Subtype-aware Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Medical Diagnosis
Xiaofeng Liu,1,2 Xiongchang Liu, 2,3 Bo Hu, 2,4 Wenxuan Ji,5 Fangxu Xing, 1 Jun Lu*, 2 Jane You, 6
C.-C. Jay Kuo,7 Georges El Fakhri, 1 Jonghye Woo 1
1
Dept. of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Dept. of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3
China University of Mining and Technology, China
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, China
6
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
7
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2

Abstract
Recent advances in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
show that transferable prototypical learning presents a powerful means for class conditional alignment, which encourages the closeness of cross-domain class centroids. However,
the cross-domain inner-class compactness and the underlying fine-grained subtype structure remained largely underexplored. In this work, we propose to adaptively carry out the
fine-grained subtype-aware alignment by explicitly enforcing
the class-wise separation and subtype-wise compactness with
intermediate pseudo labels. Our key insight is that the unlabeled subtypes of a class can be divergent to one another with
different conditional and label shifts, while inheriting the local proximity within a subtype. The cases with or without the
prior information on subtype numbers are investigated to discover the underlying subtype structure in an online fashion.
The proposed subtype-aware dynamic UDA achieves promising results on a medical diagnosis task.

Figure 1: Illustration of the failure case of prototypical UDA
(left), and the idea of our subtype-aware UDA (right).

class-wise alignment. However, the CE loss in the source
domain cannot minimize the inner-class variation (Liu et al.
2016). The class-wise separation in the to-be tested target
domain cannot be well supported by the centroid closeness
objective. As shown in Fig. 1 left, although the class centroids are well aligned, the sparsely distributed target samples can be easily misclassified.
One way to tackle this is by simply enforcing the crossdomain inner-class feature distribution compactness. However, in many cases, the unlabeled subtypes in a class can be
diverse, and form an underlying local distribution. For instance, different cancer subtypes may have significantly diverse patterns (Yeoh et al. 2002). In such circumstances, the
shared pattern among two different subtypes may not be exclusive for class-level discrimination. In these applications,
it would be more reasonable and effective to exploit the
subtype-wise patterns. Moreover, unsupervised deep clustering (Caron et al. 2018) empirically assigns 10× more clusters of the class to contain diverse subtypes. Recent works
also show the fine-grained label can be helpful for the coarse
classification (Chen et al. 2019b).
Moreover, domain shifts can be different w.r.t. subtypes,
which leads to subtype conditional shift. Besides, the incidence of disease subtypes is usually varied across differ-

Introduction
The goal of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is to
transfer knowledge learned from a label-rich domain to new
unlabeled target domains (Saito et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020c;
Liu 2020; Zou et al. 2019). The conventional adversarial
training and maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) based
methods propose to align the marginal distribution of sample x in the feature space, i.e., p(f (x)), where f (·) is a
feature extractor. Given the Bayes’ theorem p(f (x)|y) =
p(y|f (x))p(f (x))
, suppose that there are no concept and lap(y)
bel shifts (i.e., p(y|f (x)) and p(y) are the same for two domains), then the conditional distribution p(f (x)|y) can be
aligned by aligning p(f (x)) (Liu et al. 2021a). Nonetheless,
the label shift p(y) is quite common in real-world applications, which indicates the label proportion is different (Zhao
et al. 2019).
Recently, transferable prototypical networks (TPN) (Pan
et al. 2019) is proposed to promote the source domain class
separation with a cross-entropy (CE) loss, and match the
class centroids of source and target samples to perform
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2189

