The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FLAME: Differentially Private Federated Learning in the Shuffle Model
Ruixuan Liu1 , Yang Cao2 * , Hong Chen1* , Ruoyang Guo1 , Masatoshi Yoshikawa2
1

Renmin University of China
2
Kyoto University
ruixuan.liu@ruc.edu.cn, yang@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, chong@ruc.edu.cn, ryguo@ruc.edu.cn, yoshikawa@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

to provide formal privacy. The existing works are mainly
based on the curator model (DP) or local model (LDP) of
differential privacy. The curator model based FL (DP-FL)
(McMahan et al. 2018; Geyer, Klein, and Nabi 2017) allows
better learning accuracy but relies on a trusted analyzer to
collect raw local updates. The local model based FL (LDPFL) (Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) preserves strong local
privacy since the users randomize local updates before sending them to an untrusted analyzer; but it suffers a low utility. Specifically, for a basic bit summation task over n users
with privacy budget 1 , the error of DP can √
achieve O(1/);
whereas, the error of LDP is bounded by Ω( n) (Chan, Shi,
and Song 2012).
The recently proposed secure shuffle model (SS) can
achieve the best of two worlds, i.e., accuracy in the curator model and strong privacy in the local model. The shuffle
model introduces a shuffler (sitting between users and the
analyzer, as shown in Figure 1(b)) to permute the locally
randomized data before users transmitting them. The accuracy gain of the shuffle model is obtained from the privacy
amplification effect (Erlingsson et al. 2019), which indicates
that the shuffled (i.e., anonymized) outputs of local randomizers provide a stronger (amplified) privacy in the central
view of differential privacy than the one without a shuffler.
Accordingly, less local noise is needed in the shuffle model
for the same level of privacy against the untrusted analyzer.
However, it is not clear how to employ the shuffle model
in federated learning. Although a few works have investigated basic tasks such as the bit/real summation (Balle et al.
2019b) and histogram (Balcer and Cheu 2019), the existing
protocols may not be viable for the multi-dimensional aggregation FL. This is because the error brought by local noises
can be aggravated with a dimensional factor (Duchi, Jordan,
and Wainwright 2013). Moreover, since the number of users
participating in one iteration is typically a few thousands, the
aggregation escalates into a high-dimensional task. We solve
the above challenges by making the following contributions:

Federated Learning (FL) is a promising machine learning
paradigm that enables the analyzer to train a model without
collecting users’ raw data. To ensure users’ privacy, differentially private federated learning has been intensively studied.
The existing works are mainly based on the curator model
or local model of differential privacy. However, both of them
have pros and cons. The curator model allows greater accuracy but requires a trusted analyzer. In the local model where
users randomize local data before sending them to the analyzer, a trusted analyzer is not required but the accuracy is
limited. In this work, by leveraging the privacy amplification
effect in the recently proposed shuffle model of differential
privacy, we achieve the best of two worlds, i.e., accuracy in
the curator model and strong privacy without relying on any
trusted party. We first propose an FL framework in the shuffle model and a simple protocol (SS-Simple) extended from
existing work. We find that SS-Simple only provides an insufficient privacy amplification effect in FL since the dimension
of the model parameter is quite large. To solve this challenge,
we propose an enhanced protocol (SS-Double) to increase the
privacy amplification effect by subsampling. Furthermore, for
boosting the utility when the model size is greater than the
user population, we propose an advanced protocol (SS-Topk)
with gradient sparsification techniques. We also provide theoretical analysis and numerical evaluations of the privacy amplification of the proposed protocols. Experiments on realworld dataset validate that SS-Topk improves the testing accuracy by 60.7% than the local model based FL. We highlight an observation that SS-Topk improves the accuracy by
33.94% than the curator model based FL without any trusted
party. Compared with non-private FL, our protocol SS-Topk
only lose 1.48% accuracy under (2.348, 5e−6 )-DP per epoch.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2016) is a promising machine learning paradigm that enables the analyzer to
train a central model by collecting users’ local updates instead of the raw data. However, it has been shown that sharing raw local updates compromises users’ privacy (Nasr,
Shokri, and Houmansadr 2019; Hitaj, Ateniese, and PerezCruz 2017; Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019). To this end, differentially private federated learning has been wildly studied

• For the first time, we propose FLAME, a federated learning framework in the shuffle model such that the users enjoy strong privacy and the analyzer enjoys the accuracy of
the model. We first formalize our privacy goal in FLAME
by clarifying the trust boundary and fine-grained trust sep-

* Corresponding authors: Hong Chen, Yang Cao
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8688

A larger privacy budget leads to better utility and less privacy.

