The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Invariant Representations using Inverse Contrastive Loss
Aditya Kumar Akash1 , Vishnu Suresh Lokhande1 , Sathya N. Ravi2 , Vikas Singh1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison,
University of Illinois at Chicago
aakash@wisc.edu, lokhande@cs.wisc.edu, sathya@uic.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
2

Abstract

of fair machine learning models (Donini et al. 2018). Invariance is also relevant in domain adaptation when analyzing
data from multiple sources or sites. Representations that are
invariant to the categorical variable (e.g., which identifies the
site) leads to models that are more immune (or less biased)
to site-specific artifacts (Zhou et al. 2018). While invariance
is prominent in a number of other settings (Baktashmotlagh
et al. 2013; Moyer et al. 2019), we will focus on learning
representations that are minimally informative of such extraneous variables yet preserve enough information to reliably
predict the response/target variable or label.
Related works. Classical regression analysis techniques
for handling extraneous variables based on residual scores
and ANOVA (Girden 1992) are not easily applicable for deep
neural networks. Instead, one approaches the question in one
of two ways. A common approach is to use a standalone adversarial module (Xie et al. 2017) tasked with using the latent
representations of the data to predict the extraneous variable
whose influence (on the representations) we wish to remove.
If the adversary succeeds, we have not yet fully controlled for
the extraneous variable and so, the representations must be
modified. This necessitates the design of an adversary tailored
to the form of the downstream task. Further, the evaluation
of sample complexity, convergence behavior of the training
procedure, and the degree to which the representations remain invariant when the datasets are scaled or if an additional
confound must be controlled for, require careful treatment
and remain an active area of research (Jaiswal et al. 2019)
(Jaiswal et al. 2018). An alternative strategy is to ask for
statistical independence of the latent representations learned
by the network and the extraneous variable. For example,
one may approximately measure mutual information (Cover
1999) between the latent representations and the extraneous
variable Moyer et al. (2018). This idea as well as the use
of alternative distance and divergence measures is popular
(Li, Swersky, and Zemel 2014; Louizos et al. 2016), and in
most cases, perfectly models the innate requirements of the
task. In practice, however, their viability depends on a variety
of computational and implementation considerations, where
design/approximation choices may frequently lead to representations where a modest adversary can successfully recover
information about the extraneous variable fairly reliably.
Moving from theory to practice. To operationalize the
statistical independence criterion described above, a sensible

Learning invariant representations is a critical first step in
a number of machine learning tasks. A common approach
corresponds to the so-called information bottleneck principle
in which an application dependent function of mutual information is carefully chosen and optimized. Unfortunately, in
practice, these functions are not suitable for optimization purposes since these losses are agnostic of the metric structure of
the parameters of the model. We introduce a class of losses for
learning representations that are invariant to some extraneous
variable of interest by inverting the class of contrastive losses,
i.e., inverse contrastive loss (ICL). We show that if the extraneous variable is binary, then optimizing ICL is equivalent to
optimizing a regularized MMD divergence. More generally,
we also show that if we are provided a metric on the sample
space, our formulation of ICL can be decomposed into a sum
of convex functions of the given distance metric. Our experimental results indicate that models obtained by optimizing
ICL achieve significantly better invariance to the extraneous
variable for a fixed desired level of accuracy. In a variety of
experimental settings, we show applicability of ICL for learning invariant representations for both continuous and discrete
extraneous variables. The project page with code is available
at https://github.com/adityakumarakash/ICL

1

Introduction

Removing or controlling for the influence of certain observed
or unobserved extraneous variables, that may have an unintended effect on a learning task, is often a critical step in
model estimation (Xie et al. 2017). Often, we want to explicitly control for their influence on the response variable, and
estimate model coefficients that are, roughly speaking, immune to one or more confounding factors (Wasserman 2013).
These tasks involve understanding invariance properties of
data representations and/or parameters of the model we wish
to learn. While mechanisms to control for extraneous variables are not strictly necessary in typical supervised learning
tasks, where one focuses on predictive accuracy, over the last
few years, many results have indicated how it can be quite
useful (Lokhande et al. 2020). For instance, controlling the
influence of a protected attribute such as race or gender on a
response variable such as credit worthiness enables the design
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6582

