The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Invertible Concept-based Explanations for CNN Models with Non-negative
Concept Activation Vectors
Ruihan Zhang, Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Krista A. Ehinger, Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
{ruihanz, pmathugama}@student.unimelb.edu.au, {tmiller,kehinger,benjamin.rubinstein}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

However, these methods only point out the important areas
in an image, rather than, for example, identifying key concepts. To make explanations more human understandable,
more recent work uses features from within the CNN models with higher-level information (Kim et al. 2018; Bau et al.
2017; Zhou et al. 2018) under the assumption that these are
closer to human-relevant concepts than areas of pixels. This
work uses supervised learning to classify feature maps with
concepts and use weights to indicate the directions of certain
concepts called Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) in the
feature map space. To reduce the labeling workload, Automated Concept-based Explanations (ACE) (Ghorbani et al.
2019) apply unsupervised learning to segments of images
from certain classes and generate clusters of image segments
as CAVs.
ACE is powerful for learning features (CAVs) using only
images from target classes without any labels but has several drawbacks. First, learned concept weights are inconsistent for different instances. This is a common problem for
all linear approximation explanation methods as they are all
approximations to the target CNN models. Second, it is difficult to measure the performance of learned sets of CAVs.
ACE is a one-way explainer from the target model to explanations and irrelevant segments are discarded. Transforming
an explanation back to the target model’s prediction is difficult with segments. However, how much information is lost
in the explanation? Information could be lost in unused segments and distances between used segments and their cluster
centroids.
Olah et al. (2018) introduces an interpretable interface
with many methods to display what’s inside the CNN model
for a given image to achieve interpretability. Feature maps
can be shown using different grouping methods (axes). They
also introduce a method using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) on feature maps to gather interpretable information. This shares a similar idea with ACE as the clustering
methods like k-means used in ACE could be considered as
a matrix factorization (dimensionality reduction) method. In
addition to reducing the dimensionality, matrix factorization
also analyzes the information loss with inverse functions.
The feature maps from segments used in ACE are replaced
by spatial activations from the feature map. This replacement is also used in CoCoX (Akula, Wang, and Zhu 2020).
In this paper, we modify the ACE framework using ma-

Convolutional neural network (CNN) models for computer
vision are powerful but lack explainability in their most basic
form. This deficiency remains a key challenge when applying CNNs in important domains. Recent work on explanations through feature importance of approximate linear models has moved from input-level features (pixels or segments)
to features from mid-layer feature maps in the form of concept activation vectors (CAVs). CAVs contain concept-level
information and could be learned via clustering. In this work,
we rethink the ACE algorithm of Ghorbani et al., proposing an alternative invertible concept-based explanation (ICE)
framework to overcome its shortcomings. Based on the requirements of fidelity (approximate models to target models)
and interpretability (being meaningful to people), we design
measurements and evaluate a range of matrix factorization
methods with our framework. We find that non-negative concept activation vectors (NCAVs) from non-negative matrix
factorization provide superior performance in interpretability and fidelity based on computational and human subject
experiments. Our framework provides both local and global
concept-level explanations for pre-trained CNN models.

Introduction
Deep learners such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (He et al. 2016) are widely used across important
domains like computer vision due to demonstrated performance in numerous tasks. However, when applying to critical domains like medicine, justice, and finance, explainability has become a key enabler and mitigation for applications. While commentators like Rudin (2019) argue that
deep learning approaches should not be used for these risky
domains, using deep learning to discover features for more
‘interpretable’ models requires explainability to determine
what features have been discovered.
Recent CNN explanation methods attempt to quantify the
importance of each feature. Feature importance usually corresponds to a linear approximation of highly complex models. Linear models are simple and explainable with understandable features and weights. Methods like CAM (Zhou
et al. 2016), LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and
saliency maps (Bach et al. 2015) use input-level features.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11682

