The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Subverting Privacy-Preserving GANs: Hiding Secrets in Sanitized Images
Kang Liu, Benjamin Tan, Siddharth Garg
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
New York University
{kang.liu, benjamin.tan, siddharth.garg}@nyu.edu

Abstract

End User Privacy Check
"Is the tool 'good' enough?"

Unprecedented data collection and sharing have exacerbated
privacy concerns and led to increasing interest in privacypreserving tools that remove sensitive attributes from images while maintaining useful information for other tasks.
Currently, state-of-the-art approaches use privacy-preserving
generative adversarial networks (PP-GANs) for this purpose,
for instance, to enable reliable facial expression recognition
without leaking users’ identity. However, PP-GANs do not
offer formal proofs of privacy and instead rely on experimentally measuring information leakage using classification
accuracy on the sensitive attributes of deep learning (DL)based discriminators. In this work, we question the rigor of
such checks by subverting existing privacy-preserving GANs
for facial expression recognition. We show that it is possible to hide the sensitive identification data in the sanitized
output images of such PP-GANs for later extraction, which
can even allow for reconstruction of the entire input images, while satisfying privacy checks. We demonstrate our
approach via a PP-GAN-based architecture and provide qualitative and quantitative evaluations using two public datasets.
Our experimental results raise fundamental questions about
the need for more rigorous privacy checks of PP-GANs, and
we provide insights into the social impact of these.

Untrusted
Application

Third-Party
Tool Provider

Private
Data

PrivacyPreserving
GAN
(PP-GAN)

Sanitized
Data

Figure 1: Typical use case for a PP-GAN sourced from a
third-party, where a user wants to sanitize their data for use
with an (untrusted) application.
privacy, the user needs to remove sensitive—and application
irrelevant—attributes from their data while preserving relevant details. This can be achieved using a tool typically
sourced from a third-party provider (e.g. Generated Photos1 )). To select a tool, the end user performs their own “privacy check”, evaluating that the tool satisfies their definition
of privacy.
To this end, recent research proposes the use of deep
neural networks (DNNs), specifically, generative adversarial networks (GANs) for sanitizing data of sensitive attributes (Wu et al. 2019; Maximov, Elezi, and Leal-Taixé
2020; Chen, Konrad, and Ishwar 2018). These so-called
“privacy-preserving GANs” (PP-GANs) can sanitize images of human faces such that only their facial expressions are preserved while other identifying information is
replaced (Chen, Konrad, and Ishwar 2018). Other examples include: removing location-relevant information from
vehicular camera data (Xiong et al. 2019), obfuscating the
identity of the person who produced a handwriting sample (Feutry, Piantanida, and Duhamel 2020), and removal
of barcodes from images (Raval, Machanavajjhala, and Cox
2017). Given the expertise required to train such models,
one expects that users will need to acquire a privacy preservation tool from a third party or outsource GAN training,
so proper privacy evaluation is paramount. In the aforementioned works, researchers note a trade-off between “utility”
and “privacy” objectives—they suggest that PP-GANs offer

Introduction
The availability of large datasets and high performance computing resources has enabled new machine learning (ML)
solutions for a range of application domains. However, as
is often the case with transformative technologies, the ubiquity of big data and ML raises new data privacy concerns.
Given the emergence of applications that use personal data,
such as facial expression recognition (Chen, Konrad, and
Ishwar 2018) or autonomous driving (Xiong et al. 2019) one
must take care to provide data relevant to the specific application without inadvertently leaking other sensitive information. Despite recent legislative efforts to protect personal
data privacy—for instance, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) passed by EU—technology must also play
a role in safeguarding privacy (Tene et al. 2019).
Consider a scenario where a user wants to use their private data with an untrusted application, as in Figure 1. For
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14849

https://generated.photos/anonymizer

