The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Bayesian Network Structure Learning via
Parameterized Local Search on Topological Orderings
Niels Grüttemeier, Christian Komusiewicz and Nils Morawietz∗
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany
{niegru, komusiewicz, morawietz}@informatik.uni-marburg.de

parents a parent score fv (P ) is computed. Roughly speaking, the score represents how useful it is to choose this particular set of parents in order to faithfully represent the probability distribution that created the observed data. Second,
given, for each vertex v, a set of possible parent sets with
their parent scores, we aim to compute the DAG that maximizes the sum of the parent scores of its vertices. This problem, called BAYESIAN N ETWORK S TRUCTURE L EARNING
(BNSL), is NP-hard (Chickering 1995).
The current-best worst-case running time bound for exact
algorithms for BNSL is 2n · poly(|I|) where n is the number
of variables and |I| is the size of the instance. Clearly, this
running time is impractical for larger variable sets. Moreover, even very restricted special cases of BNSL remain NPhard, for example the case where every possible parent set
has constant size (Ordyniak and Szeider 2013). Finally, restricting the topology of the DAG to sparse classes such as
graphs of bounded treewidth or bounded degree leads to NPhard learning problems as well (Korhonen and Parviainen
2013, 2015; Grüttemeier and Komusiewicz 2020).
Due to this notorious hardness of BNSL, it is mostly
solved using heuristics. One of the most successful heuristic approaches relies on local search (Tsamardinos, Brown,
and Aliferis 2006). More precisely, after computing the possible parent sets and their scores, in this approach one starts
with an arcless DAG D and adds, removes, or reverses an arc
while this results in an increased network score. More recent
local search approaches do not use DAGs as solution representations but rather orderings of the variables (AlonsoBarba, de la Ossa, and Puerta 2011; Lee and van Beek 2017;
Scanagatta, Corani, and Zaffalon 2017). This approach is
motivated by the fact that given an ordering τ of the variables, one may greedily find the optimal DAG D among all
DAGs for which τ is a topological ordering.

Abstract
In Bayesian Network Structure Learning (BNSL), we are
given a variable set and parent scores for each variable and
aim to compute a DAG, called Bayesian network, that maximizes the sum of parent scores, possibly under some structural constraints. Even very restricted special cases of BNSL
are computationally hard, and, thus, in practice heuristics
such as local search are used. In a typical local search algorithm, we are given some BNSL solution and ask whether
there is a better solution within some pre-defined neighborhood of the solution. We study ordering-based local search,
where a solution is described via a topological ordering of the
variables. We show that given such a topological ordering, we
can compute an optimal DAG whose ordering is within inversion distance r in subexponential FPT time; the parameter r
allows to balance between solution quality and running time
of the local search algorithm. This running time bound can
be achieved for BNSL without any structural constraints and
for all structural constraints that can be expressed via a sum
of weights that are associated with each parent set. We show
that for other modification operations on the variable orderings, algorithms with an FPT time for r are unlikely. We also
outline the limits of ordering-based local search by showing
that it cannot be used for common structural constraints on
the moralized graph of the network.

Introduction
Bayesian networks are arguably the most popular and important model for representing dependencies between variables
of multivariate probability distributions (Darwiche 2010).
A Bayesian network consists of a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) D and a set of conditional probability tables, one
for each vertex of D. The vertices of the network are the
variables of the distribution and each conditional probability
table specifies the probability distribution of the corresponding vertex given the values of its parents. Thus, the value of
each variable depends directly on the values of its parents.
The graph D is called the structure of the network. Given a
set of observed data over some variable set N one needs to
learn the structure D from this data. This is usually done in
two steps. First, for each variable v and each possible set of

Our Results. We study different versions of local search
on variable orderings. In contrast to previous work that defined the local neighborhood of an ordering as all orderings
that can be reached via one operation, we consider parameterized local search (Fomin et al. 2010; Marx and Schlotter
2010; Gaspers et al. 2012; Fellows et al. 2012; Ordyniak and
Szeider 2013). Here, one sets a parameter r and aims to find
a better network that can be reached via at most r modifications of the ordering. The hope is that, by considering such

∗
Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG),
project OPERAH, KO 3669/5-1.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12328

