The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Topological Machine Learning Methods for Power System Responses to
Contingencies
Brian Bush,1 Yuzhou Chen,2,5 Dorcas Ofori-Boateng,3 Yulia R. Gel4,5
1

Strategic Energy Analysis Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA
2
Department of Statistical Science, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 75275, USA
3
Fariborz Maseeh Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97201, USA
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
5
Energy Storage and Distributed Resources Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
{brian.bush@nrel.gov, yuzhouc@smu.edu, doforib2@pdx.edu, ygl@utdallas.edu}
Abstract
While deep learning tools, coupled with the emerging machinery of topological data analysis, are proven to deliver various performance gains in a broad range of applications, from
image classification to biosurveillance to blockchain fraud
detection, their utility in areas of high societal importance
such as power system modeling and, particularly, resilience
quantification in the energy sector yet remain untapped. To
provide fast acting synthetic regulation and contingency reserve services to the grid while having minimal disruptions
on customer quality of service, we propose a new topologybased system that depends on neural network architecture
for impact metrics classification and prediction in power systems. This novel topology-based system allows one to evaluate the impact of three power system contingency types,
namely, in conjunction with transmission lines, transformers,
and transmission lines combined with transformers. We show
that the proposed new neural network architecture equipped
with local topological measures facilitates both more accurate classification of unserved load as well as the amount of
unserved load. In addition, we are able to learn complex relationships between electrical properties and local topological
measurements on the simulated response to contingencies for
NREL-SIIP power system.

Figure 1: Illustration of training and applying contingency
screening.

est generally are not computationally efficient or even fully
viable. In turn, AI and ML offer an opportunity to move
beyond traditional techniques and to effectively explore the
high dimensional space of system configurations and to create reduced-form approximations of complex power system
models or the non-linear simulations involved. A classic example is the process of estimating the effect of contingencies (i.e., component outages) upon a power system’s ability
to meet customer demand. Power-system modeling requires
detailed electrical data on the system and involves substantial computational resources, limiting the number of contingencies that can be routinely directly simulated. Machinelearning methods that are able to accelerate either the search
or simulation of these models promise to substantially enlarge the number and interest of the contingencies that can
be analyzed, at a fraction of the traditional computational
burden.
The purpose of this study is to assess these questions:

Introduction
Power-system simulations require detailed technical data on
system components and involve significant non-linearities,
so it is unclear whether topological measurements alone
on an unperturbed power system (the “base case”) will be
highly correlated with the prediction of the impact of outages upon the system’s operation, particularly the impact in
terms of customer load that is unserved due to the contingency.
Oftentimes, resilience quantification involves the search
over high dimensional spaces of system configurations, responses, and impacts using technical models, simulations,
and analyses that typically are data and computation intensive. The regularly used brute-force approaches that enumerate and simulate each potential configuration of inter-

1. To what extent can basic graph-theoretic and topological
measurements be used to qualitatively and quantitatively
estimate the impacts of contingencies?
2. Which machine learning techniques are best suited for
this?
3. Which graph and topology measurements are most informative?

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15262

