The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GaussianPath:A Bayesian Multi-Hop Reasoning Framework for Knowledge
Graph Reasoning
Guojia Wan1,2,3 , Bo Du1,2,3 *
1

National Engineering Research Center for MultimediaSoftware, Wuhan University, China.
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China.
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China.
guojiawan@whu.edu.cn, dubo@whu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

USA

Recently, multi-hop reasoning over incomplete Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) has attracted wide attention due to its desirable interpretability for downstream tasks, such as question
answer and knowledge graph completion. Multi-Hop reasoning is a typical sequential decision problem, which can be formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). Subsequently,
some reinforcement learning (RL) based approaches are proposed and proven effective to train an agent for reasoning
paths sequentially until reaching the target answer. However,
these approaches assume that an entity/relation representation follows a one-point distribution. In fact, different entities and relations may contain different certainties. On the
other hand, since REINFORCE used for updating the policy
in these approaches is a biased policy gradients method, the
agent is prone to be stuck in high reward paths rather than
broad reasoning paths, which leads to premature and suboptimal exploitation. In this paper, we consider a Bayesian
reinforcement learning paradigm to harness uncertainty into
multi-hop reasoning. By incorporating uncertainty into the
representation layer, the agent trained by RL has uncertainty
in a region of the state space then it should be more efficient
in exploring unknown or less known part of the KG. In our
approach, we build a Bayesian Q-learning architecture as a
state-action value function for estimating the expected longterm reward. As initialized by Gaussian prior or pre-trained
prior distribution, the representation layer drives uncertainty
that allows regularizing the training. We conducted extensive
experiments on multiple KGs. Experimental results show a
superior performance than other baselines, especially significant improvements on the automated extracted KG.

1

Ivanka
Trump

Nationality
isLocatedIn

Donald
Trump

isBornIn
p(x)

New York City

σ:Uncertainty

Gaussian Distribution

Figure 1: An illustrated toy example which generated from
randomized two-dimensional Gaussian distribution for representing entities and relations in a partial KG. The mean
of an entity indicates its position, and the variance indicates
uncertainty.

specifically, the reasoning agent is expected to infer missing knowledge based on observed knowledge, where is usually modeled as a link prediction problem to predict potential
candidate entities/relations for a query (es , r, ?)/(es , ?, et ).
The past years have seen the rapid development of knowledge graph embedding (KGE) in numerous studies (Bordes
et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2017) focusing on automated reasoning on KGs, where these approaches embed both entities and
relations into a continuous low-dimensional vector space.
However, these approaches only learn single-step reasoning.
To learn chains of reasoning paths over a KG, many reinforcement learning (RL) based methods (Xiong, Hoang, and
Wang 2017; Das et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2018; Lin, Socher,
and Xiong 2018) have been proposed to learn a query inferring agent via effective path searching. These methods have
proven powerfully, and exhibit a desirable property that provides interpretable reasoning paths for queries. For example, give a query (T rump, isP resident, ?), not only these
models output a confidence score, but also provide a series of paths to explain why isP resident(T rump, U SA)

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as WordNet (Bollacker et al.
2008), Yago (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), NELL
(Mitchell et al. 2018) contain numerous well-structured facts
as triplets, e.g. (T rump, isP resident, U SA), to support a
variety of downstream AI-applications such as question answer (QA), semantic search, and recommendation system.
Knowledge graph reasoning (KGR) is a fundamental task to
fulfill answering complex queries on large-scale incomplete
knowledge graphs (Nickel et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2020). More
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

isCitizenOf

holds, such as T rump
−→
LocatedIn
W hiteHouse −→ U SA.
4393

U SA, T rump

W orkAt

−→

