The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Data-Driven Approach for Gin Rummy Hand Evaluation
Sang T. Truong,1 Todd W. Neller, 2
1

DePauw University
Gettysburg College
sangtruong 2021@depauw.edu, tneller@gettysburg.edu
2

Abstract

deadwood generally scores according to the deadwood difference.
Players need to make a series of non-trivial choices in Gin
Rummy. This paper focuses on two play strategies that we
call “offensive” and “defensive”. Discarding offensively, the
player focuses on developing their hand while potentially
helping their opponent complete a meld. Discarding defensively, the player focuses on discarding cards that are unlikely to be used by their opponent at the cost of not improving their hand. An expert player often alternates between
these strategies (Shankar 2015). Determining when to play
which strategy requires metrics to assert the goodness of a
hand (offensive score) and the safeness of each discardable
card (defensive score).
Other than some typical suggestions to build a good hand
(e.g. low deadwood points, high melds), developing patterns
is an empirical rule for constructing an offensive hand. For
example, the player should try to form a triangle of three
cards (e.g. 4♥ − 5♥ − 5♠) as this pattern becomes a meld if
the player can draw a 3♥, 6♥, 5♦, or 5♣. Other patterns,
such as a square of four cards, i.e. two pairs in adjacent
ranks, also have advantages (Kotsckowski 2020; Rubl.com
2020; Shankar 2015). Looking for all possible patterns is a
daunting task, as there might be many good patterns to follow and bad ones to avoid. Playing offensively by balancing
between reducing deadwood, increasing melds, and assembling patterns under time pressure is even more challenging.
Since we do not know any system for quantitatively computing offensive scores, building a model to accomplish the
above task is our first goal.
The existing defensive score system relies on the basic
counting principle. For example, without any other information, since a 10 (denoted “T”) can be used in six different
ways by the opponent to form a meld of three cards (e.g.
89T, 9TJ, TJQ, and 3×TTT), it has a discard risk score of
6. Similarly, a K has a discard risk score of 4. Thus, without
other information, it is safer to discard a K than to discard a
T. The discard risk score can evolve as the game progresses.
For example, if the player knows that the opponent does not
have any 9 or J, their T’s discard risk score is only 3. Hence,
it is now relatively safer to discard the T than the K. This existing defensive scoring system gives an upper bound to the
discard risk score of a card since it only considers the worst
cases given the available information. Refining this scoring

We develop a data-driven approach for hand strength evaluation in the game of Gin Rummy. Employing Convolutional
Neural Networks, Monte Carlo simulation, and Bayesian reasoning, we compute both offensive and defensive scores of
a game state. After only one training cycle, the model was
able to make sophisticated and human-like decisions with a
55.4%±0.8% win rate (90% confidence level) against a Simple player.

Introduction
Although Gin Rummy was one of the most popular card
games of the 1930’s and 1940’s (Parlett 2008, 2020)
and remains one of the most popular standard-deck card
games (Ranker Community 2020; BoardGameGeek.com
2020), it has received relatively little Artificial Intelligence
(AI) research attention. Here, we develop initial steps towards hand strength evaluation in the game of Gin Rummy.
Gin Rummy is a 2-player imperfect information card
games played with a standard (a.k.a. French) 52-card deck.
Ranks run from aces low to kings high. The game’s object
is to be the first player to score 100 or more points accumulated through the scoring of individual rounds. We follow standard Gin Rummy rules (McLeod 2020) with North
American 25-point bonuses for both gin and undercut.
A meld is either at least 3 cards of a rank or at least 3
cards of a suit with consecutive ranks. Cards not in melds
are deadwood. Cards have associated point values with aces
being 1 point, face cards being 10 points, and other number
cards having points according to their number. Deadwood
points are the sum of card points from all deadwood cards.
At the beginning of each round, each player is dealt a
hand of 10 cards, and one card is dealt face-up to start the
discard pile. The rest of the cards form a face-down draw
pile. On each player’s turn, the player takes two actions: (1)
pick up a card (from either the face-up discard pile or the
face-down draw pile) and (2) discard a card to the face-up
discard pile. A player with total deadwood points less than
or equal to 10 may also knock to end the round. Referring
the game detailed rules (McLeod 2020), the player with less
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15647

