The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Does Explainable Artificial Intelligence Improve Human Decision-Making?
Yasmeen Alufaisan,1 Laura R. Marusich, 2 Jonathan Z. Bakdash,3 Yan Zhou,4 Murat
Kantarcioglu 4
1

EXPEC Computer Center at Saudi Aramco
Dhahran 31311, Saudi Arabia
2
U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South
at the University of Texas at Arlington
3
U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South
at the University of Texas at Dallas
4
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080
yasmeen.alufaisan@aramco.com, {laura.m.cooper20.civ, jonathan.z.bakdash.civ}@mail.mil,
{yan.zhou2,muratk}@utdallas.edu
Abstract

2017; Hoffman et al. 2018; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin
2016, 2018; Lage et al. 2019).
To fully achieve fairness and accountability, explainable
AI should lead to better human decisions. Earlier research
demonstrated that explainable AI can be understood by people (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018). Ideally, the combination of humans and machines will perform better than
either alone (Adadi and Berrada 2018), such as computerassisted chess (Cummings 2014), but this combination may
not necessarily improve the overall accuracy of AI systems.
While (causal) explanation and prediction share commonalities, they are not interchangeable concepts (Adadi and
Berrada 2018; Shmueli et al. 2010; Edwards and Veale
2018). Consequently, a ”good” explanation, interpretable
model predictions, may not be sufficient for improving
actual human decisions (Adadi and Berrada 2018; Miller
2019) because of heuristics and biases in human decisionmaking (Kahneman 2011). Therefore, it is important to
demonstrate whether, and what types of, explainable AI can
improve the decision-making performance of humans using that AI, relative to performance using the predictions of
”black box” AI with no explanations and for human making
decisions with no AI prediction.
In this work, we empirically investigate whether explainable AI improves human decision-making using a twochoice classification experiment with real-world data. Using human subject experiments, we compared three different settings where a user needs to make decision 1) No AI
prediction (Control), 2) AI predictions but no explanation,
and 3) AI predictions with explanations. Our results indicate that, while providing the AI predictions tends to help
users, the why information provided in explainable AI does
not specifically enhance user decision-making.

Explainable AI provides insights to users into the why for
model predictions, offering potential for users to better understand and trust a model, and to recognize and correct AI
predictions that are incorrect. Prior research on human and
explainable AI interactions has
typically focused on measures such as interpretability, trust,
and usability of the explanation. There are mixed findings
whether explainable AI can improve actual human decisionmaking and the ability to identify the problems with the underlying model. Using real datasets, we compare objective
human decision accuracy without AI (control), with an AI
prediction (no explanation), and AI prediction with explanation. We find providing any kind of AI prediction tends to
improve user decision accuracy, but no conclusive evidence
that explainable AI has a meaningful impact. Moreover, we
observed the strongest predictor for human decision accuracy
was AI accuracy and that users were somewhat able to detect
when the AI was correct vs. incorrect, but this was not significantly affected by including an explanation. Our results
indicate that, at least in some situations, the why information
provided in explainable AI may not enhance user decisionmaking, and further research may be needed to understand
how to integrate explainable AI into real systems.

Introduction
Explainable AI is touted as the key for users to “understand, appropriately trust, and effectively manage. . . [AI
systems])” (Gunning 2017) with parallel goals of achieving fairness, accountability, and transparency (Sokol 2019).
There are a multitude of reasons for explainable AI, but there
is little empirical research for its impact on human decisionmaking (Miller 2019; Adadi and Berrada 2018). Prior behavioral research on explainable AI has primarily focused
on human understanding/interpretability, trust, and usability for different types of explanations (Doshi-Velez and Kim

Background and Related Work
Using Doshi-Velez and Kim’s (2017) framework for interpretable machine learning, our current work focuses on: real
humans, simplified tasks. Because our objective is on eval-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6618

