The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised 3D Learning for Shape Analysis via
Multiresolution Instance Discrimination
Peng-Shuai Wang1 , Yu-Qi Yang2,1 , Qian-Fang Zou3,1 , Zhirong Wu1 , Yang Liu1 , Xin Tong1
1

Microsoft Research Asia
2
Tsinghua University
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract

Unsupervised pre-training methods first learn a feature extraction backbone network from an unlabeled dataset via carefully designed unsupervised pretext task losses. After that,
the pre-trained backbone network is concatenated with taskspecific back-end networks and refined for different downstream tasks via transfer learning. In computer vision and
natural language processing tasks, unsupervised pre-training
have demonstrated their advantages for reducing the workload of data labeling and network design (Wu et al. 2016;
Yang et al. 2018; Deng, Birdal, and Ilic 2018; Zhao et al.
2019; Hassani and Haley 2019). However, these networks
and training schemes cannot be easily adapted for 3D shape
analysis due to irregular representation of 3D point clouds
and multi-level shape features required by different shape
analysis tasks. A set of unsupervised 3D learning methods
(Wu et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018; Deng, Birdal, and Ilic
2018; Zhao et al. 2019) have been proposed for extracting
shape features from 3D point clouds, none of them offers a
generic backbone network for different shape analysis tasks
with competitive performance to the supervised methods.
In this paper, we present an unsupervised pre-training
method for learning a generic 3D shape encoding network
for 3D shape analysis. Our key observation is that a 3D
shape is composed of its local parts and thus the feature for
shape and points are coherent and should be encoded and
trained jointly. Based on this observation, our shape encoding
backbone network adapts HRNet (Wang et al. 2019a) to an
octree-based convolutional network (Wang et al. 2017) for extracting and fusing features from both points and shapes via
parallel multiresolution subnetworks and connections across
subnetworks. It takes 3D point cloud as input and outputs
an instance-wise feature of the whole 3D shape as well as
point-wise features. Inspired by the instance discrimination
designed for 2D image classification (Wu et al. 2018), we
design a simple-yet-efficient Multi-resolution Instance Discrimination (MID) losses for supervision of extracted shape
and point features, in which a shape instance discrimination
loss classifies augmented copies of each shape instance of a
3D dataset in one class, while a point instance discrimination
loss classifies the same points on the augmented copies of a
shape instance in a class.
We trained our backbone shape encoding network (denoted as MID-Net) with ShapeNetCore55 (Chang et al. 2015)
and evaluated its performance with simple back-ends in vari-

We propose an unsupervised method for learning a generic
and efficient shape encoding network for different shape analysis tasks. Our key idea is to jointly encode and learn shape
and point features from unlabeled 3D point clouds. For this
purpose, we adapt HRNet to octree-based convolutional neural
networks for jointly encoding shape and point features with
fused multiresolution subnetworks and design a simple-yetefficient Multiresolution Instance Discrimination (MID) loss
for jointly learning the shape and point features. Our network
takes a 3D point cloud as input and output both shape and point
features. After training, Our network is concatenated with simple task-specific back-ends and fine-tuned for different shape
analysis tasks. We evaluate the efficacy and generality of our
method with a set of shape analysis tasks, including shape
classification, semantic shape segmentation, as well as shape
registration tasks. With simple back-ends, our network demonstrates the best performance among all unsupervised methods
and achieves competitive performance to supervised methods.
For fine-grained shape segmentation on the PartNet dataset,
our method even surpasses existing supervised methods by a
large margin.

1

Introduction

3D shape analysis plays an important role in many graphics
and vision applications. A key step in all shape analysis tasks
is to extract representative features (or called descriptors) in
different levels from 3D shapes. In particular, distinguishable
shape instance features are preferred for shape classification,
while per-point features are essential to fine-level analysis
tasks, like semantic shape segmentation and registration.
Early methods compute handcrafted features of 3D shapes.
Although these manually-designed features can preserve
some good properties such as transformation invariant, they
are difficult to be tailored to specific shape analysis applications. State-of-the-art methods integrate the feature extraction
with specific shape analysis task and learn an end-to-end deep
neural network with the supervision of labeled shape analysis
results. The success of these supervised learning methods
is built upon large-scale labeled datasets, and the networks
optimized for one task are difficult to adapt to others.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2773

