The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Present-Biased Optimization
Fedor V. Fomin,1 Pierre Fraigniaud, 2 Petr A. Golovach 1
1

Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
2
IRIF, Université de Paris and CNRS, France
fedor.fomin@uib.no, pierre.fraigniaud@irif.fr, petr.golovach@uib.no

Abstract
This paper explores the behavior of present-biased agents,
that is, agents who erroneously anticipate the costs of future actions compared to their real costs. Specifically, the
paper extends the original framework proposed by Akerlof
(1991) for studying various aspects of human behavior related to time-inconsistent planning, including procrastination, and abandonment, as well as the elegant graph-theoretic
model encapsulating this framework recently proposed by
Kleinberg and Oren (2014). The benefit of this extension is
twofold. First, it enables to perform fine grained analysis of
the behavior of present-biased agents depending on the optimisation task they have to perform. In particular, we study
covering tasks vs. hitting tasks, and show that the ratio between the cost of the solutions computed by present-biased
agents and the cost of the optimal solutions may differ significantly depending on the problem constraints. Second, our
extension enables to study not only underestimation of future costs, coupled with minimization problems, but also all
combinations of minimization/maximization, and underestimation/overestimation. We study the four scenarios, and we
establish upper bounds on the cost ratio for three of them
(the cost ratio for the original scenario was known to be unbounded), providing a complete global picture of the behavior of present-biased agents, as far as optimisation tasks are
concerned.

Introduction
Present bias is the term used in behavioral economics to describe the gap between the anticipated costs of future actions and their real costs. A simple mathematical model of
present bias was suggested by Akerlof 1991. In this model
the cost of an action that will be perceived in the future is
assumed to be β times smaller than its actual cost, for some
constant β < 1, called the degree of present bias. The model
was used for studying various aspects of human behavior
related to time-inconsistent planning, including procrastination, and abandonment.
Kleinberg and Oren 2014; 2018 introduced an elegant
graph-theoretic model encapsulating Akerlof’s model. The
approach of Kleinberg and Oren is based on analyzing how
an agent navigates from a source s to a target t in a directed
edge-weighted graph G, called task graph. At any step, the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

agent chooses the next edge to traverse from the current vertex v thanks to an estimation of the length of the shortest
path from v to t passing through each edge outgoing from v.
A crucial characteristic of the model is that the estimation
of the path lengths is present-biased. More specifically, the
model of Kleinberg and Oren includes a positive parameter β < 1, the degree of present bias, and the length of a
path x0 , . . . , xk from x0 = v to xk = t in G is evaluated
Pk−1
as ω0 + β i=1 ωi where ωi denotes the weight of edge
(xi , xi+1 ), for every i ∈ {0, . . . , k − 1}. As a result, the
agent may choose an outgoing edge that is not on any shortest path from v to t, modeling procrastination by underestimating the cost of future actions to be performed whenever
acting now in some given way. With this effect cumulating
along its way from s to t, the agent may significantly diverge
from shortest s-t paths, which demonstrates the negative impact of procrastination. Moreover, the cost ratio, which is the
ratio between the cost of the path traversed by an agent with
present bias and the cost of a shortest path, could be arbitrarily large. An illustrating example is depicted on Fig. 1,
borrowed from (Kleinberg and Oren 2018), and originally
due to Akerlof 1991. Among many results, Kleinberg and
Oren showed that any graph in which a present-biased agent
incurs significantly more cost than an optimal agent must
contain a large specific structure as a minor. This structure,
called procrastination structure, is specifically the one depicted on Fig. 1.

v2

s

v3

x

x

x

v1
c

x
s

c

v4

c

c

c

t

v01

x
c

v5

v02

(a) The Akerlof
xample
(b)
Figure 1: Procrastination
structure as
displayed in (Kleinberg and Oren 2018); Assuming x + βc < c, the path followed by the agent is s, v1 , . . . , v5 , t; The ratio between the
length
of the
followed
by the
agent
and theprocrastination,
shortest s-t
Figure
2: path
Path
problems
that
exhibit
aband
path can be made arbitrarily large by adding more nodes vk
with k ≥ 5.

graph, it can be crucial to present the agent with a subgraph that
additional nodes and edges that do not belong to P . We give a
5415
the possible subgraphs supporting efficient traversal. Finally, fo
a simple variant of the problem based on partitioning large task
Before turning to these questions, we first discuss the basic
detail, showing how instances of this problem capture the time-i

