The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Omni-frequency Region-adaptive Representations for Real Image
Super-Resolution
Xin Li∗ , Xin Jin∗ Tao Yu, Simeng Sun, Yingxue Pang, Zhizheng Zhang, Zhibo Chen†
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei 230027, China
{lixin666, jinxustc, yutao666, smsun20, pangyx, zhizheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Traditional single image super-resolution (SISR) methods
that focus on solving single and uniform degradation (i.e.,
bicubic down-sampling), typically suffer from poor performance when applied into real-world low-resolution (LR) images due to the complicated realistic degradations. The key
to solving this more challenging real image super-resolution
(RealSR) problem lies in learning feature representations that
are both informative and content-aware. In this paper, we
propose an Omni-frequency Region-adaptive Network (ORNet) to address both challenges, here we call features of all
low, middle and high frequencies omni-frequency features.
Specifically, we start from the frequency perspective and design a Frequency Decomposition (FD) module to separate
different frequency components to comprehensively compensate the information lost for real LR image. Then, considering the different regions of real LR image have different frequency information lost, we further design a Region-adaptive
Frequency Aggregation (RFA) module by leveraging dynamic convolution and spatial attention to adaptively restore
frequency components for different regions. The extensive
experiments endorse the effective, and scenario-agnostic nature of our OR-Net for RealSR.

Frequency energy

Frequency energy

Abstract

RealSR

Frequency (from low to high)
Frequency energy

Frequency energy

Frequency (from low to high)

SISR

Frequency (from low to high)
(a)

Region 1

Region 2

Frequency (from low to high)
(b)

Figure 1: Difference analysis in frequency domain between
RealSR and the conventional SISR: (a) the overall frequency
distribution comparison between RealSR and SISR. (b) the
frequency components distribution comparison between different regions of the same real LR image. ∆ means the absolute difference of frequency degradation.

Introduction
With the development of deep learning, single image superresolution (SISR) has achieved great success either on PSNR
values (Dong et al. 2015; Haris, Shakhnarovich, and Ukita
2018; Kim, Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016; Lim et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018a; Dai et al. 2019; Mei et al. 2020; Pan
et al. 2020) or on visual quality (Ledig et al. 2017; Sajjadi, Scholkopf, and Hirsch 2017). In general, these traditional SISR methods typically focus on restoring the lowresolution (LR) image with single and uniform synthetic
degradation, such as bicubic down-sampling and Gaussian
down-sampling. However, the degradations in real-world LR
images are usually far more complicated, which makes most
SISR models become less effective when directly applied to
practical scenarios.

In recent years, some studies that focus on solving the
real image super-resolution (RealSR) problem have attracted
more and more attention (Cai et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020).
Unlike the single and uniform synthetic degradation in SISR,
the LR and HR images of RealSR are captured with digital single lens reflex (DSLR) cameras, which typically contains various/complex non-uniform real-world degradations,
including blur, noise, and down-sampling. That is why those
classic conventional SISR methods (RCAN (Zhang et al.
2018a), EDSR (Lim et al. 2017), SAN (Dai et al. 2019) etc.)
cannot handle the RealSR problem well.
Among recent representative RealSR methods, Cai et
al. (Cai et al. 2019) first construct a RealSR dataset by capturing the LR-HR image pairs on the same scene with different focal lengths of a digital camera. And then, they propose a Laplacian pyramid based kernel prediction network
(LP-KPN) to handle such non-uniform degradation. Concur-

∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1975

