The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Querying for Cooperative Probabilistic Commitments
Qi Zhang1 , Edmund H. Durfee2 , Satinder Singh2
1
2

Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of South Carolina
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
qz5@cse.sc.edu, durfee@umich.edu, baveja@umich.edu

Abstract

observable to all agents, agents might summarize the likelihood of the conditions being satisfied in the form of a probabilistic commitment (Kushmerick, Hanks, and Weld 1994;
Xuan and Lesser 1999; Witwicki and Durfee 2007).
Our focus is the process by which agents choose a probabilistic commitment, which serves as a probabilistic promise
from one agent (the provider) to another (the recipient)
about establishing a precondition for the recipient’s preferred actions/objectives. We formalize how the space of
probabilistic commitments for the precondition captures different tradeoffs between timing and likelihood, where in
general the recipient gets higher reward from earlier timing and/or higher likelihood, while the provider prefers
later timing and/or lower likelihood because these leave
it less constrained when optimizing its own policy. Thus,
when agents agree to work together (e.g., (Han, Pereira, and
Lenaerts 2017)), forming a commitment generally involves a
negotiation (Kraus 1997; Aknine, Pinson, and Shakun 2004;
Rahwan 2004).
Sometimes, however, a pair of agents might have objectives/payoffs that are aligned/shared. For example, they
might be a chef and waiter working in a restaurant (see Section 6.2). In a commitment-based coordination framework,
such agents should find a cooperative probabilistic commitment, whose timing and likelihood maximizes their joint
(summed) reward, in expectation. Decomposing the joint reward into local, individual rewards is common elsewhere as
well, like in the Dec-POMDP literature (Oliehoek, Amato
et al. 2016) and multi-agent reinforcement learning (Zhang
et al. 2018). This optimization problem is complicated by
two main factors: i) the information relevant to optimization
is distributed, and thus the agents need to exchange knowledge, preferably with low communication cost; and ii) the
space of possible timing/probability combinations is large
and evaluating a combination (requiring each agent to compute an optimal policy) is expensive, and thus identifying a
desirable probabilistic commitment is computationally challenging even with perfect centralized information.
The main contribution of this paper is an approach that addresses both challenges for cooperative agents to efficiently
converge on an approximately-optimal probabilistic commitment. To address i), our approach adopts a decentralized,
query-based protocol for the agents to exchange knowledge
effectively with low communication cost. To get the effi-

Multiagent systems can use commitments as the core of a
general coordination infrastructure, supporting both cooperative and non-cooperative interactions. Agents whose objectives are aligned, and where one agent can help another
achieve greater reward by sacrificing some of its own reward,
should choose a cooperative commitment to maximize their
joint reward. We present a solution to the problem of how cooperative agents can efficiently find an (approximately) optimal commitment by querying about carefully-selected commitment choices. We prove structural properties of the agents’
values as functions of the parameters of the commitment
specification, and develop a greedy method for composing a
query with provable approximation bounds, which we empirically show can find nearly optimal commitments in a fraction
of the time methods that lack our insights require.

1

Introduction

Commitments are a proven approach to multiagent coordination (Singh 2012; Cohen and Levesque 1990; Castelfranchi 1995; Mallya and Huhns 2003; Chesani et al. 2013;
Al-Saqqar et al. 2014). Through commitments, agents know
more about what to expect from others, and thus can plan
actions with higher confidence of success. That said, commitments are generally uncertain: an agent might abandon
a commitment if it discovers that it cannot achieve what it
promised, or that it prefers to achieve something else, or that
others will not uphold their side of the commitment (Jennings 1993; Xing and Singh 2001; Winikoff 2006).
One way to deal with commitment uncertainty is to institute protocols so participating agents are aware of the status of commitments through their lifecycles (Venkatraman
and Singh 1999; Xing and Singh 2001; Yolum and Singh
2002; Fornara and Colombetti 2008; Baldoni et al. 2015;
Günay, Liu, and Zhang 2016; Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi
2017; Dastani, van der Torre, and Yorke-Smith 2017). Another has been to qualify commitments with conditional
statements about what must (not) be true in the environment
for the commitment to be fulfilled (Singh 2012; Agotnes,
Goranko, and Jamroga 2007; Vokrı́nek, Komenda, and Pechoucek 2009). When such conditions might not be fully
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11378

