The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Symbolic Search for Optimal Total-Order HTN Planning
Gregor Behnke and David Speck
University of Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
hbehnkeg, speckdi@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract

bolic search techniques consider sets of states. Using suitable compact representations, symbolic search techniques
can often outperform explicit search techniques. Symbolic
representations have been used in HTN planning before.
Kuter et al. (2005; 2009) used symbolic representations for
solving non-deterministic planning problems. In this case,
the purpose of a symbolic representation of sets of states was
to represent all outcomes of one plan compactly. Combining
states from multiple search nodes was not considered. This
is in stark contrast to our work, which considers multiple
states at the same time using symbolic representations.
Our work builds on research from the model-checking
community (Esparza et al. 2000; Esparza and Schwoon
2001). We extend their work in three ways: (1) we show that
their approach can be used to handle TOHTN planning problems, (2) we modify it to find cost-optimal plans, and (3) we
show how such cost-optimal plans can be reconstructed.
We start our paper by first introducing the basic concepts
of Totally-Ordered HTN planning and symbolic representations. We then present our approach in four steps: (1) we
explain how it works for state-free domains without regard
for costs, (2) we extend it to handle action costs, (3) we
show how to handle the propositional state of the world, and
(4) explain how plans can be reconstructed from a symbolic
search structure. We conclude with an empirical evaluation.

Symbolic search has proven to be a useful approach to optimal classical planning. In Hierarchical Task Network (HTN)
planning, however, there is little work on optimal planning.
One reason for this is that in HTN planning, most algorithms
are based on heuristic search, and admissible heuristics have
to incorporate the structure of the task network in order to
be informative. In this paper, we present a novel approach to
optimal (totally-ordered) HTN planning, which is based on
symbolic search. An empirical analysis shows that our symbolic approach outperforms the current state of the art for optimal totally-ordered HTN planning.

Introduction
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning describes the
problem to be solved in a twofold way: It provides a description of how the execution of actions changes the (propositional) state of the world and describes the ways and means
by which a plan must be derived. This derivation takes the
form of decompositions that are akin to derivation rules of
formal grammars. While satisficing HTN planning has made
significant progress, optimal HTN planning, i.e. the search
for a guaranteed cheapest plan, is a still under-researched
topic. This is witnessed by the small amount of planners
that can actually produce optimal solutions to HTN planning problems (mainly Progression (Höller et al. 2020),
Plan-Space-Search (Bercher et al. 2017), and SAT (Behnke,
Höller, and Biundo 2019b)). We will not cover the full
scope of HTN planning problems, but restrict ourselves to
Totally-Ordered HTN (TOHTN) planning problems. This
class has been the object of several independent investigations (e.g. (Nau et al. 1999; Schreiber et al. 2019)) and has an
independent track at the 2020 International Planning Competition with twice as many competitors as the general track.
In this paper we propose a new way of solving HTN planning problems optimally – via symbolic search. In applying symbolic search, we draw from the success of symbolic
search in classical planning (Cimatti et al. 1997; Edelkamp,
Kissmann, and Torralba 2015). While explicit search techniques consider individual states as their search nodes, sym-

Preliminaries
In this paper we consider TOHTN planning problems (Erol,
Hendler, and Nau 1996). For an introduction into general
HTN planning we refer to Erol, Hendler, and Nau (1996) and
Geier and Bercher (2011). The difference between general
and TOHTN planning is that in the latter methods contain
sequences of tasks while for general HTNs they can contain
arbitrary partially ordered sets. This strictly increases expressivity (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996; Höller et al. 2014)
as the execution of parallel tasks can be interleaved.
A TOHTN planning problem Π = hP, A, M, s0 , Ii describes a grammar-like structure from which plans must be
derived. We distinguish two types of tasks: primitive actions P (terminals in a grammar) and abstract tasks A (nonterminals in a grammar). The planning domain describes a
set M of decomposition methods, which are rules of the

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11744

