The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sequential Generative Exploration Model for Partially Observable
Reinforcement Learning
Haiyan Yin1 , Jianda Chen1 , Sinno Jialin Pan1 , Sebastian Tschiatschek2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
yinhaiyan@outlook.com, {jianda001, sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg, sebastian@tschiatschek.net

Abstract

trained with those approaches could hardly stumble into a
reward/goal state by chance, when executing their simple
exploitation-exploration strategies (Pathak et al. 2017). Therefore, it is crucial to develop an efficient exploration mechanism to encourage the agent to continuously search through
the state space in seek of reward gaining experience. From
the existing reinforcement learning literature, one prominent
line of solutions for promoting the exploration behaviors of
the agent is via reward shaping (Singh 1992; Dorigo and
Colombetti 1994; Barto, Mirolli, and Baldassarre 2013). Inspired by the animal learning theory, the reward shaping
approaches mostly put the effort of identifying observations
that are novel or surprising as the key factor that drives efficient learning (Barto, Mirolli, and Baldassarre 2013). As
such, many of the existing works focus on developing some
additional reward model to generate intrinsic reward signals
as a measure of the novelty or surprise of the agent over a
state (Schmidhuber 1991; Singh, Barto, and Chentanez 2004;
Oudeyer, Kaplan, and Hafner 2007).

Many challenging partially observable reinforcement learning
problems have sparse rewards and most existing model-free
algorithms struggle with such reward sparsity. In this paper,
we propose a novel reward shaping approach to infer the intrinsic rewards for the agent from a sequential generative model.
Specifically, the sequential generative model processes a sequence of partial observations and actions from the agent’s
historical transitions to compile a belief state for performing
forward dynamics prediction. Then we utilize the error of the
dynamics prediction task to infer the intrinsic rewards for the
agent. Our proposed method is able to derive intrinsic rewards
that could better reflect the agent’s surprise or curiosity over
its ground-truth state by taking a sequential inference procedure. Furthermore, we formulate the inference procedure for
dynamics prediction as a multi-step forward prediction task,
where the time abstraction that has been incorporated could
effectively help to increase the expressiveness of the intrinsic
reward signals. To evaluate our method, we conduct extensive
experiments on challenging 3D navigation tasks in ViZDoom
and DeepMind Lab. Empirical evaluation results show that
our proposed exploration method could lead to significantly
faster convergence than various state-of-the-art exploration
approaches in the testified navigation domains.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning is a formalism for autonomous agents
to learn meaningful task skills through the execution of
exploration-exploitation, driven by the reward signals issued
by the environment (Sutton and Barto 1998). When such
reward signals are sparse, it would be difficult for the agent
to progress in grasping meaningful task skills. Unfortunately,
many reinforcement learning problems come with sparse rewards, such as navigation, robotics control and video games
playing. For instance, in many navigation domains, the agent
only receives a single positive reward upon reaching the
target location. Thus the agents trained under such reward
sparsity would easily get stuck into a local state space, such
as bumping into a wall, and thus become unable to make
efficient progress for policy learning.
One inherent reason that leads to the struggle of existing
algorithms with such reward sparsity is that initially, agents
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10700

Since many of the well-adopted exploration methods from
the conventional reinforcement learning literature, such as
the UCB-type algorithms (Lai and Robbins 1985; Garivier
and Cappé 2011), work well with tractable MDPs but are not
straightforwardly applicable to deal with the tasks with high
dimensional state space, it is a non-trivial task to develop
an effective reward shaping method for deep reinforcement
learning problems. When considering the problems under a
partially observable setting, the challenge of developing an
effective intrinsic reward system becomes even more severe,
as it is extremely difficult to infer the novelty of the agent
over its true MDP state given only partial observations. In
recent years, there are a number of reward shaping exploration approaches emerged for deep reinforcement learning,
which have brought significant performance improvement
over many popular benchmark tasks (Pathak et al. 2017; Savinov et al. 2019; Pathak, Gandhi, and Gupta 2019). Despite
their success, there are two main limitations for such methods to effectively work on tasks with partial observability.
First, most of the well-adopted exploration models, such as
the Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) (Pathak et al. 2017)
and Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al. 2019)
develop their intrinsic reward systems upon the local observations. However, only considering the local observations is
clearly insufficient to infer the novelty over the true world

