The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Complexity of Finding Justifications for Collective Decisions
Arthur Boixel, Ronald de Haan
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), University of Amsterdam
a.boixel@uva.nl, me@ronalddehaan.eu

Abstract

choice theory—showing that and how the selection of the
target outcome follows from these principles in a specific
situation.
While they propose a straightforward—and computationally demanding—algorithm to find such justifications, the
precise computational complexity of their approach has not
been studied. In this paper, we will do exactly this.
Our aim is to give insights into the potential and limits of
algorithms for the approach of Boixel and Endriss (2020). In
particular, we hope to lay the foundations for identifying in
what (restricted) settings their approach can work efficiently
in practice. Boixel and Endriss operationalise their approach
by encoding axioms into a constraint modeling language
(with potentially an exponential blow-up in the encoding),
and then using constraint programming algorithms (for deciding satisfiability and for finding minimally unsatisfiable
subsets) to find justifications. That is, they essentially use an
exponential-time algorithm with an NP oracle. Our results
will show that—in the general case—one cannot do significantly better than this, as the problem of deciding on the
existence of a justification is NEXP-hard.
Concretely, we will study two computational tasks related
to the setting of automatically justifying outcomes of a voting scenario. The first task is that of verifying whether a
given justification is correct (for a given voting scenario).
Boixel and Endriss defined various technical requirements
that justifications should meet—we will define these requirements in Section 2. Another important condition for a justification to be convincing to non-expert agents is that its correctness can be checked efficiently. This indicates the importance of studying this first computational task. The second
task that we study is that of identifying whether a correct justification exists, given a particular voting scenario. Clearly,
this computational problem is central to the approach of using automated reasoning to find justifications.

In a collective decision-making process, having the possibility to provide non-expert agents with a justification for why
a target outcome is a good compromise given their individual preferences, is an appealing idea. Such questions have
recently been addressed in the computational social choice
community at large—whether it was to explain the outcomes
of a specific rule in voting theory or to seek transparency and
accountability in multi-criteria decision making. Ultimately,
the development of real-life applications based on these notions depends on their practical feasibility and on the scalability of the approach taken. In this paper, we provide computational complexity results that address the problem of finding
and verifying justifications for collective decisions.
In particular, we focus on the recent development of a general
notion of justification for outcomes in voting theory. Such a
justification consists of a step-by-step explanation, grounded
in a normative basis, showing how the selection of the target
outcome follows from the normative principles considered.
We consider a language in which normative principles can be
encoded—either as an explicit list of instances of the principles (by means of quantifier-free sentences), or in a succinct fashion (using quantifiers). We then analyse the computational complexity of identifying and checking justifications. For the case where the normative principles are given
in the form of a list of instances, verifying the correctness of
a justification is DP-complete and deciding on the existence
of such a justification is complete for Sigma 2 P. For the case
where the normative principles are given succinctly, deciding
whether a justification is correct is in NEXP wedge coNEXP,
and NEXP-hard, and deciding whether a justification exists is
in EXP with access to an NP oracle and is NEXP-hard.

Introduction
In a recent paper, Boixel and Endriss (2020) developed a
general notion of justification for collective decisions, and
applied it to the setting of justifying outcomes in a voting
scenario. Their approach, grounded in the axiomatic method
of social choice theory, aims at providing non-expert agents
with easily understandable arguments for showing that a target outcome is a reasonable compromise in a given situation. More precisely, a justification consists of (concrete instances of) normative principles—so-called axioms in social

Related work. There has only been little work on the
notion of generating justifications for collective decisions.
Cailloux and Endriss (2016) proposed an algorithm for finding a justification of a given outcome in the case where that
outcome is the one given by the Borda rule. The notion they
developed can be seen as a restriction of the one proposed
by Boixel and Endriss (2020) and to date, the computational
complexity of their approach is unknown. However, in a re-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5194

