The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bayesian Persuasion under Ex Ante and Ex Post Constraints∗
Yakov Babichenko, Inbal Talgam-Cohen, Konstantin Zabarnyi
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
yakovbab@technion.ac.il, italgam@cs.technion.ac.il, konstzab@gmail.com

Abstract

act in Sender’s interest. Mathematically, a signaling scheme
transforms Receiver’s prior belief about how some unknown
state of nature is distributed into a posterior belief, which
determines Receiver’s action.
Since strategic communication of information is intrinsic
to most human endeavours, persuasion is of high importance
in practice, and is becoming even more so in today’s digital economy. Indeed, persuasion has been estimated to account for at least 30% of the total US economy (McCloskey
and Klamer 1995; Antioch 2013). Persuasion has also attracted significant research interest in recent years, initiated
by the celebrated Bayesian persuasion model of Kamenica
and Gentzkow.
We study a theoretical model for constrained Bayesian
persuasion under general families of ex ante and ex post
constraints. Ex ante constraints are statistical limitations
on the amount of information Receiver may learn when
the Sender-Receiver communication is repeated over time;
ex post constraints are a strong particular case restricting
the information passage on every instance of the communication. These constraint families have various applications. In particular, Tsakas and Tsakas (2019) model signaling via noisy channels by ex ante-constrained persuasion. Doval and Skreta (2018) further show that optimal signaling via a capacity-constrained channel is equivalent to a
constrained persuasion setting with a single entropy ex ante
constraint. Vølund (2018), based on research in cognitive
science, suggests ex post constraints as a possible model for
human behaviour upon receiving an unwelcome signal. One
of our main motivating examples in this work is online ad
auctions in which ex ante constraints reduce discrimination
and ex post constraints protect user privacy.

Bayesian persuasion, as introduced by Kamenica and
Gentzkow in 2011, is the study of information sharing policies among strategic agents. A prime example is signaling in
online ad auctions: what information should a platform signal
to an advertiser regarding a user when selling the opportunity
to advertise to her? Practical considerations such as preventing discrimination, protecting privacy or acknowledging limited attention of the information receiver impose constraints
on information sharing. We propose a simple way to mathematically model such constraints as restrictions on Receiver’s
admissible posterior beliefs. We consider two families of constraints – ex ante and ex post; the latter limits each instance
of Sender-Receiver communication, while the former more
general family can also pose restrictions in expectation. For
the ex ante family, a result of Doval and Skreta (2018) establishes the existence of an optimal signaling scheme with a
small number of signals – at most the number of constraints
plus the number of states of nature – and we show this result
is tight. For the ex post family, we tighten the previous bound
of Vølund (2018), showing that the required number of signals is at most the number of states of nature, as in the original Kamenica-Gentzkow setting. As our main algorithmic result, we provide an additive bi-criteria FPTAS for an optimal
constrained signaling scheme assuming a constant number
of states of nature; we improve the approximation to singlecriteria under a Slater-like regularity condition. The FPTAS
holds under standard assumptions, and more relaxed assumptions yield a PTAS. We then establish a bound on the ratio
between Sender’s optimal utility under convex ex ante constraints and the corresponding ex post constraints. We demonstrate how this result can be applied to find an approximately
welfare-maximizing constrained signaling scheme in ad auctions.

1

Introduction

Our contribution and paper organization. Let m and k
be the numbers of constraints and states of nature, respectively. Section 2 formally defines the model and describes
our main motivations. Section 3 proves tightness of the k+m
bound of Doval and Skreta (2018) on the support size of an
optimal ex ante-constrained signaling scheme; it further extends the lower bound result of Le Treust and Tomala (2019)
beyond a single constraint. For ex post constraints, Section 3
shows a tight bound of k on the support size, which is the
same as in the original setting of Kamenica and Gentzkow.
The support size of a signaling scheme is a standard mea-

In many real-life situations, one entity relies on information
revealed by another entity to decide which action to take.
Call the former and the latter entities Receiver and Sender,
respectively. Sender has the power to commit to a revelation policy, a.k.a. a signaling scheme. Sender would like to
strategically design such a scheme to persuade Receiver to
∗
For omitted proofs, please see our full paper version, which is
available at arXiv:2012.03272.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5127

