The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Large Batch Optimization for Deep Learning Using New Complete Layer-Wise
Adaptive Rate Scaling
Zhouyuan Huo1 , Bin Gu2, 3 , Heng Huang3, 4 *
1

Google, USA;
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
4
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
zhouyuan.huo@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu
2

Abstract

and leads to worse generalization errors (Hoffer, Hubara,
and Soudry 2017; Keskar et al. 2016).
Many empirical training techniques have been proposed
for large-batch deep learning optimization. (Goyal et al.
2017) proposed to adjust the learning rate through linear
learning rate scaling and gradual warmup. By using these
two techniques, they successfully trained ResNet50 with a
batch size of 8192 on 256 GPUs in one hour with no loss of
accuracy. Finding that the ratios of weight’s `2 -norm to gradient’s `2 -norm vary greatly among layers, (You, Gitman,
and Ginsburg 2017; You et al. 2019a) proposed and analyzed the state-of-the-art large-batch optimizer Layer-wise
Adaptive Rate Scaling (LARS) and scaled the batch size to
16384 for training ResNet50 on ImageNet. However, LARS
still requires warmup in early epochs of training and may
diverge if it is not tuned properly. There are many theoretical analysis about linear learning rate scaling (Lian et al.
2015, 2016; Zhang et al. 2019). However, it is still unknown
whether there is a better algorithm than warmup trick for
large batch training with theoretical underpinnings.
In this paper, we target to remove the empirical warmup
trick for large-batch training and propose a better algorithm
with theoretical underpins. We summarize our main contributions as follows:

Training deep neural networks using a large batch size has
shown promising results and benefits many real-world applications. Warmup is one of nontrivial techniques to stabilize
the convergence of large batch training. However, warmup
is an empirical method and it is still unknown whether there
is a better algorithm with theoretical underpinnings. In this
paper, we propose a novel Complete Layer-wise Adaptive
Rate Scaling (CLARS) algorithm for large-batch training.
We prove the convergence of our algorithm by introducing
a new fine-grained analysis of gradient-based methods. Furthermore, the new analysis also helps to understand two other
empirical tricks, layer-wise adaptive rate scaling and linear
learning rate scaling. We conduct extensive experiments and
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms gradual
warmup technique by a large margin and defeats the convergence of the state-of-the-art large-batch optimizer in training advanced deep neural networks (ResNet, DenseNet, MobileNet) on ImageNet dataset.

Introduction
Deep learning has made significant breakthroughs in many
fields, such as computer vision (He et al. 2016, 2017;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Ren et al. 2015),
nature language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997; Vaswani et al. 2017), and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al. 2013; Silver et al. 2017). Recent studies show that better performance can usually be
achieved by training a larger neural network with a bigger
dataset (Mahajan et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019). Nonetheless, it is time-consuming to train deep neural networks,
which limits the efficiency of deep learning research. For example, training ResNet50 on ImageNet with batch size 256
needs to take about 29 hours to obtain 75.3% Top-1 accuracy on 8 Tesla P100 GPUs (He et al. 2016). Thus, it is a
critical topic to reduce the training time for the development
of deep learning using data parallelism (Dean et al. 2012;
Krizhevsky 2014; Yadan et al. 2013) or model parallelism
(Huang et al. 2019; Huo et al. 2018). However, the largebatch neural network training using conventional gradientbased methods techniques usually requires heuristic tricks

1. We propose a novel Complete Layer-wise Adaptive
Rate Scaling (CLARS) algorithm for large-batch deep
neural networks optimization, which provides an superior performance than warmup trick in the beginning
of training.
2. We analyze the convergence of the proposed CLARS
algorithm by introducing a new fine-grained analysis for gradient-based methods and demonstrate that
warmup and CLARS alleviate the training difficulties
caused by layer-wise gradient variance. Furthermore,
our analysis can help to understand layer-wise adaptive rate scaling and linear learning rate scaling.
3. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed CLARS method outperforms gradual
warmup by a large margin and defeats the convergence
of the state-of-the-art large-batch optimizer in training
advanced deep neural networks (ResNet, DenseNet,
MobileNet) on ImageNet dataset.

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7883

