The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-Supervised Learning with Variational Bayesian Inference and Maximum
Uncertainty Regularization
Kien Do, Truyen Tran, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{k.do, truyen.tran, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
We propose two generic methods for improving semisupervised learning (SSL). The first integrates weight perturbation (WP) into existing “consistency regularization” (CR)
based methods. We implement WP by leveraging variational
Bayesian inference (VBI). The second method proposes a
novel consistency loss called “maximum uncertainty regularization” (MUR). While most consistency losses act on perturbations in the vicinity of each data point, MUR actively
searches for “virtual” points situated beyond this region that
cause the most uncertain class predictions. This allows MUR
to impose smoothness on a wider area in the input-output
manifold. Our experiments show clear improvements in classification errors of various CR based methods when they are
combined with VBI or MUR or both.

Figure 1: The most uncertain “virtual” point x∗ usually lies
outside the vicinity of x0 and is the most disruptive.

indirectly causes the classifier to adjust its view to adapt to
different data distributions (e.g., fw (x) v.s. fw (x0 )). Therefore, we hypothesize that the two types of perturbations are
complementary and could be combined to increase the classifier’s robustness. To implement WP, we treat the classifier’s weights w as random variables and perform variational
Bayesian inference (VBI) on w. This approach has several
advantages. First, perturbations of w can be generated easily
via drawing samples from an explicit variational distribution
qφ (w|D). We also take advantage of the local reparameterization trick and variational dropout (VD) (Kingma, Salimans,
and Welling 2015; Molchanov, Ashukha, and Vetrov 2017)
to substantially reduce the sampling cost and variance of the
gradients w.r.t. the weight samples, making VBI scalable for
deep neural networks. Second, since VBI is a realization of
the Minimum Description Length (MDL) framework (Hinton
and von Cramp 1993; Honkela and Valpola 2004), a classifier
trained under VBI, in principle, often generalize better than
those trained in the standard way.
Standard DP methods (e.g., Gaussian noise, dropout) often generate perturbations in the vicinity of each data point
and ignore those in the vacancy among data points, which
means consistency losses equipped with standard DPs can
only train locally smooth classifiers that do not generalize
well in general. To overcome this limitation, we propose a
novel consistency loss called “maximum uncertainty regularization” (MUR) of which the key component is finding
for each real data point x0 a neighbor “virtual” point x∗ that
has the most uncertain class prediction given by the classifier
f . During training, f becomes increasingly confident about

Introduction
Recent success in training deep neural networks is mainly
attributed to the availability of large, labeled datasets. However, annotating large amounts of data is often expensive
and time-consuming, and sometimes requires specialized
expertise (e.g., healthcare). Under these circumstances, semisupervised learning (SSL) has proven to be an effective means
of mitigating the need for labels by leveraging unlabeled data
to considerably improve performance. Among a wide range
of approaches to SSL (van Engelen and Hoos 2019), “consistency regularization” (CR) based methods are currently
state-of-the-art (Bachman, Alsharif, and Precup 2014; Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and Tasdizen 2016; Laine and Aila 2016;
Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Verma et al.
2019; Xie et al. 2019; Berthelot et al. 2019b; Sohn et al.
2020). These methods encourage neighbor samples to share
labels by enforcing consistent predictions for inputs under
perturbations.
Although the perturbations can be created in either the
input/feature space (data perturbation) or the weight space
(weight perturbation), existing CR based methods focus exclusively on the former and leave the latter underexplored.
Despite being related, weight perturbation (WP) is inherently different from data perturbation (DP) in the sense that
WP directly reflects different views of the classifier f on the
original data distribution (e.g., fw (x) v.s. fw0 (x)) while DP
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7236

