The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Joint Air Quality and Weather Predictions Based on Multi-Adversarial
Spatiotemporal Networks
Jindong Han1∗ , Hao Liu1∗† , Hengshu Zhu2 , Hui Xiong3 , Dejing Dou1
1

Baidu Research, Beijing, China, 2 Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc, Beijing, China, 3 Rutgers University, USA
{v hanjindong, liuhao30, zhuhengshu, doudejing}@baidu.com, hxiong@rutgers.edu

Abstract
!"
!!

Accurate and timely air quality and weather predictions are
of great importance to urban governance and human livelihood. Though many efforts have been made for air quality
or weather prediction, most of them simply employ one another as feature input, which ignores the inner-connection
between two predictive tasks. On the one hand, the accurate prediction of one task can help improve another task’s
performance. On the other hand, geospatially distributed air
quality and weather monitoring stations provide additional
hints for city-wide spatiotemporal dependency modeling. Inspired by the above two insights, in this paper, we propose the
Multi-adversarial spatiotemporal recurrent Graph Neural
Networks (MasterGNN) for joint air quality and weather
predictions. Specifically, we first propose a heterogeneous
recurrent graph neural network to model the spatiotemporal autocorrelation among air quality and weather monitoring
stations. Then, we develop a multi-adversarial graph learning framework to against observation noise propagation introduced by spatiotemporal modeling. Moreover, we present
an adaptive training strategy by formulating multi-adversarial
learning as a multi-task learning problem. Finally, extensive experiments on two real-world datasets show that MasterGNN achieves the best performance compared with seven
baselines on both air quality and weather prediction tasks.

(b) AQI of air quality station "$

Air quality station

Weather station

(a) Spatial distribution of air quality
(c) Wind speed of weather station "#
and weather stations

Figure 1: Spatial distribution of air quality and weather monitoring stations in Beijing. Two types of stations are monitoring exclusively different but correlated air quality and
weather conditions in different city locations.

been made for air quality and weather predictions (Liang
et al. 2018; Yi et al. 2018; Wang, Cao, and Yu 2019).
However, existing air quality and weather prediction
methods are designated for either air quality or weather prediction, perhaps with one another as a side input (Zheng
et al. 2015; Yi et al. 2018), but overlook the intrinsic connections and interactions between two tasks. Different from
existing studies, this work is motivated by the following
two insights. First, air quality and weather predictions are
two highly correlated tasks and can be mutually enhanced.
For example, accurately predicting the regional wind condition can help model the future dispersion and transport of
air pollutants (Ding, Huang, and Fu 2017). As another example, modeling the future concentration of aerosol pollutants (e.g., PM2.5 and PM10) also can help predict the local
climate (e.g., temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction), since aerosol elements can influence weather conditions through radiation, absorption, and boundary layer interactions (Hong et al. 2020; Ding, Huang, and Fu 2017).
Second, as illustrated in Figure 1, the geospatially distributed air quality and weather monitoring stations provide
additional hints to improve both predictive tasks. The air
quality and weather condition variations in different city locations reflect the urban dynamics and can be exploited to
improve spatiotemporal autocorrelation modeling.
In this work, we investigate the joint prediction of air
quality and weather conditions by explicitly modeling the

Introduction
With the rapid development of the economy and urbanization, people are increasingly concerned about emerging public health risks and environmental sustainability. As reported
by the World Health Organization (WHO), air pollution is
the world’s largest environmental health risk (CampbellLendrum and Prüss-Ustün 2019), and the changing weather
profoundly affects the local economic development and people’s daily life (Baklanov et al. 2018). Thus, accurate and
timely air quality and weather predictions are of great importance to urban governance and human livelihood. In the past
years, massive sensor stations have been deployed for monitoring air quality (e.g., PM2.5 and PM10) or weather conditions (e.g., temperature and humidity) and many efforts have
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4081

