The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Boundary Knowledge Translation for Foreground Segmentation
Zunlei Feng1# , Lechao Cheng2# , Xinchao Wang3 , Xiang Wang1 , Ya Jie Liu2 , Xiangtong Du4 ,
Mingli Song1∗
1

Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang Lab
3
Stevens Institute of Technology
4
Jiangsu University of Science and Technology
{zunleifeng, xiang.wang, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, {chenglc,liuyj}@zhejianglab.com, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu
Abstract

2019) and a large number of annotated samples (Hong et al.
2017; Li, Arnab, and Torr 2018; Papandreou et al. 2015).
Nevertheless, our human eyes can effortlessly recognize
the visual boundary of a scene object, even if this object seems unfamiliar or belongs to an unknown category. Inspired by this fact, we study in this paper a new Boundary
Knowledge Translation Task (BKT-Task), in aim to translate the knowledge learned from p training categories where
abundant annotations are available, into another q target categories where a very small number of annotations are available for each class.
The differences between the proposed BKT-Task and the
two related tasks, transfer learning and few-shot learning,
are summarized in Fig. 1. Unlike transfer learning that requires the p source categories and the q target ones to be
highly related so as to achieve reasonable performances, in
BKT such requirement is largely relaxed. As demonstrated
in our experiments, for example, the visual boundary knowledge of birds can be seamlessly translated into the segmentation network for flowers. Also, in contrast to both transfer
and few-shot learning, whose outputs span p + q categories,
BKT focuses on the q categories only, which seems to be a
flaw of BKT but in reality not. In many cases, since abundant annotations are available for the p categories, indicating
that state-of-the-art deep networks will highly likely to deliver gratifying results, a model that focuses on the novel
q categories where annotations are insufficient is much desired. Furthermore, as shown in prior works (Chen, Artieres,
and Denoyer 2019; Minaee et al. 2020; Vinyals et al. 2016)
and also demonstrated in our experiments, handling many
categories simultaneously at once, especially under a compact network architecture, will significantly downgrade the
performances for all classes; focusing on the q critical categories, on the other hand, will alleviate this dilemma to a
large extend and ensure satisfactory performances.
To this end, we propose a Translation Segmentation Network (Trans-Net) for the above BKT-Task. The Trans-Net is
designed to contain a segmentation network and two boundary discriminators. The segmentation network focuses on
only segmenting the target categories, while the two discriminators collaborate in an adversarial fashion: one works on
distinguishing whether the segmented foreground contains
the background features, and the other distinguishes whether

When confronted with objects of unknown types in an image, humans can effortlessly and precisely tell their visual
boundaries. This recognition mechanism and underlying generalization capability seem to contrast to state-of-the-art image segmentation networks that rely on large-scale categoryaware annotated training samples. In this paper, we make an
attempt towards building models that explicitly account for
visual boundary knowledge, in hope to reduce the training
effort on segmenting unseen categories. Specifically, we investigate a new task termed as Boundary Knowledge Translation (BKT). Given a set of fully labeled categories, BKT aims to translate the visual boundary knowledge learned
from the labeled categories, to a set of novel categories, each
of which is provided only a few labeled samples. To this end,
we propose a Translation Segmentation Network (Trans-Net),
which comprises a segmentation network and two boundary
discriminators. The segmentation network, combined with
a boundary-aware self-supervised mechanism, is devised to
conduct foreground segmentation, while the two discriminators work together in an adversarial manner to ensure an accurate segmentation of the novel categories under light supervision. Exhaustive experiments demonstrate that, with only tens
of labeled samples as guidance, Trans-Net achieves close results on par with fully supervised methods.

Introduction
Image segmentation has witnessed an unprecedented development in the past decade thanks to the deep learning. The
encouraging results, however, come at the cost of the vast
number of annotations and GPU training for days or even
weeks. To alleviate the training effort, a number of learning
techniques, such as few-shot learning and transfer learning,
have proposed. The former aims to train models using only
a few annotated samples, while the later focuses on transferring the models learned on one domain to another novel one. Despite the recent progress in few-shot and transfer
learning, existing approaches are still prone to either inferior
results (Shaban et al. 2017; Siam, Oreshkin, and Jagersand
2019; Wang et al. 2019a), or the rigorous requirement that
the two tasks are strongly related (Dai et al. 2019; Sun et al.
∗

Corresponding author. # Equal contribution to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1334

