The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Understanding the Influence of Individual Clients in Federated Learning
Yihao Xue 1 , Chaoyue Niu 1 , Zhenzhe Zheng 1 ,
Shaojie Tang 2 , Chengfei Lyu 3 , Fan Wu 1 , and Guihai Chen 1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
The University of Texas at Dallas,
3
Alibaba Group
yh xue@outlook.com, rvince@sjtu.edu.cn, zhengzhenzhe@sjtu.edu.cn,
shaojie.tang@utdallas.edu, chengfei.lcf@alibaba-inc.com, fwu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, gchen@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

a fair credit/reward allocation, and, more importantly, debugging for federated learning. Thus, a fine-grained understanding of clients’ influence further facilitates the exclusion
of negative-influence clients or dynamically requires them
to check their local data, thereby improving model performance. All of these are important to the explanation and robustness of federated learning, and also help sustain longterm user participation.

Federated learning allows mobile clients to jointly train a
global model without sending their private data to a central
server. Extensive works have studied the performance guarantee of the global model, however, it is still unclear how
each individual client influences the collaborative training
process. In this work, we defined a new notion, called FedInfluence, to quantify this influence over the model parameters, and proposed an effective and efficient algorithm to estimate this metric. In particular, our design satisfies several
desirable properties: (1) it requires neither retraining nor retracing, adding only linear computational overhead to clients
and the server; (2) it strictly maintains the tenets of federated
learning, without revealing any client’s local private data; and
(3) it works well on both convex and non-convex loss functions, and does not require the final model to be optimal.
Empirical results on a synthetic dataset and the FEMNIST
dataset demonstrate that our estimation method can approximate Fed-Influence with small bias. Further, we show an application of Fed-Influence in model debugging.

There already exists a classical statistics notion of “influence” in centralized learning, which evaluates the effect that
the absence of an individual sample has on a model. To measure this influence, one should conduct a leave-one-out test
(Cook 1977): retrain the model over the training set with one
certain sample removed, and compare this model with that
trained on the full dataset. A notion from robust statistics,
called “influence function” (Jaeckel 1972; Hampel 1974;
Cook and Weisberg 1980), was introduced to avoid retraining by measuring the change in the model caused by slightly
changing the weight of one sample and using quadratic approximation combined with a Newton step (Cook and Weisberg 1982). Koh and Liang (2017) leveraged influence function in modern machine learning settings and developed an
efficient and simple implementation using second-order optimization techniques. Hara, Nitanda, and Maehara (2019)
went beyond convexity and optimality, which are two important assumptions in (Koh and Liang 2017). Koh et al. (2019)
studied the effects of removing a group of data points, which
is analogous to removing a client that holds a subset of training data in federated learning, except that their study is still
in a centralized setting. Khanna et al. (2019) applied Fisher
kernels along with sequential Bayesian quadrature to identify a subset of training examples that are most responsible
for a given set of predictions and recovered (Koh and Liang
2017) as a special case.

Introduction
Federated learning ingeniously leverages a large amount of
valuable data in a distributed manner, while mitigating systemic privacy risks (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz et al.
2019). In such a setting, the training data are stored on multiple decentralized clients, who share a common global model
and train it collaboratively. There is a central server that
orchestrates the whole training process. In each round, the
server collects local models from some eligible clients and
use them to update the global model.
In this paper, we consider a significantly important but
less considered problem in federated learning: how does
each client influence the global model? Finding the answer
to this question is meaningful in several aspects. On one
hand, it helps us understand where the model comes from
by explaining the prediction of the current global model
in terms of clients. On the other hand, it provides quantitative insights into the roles of individual clients in federated learning, and informs us whether the existence of a
certain client benefits the global model. This is critical to

The existing works above focused on centralized learning,
and we are the first to consider a similar problem, the influence of individual clients, under a brand new framework,
namely federated learning. There are some essential differences between centralized learning and federated learning
which raise several design challenges: (1) The server in centralized learning, as the influence evaluator, has the full control over the considered sampling data, while in federated
learning, the server would not be able to access clients’ raw

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10560

