The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inverse Reinforcement Learning with Explicit Policy Estimates
Navyata Sanghvi†1 , Shinnosuke Usami†1,2 , Mohit Sharma†1 , Joachim Groeger∗1 , Kris Kitani1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Sony Corporation
navyatasanghvi@cmu.edu, shinnosuke.usami@sony.com,
mohitsharma@cmu.edu, jrg@joachimgroeger.com, kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

the perspectives these four methods take suggest a relationship between them, to the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to make explicit connections between them. The development of a common theoretical framework results in a
unified perspective of related methods from both fields. This
enables us to compare the suitability of methods for various
problem scenarios, based on their underlying assumptions
and the resultant quality of solutions.
To establish these connections, we first develop a common optimization problem form, and describe the associated
objective, policy and gradient forms. We then show how
each method solves a particular instance of this common
form. Based on this common form, we show how estimating the optimal soft value function is a key characteristic
which differentiates the methods. This difference results in
two algorithmic perspectives, which we call optimizationand approximation-based methods. We investigate insights
derived from our study of the common optimization problem
towards determining the suitability of the methods for various
problem settings.
Our contributions include: (1) developing a unified perspective of methods proposed by Ziebart (2010); Rust (1987);
Hotz and Miller (1993); Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002) as
particular instances of a class of IRL optimization problems that share a common objective and policy form (Section
4); (2) explicitly demonstrating algorithmic and computational differences between methods, which arise from a
difference in soft value function estimation (Section 5); (3)
investigating the suitability of methods for various types of
problems, using insights which emerge from a study of our
unified perspective (Section 6).

Various methods for solving the inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) problem have been developed independently in machine learning and economics. In particular, the method of
Maximum Causal Entropy IRL is based on the perspective
of entropy maximization, while related advances in the field
of economics instead assume the existence of unobserved action shocks to explain expert behavior (Nested Fixed Point
Algorithm, Conditional Choice Probability method, Nested
Pseudo-Likelihood Algorithm). In this work, we make previously unknown connections between these related methods
from both fields. We achieve this by showing that they all
belong to a class of optimization problems, characterized by
a common form of the objective, the associated policy and
the objective gradient. We demonstrate key computational and
algorithmic differences which arise between the methods due
to an approximation of the optimal soft value function, and
describe how this leads to more efficient algorithms. Using
insights which emerge from our study of this class of optimization problems, we identify various problem scenarios and
investigate each method’s suitability for these problems.

1

Introduction

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) – the problem of inferring the reward function from observed behavior – has
been studied independently both in machine learning (ML)
(Abbeel and Ng 2004; Ratliff, Bagnell, and Zinkevich 2006;
Boularias, Kober, and Peters 2011) and economics (Miller
1984; Pakes 1986; Rust 1987; Wolpin 1984). One of the most
popular IRL approaches in the field of machine learning is
Maximum Causal Entropy IRL (Ziebart 2010). While this
approach is based on the perspective of entropy maximization, independent advances in the field of economics instead
assume the existence of unobserved action shocks to explain
expert behavior (Rust 1988). Both these approaches optimize likelihood-based objectives, and are computationally
expensive. To ease the computational burden, related methods
in economics make additional assumptions to infer rewards
(Hotz and Miller 1993; Aguirregabiria and Mira 2002). While

2

Related Work

Many formulations of the IRL problem have been proposed
previously, including maximum margin formulations (Abbeel
and Ng 2004; Ratliff, Bagnell, and Zinkevich 2006) and
probabilistic formulations (Ziebart 2010). These methods are
computationally expensive as they require repeatedly solving
the underlying MDP. We look at some methods which reduce
this computational burden.
One set of approaches avoids the repeated computation by
casting the estimation problem as a supervised classification
or regression problem (Klein et al. 2012, 2013). Structured
Classification IRL (SC-IRL) (Klein et al. 2012) assumes a lin-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Equal contribution.∗ Work done while at CMU.

9472

