The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Understanding Decoupled and Early Weight Decay
Johan Bjorck, Kilian Q. Weinberger, Carla P. Gomes
Cornell University
{njb225,kqw4,gomes}@cornell.edu

common to formulate WD as adding an l2 penalty 12 λkwk22
P
1
to a loss function L(w) = |D|
i∈D `i (w) for a dataset D
and weights w. For SGD with batch B and learning rate α
this leads to the following update
α X
wt+1 = wt −
∇
`i (wt ) − αλwt
(1)
|B|

Abstract
Weight decay (WD) is a traditional regularization technique
in deep learning, but despite its ubiquity, its behavior is still
an area of active research. Golatkar et al. have recently shown
that WD only matters at the start of the training in computer
vision, upending traditional wisdom. Loshchilov et al. show
that for adaptive optimizers, manually decaying weights can
outperform adding an l2 penalty to the loss. This technique
has become increasingly popular and is referred to as decoupled WD. The goal of this paper is to investigate these two recent empirical observations. We demonstrate that by applying
WD only at the start, the network norm stays small throughout training. This has a regularizing effect as the effective
gradient updates become larger. However, traditional generalizations metrics fail to capture this effect of WD, and we
show how a simple scale-invariant metric can. We also show
how the growth of network weights is heavily influenced by
the dataset and its generalization properties. For decoupled
WD, we perform experiments in NLP and RL where adaptive
optimizers are the norm. We demonstrate that the primary issue that decoupled WD alleviates is the mixing of gradients
from the objective function and the l2 penalty in the buffers of
Adam (which stores the estimates of the first-order moment).
Adaptivity itself is not problematic and decoupled WD ensures that the gradients from the l2 term cannot ”drown out”
the true objective, facilitating easier hyperparameter tuning.

i∈B

By adding an l2 penalty term, the weights w are ”decayed”
by a factor (1−αλ) per update. Thus, it is common to use the
terms weight decay and l2 regularization interchangeably.
Background. The motivation for this work is to understand two recent observations. The first observation comes
from Loshchilov and Hutter [2017], who show that for
Adam [Kingma and Ba 2014], manually decaying weights
can outperform an l2 loss. As the gradient of the l2 term
will appear both in the numerator and denominator of the
adaptive gradient step, these methods are not equivalent.
Loshchilov and Hutter [2017] dub this technique decoupled weight decay and perform experiments on small-scale
computer vision tasks, observing improved generalization
and increased hyperparameter stability. This strategy has become increasingly popular [Wang et al. 2018, Radford et al.
2018, Carion et al. 2020, Liu et al. 2020] and is e.g. used in
the Facebook NLP repository fairseq [Ott et al. 2019]. However, the motivation for this approach is primarily empirical.
The second phenomenon we investigate is due to Golatkar,
Achille, and Soatto [2019] who show that in computer vision, applying WD only during say the first quarter of training is essentially as good as always applying it, and applying
it after the first quarter is roughly as good as never applying
it. We refer to these two schedules as early/late WD. We focus on the first quarter in this paper for concreteness but note
that the same trend holds beyond exactly the first quarter. We
will relate the observations of Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto
[2019] to the sharp/flat minima hypothesis of Keskar et al.
[2016] which essentially states that the noise in SGD biases
the network to flat minimizers which generalize well.
Our Contributions. Regarding observations of [Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2019], we show that the network
norm typically grows during the start, using WD early in
training then ensures that the gradient steps are large relative to the weights throughout training. This has a regularizing effect, but traditional metrics of generalization [Keskar
et al. 2016] do not consistently capture this. We provide

Introduction
The roots of weight decay (WD) go back to at least Tikhonov
[1943], and within the context of deep learning, it has been
used at least since 1987 [Hinton 1987]. Modern DNNs are
typically trained with WD [Tan and Le 2019, Huang et al.
2017]. The technique is also used in modern NLP (natural
language processing) [Ott et al. 2019, Radford et al. 2018]
but is less commonly used in reinforcement learning. Despite its ubiquity, there is still ongoing research on WD –
Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto [2019] have recently shown
that WD essentially only matters at the start of the training in computer vision. Additionally, Loshchilov and Hutter [2017] have shown that WD interacts poorly with adaptive optimizers. The motivation of this paper is to investigate
and explain these recent empirical observations on WD. It is
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6777

