The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Audio-Oriented Multimodal Machine Comprehension via
Dynamic Inter- and Intra-modality Attention
∗

∗

†

Zhiqi Huang1 , Fenglin Liu1 , Xian Wu2 , Shen Ge2 , Helin Wang1 , Wei Fan2 , Yuexian Zou1,3
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, China
2
Tencent, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{zhiqihuang, fenglinliu98, wanghl15, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn, {kevinxwu, shenge, davidwfan}@tencent.com
Abstract

developed for the MC problem and are proven to be effective (Liu et al. 2019c; Qiu et al. 2019).
However, conventional MC only focus on accepting single modal textual inputs, while in real life many multimodal
(audio and textual modalities) scenarios exist, such as playing music with lyrics, and taking a listening examination
in TOEFL, etc. Moreover, multimodal inputs often convey
more information than single modality inputs, and it is easy
to make wrong judgments under single modal scenarios. For
example, people could express opposite intentions by using different tones to say the sentence “that’s interesting”. If
the emphasis is put on the word “interesting!”, he/she may
really be interested and wants to know more; on the other
hand, if the whole sentence is expressed intermittently, e.g.,
“that’s... um... interesting.”, he/she may not be interested at
all. Another example in English exams like TOEFL, i.e., ”He
hasn’t seen his parent four years!” and ”He hasn’t seen his
parent for years!”, may only be distinguished by their different sound emphasis, showing a clear trap in the audio.
As a result, different tones of voice could lead to different
meanings, even when the textual sentences are nearly identical. Inspired by these real-world applications and observations, we propose the novel problem of Audio-Oriented
Multimodal Machine Comprehension. As shown in Figure 1,
the novel problem requires the system to consider both the
audio and textual modality inputs in selecting the correct answers. Compared to the conventional setting of unimodal
based MC, our new problem poses two fundamental challenges. First, in the learning of multimodal tasks, due to the
great disparities between the textual and the audio domains,
plus the distinct features of the modalities, one core challenge is to effectively bridge the gap between textual and
the audio domains and learn an effective fusion of multimodality features (Lu et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2019a, 2020b). Second, due to the abundance of unimodal
(textual or audio) real-world application scenarios, e.g., the
conventional machine reading comprehension (textual) (Lai
et al. 2017) and the end-to-end spoken language understanding (audio) (Serdyuk et al. 2018), it is necessary to enable
the multimodal MC model to work in the unimodal scenarios. In other words, we should empower the proposed multimodal MC model with the capability to accurately predict
the answers based only on the textual or only on audio input.
To tackle the first challenge, we propose a novel Dy-

While Machine Comprehension (MC) has attracted extensive research interests in recent years, existing approaches
mainly belong to the category of Machine Reading Comprehension task which mines textual inputs (paragraphs and
questions) to predict the answers (choices or text spans).
However, there are a lot of MC tasks that accept audio input
in addition to the textual input, e.g. English listening comprehension test. In this paper, we target the problem of AudioOriented Multimodal Machine Comprehension, and its goal
is to answer questions based on the given audio and textual
information. To solve this problem, we propose a Dynamic
Inter- and Intra-modality Attention (DIIA) model to effectively fuse the two modalities (audio and textual). DIIA can
work as an independent component and thus be easily integrated into existing MC models. Moreover, we further develop a Multimodal Knowledge Distillation (MKD) module
to enable our multimodal MC model to accurately predict the
answers based only on either the text or the audio. As a result,
the proposed approach can handle various tasks including:
Audio-Oriented Multimodal Machine Comprehension, Machine Reading Comprehension and Machine Listening Comprehension, in a single model, making fair comparisons possible between our model and the existing unimodal MC models. Experimental results and analysis prove the effectiveness
of the proposed approaches. First, the proposed DIIA boosts
the baseline models by up to 21.08% in terms of accuracy;
Second, under the unimodal scenarios, the MKD module allows our multimodal MC model to significantly outperform
the unimodal models by up to 18.87%, which are trained and
tested with only audio or textual data.

Introduction
Recently, there is a surge of research interests in Machine
Comprehension (MC), which aims to teach the machine
to answer questions after giving comprehension materials (Nguyen et al. 2016; Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Lai et al.
2017). As shown in Figure 1, conventional MC system accepts unimodal textual inputs, and predict the corresponding
answers to the given multiple-choice questions. By adopting
various deep learning techniques, many models have been
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13098

