The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Personalized Cross-Silo Federated Learning on Non-IID Data
Yutao Huang1 , Lingyang Chu* 2 , Zirui Zhou3 , Lanjun Wang3 ,
Jiangchuan Liu1 , Jian Pei1 , Yong Zhang3
1

Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
2
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
3
Huawei Technologies Canada, Burnaby, Canada
yutaoh@sfu.ca, chul9@mcmaster.ca, zirui.zhou@huawei.com, langjun.wang@huawei.com,
jcliu@sfu.ca, jpei@cs.sfu.ca, yong.zhang3@huawei.com
Abstract

Mohri 2014; Mansour et al. 2020; Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009; Schneider and Vlachos 2020; Wang et al.
2019).While those methods work in some cases, they cannot solve the problem systematically as demonstrated in our
experimental results (e.g., data set CIFAR100 in Table 3).
We argue that the fundamental bottleneck in personalized
cross-silo federated learning with non-IID data is the misassumption of one global model can fit all clients. Consider
the scenario where each client tries to train a model on customers’ sentiments on food in a country. Different clients
collect data in different countries. Obviously, customers’
reviews on food are likely to be related to their cultures,
life-styles, and environments. Unlikely there exists a global
model universally fitting all countries. Instead, pairwise collaborations among countries that share similarity in culture,
life-styles, environments and other factors may be the key
to accomplish good performance in personalized cross-silo
federated learning with non-IID data.
Carrying the above insight, in this paper, we tackle the
challenging personalized cross-silo federated learning problem by a novel attentive message passing mechanism that
adaptively facilitates the underlying pairwise collaborations
between clients by iteratively encouraging similar clients to
collaborate more. We make several technical contributions.
We propose a novel method federated attentive message
passing (FedAMP) whose central idea is the attentive message passing mechanism. FedAMP allows each client to own
a local personalized model, but does not use a single global
model on the cloud server to conduct collaborations. Instead,
it maintains a personalized cloud model on the cloud server
for each client, and realizes the attentive message passing
mechanism by attentively passing the personalized model of
each client as a message to the personalized cloud models
with similar model parameters. Moreover, FedAMP updates
the personalized cloud model of each client by a weighted
convex combination of all the messages it receives. This
adaptively facilitates the underlying pairwise collaborations
between clients and significantly improves the effectiveness
of collaboration.
We prove the convergence of FedAMP for both convex
and non-convex personalized models. Furthermore, we propose a heuristic method to further improve the performance
of FedAMP on clients using deep neural networks as person-

Non-IID data present a tough challenge for federated learning. In this paper, we explore a novel idea of facilitating
pairwise collaborations between clients with similar data. We
propose FedAMP, a new method employing federated attentive message passing to facilitate similar clients to collaborate
more. We establish the convergence of FedAMP for both convex and non-convex models, and propose a heuristic method
to further improve the performance of FedAMP when clients
adopt deep neural networks as personalized models. Our extensive experiments on benchmark data sets demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (Yang et al. 2019) facilitates collaborations among a set of clients and preserves their privacy so
that the clients can achieve better machine learning performance than individually working alone. The underlying idea
is to collectively learn from data from all clients. The initial
idea of federated learning starts from aggregating models
from clients to achieve a global model so that the global
model can be more general and capable. The effectiveness
of this global collaboration theme that is not differentiating among all clients highly depends on the data distribution
among clients. It works well on IID data, that is, clients are
similar to each other in their private data distribution.
In many application scenarios where collaborations
among clients are needed to train machine learning models,
data are unfortunately not IID. For example, consider the
cases of personalized cross-silo federated learning (Kairouz
et al. 2019), where there are tens or hundreds of clients and
the private data of clients may be different in size, class distributions and even the distribution of each class. Global collaboration without considering individual private data often
cannot achieve good performance for individual clients.
Some federated learning methods try to fix the problem by conducting an additional fine-tuning step after a
global model is trained (Ben-David et al. 2010; Cortes and
* Lingyang Chu and Yutao Huang contribute equally in this
work. The API of this work is available at https://t.ly/nGN9, free
registration at Huawei Cloud is required before use.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7865

