The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-supervised Pre-training and Contrastive Representation Learning
for Multiple-choice Video QA
Seonhoon Kim1,2 , Seohyeong Jeong1 , Eunbyul Kim2 , Inho Kang2 , Nojun Kwak1,†
1

Seoul National University
2
Naver Search
{seo hyeong, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr, {seonhoon.kim, silverstar.kim, once.ihkang}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Video Question Answering (Video QA) requires fine-grained
understanding of both video and language modalities to answer the given questions. In this paper, we propose novel
training schemes for multiple-choice video question answering with a self-supervised pre-training stage and a supervised
contrastive learning in the main stage as an auxiliary learning. In the self-supervised pre-training stage, we transform
the original problem format of predicting the correct answer
into the one that predicts the relevant question to provide
a model with broader contextual inputs without any further
dataset or annotation. For contrastive learning in the main
stage, we add a masking noise to the input corresponding
to the ground-truth answer, and consider the original input
of the ground-truth answer as a positive sample, while treating the rest as negative samples. By mapping the positive
sample closer to the masked input, we show that the model
performance is improved. We further employ locally aligned
attention to focus more effectively on the video frames that
are particularly relevant to the given corresponding subtitle
sentences. We evaluate our proposed model on highly competitive benchmark datasets related to multiple-choice video
QA: TVQA, TVQA+, and DramaQA. Experimental results
show that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
all datasets. We also validate our approaches through further
analyses.

Figure 1: Multiple-choice Video QA example of TVQA
dataset, composed of a 60-90 second long video clip, question, and the answer options. A video clip consists of video
frames and subtitles, and each subtitle is connected to several frames. In our setting, we additionally extract object information and visual features from the video frames using
Faster R-CNN and ResNet-101 as in the bottom right yellow box. We use question, answer, subtitles, and objects as
our text input and visual features as our visual input.
and language. Figure 1 shows an example of multiple-choice
video QA from the TVQA dataset. The multiple-choice
video QA task requires the model to select the correct answer given a question, corresponding video frames, and subtitles.
To address video QA, several works have utilized early
stage fusion method (Kim et al. 2017; Na et al. 2017) to
merge two different modalities, while other recent works
(Lei et al. 2018, 2019) have employed late stage fusion
method, which extracts representation from language and
vision independently during the early stage of framework,
and combines them in QA-aware manners. To obtain further fine-grained information from videos, Kim, Tang, and
Bansal (2020) has generated captions using a dense caption
model (Yang et al. 2017) to translate vision modality to that
of language. Furthermore, Geng et al. (2020) has reckoned
that explicitly replacing the predicted regions corresponding
to a person from object detection with the name of protagonists helps the model to answer the questions.
Unlike the previously mentioned methods, which focus
on extracting QA-aware visual information, we shift our fo-

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant improvements
in vision and language communities, which have consequently led to substantial attention in vision-language multimodality tasks such as visual grounding (Plummer et al.
2015), image captioning (Chen et al. 2015), and visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017). Furthermore, as video becomes ubiquitous, as a daily source of
information and communication, video-language tasks such
as video captioning (Zhou et al. 2018), video moment retrieval (Liu et al. 2018), and video question answering (video
QA) (Lei et al. 2018, 2019) are emerging as important topics. Among these topics, video QA is especially challenging, as it requires fine-grained understanding of both video
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† Corresponding author.

13171

