The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Bayesian Approach for Subset Selection in Contextual Bandits
Jialian Li1 , Chao Du2 , Jun Zhu* 1
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Lab, Bosch-Tsinghua Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
lijialia16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duchao0726@gmail.com, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

focuses on gaining information for identifying the optimal
target set.1
Recent works for pure exploration in CB mainly concentrate on single-arm identification for Linear Bandits (LB),
where arm contexts and environment parameters are represented as vectors and the expected reward for each arm is
the inner product of its context and the environment vector. Frequentist methods (Soare, Lazaric, and Munos 2014;
Xu, Honda, and Sugiyama 2018) on LB construct confidence bounds to estimate the uncertainty of the expected
rewards of arms. Comparing with Bayesian methods, frequentist methods are usually conservative and empirically
less efficient (Eckman and Henderson 2018; Branke, Chick,
and Schmidt 2007), since they require all confidence bounds
to be small enough.
The Bayesian framework provides a way to handle uncertainty explicitly by maintaining a posterior distribution
for parameters, which makes it possible to characterize
the probability of being optimal directly. For example,
BayesGap (Hoffman, Shahriari, and Freitas 2014) uses a
posterior distribution to characterize the environment parameters in LB. When turning to choosing arms, it still constructs bounds for each arm and chooses the best one. However, it fails to exploit the contextual information for arm selection. For example, consider the three-arm LB with arms
featured as x1 = (1, 0), x2 = (1, 0.1) and x3 = (0, 1) and
environment parameter (1, 0.1) (Xu, Honda, and Sugiyama
2018). Then the key is to identify the optimal one between
x1 and x2 . For this problem, pulling x3 can be more efficient in distinguishing x1 and x2 than pulling either of them.
Therefore, in CB, arms with low rewards might be informative in exploration.
These best arm identification methods on LB cannot be
extended to general CB subset selection for two reasons: (1)
their constructions of confidence bounds highly rely on the
linear property, and (2) their arm selection rules for best arm
identification cannot be directly applied for general problems with I and Z.
Considering the above issues, we propose Bayesian Resample Explore (BRE), a novel Bayesian method for sub-

Subset selection in Contextual Bandits (CB) is an important
task in various applications such as advertisement recommendation. In CB, arms are attached with contexts and thus correlated in the context space. Proper exploration for subset selection in CB should carefully consider the contexts. Previous works mainly concentrate on the best one arm identification in linear bandit problems, where the expected rewards
are linearly dependent on the contexts. However, these methods highly rely on linearity, and cannot be easily extended to
more general cases. We propose a novel Bayesian approach
for subset selection in general CB where the reward functions can be nonlinear. Our method provides a principled way
to employ contextual information and efficiently explore the
arms. For cases with relatively smooth posteriors, we give
theoretical results that are comparable to previous works. For
general cases, we provide a calculable approximate variant.
Empirical results show the effectiveness of our method on
both linear bandits and general CB.

Introduction
Subset selection (Soare, Lazaric, and Munos 2014) is an important task in decision-making. In this paper, we consider
the subset selection task in a contextual bandit (CB) setting,
where we have some featured arms, and the goal is to identify an optimal subset of arms by interacting with them and
gaining observations. Practical problems like advertisement
recommendation (Li et al. 2010) fall into this category. For
example, a new advertiser might wish to identify a set of customers who are most probable to be interested in her advertisements. The goal is to conduct this subset selection with
as few as possible interactions with the arms.
Formally, assume that we are facing a set of N arms (denoted by [N ] = {1, 2, ..., N }) where each arm is attached
with a context. Each time, we choose a subset of arms as an
action set and obtain a corresponding reward observation.
Our goal is to identify the optimal target set with a maximum expected reward based on the observations. We denote
the sets of action sets and target sets as I and Z respectively. In this paper, we focus on the pure exploration setting
for subset selection problems. That is, the training process

1

There is another setting considering regret, where the goal is to
improve the average performance over the whole training process.
Thus the trade-off between exploitation and exploration is needed.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8384

