The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bag of Tricks for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition with Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks
Yongshun Zhang1 , Xiu-Shen Wei2,3∗ , Boyan Zhou4 , Jianxin Wu1
2

1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
4
Megvii Research Nanjing
zhangys@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {weixs.gm, zhouboyan94, wujx2001}@gmail.com

Abstract

datasets deliver poor recognition accuracy, especially for
under-represented minority categories. Dealing with such
long-tailed distributions is indispensable in real-world applications, such as object detection (Lin et al. 2017; Ouyang
et al. 2016), instance segmentation (Wang et al. 2019; Gupta,
Dollar, and Girshick 2019), visual recognition (Zhang et al.
2017; Cui et al. 2019), etc. In this paper, we focus on the
fundamental long-tailed visual recognition problem.

In recent years, visual recognition on challenging long-tailed
distributions, where classes often exhibit extremely imbalanced frequencies, has made great progress mostly based on
various complex paradigms (e.g., meta learning). Apart from
these complex methods, simple refinements on training procedure also make contributions. These refinements, also called
tricks, are minor but effective, such as adjustments in the
data distribution or loss functions. However, different tricks
might conflict with each other. If users apply these long-tail
related tricks inappropriately, it could cause worse recognition
accuracy than expected. Unfortunately, there has not been a
scientific guideline of these tricks in the literature. In this
paper, we first collect existing tricks in long-tailed visual
recognition and then perform extensive and systematic experiments, in order to give a detailed experimental guideline
and obtain an effective combination of these tricks. Furthermore, we also propose a novel data augmentation approach
based on class activation maps for long-tailed recognition,
which can be friendly combined with re-sampling methods
and shows excellent results. By assembling these tricks scientifically, we can outperform state-of-the-art methods on four
long-tailed benchmark datasets, including ImageNet-LT and
iNaturalist 2018. Our code is open-source and available at
https://github.com/zhangyongshun/BagofTricks-LT.

Recently, long-tailed visual recognition has attracted increasing attentions. Various methods belonging to different
paradigms, e.g., metric learning (Wang et al. 2018; Cao et al.
2019), meta learning (Liu et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019; Jamal et al. 2020) and knowledge transfer (Wang, Ramanan,
and Hebert 2017), have been successfully explored. Although
these methods bring a steady trend of accuracy improvements
on long-tailed datasets, they often suffer from high sensitivity
to hyper-parameters (Cao et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019) or high
complexity in the training procedures (Wang, Ramanan, and
Hebert 2017; Liu et al. 2019; Xiang, Ding, and Han 2020). Besides, it causes difficulties to efficiently apply these methods
in various real-world scenarios. Apart from these methods,
existing training tricks in long-tailed visual recognition also
play a major role, which just make simple refinements to
the vanilla training procedure, such as adjustments in loss
functions or data sampling strategies. These tricks are simple
but make big differences. However, different tricks might
hurt each other during training when they were employed
inappropriately. For instance, re-sampling (Buda, Maki, and
Mazurowski 2018; Japkowicz and Stephen 2002) and reweighting (Mikolov et al. 2013; Cui et al. 2019) are two commonly used tricks to alleviate the imbalance of long-tailed
distributions. Re-sampling tries to get balanced datasets, and
re-weighting assigns weights to categories determined by
inversion of class frequencies. Since both re-sampling and reweighting try to enlarge the influence of minority categories,
applying re-weighting and re-sampling simultaneously will
obtain similar or even worse accuracy than using them alone.
Similar to re-weighting and re-sampling, when we apply two
or more long-tail related tricks, it would be great to know
which of them can be combined synergistically and also
which of them might conflict with others. Yet, no guideline
is available in the literature. Although there are several good

Introduction
Computer vision has achieved great progress with the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on
balanced distributed datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Krizhevsky
and Hinton 2009). But in real-world scenarios, large scale
datasets (Zhou et al. 2017; Van Horn et al. 2018; Lin et al.
2014) naturally exhibit the imbalanced and long-tailed distributions, where a few categories (majority categories) occupy
most of the data while most categories (minority categories)
are under-represented. CNNs trained on these long-tailed
∗

Corresponding author: X.-S. Wei (Nanjing University of Science and Technology). This research was supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61772256, 61921006),
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.
30920041111) and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3447

