The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evaluating Gin Rummy Hands Using
Opponent Modeling and Myopic Meld Distance
Phoebe Goldman, *1 Corey R. Knutson, *2 Ryan Mahtab, *3
Jack Maloney, *4 Joseph B. Mueller, 5,6 Richard G. Freedman 6
1

New York University College of Arts and Science
2
University of Minnesota Duluth
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
University of Minnesota Twin Cities
5
University of Minnesota
6
SIFT, LLC

phoebe.goldman@nyu.edu, knuts983@d.umn.edu, rmahtab@andrew.cmu.edu, malon559@umn.edu, muel0053@umn.edu,
{rfreedman,jmueller}@sift.net
Abstract

observations of their actions each turn. In addition, we applied domain knowledge from our experience playing Gin
Rummy to introduce a conservative, but surprisingly simple and effective, strategy that decides to end the round only
when the player has the best possible score (because the objective is to minimize a non-negative score, this is 0). These
elements synergize to prepare for the case that the opponent
ends the game first because there is a penalty for ending the
game while having a greater score than the other player.
In this paper, we present our Gin Rummy-playing agent
and its components in further detail. After we present how
to play Gin Rummy with our insights in Section 2, Section 3
reviews related research about gameplaying agents. Following this background, Section 4 introduces each component
of our agent in more depth. To study how our agent performs, we perform experiments involving play against variations of itself in Section 5. Based on the results, we provide
discussions and propose future work in Section 6.

Gin Rummy is a popular two-player card game involving
choices to draw and discard cards to form sets of matching cards. Unlike other popular games such as Chess, Poker,
and Go, there is little formal artificial intelligence research
about how to make good decisions when playing Gin Rummy.
In this paper, we develop an agent that plays Gin Rummy
through a combination of known and expected card values,
modeling the opponent to predict their cards of interest, and
a conservative approach to assessing when to end the hand.
In addition to discussing our observations about Gin Rummy
that inspired our agent’s design and how the agent works, we
evaluate the relative importance of various features employed
by our agent by competing agents which implement various
subsets of those features.

1

Introduction

Gin Rummy is a two-player card game that, despite having simple rules, introduces the opportunity for complex
strategic decision-making based on both hidden information and randomness. Unlike other incomplete information
games such as Poker, there has been little scholarly study
about playing Gin Rummy. Although Poker has a betting
element that is absent in Gin Rummy, it contains other interesting challenges not found in Poker such as a sequence
of actions per turn and gambling whether to terminate the
round in confidence of having a better score than the opponent. The absence of existing strategies in the literature, the
simplicity of the game rules, and the potential to implement
complex reasoning makes Gin Rummy an intriguing problem space for artificial intelligence research.
Using the limited information available to a player, our
approach uses approximate statistical analysis of potential
hand outcomes and analysis of the opponent’s strategy given

2

Game Rules

Gin Rummy is a two-player card game played in a series of
rounds. At the beginning of each round, each player is dealt a
ten-card hand from a standard 52-card deck. One additional
card is placed face up as the initial discard pile. The players
alternate turns making two or three decisions in sequence:
1. whether to draw the top card from the discard pile (faceup) or from the deck (face-down),
2. which card to discard from their hand, and
3. whether to knock and end the round (if applicable).
Each card has a point value, with aces worth one point, pip
cards worth their number, and face cards worth ten points.
Cards are worth no points if they are grouped into melds of
at least three cards, either all matching rank (sets) or forming
a straight within the same suit (runs). The sum of the cards’
point values in a player’s hand is called their deadwood. If
a player has at most ten deadwood points at the end of a

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15510

