The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Network Satisfaction for Symmetric Relation Algebras with a Flexible Atom
Manuel Bodirsky, Simon Knäuer
Institut für Algebra, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
manuel.bodirsky@tu-dresden.de, simon.knaeuer@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

also exist relation algebras where the complexity of the network satisfaction problem is not in NP: Hirsch gave an example of a finite relation algebra with an undecidable network satisfaction problem (Hirsch 1999). This result might
be surprising at first sight; it is related to the fact that the
representation of a finite relation algebra by concrete binary
relations over some set can be quite complicated. We also
mention that not every finite relation algebra has a representation (Lyndon 1950). There are even non-representable relation algebras that are symmetric (Maddux 2006); a relation
algebra is symmetric if every element is its own converse.
A simple condition that implies that a finite relation algebra has a representation is the existence of a so-called
flexible atom (Comer 1984; Maddux 1982), combined with
the assumption that A is integral; formal definitions can
be found in section “Preliminaries”.Such relation algebras
have been studied intensively, for example in the context of
the so-called flexible atoms conjecture (Maddux 1994; Alm,
Maddux, and Manske 2008). We will see that integral relation algebras with a flexible atom even have a normal representation, i.e., a representation which is fully universal,
square, and homogeneous (Hirsch 1996). The network satisfaction problem for a relation algebra with a normal representation can be seen as a constraint satisfaction problem for
an infinite structure B that is well-behaved from a modeltheoretic point of view; in particular, we may choose B to
be homogeneous and finitely bounded.
Constraint satisfaction problems over finite domains have
been studied intensively in the past two decades, and tremendous progress has been made concerning systematic results about their computational complexity. In 2017, Bulatov (2017) and Zhuk (2017) announced proofs of the famous
Feder-Vardi dichotomy conjecture which states that every
finite-domain CSP is in P or NP-complete. Both proofs build
on an important connection between the computational complexity of constraint satisfaction problems and central parts
of universal algebra.
The universal-algebraic approach can also be applied
to study the computational complexity of countably infinite homogeneous structures B with finite relational signature (Bodirsky and Nešetřil 2006). If B is finitely bounded,
then CSP(B) is contained in NP; see, e.g. (Bodirsky 2012).
If B is homogeneous and finitely bounded then a complexity dichotomy has been conjectured, along with a conjecture

Robin Hirsch posed in 1996 the Really Big Complexity Problem: classify the computational complexity of the network
satisfaction problem for all finite relation algebras A. We
provide a complete classification for the case that A is symmetric and has a flexible atom; the problem is in this case
NP-complete or in P. If a finite integral relation algebra has a
flexible atom, then it has a normal representation B. We can
then study the computational complexity of the network satisfaction problem of A using the universal-algebraic approach,
via an analysis of the polymorphisms of B. We also use a
Ramsey-type result of Nešetřil and Rödl and a complexity
dichotomy result of Bulatov for conservative finite-domain
constraint satisfaction problems.

Introduction
One of the earliest approaches to formalise constraint satisfaction problems over infinite domains is based on relation
algebras (Ladkin and Maddux 1994; Hirsch 1997). We think
about the elements of a relation algebra as binary relations;
the algebra has operations for intersection, union, complement, converse, and composition of relations, and constants
for the empty relation, the full relation, and equality, and is
required to satisfy certain axioms. Important examples of relation algebras are the Point Algebra, the Left Linear Point
Algebra, Allen’s Interval Algebra, RCC5, and RCC8, just to
name a few.
The so-called network satisfaction problem (NSP) for a
finite relation algebra asks whether a given finite network of
constraints is consistent with the relation algebra. NSPs can
be used to model many computational problems in temporal
and spatial reasoning (Düntsch 2005; Renz and Nebel 2007;
Bodirsky and Jonsson 2017). In 1996, Robin Hirsch (1996)
asked the Really Big Complexity Problem (RBCP): can we
classify the computational complexity of the network satisfaction problem for every finite relation algebra? For example, the complexity of the network satisfaction problem
for the Point Algebra and the Left Linear Point Algebra is
in P (Vilain, Kautz, and van Beek 1989; Bodirsky and Kutz
2007), while it is NP-complete for all of the other examples
mentioned above (Allen 1983; Renz and Nebel 1999). There
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6218

