The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AI-Infused Collaborative Inquiry in Upper Elementary School:
A Game-Based Learning Approach
Seung Lee1, Bradford Mott1, Anne Ottenbreit-Leftwich2, Adam Scribner2, Sandra Taylor1,
Kyungjin Park1, Jonathan Rowe1, Krista Glazewski2, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver2, and James Lester1
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University
2
School of Education, Indiana University
{sylee, bwmott, smtayl23, kpark8, jprowe, lester}@ncsu.edu, {aleftwic, jascrib, glaze, chmelosi}@indiana.edu
1

Abstract

enabling improvements in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (Manyika 2017). This has generated a vital
need to develop a deep understanding of how to best introduce K-12 students to AI (Touretzky et al. 2019), and how
to best support K-12 teachers in integrating AI learning experiences into their classrooms.
Recognizing the importance of fostering K-12 students’
awareness and interest in AI, emerging efforts are underway
to incorporate AI within K-12 education (Ali et al. 2019;
Touretzky et al. 2019), as well as to establish guidelines for
K-12 AI education (AAAI 2018). However, there has been
limited research examining AI learning and teaching at the
elementary level. Because early learning experiences can
significantly affect future academic and career trajectories,
it is essential to create engaging AI learning experiences for
elementary school students.
Game-based learning is a powerful tool for creating effective and engaging learning experiences through immersive problem solving (Wouters 2013; McLaren et al. 2017).
Game-based learning environments, with the potential to
motivate students with inviting settings, expressive characters, and compelling virtual worlds, are being used to create
engaging, effective computer science (CS) and AI learning
experiences in K-12 classrooms (Buffum 2016; Wang and
Johnson 2019), including fostering computational thinking
in the elementary grades (Rowe et al. 2017). Well-designed
game-based learning environments enable students to develop problem-solving skills, communicate and collaborate
with other students, and actively participate in rich virtual
contexts (Gee 2003; Salen 2007; Shaffer 2006). Similarly,
inquiry-based learning approaches for CS have yielded encouraging results that demonstrate improved student engagement (Hoffman et al. 2019), student achievement

Artificial intelligence has emerged as a technology that is
profoundly reshaping society and enabling rapid improvements in science, engineering, and mathematics, as well as
information technology itself. This has generated increased
demand for fostering an AI-literate populace as well as a
growing recognition of the importance of promoting K-12
students’ awareness and interest in AI. Although efforts are
beginning to incorporate AI learning within K-12 education,
there is little research exploring how to introduce students to
AI and how to support teachers to integrate AI learning experiences in their classrooms. This is especially true at the elementary school level. A particularly promising approach for
providing effective and engaging AI learning experiences for
elementary students is game-based learning. In this paper, we
explore how to introduce AI-infused collaborative inquiry
learning into upper elementary school (student ages 8 to 11)
using game-based learning. To ground the work in the realities of elementary school classrooms, we present insights
from interviews with elementary school teachers to understand how best to support them in integrating AI into their
classrooms. We then present the design of PRIMARYAI, a
game-based learning environment that supports rich problem-based learning activities within upper elementary classrooms centered on AI applied toward solving life-science
problems. Finally, we discuss some of the challenges we face
in bringing AI-infused collaborative inquiry learning to upper
elementary students.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged as a foundational
technology that is fundamentally reshaping the workplace of
the future (McKinsey Global Institute, 2017; West, 2018).
With rapid developments in a wide array of capabilities
ranging from automated reasoning, computer vision, robotics, and machine learning, AI is becoming a critical tool for
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15591

