The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Single Player Monte-Carlo Tree Search Based on the Plackett-Luce Model
Felix Mohr1 , Viktor Bengs2 , Eyke Hüllermeier2
1

Universidad de La Sabana, Campus del Puente del Común, Km. 7, Autopista Norte de Bogotá, Chía, Colombia
2
Paderborn University, Warburgerstraße 100, Paderborn, Germany
felix.mohr@unisabana.edu.co, viktor.bengs@uni-paderborn.de, eyke@uni-paderborn.de

Abstract

[De Mesmay et al. 2009; Schadd et al. 2008; Bjornsson and
Finnsson 2009].
The contribution of this paper is to complement the group
of MCTS algorithms for single player problems by PlackettLuce MCTS (PL - MCTS), a version of MCTS based on preferences. Different to previous algorithms that directly use
the quantitative observations to control the search process,
PL - MCTS associates the successors of a node with a probability that following it will reveal the best improvement
over the currently best solution. An important advantage
of this approach is its ability to work upon rankings over
child nodes. Such rankings are a natural choice to capture
the only vague belief of node promisingness one usually has
in MCTS due to the unavoidable distribution drifts. In three
heterogeneous problem domains, we show that PL - MCTS is
highly competitive and often superior to all other state-ofthe-art algorithms when run with a standard configuration
and that its flexibility to customize preference schemes can
improve the performance of PL - MCTS even more.
The code of PL - MCTS is published in the Java library
AILibs1 and can be directly used through a Maven artifact2 .
This paper is accompanied by a code repository to reproduce
the experiments 3 , which also contains the technical supplementary material.

The problem of minimal cost path search is especially difficult when no useful heuristics are available. A common solution is roll-out-based search like Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS). However, MCTS is mostly used in stochastic or adversarial environments, with the goal to identify an agent’s
best next move. For this reason, even though single player
versions of MCTS exist, most algorithms, including UCT, are
not directly tailored to classical minimal cost path search. We
present Plackett-Luce MCTS (PL - MCTS), a path search algorithm based on a probabilistic model over the qualities of
successor nodes. We empirically show that PL - MCTS is competitive and often superior to the state of the art.

Introduction
In the context of minimal cost path search, we consider the
problem of finding an optimal path in a (possibly infinite)
tree, i.e., a leaf l∗ ∈ argminl∈L φ(l), where φ : L → R+ is
a scoring function on the set L of leaf nodes. As an important difference to classical planning problems, we assume
that there is no informative heuristic to reliably approximate
φ(ln∗ ), where ln∗ is the best scored leaf underneath n.
Examples include offline-planning problems, in which
performances can only be assessed by simulation, e.g., traffic light placement [Corti, Manzoni, and Savaresi 2012] or
economic well-fare evolvement [Borghesi et al. 2013]. Another area that deals with such problems is software and algorithm configuration, e.g., software product lines [Henard
et al. 2015], automated machine learning [Mohr, Wever, and
Hüllermeier 2018] or automated SAT solver selection and
configuration [Bischl et al. 2016].
In the absence of an informative heuristic, one approach
to solve this problem is to use Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) [Browne et al. 2012]. MCTS is a tree search algorithm scheme that was originally designed to learn optimal
policies for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). While our
tree could be considered as a special type of MDP and tackled with classical MCTS algorithms such as UCT [Kocsis,
Szepesvári, and Willemson 2006], we know from the realm
of single player games that variants of MCTS more specialized to deterministic conditions are superior to that approach

Problem Formulation
Since we tackle the optimal path problem via the MCTS algorithm scheme, we reformulate the problem in this context.
Algorithm 1 depicts the MCTS scheme for this case. At its
core, MCTS is a loop in which each iteration consists of
the generation of a random path from the root to a leaf (rollout), the evaluation of that path, and the back-propagation of
the observation along the path. The roll-out is computed using two types of policies, which determine, for a given inner
node, a successor to complement the current path. Simply
speaking, the tree policy (TP) is used to determine successors of nodes that have already been considered in the past
and uses past observations to make its choices, and the default policy (DP) is used for all other nodes. In this paper, we
assume the absence of prior knowledge, so that the DP shall
1

https://github.com/starlibs/AILibs
https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/ai.libs/jaicore-search/0.2.4
3
https://github.com/fmohr/aaai2021
2

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12373

