The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Image Captioning by Leveraging Intra- and Inter-layer Global
Representation in Transformer Network
Jiayi Ji1 , Yunpeng Luo1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1,2 * , Fuhai Chen1 , Gen Luo1 , Yongjian Wu3 , Yue Gao4 ,
Rongrong Ji1,2
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab
4
Tsinghua University
jjyxmu@gmail.com,lyricpoem1997@gmail.com,xssun@xmu.edu.cn,chenfuhai3c@163.com,
luogen@stu.xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Transformer-based architectures have shown great success
in image captioning, where object regions are encoded and
then attended into the vectorial representations to guide the
caption decoding. However, such vectorial representations
only contain region-level information without considering the
global information reflecting the entire image, which fails to
expand the capability of complex multi-modal reasoning in
image captioning. In this paper, we introduce a Global Enhanced Transformer (termed GET) to enable the extraction of
a more comprehensive global representation, and then adaptively guide the decoder to generate high-quality captions. In
GET, a Global Enhanced Encoder is designed for the embedding of the global feature, and a Global Adaptive Decoder
are designed for the guidance of the caption generation. The
former models intra- and inter-layer global representation by
taking advantage of the proposed Global Enhanced Attention
and a layer-wise fusion module. The latter contains a Global
Adaptive Controller that can adaptively fuse the global information into the decoder to guide the caption generation. Extensive experiments on MS COCO dataset demonstrate the
superiority of our GET over many state-of-the-arts.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The self-attention mechanism in the l-th layer
of a standard Transformer. The vectorial representation vil
is region-biased, which only focuses on the region-level information (Devlin et al. 2018; Song et al. 2020; Weng et al.
2020). (b) Two key issues of the traditional Transformerbased captioning model that we try to address: object missing (top: missing “snow”) and false prediction (bottom: predicting “playing with a boy” as “waking down”).

Introduction
Image captioning aims to describe the semantic content of
an image via neural language, which has recently attracted
extensive research attention. Inspired by the sequence-tosequence model for machine translation, most captioning
models (Vinyals et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2015; Anderson et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2019) mainly adopt a encoder-decoder
framework, where an encoder network encodes the input image into a vectorial feature, and a decoder network takes the
vectorial feature as input and generates the output caption.
Such an encoder-decoder framework is recently well promoted with the development of the Transformer (Vaswani
et al. 2017), where the self-attention is efficiently utilized to
capture the correlations among the regions and words (Liu
et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a; Herdade et al.
2019; Cornia et al. 2020).

In the Transformer architecture, a set of image regions
are encoded and attended into vectorial representations, as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). These representations are then fused into
the decoder to generate the corresponding captions. However, as demonstrated by earlier works (Devlin et al. 2018;
Song et al. 2020; Weng et al. 2020), even though the vectorial representations of these regions are hierarchically calculated by being attended to all regions in the image, they still
ignore the image-level characteristics and are thereby less
effective for the decoder (Weng et al. 2020; Anderson et al.
2018). It causes the problem of object missing when gener-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1655

