The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation for Large-Scale Point Cloud
∗

∗

Yachao Zhang1 , Zonghao Li1 , Yuan Xie2 , Yanyun Qu1 , Cuihua Li1 , Tao Mei3
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{yachaozhang,zonghaoli}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, {yyqu,chli}@xmu.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com
2

Abstract
Existing methods for large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation require expensive, tedious and error-prone manual
point-wise annotations. Intuitively, weakly supervised training is a direct solution to reduce the cost of labeling. However, for weakly supervised large-scale point cloud semantic
segmentation, too few annotations will inevitably lead to ineffective learning of network. We propose an effective weakly
supervised method containing two components to solve the
above problem. Firstly, we construct a pretext task, i.e., point
cloud colorization, with a self-supervised learning to transfer the learned prior knowledge from a large amount of unlabeled point cloud to a weakly supervised network. In this way,
the representation capability of the weakly supervised network can be improved by the guidance from a heterogeneous
task. Besides, to generate pseudo label for unlabeled data, a sparse label propagation mechanism is proposed with the help
of generated class prototypes, which is used to measure the
classification confidence of unlabeled point. Our method is
evaluated on large-scale point cloud datasets with different
scenarios including indoor and outdoor. The experimental results show the large gain against existing weakly supervised
methods and comparable results to fully supervised methods.

Figure 1: Visualize the results of semantic segmentation, the
misclassification points are signed in red. From left to right,
the columns show the results with one labeled point, 1% labeled points, 10% labeled points and the ground truth.

proach (Xu and Lee 2020) whose results are close to the previous fully supervised performance with 10× fewer labeled
points. This approach only deal with an instance (ShapeNetPart) or a block (1m × 1m on S3DIS) of point cloud in a
small scale.
For large-scale point clouds, the network cannot effectively learn feature representation with a few labeled points. We
consider the two strategies to solve this problem: 1) What
prior knowledge can be transferred to the segmentation network for improving feature representation in weakly supervised learning? 2) How are the labels of given points propagated to unlabeled points effectively?
Firstly, transfer learning provides a promising way and is
relatively successful in 2D vision tasks, such as image classification, segmentation, and so on. But point cloud tasks lack
a well-annotated and category-extensive dataset like ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) for pre-training. We consider to
use self-supervised learning for knowledge transfer. However, how to use enormous amounts of unlabeled point cloud
to generate labels by itself and learn a semantically related representation for subsequent tasks is very challenging.
Secondly, propagating pseudo labels to unlabeled points is a
common method for weakly supervised and semi-supervised
task to learn effectively. Usually, this requires constructing
a fully-connected graph with all points. However, for largescale point clouds (∼ 106 points), the fully-connected graph

Introduction
3D scene understanding is required in numerous applications, in particular robotics, autonomous driving and virtual
reality. Large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation as a
fundamental task attracts more and more attention. The success of deep neural networks in point cloud semantic segmentation is attribute to their ability to scale up with more
well-labeled training data (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Zhang, Hua,
and Yeung 2019; Li, Chen, and Hee Lee 2018; Wang et al.
2019; Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Hu et al.
2020).
Fully supervised point cloud semantic segmentation
methods need expensive, tedious and error-prone manual
point-wise annotations. One direct solution is to achieve effective segmentation via weakly supervised learning with
annotating partial points or semantic category which is still
in its infancy. Xu and Lee proposed a weakly supervised ap∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3421

