The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Retrospective Reader for Machine Reading Comprehension
Zhuosheng Zhang1,2,3 , Junjie Yang2,3,4 , Hai Zhao1,2,3,

∗

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
SJTU-ParisTech Elite Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
zhangzs@sjtu.edu.cn, jj-yang@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Passage:
Computational complexity theory is a branch of the theory of computation in theoretical computer science that
focuses on classifying computational problems according
to their inherent difficulty, and relating those classes to
each other. A computational problem is understood to be
a task that is in principle amenable to being solved by a
computer, which is equivalent to stating that the problem
may be solved by mechanical application of mathematical steps, such as an algorithm.
Question:
What cannot be solved by mechanical application of
mathematical steps?
Gold Answer: hno answeri
Plausible answer: algorithm

Abstract
Machine reading comprehension (MRC) is an AI challenge
that requires machines to determine the correct answers to
questions based on a given passage. MRC systems must
not only answer questions when necessary but also tactfully abstain from answering when no answer is available
according to the given passage. When unanswerable questions are involved in the MRC task, an essential verification module called verifier is especially required in addition
to the encoder, though the latest practice on MRC modeling
still mostly benefits from adopting well pre-trained language
models as the encoder block by only focusing on the “reading”. This paper devotes itself to exploring better verifier design for the MRC task with unanswerable questions. Inspired
by how humans solve reading comprehension questions, we
proposed a retrospective reader (Retro-Reader) that integrates
two stages of reading and verification strategies: 1) sketchy
reading that briefly investigates the overall interactions of
passage and question, and yields an initial judgment; 2) intensive reading that verifies the answer and gives the final prediction. The proposed reader is evaluated on two benchmark
MRC challenge datasets SQuAD2.0 and NewsQA, achieving
new state-of-the-art results. Significance tests show that our
model is significantly better than strong baselines.

1

Table 1: An unanswerable MRC example.

tems (Zhang et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2018; Reddy, Chen, and
Manning 2019; Zhang, Huang, and Zhao 2018; Xu, Zhao,
and Zhang 2021; Zhu et al. 2018). The early MRC systems
(Kadlec et al. 2016; Chen, Bolton, and Manning 2016; Dhingra et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Seo et al. 2016) were designed on a latent hypothesis that all questions can be answered according to the given passage (Figure 1-[a]), which
is not always true for real-world cases. The recent progress
on the MRC task has required that the model must be capable of distinguishing those unanswerable questions to avoid
giving plausible answers (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018).
MRC task with unanswerable questions may be usually decomposed into two subtasks: 1) answerability verification
and 2) reading comprehension. To determine unanswerable
questions requires a deep understanding of the given text
and requires more robust MRC models, making MRC much
closer to real-world applications. Table 1 shows an unanswerable example from SQuAD2.0 MRC task (Rajpurkar,
Jia, and Liang 2018).
So far, a common reading system (reader) which solves
MRC problem generally consists of two modules or building
steps as shown in Figure 1-[a]: 1) building a robust language
model (LM) as encoder; 2) designing ingenious mechanisms
as decoder according to MRC task characteristics.

Introduction

Be certain of what you know and be aware what you
don’t. That is wisdom.
Confucius (551 BC - 479 BC)
Machine reading comprehension (MRC) aims to teach
machines to answer questions after comprehending given
passages (Hermann et al. 2015; Joshi et al. 2017; Rajpurkar,
Jia, and Liang 2018), which is a fundamental and longstanding goal of natural language understanding (NLU)
(Zhang, Zhao, and Wang 2020). It has significant application scenarios such as question answering and dialog sys∗
Corresponding author. This paper was partially supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2017YFB0304100), Key Projects of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1836222 and 61733011), Huawei-SJTU
long term AI project, Cutting-edge Machine reading comprehension and language model.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14506

