The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Frequency Consistent Adaptation for Real World Super Resolution
Xiaozhong Ji1 * , Guangpin Tao1 * , Yun Cao2 , Ying Tai2 , Tong Lu1† ,
Chengjie Wang2 , Jilin Li2 , Feiyue Huang2
1

National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
shawn ji@163.com, tgpin@smail.nju.edu.cn, {yuncao, yingtai}@tencent.com,
lutong@nju.edu.cn, {jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recent deep-learning based Super-Resolution (SR) methods have achieved remarkable performance on images with
known degradation. However, these methods always fail in
real-world scene, since the Low-Resolution (LR) images after the ideal degradation (e.g., bicubic down-sampling) deviate from real source domain. The domain gap between the
LR images and the real-world images can be observed clearly
on frequency density, which inspires us to explicitly narrow
the undesired gap caused by incorrect degradation. From this
point of view, we design a novel Frequency Consistent Adaptation (FCA) that ensures the frequency domain consistency
when applying existing SR methods to the real scene. We
estimate degradation kernels from unsupervised images and
generate the corresponding LR images. To provide useful
gradient information for kernel estimation, we propose Frequency Density Comparator (FDC) by distinguishing the frequency density of images on different scales. Based on the
domain-consistent LR-HR pairs, we train easy-implemented
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) SR models. Extensive
experiments show that the proposed FCA improves the performance of the SR model under real-world setting achieving
state-of-the-art results with high fidelity and plausible perception, thus providing a novel effective framework for realworld SR application.

LR

Bicubic

ESRGAN

KernelGAN

IKC

Correction Filter

Ours

Figure 1: 4× SR results of different methods on a real image
taken by smartphone. The red rectangle area of each result
is cropped and enlarged for visual comparison. Compared
with other results, our method generates natural HR image
without blur or artifacts.

Introduction
Super-Resolution (SR) is a basic low-level visual problem (Freeman, Jones, and Pasztor 2002; Glasner, Bagon,
and Irani 2009), which is defined as enlarging the resolution of a Low-Resolution (LR) image and restoring it to a
High-Resolution (HR) image. In recent years, deep-learning
methods have dominated the research in the SR field, and
lots of novel structures (Dong et al. 2015; Tai et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2018; Tai, Yang, and Liu 2017; Lai et al. 2017;
Kim, Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016; Lim et al. 2017) are
proposed to improve performance on standard benchmarks.
However, known degradation used to train these models is
not suitable to real-world scenarios. In fact, the SR model
is sensitive to different degradation (Zhang, Zuo, and Zhang

2019; Zhou and Susstrunk 2019; Gu et al. 2019). Inconsistent degradation leads to generating undesirable SR results,
either losing high-frequency detail or producing artifacts.
To address the challenge of Real-World Super-Resolution
(RWSR), some non-blind/blind SR methods have been proposed to improve SR performance under real degradation.
Among them, ZSSR (Shocher, Cohen, and Irani 2018) explores the internal information inside the image and uses
the zero-shot learning method by training on the test image. However, the given kernel is needed when constructing
training pairs, which is not available in real scene. IKC (Gu
et al. 2019) tries to construct supervised data and predict
the degraded kernel from LR images. However, the super-

* indicates equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1664

