The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Indecision Modeling
Duncan C McElfresh,1 Lok Chan,2 Kenzie Doyle,3
Walter Sinnott-Armstrong,2 Vincent Conitzer,2 Jana Schaich Borg,2 John P Dickerson1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Duke University
3
University of Oregon
dmcelfre@umd.edu, lok.c@duke.edu

Abstract

typically learned using data collected via hypothetical decision scenarios or online surveys.1 There is a rich literature addressing how to elicit preferences accurately and efficiently, spanning the fields of computer science, operations
research, and social science.
It is critical that these observed preferences accurately
represent peoples’ true preferences, since these observations
guide deployed AI systems. Importantly, the way we measure (or elicit) preferences is closely tied to the accuracy of
these observations. In particular, it is well-known that both
the order in which questions are asked, and the set of choices
presented, impact expressed preferences (Day et al. 2012;
DeShazo and Fermo 2002).
Often people choose not to express a strict preference,
in which case we call them indecisive. The economics literature has suggested a variety of explanations for indecision (Gerasimou 2018)—for example when there are no desirable alternatives, or when all alternatives are perceived as
equivalent. Moral psychology research has found that people often “do not want to play god” in moral situations, and
would prefer for somebody or something else to take responsibility for the decision (Gangemi and Mancini 2013).
In philosophy, indecision of the kind discussed in this paper is typically linked to a class of moral problems called
symmetrical dilemmas, in which an agent is confronted with
the choice between two alternatives that are or appear to the
agent equal in value (Sinnott-Armstrong 1988).2 Much of
the literature concerns itself with the morality and rationality of the use of a randomizer, such as flipping a coin, to resolve these dilemmas. Despite some disagreements over details (McIntyre 1990; Donagan 1984; Blackburn 1996; Hare
1981), many philosophers do agree that flipping a coin is
often a viable course of action in response to indecision3 .
The present study accepts the assumption that flipping a
coin is typically an expression of one’s preference to not
decide between two options, but goes beyond the received

AI systems are often used to make or contribute to important decisions in a growing range of applications, including
criminal justice, hiring, and medicine. Since these decisions
impact human lives, it is important that the AI systems act in
ways which align with human values. Techniques for preference modeling and social choice help researchers learn and
aggregate peoples’ preferences, which are used to guide AI
behavior; thus, it is imperative that these learned preferences
are accurate. These techniques often assume that people are
willing to express strict preferences over alternatives; which
is not true in practice. People are often indecisive, and especially so when their decision has moral implications. The
philosophy and psychology literature shows that indecision is
a measurable and nuanced behavior—and that there are several different reasons people are indecisive. This complicates
the task of both learning and aggregating preferences, since
most of the relevant literature makes restrictive assumptions
on the meaning of indecision. We begin to close this gap by
formalizing several mathematical indecision models based on
theories from philosophy, psychology, and economics; these
models can be used to describe (indecisive) agent decisions,
both when they are allowed to express indecision and when
they are not. We test these models using data collected from
an online survey where participants choose how to (hypothetically) allocate organs to patients waiting for a transplant.

Introduction
AI systems are currently used to make, or contribute to,
many important decisions. These systems are deployed in
self-driving cars, organ allocation programs, businesses for
hiring, and courtrooms to set bail. It is an ongoing challenge
for AI researchers to ensure that these systems make decisions that align with human values.
A growing body of research views this challenge through
the lens of preference aggregation. From this perspective, researchers aim to (1) understand the preferences (or values)
of the relevant stakeholders, and (2) design an AI system
that aligns with the aggregated preferences of all stakeholders. This approach has been proposed recently in the context
of self-driving cars (Noothigattu et al. 2018) and organ allocation (Freedman et al. 2020). These approaches rely on
a mathematical model of stakeholder preferences–which is

1

The MIT Moral Machine project is one example: https://www.
moralmachine.net/
2
Sophie’s Choice is a well-known example: a guard at the concentration camp cruelly forces Sophie to choose one of her two
children to be killed. The guard will kill both children if Sophie refuses to choose. Sophie’s reason for not choosing one child applies
equally to another, hence the symmetry.
3
With some exceptions: for example, see (Railton 1992).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5975

