The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpretable NLG for Task-oriented Dialogue Systems with
Heterogeneous Rendering Machines
Yangming Li1 * , Kaisheng Yao2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Ant Group
yangmingli@ir.hit.edu.cn, kaisheng.yao@antgroup.com

Abstract

inform

End-to-end neural networks have achieved promising performances in natural language generation (NLG). However, they
are treated as black boxes and lack interpretability. To address
this problem, we propose a novel framework, heterogeneous
rendering machines (HRM), that interprets how neural generators render an input dialogue act (DA) into an utterance.
HRM consists of a renderer set and a mode switcher. The renderer set contains multiple decoders that vary in both structure and functionality. For every generation step, the mode
switcher selects an appropriate decoder from the renderer set
to generate an item (a word or a phrase). To verify the effectiveness of our method, we have conducted extensive experiments on 5 benchmark datasets. In terms of automatic metrics (e.g., BLEU), our model is competitive with the current
state-of-the-art method. The qualitative analysis shows that
our model can interpret the rendering process of neural generators well. Human evaluation also confirms the interpretability of our proposed approach.

1

name

Blue Spice

familyFriendly

yes

priceRange

less than £20

The Blue Spice is a low cost venue . It
is a family friendly location .
Figure 1: This example case is extracted from E2E-NLG
dataset (Novikova, Dušek, and Rieser 2017). The upper part
is a DA and the lower part is an utterance.

structure into the final surface form. Although these models are of great interpretability, they heavily rely on handcraft rules and domain-specific knowledge. Recently, datadriven methods using end-to-end neural networks have attracted much attention (Tran and Nguyen 2017; Zhu, Zeng,
and Huang 2019; Li et al. 2020b). For example, Dušek and
Jurčı́ček (2016) apply sequence-to-sequence learning (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) to model response generation. These methods facilitate end-to-end learning on the
unaligned corpus and achieve state-of-the-art results. However, they are treated as black boxes and lack interpretability.
In this work, we consider a neural generator is interpretable
if it’s capable of showing how slot values are rendered and
their locations in the generated utterance.
To generalize NLG models to low-frequency and unseen
slot values, prior methods mostly adopt the delexicalization
technique, where slot values in the utterance are replaced
with corresponding placeholders (Wen et al. 2015a,b; Tran
and Nguyen 2017). While delexicalization, to some extent,
has improved the interpretability, it’s applicable for delexicalizable slots only, and therefore has limited usage. This
is especially apparent in datasets with the majority of slots
being reworded, e.g., E2E-NLG dataset (Novikova, Dušek,
and Rieser 2017). Moreover, Nayak et al. (2017); Juraska
et al. (2018) observe that using delexicalization can result
in lexical errors. Visualizing attention weight is another approach to understanding neural generators. However, many
works (Jain and Wallace 2019) have found that it’s hard to
reach meaningful interpretability.

Introduction

Natural language generation (NLG), a critical component of
task-oriented dialogue systems, converts a meaning representation, i.e., dialogue act (DA), into a natural language utterance. As demonstrated in Figure 1, an input DA consists
of an act type and a set of slot values, while the ground truth
is a sequence of words. We categorize all the slots into three
types: 1) delexicalizable slot whose value is always propagated verbatim to the utterance (colored in red); 2) indicative
slot whose value is yes, no, and so on (blue); 3) reworded slot
whose value is possibly paraphrased into another expression
in the utterance (green). Note that the slot types are defined
by us for better understanding and this information is not
available in the datasets.
Conventional approaches (Mirkovic and Cavedon 2011;
Cheyer and Guzzoni 2014) are mostly pipeline-based, dividing NLG tasks into sentence planning and surface realization. Sentence planning determines a tree-like structure of
the given input DA, while surface realization linearizes the
* This work was done when the first author did internship at Ant
Group.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13306

