The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TreeCaps: Tree-Based Capsule Networks for Source Code Processing
Nghi D. Q. Bui 1 3 Yijun Yu 1 2 Lingxiao Jiang 3
1

Trustworthy Open-Source Software Engineering Lab, Huawei Research Centre, Ireland
2
School of Computing & Communications, The Open University, UK
3
School of Computing & Information Systems, Singapore Management University
nghi.bui@huawei.com , y.yu@open.ac.uk, lxjiang@smu.edu.sg
Abstract

may enhance human understanding of programs and ease
machine learning. With the help of static code dependency
analysis techniques (Nielson, Nielson, and Hankin 1999),
for example, Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNN) (Li
et al. 2016; Fernandes, Allamanis, and Brockschmidt 2019;
Allamanis, Brockschmidt, and Khademi 2018) learn code
semantics via graphs where edges are added between the
code syntax tree nodes to indicate various kinds of dependencies between the nodes. However, adding such edges requires extra processing of ASTs and may introduce noise for
different learning tasks since there is no consensus on which
types of edges are needed for which tasks.
There also exist deep learning techniques that process
code syntax trees or abstract syntax trees (ASTs) (Mou
et al. 2016; Alon et al. 2019b; Zhang et al. 2019). However, they are limited in how they represent and learn ASTs
although ASTs entail all code semantics. Tree-Based Convolutional Neural Network (TBCNN) (Mou et al. 2016)
shares the same computational principle as GGNN, i.e.,
information is accumulated from nearby children to parent nodes only, which limits the number of iterations for
a node to accumulate information from its distant descendants. Code2vec (Alon et al. 2019b) decomposes trees into
a bag of path-contexts for learning; ASTNN (Zhang et al.
2019) splits big trees for programs and functions into smaller
subtrees for individual statements. They adapt recurrent neural network models to learn the path-contexts or flattened
subtrees, but still likely miss code dependency information
that is not represented in the decomposed paths and subtrees.
It is desirable to learn code models via ASTs because
trees can be more efficiently and precisely constructed from
code than graphs without the need of semantic analysis that
may be expensive or inaccurate. Towards this goal, this paper proposes a novel architecture called TreeCaps by fusing capsule networks (Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017) with
TBCNN to build code models from trees, as a complement
to graph-based models. TreeCaps first adapts TBCNN to
take in trees and extract (local) node features with its convolution capability and converts the node features into capsules
in its Primary Variable Capsule (PVC) layer where the number of capsules can change for different tree inputs. It then
adapts CapsNet by introducing two methods to route the dynamic number of capsules in PVC to a static number of capsules in its Secondary Capsule (SC) layer. Our first method
inherits the dynamic routing algorithm (Sabour, Frosst, and
Hinton 2017) for static numbers of capsules; it shares a

Recently program learning techniques have been proposed
to process source code based on syntactical structures (e.g.,
abstract syntax trees) and/or semantic information (e.g., dependency graphs). While graphs may be better than trees
at capturing code semantics, constructing the graphs from
code inputs through the semantic analysis of multiple viewpoints can lead to inaccurate noises for a specific software
engineering task. Compared to graphs, syntax trees are more
precisely defined on the grammar and easier to parse; unfortunately, previous tree-based learning techniques have not
been able to learn semantic information from trees to achieve
better accuracy than graph-based techniques. We have proposed a new learning technique, named TreeCaps, by fusing together capsule networks with tree-based convolutional
neural networks to achieve a learning accuracy higher than
some existing graph-based techniques while it is based only
on trees. TreeCaps introduces novel variable-to-static routing
algorithms into the capsule networks to compensate for the
loss of previous routing algorithms. Aside from accuracy, we
also find that TreeCaps is the most robust to withstand those
semantic-preserving program transformations that change
code syntax without modifying the semantics. Evaluated on
a large number of Java and C/C++ programs, TreeCaps models outperform prior deep learning models of program source
code, in terms of both accuracy and robustness for program
comprehension tasks such as code functionality classification
and function name prediction. Our implementation is publicly
available at: https://github.com/bdqnghi/treecaps.

Introduction
Software developers often spend the majority of their time
in navigating existing program code bases to understand the
functionality of existing source code before implementing
new features or fixing bugs (Xia et al. 2018; Britton et al.
2012). Learning a model of programs has been found useful
for their tasks such as classifying the functionality of programs (Nix and Zhang 2017; Dahl et al. 2013; Pascanu et al.
2015; Rastogi, Chen, and Jiang 2013), predicting bugs (Yang
et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017, 2018; Zhou et al. 2019), translating programs (Chen, Liu, and Song 2018; Gu et al. 2017;
Bui, Jiang, and Yu 2018; Bui, Yu, and Jiang 2019; Nghi, Yu,
and Jiang 2019), etc.
It is common that adding semantic descriptions (e.g., via
code comments, visualizing code control flow graphs, etc.)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

30

