The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Constrained Risk-Averse Markov Decision Processes
Mohamadreza Ahmadi1 , Ugo Rosolia1 ,
Michel D. Ingham2 , Richard M. Murray1 , and Aaron D. Ames1
1

California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125
2
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Dr, Pasadena, CA 91109.
mrahmadi@caltech.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of designing policies for
Markov decision processes (MDPs) with dynamic coherent risk objectives and constraints. We begin by formulating the problem in a Lagrangian framework. Under the assumption that the risk objectives and constraints can be represented by a Markov risk transition
mapping, we propose an optimization-based method
to synthesize Markovian policies that lower-bound the
constrained risk-averse problem. We demonstrate that
the formulated optimization problems are in the form
of difference convex programs (DCPs) and can be
solved by the disciplined convex-concave programming
(DCCP) framework. We show that these results generalize linear programs for constrained MDPs with total discounted expected costs and constraints. Finally,
we illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
with numerical experiments on a rover navigation problem involving conditional-value-at-risk (CVaR) and
entropic-value-at-risk (EVaR) coherent risk measures.

Figure 1: Mars surface (Eberswalde Crater) slope uncertainty for rover navigation: the slopes range within (blue)
5◦ − 10◦ , (green) 10◦ − 15◦ , (yellow) 15◦ − 20◦ , (orange)
20◦ − 25◦ , (red) ≥ 25◦ , and (the rest) < 5◦ or no data.
Risk can be quantified in numerous ways, such as chance
constraints (Ono et al. 2015; Wang, Jasour, and Williams
2020). However, applications in autonomy and robotics require more “nuanced assessments of risk” (Majumdar and
Pavone 2020). Artzner et. al. (Artzner et al. 1999) characterized a set of natural properties that are desirable for a risk
measure, called a coherent risk measure, and have obtained
widespread acceptance in finance and operations research,
among other fields. An important example of a coherent
risk measure is the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) that
has received significant attention in decision making problems, such as Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Chow
et al. 2015; Chow and Ghavamzadeh 2014; Prashanth 2014;
Bäuerle and Ott 2011).
In many real world applications, risk-averse decision
making should account for system constraints, such as fuel
budget, communication rates, and etc. In this paper, we attempt to address this issue and therefore consider MDPs
with both total coherent risk costs and constraints. Using a
Lagrangian framework and properties of coherent risk measures, we propose an optimization problem, whose solution
provides a lower bound to the constrained risk-averse MDP
problem. We show that this result is indeed a generalization
of constrained MDPs with total expected cost costs and constraints (Altman 1999). For general coherent risk measures,

Introduction
With the rise of autonomous systems being deployed in
real-world settings, the associated risk that stems from unknown and unforeseen circumstances is correspondingly on
the rise. In particular, in risk-sensitive scenarios, such as
aerospace applications, decision making should account for
uncertainty and minimize the impact of unfortunate events.
For example, spacecraft control technology relies heavily
on a relatively large and highly skilled mission operations
team that generates detailed time-ordered and event-driven
sequences of commands. This approach will not be viable in
the future with increasing number of missions and a desire
to limit the operations team and Deep Space Network (DSN)
costs. In order to maximize the science returns under these
conditions, the ability to deal with emergencies and safely
explore remote regions are becoming increasingly important (McGhan et al. 2016). For instance, in Mars rover navigation problems, finding planning policies that minimize
risk is critical to mission success, due to the uncertainties
present in Mars surface data (Ono et al. 2018) (see Figure 1).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11718

