The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Incentivizing Truthfulness Through Audits in Strategic Classification
Andrew Estonrell1 , Sanmay Das2 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1

Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
2
Computer Science, George Mason University
aestornell@wustl.edu, sanmay@gmu.edu, yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

Abstract

many such settings, the feature vector will combine information submitted by the agents themselves with information about them available from other sources. For example,
in prioritizing households for homeless services, agencies
make decisions based on self-reported items (e.g., history
of alcohol or drug use) as well as on information available
to them in government records (e.g., child-support or welfare payments received) (Brown et al. 2018). Naturally, this
creates incentives for agents to try and game the system by
strategically choosing their self-reported features in order to
maximize their chances of receiving the resource or avoiding
scrutiny.
Prior work on strategic or adversarial classification has
considered a closely related problem where agents subject to
classification can modify feature values at some cost or subject to a constraint on the total magnitude of such modification, with the goal of inducing an incorrect prediction (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Hardt et al. 2016; Milli et al. 2019; Papernot et al. 2018;
Tong et al. 2019; Vorobeychik and Kantarcioglu 2018). This
research has typically focused on either assessing how vulnerable particular families of classifiers are to such attacks
(often termed adversarial examples) (Athalye, Carlini, and
Wagner 2018; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Lowd and Meek
2005; Xu, Qi, and Evans 2016), or on designing classifiers that are robust in the sense that the prediction remains
unchanged even after budget-constrained feature modifications (Brückner and Scheffer 2011, 2012; Hardt et al. 2016;
Li and Vorobeychik 2018; Madry et al. 2018; Tong et al.
2019; Wong and Kolter 2018). In this literature, the interests of the agents are commonly viewed as opposed to
those of the decision-maker (e.g., learner), often motivated
by security considerations (Šrndic and Laskov 2014; Xu,
Qi, and Evans 2016). Moreover, the typical models representing costs to agents of modifying features are at times
not adequate at capturing realistic limits on what agents can
do (Tong et al. 2019; Wu, Tong, and Vorobeychik 2020).
In contrast, in the kinds of social services settings we describe, and potentially numerous others (e.g., tax filing), the
costs of misrepresenting one’s self-reported features are better captured by the risk associated with being audited than,
say, a hard constraint on how much the features are modified. Moreover, the agents’ interests are not fundamentally
opposed to the principal’s; rather, this is a case of misaligned

In many societal resource allocation domains, machine learning methods are increasingly used to either score or rank
agents in order to decide which ones should receive either
resources (e.g., homeless services) or scrutiny (e.g., child
welfare investigations) from social services agencies. An
agency’s scoring function typically operates on a feature
vector that contains a combination of self-reported features
and information available to the agency about individuals or
households. This can create incentives for agents to misrepresent their self-reported features in order to receive resources
or avoid scrutiny, but agencies may be able to selectively audit agents to verify the veracity of their reports.
We study the problem of optimal auditing of agents in such
settings. When decisions are made using a threshold on an
agent’s score, the optimal audit policy has a surprisingly simple structure, uniformly auditing all agents who could benefit
from lying. While this policy can, in general be hard to compute because of the difficulty of identifying the set of agents
who could benefit from lying given a complete set of reported
types, we also present necessary and sufficient conditions under which it is tractable. We show that the scarce resource
setting is more difficult, and exhibit an approximately optimal audit policy in this case. In addition, we show that in
either setting verifying whether it is possible to incentivize
exact truthfulness is hard even to approximate. However, we
also exhibit sufficient conditions for solving this problem optimally, and for obtaining good approximations.

Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making systems are increasingly used
to make high-stakes resource allocation decisions by social
services agencies. This includes both scarce resource settings, where the demand for a limited pool of resources exceeds supply (for example, housing for the homeless (Kube,
Das, and Fowler 2019)), as well as risk-scoring settings,
where only those who fall above or below a certain threshold
are either given a resource (for example, a loan (Agarwal,
Skiba, and Tobacman 2009)) or targeted for further scrutiny
(for example, parents suspected of child maltreatment or neglect (Chouldechova et al. 2018)). As is standard in classification and ranking settings, each individual or household
(henceforth agent) is associated with a feature vector. In
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5347

