The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Pattern-Parameter Matching for Robust Pedestrian Detection
Mengyin Liu, Chao Zhu* , Jun Wang, Xu-Cheng Yin*
School of Computer and Communication Engineering
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
blean@live.cn, chaozhu@ustb.edu.cn, wj fm0604@foxmail.com, xuchengyin@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
Pedestrians with challenging patterns, e.g. small scale or
heavy occlusion, appear frequently in practical applications
like autonomous driving, which remains tremendous obstacle
to higher robustness of detectors. Although plenty of previous works have been dedicated to these problems, properly
matching patterns of pedestrian and parameters of detector,
i.e., constructing a detector with proper parameter sizes for
certain pedestrian patterns of different complexity, has been
seldom investigated intensively. Pedestrian instances are usually handled equally with the same amount of parameters,
which in our opinion is inadequate for those with more difficult patterns and leads to unsatisfactory performance. Thus,
we propose in this paper a novel detection approach via adaptive pattern-parameter matching. The input pedestrian patterns, especially the complex ones, are first disentangled into
simpler patterns for detection head by Pattern Disentangling
Module (PDM) with various receptive fields. Then, Gating
Feature Filtering Module (GFFM) dynamically decides the
spatial positions where the patterns are still not simple enough
and need further disentanglement by the next-level PDM. Cooperating with these two key components, our approach can
adaptively select the best matched parameter size for the input
patterns according to their complexity. Moreover, to further
explore the relationship between parameter sizes and their
performance on the corresponding patterns, two parameter
selection policies are designed: 1) extending parameter size
to maximum, aiming at more difficult patterns for different
occlusion types; 2) specializing parameter size by group division, aiming at complex patterns for scale variations. Extensive experiments on two popular benchmarks, Caltech and
CityPersons, show that our proposed method achieves superior performance compared with other state-of-the-art methods on subsets of different scales and occlusion types.

Figure 1: Sample image from Caltech pedestrian dataset. (a)
Pedestrians of small scale. (b) Pedestrians with different occlusion types. Both of them possess more difficult patterns
which occupy various sizes of area due to scales or occluded
parts, requiring more detector parameters to be detected.

e.g. small scale or heavy occlusion. Despite of improved performance achieved by the existing approaches in the literature (Li et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Huang
et al. 2020), the problem of how to properly match these difficult pedestrian patterns and the required amount of detector
parameters, i.e., constructing a detector with proper parameter sizes for certain pedestrian patterns of different complexity, has been seldom investigated intensively. Instead, most
detectors treat pedestrian instances equally with the same
parameter size, which in our opinion is inadequate for those
with harder patterns, leading to unsatisfactory performance.
For instance, as shown in Figure 1(a), in autonomous driving scenario, some small-scale pedestrians comprise blurry
and noisy patterns, which require a detector with more parameters to discriminate them from other human-like small
objects or background. Instead, large-scale pedestrians usually contain numerous sharper patterns, which is painless for
detectors to distinguish them with far less parameters.
Among those methods tried matching patterns and parameters for multi-scale detection, FPN (Lin et al. 2017) introduces the lateral connection to fuse high-level semantics and
low-level details, and provides more parameters for detecting smaller objects. Hence, it has been widely adopted in
detecting objects with scale variations like pedestrians (Cao

Introduction
In recent years, pedestrian detection has made great progress
with the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), and
has been widely applied in person re-identification, video
surveillance and autonomous driving, etc. Nevertheless, especially in realistic circumstances, pedestrian detectors suffer an inevitable accuracy loss from challenging patterns,
* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2154

