The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bounded Risk-Sensitive Markov Games: Forward Policy Design and Inverse
Reward Learning with Iterative Reasoning and Cumulative Prospect Theory
Ran Tian ∗ , Liting Sun ∗ , Masayoshi Tomizuka
University of California, Berkeley
{rantian, litingsun, tomizuka}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

such assumptions, we can either solve for humans’ optimal
policies with handcrafted rewards (forward policy design) or
learn humans’ rewards from demonstrations (inverse reward
learning).
However, in real life, humans often significantly deviate
from such “perfectly rational” assumptions from two major
aspects (Goeree and Holt 2001). First, mounting evidence has
shown that rather than spending a great amount of effort hunting for the best response, humans often choose actions that
are satisfying (i.e., actions that are above their pre-defined
thresholds according to certain criteria) and relatively quick
and easy to find. Simon (Simon 1976) formulated such a cognitive characteristic as bounded rationality. Among the many
developed behavioral models that capture bounded rationality, iterative reasoning models from behavioral game theory
(Camerer 2011) are some of the most prominent paradigms.
These models do not assume humans perform infinite layers
of strategic thinking during interactions but model humans as
agents with finite levels of intelligence (bounded rationality).
Second, instead of optimizing risk-neutral rewards, humans
demonstrate a strong tendency towards risk-sensitive measures when evaluating the outcomes of their actions. They
are risk-seeking in terms of gains and risk-averse for losses.
Such deviations make it difficult to model realistic human
behaviors using classical MGs.
In this work, we aim to establish a new game-theoretic
framework (BRSMG) that captures the two aspects of realistic human behaviors discussed above. The incorporation
of bounded rationality and risk-sensitivity in classical MGs
requires revisiting fundamental concepts in both the forward
policy design and the inverse reward learning problem. Standard value iteration and inverse learning algorithms for traditional MGs do not hold any more, and new algorithms should
be established to reflect the impact of bounded intelligence
and risk sensitivity.
More specifically, in the forward policy design problem,
we model humans’ bounded intelligence via an instantiation
of iterative reasoning models and model the influence of humans’ risk sensitivity via cumulative prospect theory (CPT)
(Tversky and Kahneman 1992). In the inverse reward learning
problem, we develop a bounded risk-sensitive inverse learning algorithm that can recover not only the nominal rewards
of agents but also their intelligence levels and risk-measure
parameters from demonstrations. To our best knowledge, our

Classical game-theoretic approaches for multi-agent systems
in both the forward policy design problem and the inverse
reward learning problem often make strong rationality assumptions: agents perfectly maximize expected utilities under
uncertainties. Such assumptions, however, substantially mismatch with observed human behaviors such as satisficing with
sub-optimal, risk-seeking, and loss-aversion decisions. Drawing on iterative reasoning models and cumulative prospect
theory, we propose a new game-theoretic framework, bounded
risk-sensitive Markov Game (BRSMG), that captures two aspects of realistic human behaviors: bounded intelligence and
risk-sensitivity. General solutions to both the forward policy
design problem and the inverse reward learning problem are
provided with theoretical analysis and simulation verification.
We validate the proposed forward policy design algorithm and
the inverse reward learning algorithm in a two-player navigation scenario. The results show that agents demonstrate
bounded-intelligence, risk-averse and risk-seeking behaviors
in our framework. Moreover, in the inverse reward learning
task, the proposed bounded risk-sensitive inverse learning algorithm outperforms a baseline risk-neutral inverse learning algorithm by effectively learning not only more accurate reward
values but also the intelligence levels and the risk-measure
parameters of agents from demonstrations.

1

Introduction

Markov Game (MG), as an approach to modeling interactions
and decision-making processes in multi-agent systems, has
been employed in many domains such as economics (Amir
2003), games (Silver et al. 2017), and human-robot/machine
interaction (Bu et al. 2008). In classical MGs, agents are
commonly assumed to be perfectly rational when computing
their policies. For instance, in a two-player MG, agent 1 is
assumed to make decisions based on his/her belief in agent
2’s behavioral model in which agent 2 is also assumed to
behave according to his/her belief in agent 1’s model . . . and
both agents are maximizing their expected rewards based on
such infinite levels of mutual beliefs. If the beliefs match
the actual models, perfect Markov strategies of all agents
may be found by solving the Markov-perfect equilibrium
of the game where a Nash equilibrium is reached. Under
∗

First two authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6011

