The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DEAR: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Online Advertising Impression
in Recommender Systems
Xiangyu Zhao1 , Changsheng Gu2 , Haoshenglun Zhang2
Xiwang Yang2 , Xiaobing Liu2 , Jiliang Tang1 , Hui Liu1
1

Michigan State University, 2 Bytedance
{zhaoxi35,tangjili,liuhui7}@msu.edu
{guchangsheng,zhanghaoshenglun,yangxiwang,will.liu}@bytedance.com
original rec-list

Abstract
With the recent prevalence of Reinforcement Learning (RL),
there have been tremendous interests in utilizing RL for
online advertising in recommendation platforms (e.g., ecommerce and news feed sites). However, most RL-based advertising algorithms focus on optimizing ads’ revenue while
ignoring the possible negative influence of ads on user experience of recommended items (products, articles and videos).
Developing an optimal advertising algorithm in recommendations faces immense challenges because interpolating ads
improperly or too frequently may decrease user experience,
while interpolating fewer ads will reduce the advertising revenue. Thus, in this paper, we propose a novel advertising
strategy for the rec/ads trade-off. To be specific, we develop
an RL-based framework that can continuously update its advertising strategies and maximize reward in the long run.
Given a recommendation list, we design a novel Deep Qnetwork architecture that can determine three internally related tasks jointly, i.e., (i) whether to interpolate an ad or not
in the recommendation list, and if yes, (ii) the optimal ad and
(iii) the optimal location to interpolate. The experimental results based on real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework.

Recommender
Agent

insert an ad

Advertising
Agent

all items to be displayed

Figure 1: An example of online advertising impression

ness, especially when the environment is unstable. Therefore, great efforts have been made on developing reinforcement learning-based online advertising techniques (Cai et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018a; Rohde et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018b;
Jin et al. 2018), which can continuously update their advertising strategies during the interactions with consumers, and
the optimal strategy is made by maximizing the expected
long-term cumulative revenue from consumers. However,
most existing works focus on maximizing the income of ads,
while ignoring the negative influence of ads on user experience for recommendations.
Designing an appropriate advertising strategy is a challenging problem, since (i) displaying too many ads or improper ads will degrade user experience and engagement;
and (ii) displaying insufficient ads will reduce the advertising revenue of the platforms. In real-world platforms, as
shown in Figure 1, ads are often displayed with normal recommended items, where recommendation and advertising
strategies are typically developed by different departments,
and optimized by different techniques with different metrics (Feng et al. 2018). Upon a user’s request, the recommendation system generates a list of recommendations according to user’s interests. Then, the advertising system needs
to make three decisions (sub-actions), i.e., whether to interpolate an ad in current recommendation list (rec-list); and
if yes, the advertising system also needs to choose the optimal ad and interpolate it into the optimal location (e.g., in

Introduction
Online advertising is a form of advertising that leverages the
Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. The goal of online advertising is to assign the right
ads to the right consumers so as to maximize the revenue,
click-through rate (CTR) or return on investment (ROI) of
the advertising campaign. The two main marketing strategies in online advertising are guaranteed delivery (GD) and
real-time bidding (RTB). For guaranteed delivery, ad exposures to consumers are guaranteed by contracts signed
between advertisers and publishers in advance (Jia et al.
2016). For real-time bidding, each ad impression is bid by
advertisers in real-time when an impression is just generated from a consumer visit (Cai et al. 2017). However, the
majority of online advertising techniques are based on offline/static optimization algorithms that treat each impression independently and maximize the immediate revenue for
each impression, which is challenging in real-world busiCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

750

