The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Frequency Principle Towards Understanding Why Deeper Learning Is
Faster
Zhiqin John Xu and Hanxu Zhou
School of Mathematical Sciences, MOE-LSC and Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
200240, P.R. China
xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn, 1210123652@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

neural networks may learn faster, there is few understanding
of the mechanism.

Understanding the effect of depth in deep learning is a critical
problem. In this work, we utilize the Fourier analysis to empirically provide a promising mechanism to understand why
feedforward deeper learning is faster. To this end, we separate
a deep neural network, trained by normal stochastic gradient
descent, into two parts during analysis, i.e., a pre-condition
component and a learning component, in which the output
of the pre-condition one is the input of the learning one. We
use a filtering method to characterize the frequency distribution of a high-dimensional function. Based on experiments of
deep networks and real dataset, we propose a deep frequency
principle, that is, the effective target function for a deeper hidden layer biases towards lower frequency during the training.
Therefore, the learning component effectively learns a lower
frequency function if the pre-condition component has more
layers. Due to the well-studied frequency principle, i.e., deep
neural networks learn lower frequency functions faster, the
deep frequency principle provides a reasonable explanation
to why deeper learning is faster. We believe these empirical
studies would be valuable for future theoretical studies of the
effect of depth in deep learning.

In this work, we would empirically explore an underlying mechanism that may explain why deeper neural network
(note: in this work, we only study feedforward networks)
can learn faster from the perspective of Fourier analysis. We
start from a universal phenomenon of frequency principle
(Xu, Zhang, and Xiao 2019; Rahaman et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2020; Luo et al. 2019; E, Ma, and Wu 2020), that is, deep
neural networks often fit target functions from low to high
frequencies during the training. Recent works show that frequency principle may provide an understanding to the success and failure of deep learning (Xu et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2019; E, Ma, and Wu 2020; Ma, Wu, and E 2020). We use
an ideal example to illustrate the frequency principle, i.e.,
using a deep neural network to fit different target functions.
As the frequency of the target function decreases, the deep
neural network achieves a designated error with fewer training epochs, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), which is similar to the
phenomenon when using a deeper network to learn a fixed
target function.
Inspired by the above analysis, we propose a mechanism
to understand why a deeper network, fθ (x), faster learns
a set of training data, S = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 sampled from a
target function f ∗ (x), illustrated as follows. Networks are
trained as usual while we separate a deep neural network
into two parts in the analysis, as shown in Fig. 2, one is a precondition component and the other is a learning component,
in which the output of the pre-condition one, denoted as
[l−1]
fθ (x) (first l −1 layers are classified as the pre-condition
component), is the input of the learning one. For the learning component, the effective training data at each training
[l−1]
epoch is S [l−1] = {(fθ (xi ), yi )}ni=1 . We then perform
experiments based on the variants of Resnet18 structure (He
et al. 2016) and CIFAR10 dataset. We fix the learning component (fully-connected layers). When increasing the number of the pre-condition layer (convolution layers), we find
that S [l−1] has a stronger bias towards low frequency during
the training. By frequency principle, the learning of a lower
frequency function is faster, therefore, the learning component is faster to learn S [l−1] when the pre-condition component has more layers. The analysis among different network structures is often much more difficult than the analy-

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved tremendous success in
many applications, such as computer vision, speech recognition, speech translation, and natural language processing
etc. The depth in neural networks plays an important role
in the applications. Understanding the effect of depth is a
central problem to reveal the “black box” of deep learning.
For example, empirical studies show that a deeper network
can learn faster and generalize better in both real data and
synthetic data (He et al. 2016; Arora, Cohen, and Hazan
2018). Different network structures have different computation costs in each training epoch. In this work, we define
that the learning of a deep neural network is faster if the
loss of the deep neural network decreases to a designated
error with fewer training epochs. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a), when learning data sampled from a target function
cos(3x) + cos(5x), a deep neural network with more hidden layers achieves the designated training loss with fewer
training epochs. Although empirical studies suggest deeper
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10541

