The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Quantum-inspired Neural Network for Conversational Emotion Recognition
Qiuchi Li1 , Dimitris Gkoumas2 , Alessandro Sordoni3 , Jian-Yun Nie4 , Massimo Melucci1
1

University of Padua, Padua, Italy
The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
3
Microsoft Research Montreal, Montreal, Canada
4
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
1
2
{qiuchili,melo}@dei.unipd.it, dimitris.gkoumas@open.ac.uk, 3 alsordon@microsoft.com, 4 nie@iro.umontreal.ca
2

Abstract
We provide a novel perspective on conversational emotion
recognition by drawing an analogy between the task and a
complete span of quantum measurement. We characterize different steps of quantum measurement in the process of recognizing speakers’ emotions in conversation, and stitch them up
with a quantum-like neural network. The quantum-like layers are implemented by complex-valued operations to ensure
an authentic adoption of quantum concepts, which naturally
enables conversational context modeling and multimodal fusion. We borrow an existing algorithm to learn the complexvalued network weights, so that the quantum-like procedure
is conducted in a data-driven manner. Our model is comparable to state-of-the-art approaches on two benchmarking
datasets, and provide a quantum view to understand conversational emotion recognition.

Figure 1: An example of a multimodal conversation. The
task is to predict the emotion of each utterance.

Introduction
Multimodal conversational emotion recognition is a new but
rapid-growing area. The task is to classify each utterance in
a conversation into one of the candidate emotions based on
clues from multimodal channels. A speaker’s emotion is expressed not only by words, but also from his facial emotions
and speech voices. The recognition of emotion in a conversation hence requires a joint analysis of multimodal data
including textual, visual and acoustic modalities. Figure 1
is an example of a multimodal conversation between three
speakers (parties), Joey, Monica and Phoebe. The emotions
of all speakers dramatically change in the course of conversation. Hence, we are facing with a challenge of automatically tracking the emotion evolution.
Existing works have mainly managed to model two levels of interaction. On the one hand, unimodal features are
merged into a joint multimodal utterance representation,
in which interactions between different modalities are captured (i.e. multimodal fusion) (Liang et al. 2018; Zadeh
et al. 2018a; Tsai et al. 2019a; Zadeh et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2020). On the other hand, the speakers’ interactions
in a conversation are captured based on RNN-based backbone structures (i.e. conversational context modeling) (Poria
et al. 2017; Hazarika et al. 2018a,b; Ghosal et al. 2019; Majumder et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020). However, few works

have joined multimodal fusion and conversational context
modeling in a unified architecture. Most multimodal fusion
works are evaluated on monologue data with no conversational structure involved. For conversational context modeling, however, simple concatenation or attention mechanism is employed to join pre-trained unimodal utterance
features. Another issue facing both aspects of research is
a lack of formal understanding of the constructed model,
which is mainly composed of black-box-like neural components (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2017).
We design a quantum-like framework to approach conversational emotion recognition, which tackles both limitations
in one shot. The motivation stems theoretical investigations
of quantum cognition (Busemeyer and Bruza 2012), which
suggest that quantum-inspired frameworks can properly explain phenomena in human cognition that violate the probability theory that grounds almost all classical models. As a
typical cognitive concept, emotion recognition has received
little attention from a quantum viewpoint. We therefore seek
to explore the use of quantum-like procedure to model emotion recognition.
We draw an analogy between the process of quantum
measurement and the emotion recognition. In a quantum
physics experiment, a particle is in a mixture of multiple mutually independent pure states prior to measurement, and the
measurement makes it collapse onto a single pure measure-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13270

