The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Demodalizing Face Recognition with Synthetic Samples
Zhonghua Zhai1,2∗ Pengju Yang1∗ Xiaofeng Zhang1 Maji Huang1
Haijing Cheng1 Xuejun Yan1 Chunmao Wang1 Shiliang Pu1†
1

Hikvision Research Institute
2
Zhejiang University
{zhaizhonghua, yangpengju, zhangxiaofeng15, huangmaji, chenghaijing,
yanxuejun, wangchunmao, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com
Abstract

REAL

Using data generated by generative adversarial networks or
three-dimensional (3D) technology for face recognition training is a theoretically reasonable solution to the problems of
unbalanced data distributions and data scarcity. However, due
to the modal difference between synthetic data and real data,
the direct use of data for training often leads to a decrease in
the recognition performance, and the effect of synthetic data
on recognition remains ambiguous. In this paper, after observing in experiments that modality information has a fixed
form, we propose a demodalizing face recognition training
architecture for the first time and provide a feasible method
for recognition training using synthetic samples. Specifically,
three different demodalizing training methods, from implicit
to explicit, are proposed. These methods gradually reveal a
generated modality that is difficult to quantify or describe.
By removing the modalities of the synthetic data, the performance degradation is greatly alleviated. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on various benchmarks of largescale face recognition and outperform the previous methods,
especially in the low FAR range.

REAL

GEN

REAL

REAL

DMFR

GEN

GEN

GEN

Figure 1: Due to changes in attributes (such as the head pose
and image quality), the distance between synthetic samples
and real samples in the same category may be relatively
large, and due to the existence of a fixed synthetic mode, the
distance between the synthetic samples of different people
will be close. After DMFR removes the synthetic modality,
the synthetic samples will be closer to the real samples in
their own category and farther from the generated samples
in other categories. This figure is best viewed in color.

With continuous improvement in the quality of synthetic
images, some researchers have begun to use generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and
three-dimensional (3D) methods (Feng et al. 2018; Masi
et al. 2016) to generate images to enrich classes with fewer
samples. This approach is applied in the fields of person reidentification (re-ID) (Dai et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019)
and few-shot learning (Mishra et al. 2018; Mondal, Dolz,
and Desrosiers 2018). However, in face recognition tasks,
we discover that directly mixing real and synthetic samples
in training often yields negative effects (Shi et al. 2020) regardless of how realistic the synthetic samples appear. After
experimentation, we discovered that the synthetic samples
often have unified modality information. As with adversarial samples, this information often does not have obvious
visual characteristics, but it will create problems for training
the model.
For the first time, we propose demodalizing face recognition (DMFR) to remove fixed modalities in synthetic samples. As shown in Fig. 1, the distribution of the synthetic
samples after removing the modal information is similar
to that of the real samples, and the distances between the
synthetic samples increases. The classifier does not need
to make incorrect offsets to fit sample points that are outliers due to the modal information. Therefore, the synthetic
samples can be better utilized for face recognition and other
tasks.

Introduction
Deep face recognition aims to map an input image to a feature space with a small intraclass distance and a large interclass distance. Previous work was implemented via loss
function design and datasets with rich intraclass differences
(Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Wen et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2019). However, most of the face datasets that we have utilized are biased and long-tailed. Even very large public datasets manifest strong biases in image characteristics, such as ethnicity
(Sohn et al. 2018), age (Wen, Li, and Qiao 2016; Zheng,
Deng, and Hu 2017) and head poses (Masi et al. 2016; Peng
et al. 2017). On the other hand, a few classes tend to have
rich in-class samples, while most classes have very few inclass samples (Yin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019). These biased and long-tailed characteristics greatly affect the performance of the recognition model, especially on difficult test
datasets.
∗

Equally-contributed
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3278

