The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Traffic Flow Forecasting with Spatial-Temporal Graph Diffusion Network
Xiyue Zhang1 , Chao Huang2 * , Yong Xu1,3,4 , Lianghao Xia1 , Peng Dai2
Liefeng Bo2 , Junbo Zhang5,6 , Yu Zheng5,6
1

South China University of Technology, China
2
JD Finance America Corporation, USA
3
Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
5
JD Intelligent Cities Research, China, 6 JD Intelligent Cities Business Unit, JD Digits, China
{zhang.xiyue,cslianghao.xia}@mail.scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn, chaohuang75@gmail.com
{peng.dai,liefeng.bo}@jd.com, {msjunbozhang,msyuzheng}@outlook.com

Abstract

With the advancement of deep learning techniques, many
efforts have been devoted to developing traffic prediction methods with various neural network architecture for
spatial-temporal pattern modeling. Inspired by the sequence
learning paradigm, recent neural networks have been utilized to model temporal effects of traffic variations (Liu
et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2017). To make use of spatial features, some research work propose to adopt convolutional
neural network to model correlations between adjacent regions (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017), along with using recurrent neural layers on the temporal dimension (Yao et al.
2018). Although both spatial and temporal correlations have
been considered in existing methods, several key challenges
have not been well addressed.
In real-life scenarios, traffic flow pattern is often complex and multi-periodic (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Deng
et al. 2016), as different views with respect to time resolutions (e.g., hourly, daily, weekly) reflect the traffic dynamics
from different temporal dimensions. The captured temporal patterns are often complementary with each other (Wu
et al. 2018). Hence, learning accurate representations of traffic variation patterns requires the collaboration of multiple views with different time resolutions. While recurrent
neural network-based approaches have achieved good performance on various spatial-temporal sequence prediction
tasks, they can only be effective for short-term, smooth dynamics and can hardly make predictions over the high-order
multi-dimensional time horizons.
Most current forecasting approaches merely focus on
modeling nearby geographical correlations (Yao et al. 2018;
Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017), while ignoring the cross-region
inter-dependencies under a global context. For example, two
geographical areas with similar urban functions (e.g., shopping zone or transportation hub) can be correlated in terms
of their traffic distribution, although they are not spatially
adjacent or even far away from each other (Shen et al. 2018;
Wang and Li 2017). Hence, the learned region-wise relational structures without the global-level traffic transition information, are insufficient to distill not only local geographical dependencies, but also global relations across regions,

Accurate forecasting of citywide traffic flow has been playing critical role in a variety of spatial-temporal mining applications, such as intelligent traffic control and public risk assessment. While previous work has made significant efforts
to learn traffic temporal dynamics and spatial dependencies,
two key limitations exist in current models. First, only the
neighboring spatial correlations among adjacent regions are
considered in most existing methods, and the global interregion dependency is ignored. Additionally, these methods
fail to encode the complex traffic transition regularities exhibited with time-dependent and multi-resolution in nature.
To tackle these challenges, we develop a new traffic prediction framework–Spatial-Temporal Graph Diffusion Network
(ST-GDN). In particular, ST-GDN is a hierarchically structured graph neural architecture which learns not only the local
region-wise geographical dependencies, but also the spatial
semantics from a global perspective. Furthermore, a multiscale attention network is developed to empower ST-GDN
with the capability of capturing multi-level temporal dynamics. Experiments on several real-life traffic datasets demonstrate that ST-GDN outperforms different types of state-ofthe-art baselines. Source codes of implementations are available at https://github.com/jill001/ST-GDN.

Introduction
Accurate forecasting of traffic flow across different geographical regions in a city, have played a critical role in
smart transformation systems, such as intelligent transportation (Wei et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2020) and public risk assessment (Gao et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2018). For example,
in disaster control, by predicting future traffic volume, local
governments and communities is able to design better transportation scheduling and mobility management strategies, to
mitigate the tragedies caused by the crowd flow (Zhao et al.
2017). In general, the objective of traffic prediction is to
forecast the traffic volume (e.g., inflow and outflow of each
region), from past traffic observations (Diao et al. 2019).
* Corresponding author: Chao Huang
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15008

