The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Audio-Visual Consistency with
Partial Supervision for Spatial Audio Generation
Yan-Bo Lin 1 and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1

Graduate Inst. Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{yblin98,ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

et al. 2019; Pedro Morgado and Wang 2018; Li, Langlois,
and Zheng 2018; Kim et al. 2019), which is among active research topics in computer vision and signal processing, and with applications ranging from augmented reality
(AR) (Kim et al. 2019), virtual reality (VR) (Li, Langlois,
and Zheng 2018), social video sharing (Gao and Grauman
2019a; Lu et al. 2019), and audio-visual video understanding (Lin, Li, and Wang 2019; Tian et al. 2018; Lin and Wang
2020; Tian, Li, and Xu 2020). Nevertheless, by observing
visual data, generating audio outputs for left and right channels from a monaural audio input is a challenging task.
Since the visual content explicitly preserves the location
of the sounding objects in a scene, it would be desirable
to take videos accompanying monaural audio for recovering spatial sound information, i.e., to lift a flat audio signal into left-right spatial audio outputs. A number of methods (Gao and Grauman 2019a; Lu et al. 2019; Pedro Morgado and Wang 2018) jointly considering spatial-audio features have been proposed. These methods are able to generate spatial audio signals associated with proper position
of the sounding objects. With videos recording in binaural
settings (Gao and Grauman 2019a; Lu et al. 2019), these
methods simulate how monaural audio is presented on the
mainstream media by mixing two channels audio into one
channel. Thus, the resulting models of (Gao and Grauman
2019a; Lu et al. 2019) are end-to-end trainable to perform
audio spatialization with stimulated monaural audio inputs.
Since the ground truth binaural outputs are available, the
predicted binaural audio signals can be properly guided by
the real binaural ones during training. While promising performance has been presented, collecting a sufficient amount
of binaural audio datasets would be expensive. Moreover,
the method in (Lu et al. 2019) requires additional scene classifiers during training, which might limit its generalization
to videos with unseen content/scenes.
To overcome the above limitations, we propose a novel
deep learning network for audio spatialization. By exploiting the visual cues across video frames, our model recovers
binaural audio outputs from the input video with monaural
recording. More specifically, we propose to identify audiovisual cross-modal correlation, which allows us to identify
audio channels with the associated visual components. Such
spatial information would guide the prediction of left and
right-channel audio outputs throughout the video. Thus, the

Human perceives rich auditory experience with distinct sound
heard by ears. Videos recorded with binaural audio particular simulate how human receives ambient sound. However, a
large number of videos are with monaural audio only, which
would degrade the user experience due to the lack of ambient information. To address this issue, we propose an audio
spatialization framework to convert a monaural video into a
binaural one exploiting the relationship across audio and visual components. By preserving the left-right consistency in
both audio and visual modalities, our learning strategy can
be viewed as a self-supervised learning technique, and alleviates the dependency on a large amount of video data with
ground truth binaural audio data during training. Experiments
on benchmark datasets confirm the effectiveness of our proposed framework in both semi-supervised and fully supervised scenarios, with ablation studies and visualization further support the use of our model for audio spatialization.

Introduction
Human beings are able to localize objects based on the
sound heard by ears. The reason behind this ability is that,
by parsing the audio difference between the two ears, human
beings are able to infer spatial information of the sound origins (e.g., the drum is at the left hand side, and the piano is
at the right hand side in Fig. 1), even if the audiences do not
see and are not physically present in the scene. Thus, if one
can design machines to measure the difference between the
arrival times, including that between the frequency distributions perceive by left and right audio sensors, such machines
would be able to perform sound localization accordingly.
However, most of the videos on social media contain only
monaural audio signals (i.e., the same audio source heard
by ears), which implicitly loses the spatial information of
interest. Without the difference between two ears while perceiving sound, it is difficult for the users to immerse surroundings as if they were in the scenes. Therefore, the lack
of spatial-related audio signals in media contents thereby diminishes the watching experiences of the users. To alleviate
this issue, it would be desirable if one can convert monaural audio data into binaural ones. This is considered as the
task of audio spatialization (Gao and Grauman 2019a; Lu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2056

