The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Welfare Guarantees in Schelling Segregation
Martin Bullinger,1 Warut Suksompong,2 Alexandros A. Voudouris3
1

Institut für Informatik, Technische Universität München
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex
2

Abstract

and made similar ones for numerous variants of the model
using computer simulations—see, e.g., (Clark and Fossett
2008). More recent work, mainly in computer science, performed rigorous analyses of such variants, some of which
are quite close to the original model, and showed that the dynamics according to which the agents relocate converges to
assignments in which the agents form large monochromatic
regions (that is, subgraphs consisting only of agents of the
same type); in addition, this line of work established bounds
on the size of these regions. We refer to the papers (Pollicott and Weiss 2001; Young 2001; Zhang 2004; Pancs and
Vriend 2007; Brandt et al. 2012; Barmpalias, Elwes, and
Lewis-Pye 2014, 2015; Bhakta, Miracle, and Randall 2014;
Immorlica et al. 2017) for results of this flavor.
While most of the literature on Schelling’s model has focused on properties related to segregation between the two
types, segregation itself is only one side of the story, especially when we allow different, possibly more complex location graphs. Given that the agents are willing to relocate
to be close to other agents of the same type, another natural
question is whether the resulting assignments satisfy some
sort of efficiency. This has been considered in part by a recent array of papers (Chauhan, Lenzner, and Molitor 2018;
Echzell et al. 2019; Elkind et al. 2019; Agarwal et al. 2020;
Bilò et al. 2020; Chan, Irfan, and Than 2020; Kanellopoulos, Kyropoulou, and Voudouris 2020), which have studied
Schelling’s model from a game-theoretic perspective. In particular, instead of randomly relocating, the agents are assumed to be strategic and each of them aims to select a location that maximizes her utility, defined as the fraction of
same-type agents in her neighborhood.
Besides questions related to the existence and computation of equilibria (i.e., assignments in which no agent has an
incentive to relocate in order to increase her utility), the authors of some of the aforementioned papers have also studied the efficiency of assignments in terms of social welfare,
defined as the total utility of the agents. For this objective,
these authors have shown that computing assignments (not
necessarily equilibria) maximizing the social welfare is NPhard under specific assumptions about the graph and the behavior of the agents. Furthermore, they established several
bounds on the worst-case ratio between the maximum social
welfare (achieved by any possible assignment) and the social welfare of the best or worst equilbrium assignment, also

Schelling’s model is an influential model that reveals how individual perceptions and incentives can lead to racial segregation. Inspired by a recent stream of work, we study welfare guarantees and complexity in this model with respect to
several welfare measures. First, we show that while maximizing the social welfare is NP-hard, computing an assignment
with approximately half of the maximum welfare can be done
in polynomial time. We then consider Pareto optimality and
introduce two new optimality notions, and establish mostly
tight bounds on the worst-case welfare loss for assignments
satisfying these notions. In addition, we show that for trees, it
is possible to decide whether there exists an assignment that
gives every agent a positive utility in polynomial time; moreover, when every node in the topology has degree at least 2,
such an assignment always exists and can be found efficiently.

1

Introduction

Schelling’s model was proposed half a century ago to illustrate how individual perceptions and incentives can lead
to racial segregation, and has been used to study this
phenomenon in residential metropolitan areas in particular
(Schelling 1969, 1971). The model is rather simple to describe. There are a number of agents, each of whom belongs
to one of two predetermined types and occupies a location;
in his original work, Schelling assumed that the locations
are cells of a rectangular board, which can be represented as
a grid graph.1 Every agent would like to occupy a node on
the graph such that the fraction of other agents of the same
type in the neighborhood of that node is at least a predefined tolerance threshold τ ∈ [0, 1]. If this condition is not
met for an agent, then the agent can relocate to a randomly
chosen empty node on the grid. One of the most surprising
findings of Schelling is that, starting from a random initial
assignment of the agents to the nodes of the grid, the dynamics may converge to segregated assignments even when
τ ≈ 1/3, contrasting the intuition that segregation should
happen only when τ ≥ 1/2.
Throughout the years, hundreds of researchers in sociology and economics reconfirmed Schelling’s observations
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Schelling also considered a variant in which the locations form
a line graph.

5236

