The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Algebra of Modular Systems: Containment and Equivalence
Andrei Bulatov, Eugenia Ternovska
Simon Fraser University
abulatov@sfu.ca, ter@sfu.ca

Abstract

For example, the first expression may represent the system
and the second one the property to be satisfied. Containment then implies that the design is good, that is, it satisfies
the specification. Moreover, containment property is in the
core of the notions of abstraction-refinement and tighteningrelaxation often used in reasoning about computational processes and operations research. Algorithms for containment
also solve equivalence, i.e., containment in both directions.
While several declarative formalisms provide their own
solutions for combining homogeneous modules, our goal is
distinctly different. We need combinations of components
specified in different languages (even legacy languages),
and those that rely on different solving technologies. For instance, consider a company that provides logistics services.
It decides how to pack goods and deliver them. The system has to solve two NP-complete tasks interactively – Multiple Knapsack and Travelling Salesman Problem. It takes
items from customers to deliver, and considers their profits, weights, and the capacity of trucks available. It has to
decide how to pack the items in the trucks, and for each
truck, to solve a TSP problem. To save time and other resources, the company utilizes reusable components, that we
call concrete modules. The Knapsack part can be solved,
by, e.g., a concrete module in Integer Linear Programming
(ILP), and the TSP part by a concrete module in Answer
Set Programming (ASP). The system is specified by an algebraic expression that combines these and possibly other
components. The expression can be optimized using modular system equivalence and verified against a specification of a desired behaviour. Clearly, our goal of utilizing
modules “as is” implies the need for a semantic, languageindependent approach. Moreover, a natural compositionality
principle should hold: a combination of modules is, again, a
module that can be further reused.
Early work on combining heterogeneous modules, with a
range of operators, is (Järvisalo et al. 2009) and (Tasharrofi
and Ternovska 2011). The latter paper proposed a semantic
approach to combining modules, where modules correspond
to classes of structures. However, when a module is a class
of structures over a specific vocabulary, what is the notion
of substitutability of a module by a new one, that uses a different but “compatible” vocabulary? The authors have not
formalized this notion. Thus, that early work, while making
an important transition to considering classes of structures,

The Algebra of Modular System is a KR formalism that allows for combinations of modules written in multiple languages. Informally, a module represents a piece of knowledge. It can be given by a knowledge base, be an agent, an
ASP, ILP, CP program, etc. Formally, a module is a class
of structures over the same vocabulary. Modules are combined declaratively, using, essentially, operations of Codd’s
relational algebra.
In this paper, we address the problem of checking modular
system containment, which we relate to a homomorphism
problem. We prove that, for a large class of modular systems, the containment problem (and thus equivalence) is in
the complexity class NP, and therefore is solvable by, e.g.,
SAT solvers. We discuss conditions under which the problem
is polynomial time solvable.

Introduction
Programming from reusable components is one of the main
attributes of good software engineering practice. Such a
practice reduces the effort, minimizes bugs, saves the cost
and time for more high-level development tasks. The theory of combining conventional imperative programs and
digital circuits is relatively well developed. However, in
knowledge-intensive computing, characterized by using socalled declarative programming, research on combining heterogeneous components is not as advanced. It would be very
desirable to be able to write new programs by taking, e.g., a
program written in Answer Set Programming (ASP), combining it with a specification of a Constraint Satisfaction
Problem (CSP), and then also with an Integer Linear Program (ILP), in a compound specification for solving a more
complex task. Moreover, the components should be substitutable, so that parts can be replaced with an alternative design without breaking the intended functionality.
A central algorithmic problem in the modular setting is
that of modular system equivalence. Being able to solve the
equivalence problem is usually the first step toward developing optimization techniques. Moreover, this task is crucial,
for example, in system development and rapid prototyping.
A related notion is that of modular systems containment. It
asks whether one modular system is “contained” in the other.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6235

