The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Data-Driven Multimodal Patrol Planning for Anti-poaching
Weizhe Chen1 , Weinan Zhang1 , Duo Liu2 , Weiping Li2 , Xiaojun Shi3 , Fei Fang4
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
WWF-China NEC,
3
Huang Ni He Forest Bureau,
4
Carnegie Mellon University
chenweizhe@sjtu.edu.cn, wnzhang@apex.sjtu.edu.cn, {dliu, wpli}@wwfchina.org, 15043342333@139.com,
feif@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract

at a pick-up location, and then drive to the next drop-off location, etc. If the ranger team has a driver, the pick-up location can be different from where the rangers are dropped off.
Such a complex patrol makes route planning a tough task as
the planner needs to take into account the varying poaching
threat across the site, the movement speed and the total patrol time. In current practice, the domain experts rely on their
understanding of the poaching threat and some rudimentary
planning methods to plan the routes, resulting in a significant cognitive burden on the domain experts. Furthermore,
their understanding may be biased and the planned routes
may be far from optimal. Besides, when there is employee
movement, it is hard to transfer the site-specific knowledge
needed for planning the routes to new managers and rangers
who lack experience patrolling in the specific site.

Wildlife poaching is threatening key species that play important roles in the ecosystem. With historical ranger patrol
records, it is possible to provide data-driven predictions of
poaching threats and plan patrols to combat poaching. However, the patrollers often patrol in a multimodal way, which
combines driving and walking. It is a tedious task for the domain experts to manually plan such a patrol and as a result,
the planned patrol routes are often far from optimal. In this
paper, we propose a data-driven approach for multimodal patrol planning. We first use machine learning models to predict
the poaching threats and then use a novel mixed-integer linear programming-based algorithm to plan the patrol route. In
a field test focusing on the machine learning prediction result at Jilin Huangnihe National Nature Reserve (HNHR) in
December 2019, the rangers found 42 snares, which is significantly higher than the historical record. Our offline experiments show that the resulting multimodal patrol routes can
improve the efficiency of patrol and thus they can serve as the
basis for future deployment in the field.

In this paper, we propose a data-driven approach to plan
the patrol routes, aiming to make better use of the limited
patrol time of rangers and reduce the cognitive burden of
patrol planning. In some sites, rangers record their waypoints and findings during the patrols through the Spatial
Monitoring And Reporting Tool (SMART), including where
and when they find animal signs, human activity signs,
and snares. These records enable the use of machine learning (ML) methods to analyze the data. Some prior efforts
use ML to assist conservation agencies identify poaching
hotspots (Nguyen et al. 2016; Gholami et al. 2017, 2020),
but the results are still far from perfect. Also, most of them
focus on predicting the poaching threat and do not take planning into account. Among the ones that consider route planning, the practical aspect of multimodal patrol is neglected.
In contrast, in our approach, we first apply ML methods to
the processed data to predict poaching threats and then use
mathematical programming to plan multimodal patrols. The
workflow is shown in Figure 1. In the poaching threat prediction part, we use a averaging ensemble model with a neural network (NN) and decision trees to predict the poaching
threats. We show that with proper hyper-parameter tuning,
NN can improve the F1 score by 0.2 in our dataset of Jilin
Huangnihe National Nature Reserve (HNHR), a conservation area of about 75 sq. km in Northeast China. Furthermore, the averaging ensemble model can lead to a precision
of 0.63. During a field test at HNHR focusing on the prediction, the rangers found 42 snares placed by poachers, encountered other humans (who are likely poachers) 3 times,

Introduction
Poaching has been a global concern for many years. Key
species that play important roles in the ecosystem, such
as elephants, tigers, rhinos, are under constant poaching
threats due to the trade of profitable wildlife products, including ivory, rhino horns, and tiger skins (Chase et al.
2016; Spillane 2016). Besides, wild boars, roar deer, and
other wildlife species are poached for bushmeat (Warchol
2004). Wildlife conservation agencies are trying to protect
wildlife from poaching by sending rangers to patrol in the
conservation sites to confiscate poaching tools like snares
and stop the poachers (Lemieux 2014).
The patrol routes are traditionally planned by domain experts such as site managers and experienced rangers, with
the main goal of detecting and deterring poaching activities.
In many huge conservation sites, the rangers patrol through
multiple modes of transportation, e.g., driving through cars
and motorcycles, walking, and sometimes even through
boats. We consider a typical multimodal patrol scenario:
rangers drive along existing roads to open trails to a dropoff location, then patrol on foot and get back to the vehicle
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15270

