The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Continual Learning Framework for Uncertainty-Aware
Interactive Image Segmentation
Ervine Zheng, Qi Yu * , Rui Li, Pengcheng Shi, Anne Haake
Rochester Institute of Technology
{mxz5733, qi.yu, rxlics, spcast, arhics}@rit.edu

Abstract

poses a key challenge of applying state-of-the-art DL models. Furthermore, segmentation results provided by fully automatic algorithms are not always guaranteed satisfactory to
users. For example, in medical image analysis, physicians
may form different opinions on the boundary of segments.
It is vital to provide an effective means for users to adjust
the segmentation results. Finally, domain shift may cause
severe deterioration of segmentation results if training images vary significantly from the testing ones due to different imaging devices, environments, and other factors, which
may frequently occur in many applications.
Interactive segmentation offers a promising direction by
leveraging users’ knowledge to refine the segmentation results. It allows users to interact with the system by annotating a few pixels, which are then used by the model to update
the segmentation results. However, most existing algorithms
process images and user annotations as isolated cases. They
mainly focus on correcting the current image’s misclassified
pixels but ignore carrying over knowledge learned from user
annotations to other images. In a practical setting, new images are usually provided to a model in sequential order. The
model should effectively learn from user annotations to improve segmentation performance and reduce users’ (repetitive) annotation effort in the future. Besides, most existing
algorithms leave the decision of selective annotation altogether to the users, i.e., users may make edits on any areas
without knowing which edit is most useful to the model for
improving the results. A fundamental challenge of interactive segmentation is how to provide users informative guidance to improve the segmentation accuracy with minimum
annotation effort.
To address the above challenges, we formulate interactive
segmentation as a continual learning problem. The segmentation tasks are organized as a sequence. In each task, the
model is trained with only one or a few images and along
with limited user annotations. This is different from conventional continual learning, where one task usually contains a large batch of data instances, because interactive segmentation aims to leverage limited user annotations to improve performance. We also design a training-testing protocol to evaluate how a model can effectively learn from
user annotations to improve the segmentation performance
on 1) the current image and 2) the unseen images in future tasks, while mitigating the deteriorated performance on

Deep learning models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in semantic image segmentation, but the results provided by fully automatic algorithms are not always guaranteed satisfactory to users. Interactive segmentation offers
a solution by accepting user annotations on selective areas
of the images to refine the segmentation results. However,
most existing models only focus on correcting the current image’s misclassified pixels, with no knowledge carried over to
other images. In this work, we formulate interactive image
segmentation as a continual learning problem and propose a
framework to effectively learn from user annotations, aiming to improve the segmentation on both the current image
and unseen images in future tasks while avoiding deteriorated performance on previously-seen images. It employs a
probabilistic mask to control the neural network’s kernel activation and extract the most suitable features for segmenting images in each task. We also apply a task-aware embedding to automatically infer the optimal kernel activation for
initial segmentation and subsequent refinement. Interactions
with users are guided through multi-source uncertainty estimation so that users can focus on the most important areas to
minimize the overall manual annotation effort. Experiments
are performed on both medical and natural image datasets
to illustrate the proposed framework’s effectiveness on basic
segmentation performance, forward knowledge transfer, and
backward knowledge transfer.

Introduction
Deep learning (DL) based methods have been increasingly
applied to semantic image segmentation in recent years with
superior performance (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Chen et al. 2017; He
et al. 2017). However, large-scale annotated images are usually required to properly train a complex DL model to ensure a good segmentation performance. Fully annotating an
image is a lengthy and laborious process. In many specialized domains (e.g., medicine and biology), image annotation may only be performed by expert users with special expertise. Thus, the availability of large-scale fully annotated
images is usually rather limited in these domains, which
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6030

