The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Storage Fit Learning with Feature Evolvable Streams
Bo-Jian Hou, Yu-Hu Yan, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{houbj, yanyh, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

steps under certain assumptions (Beyazit, Alagurajah, and
Wu 2019; He et al. 2019).
Note that the setting of feature evolvable learning is different from transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010) or domain
adaptation (Jiang 2008; Sun, Shi, and Wu 2015). Transfer learning usually assumes that data come in batches instead of the streaming form. One exception is online transfer learning (Zhao et al. 2014) in which data from both sets
of features arrive sequentially. However, they assume that
all the feature spaces must appear simultaneously during
the whole learning process while such an assumption does
not hold in feature evolvable learning. Domain adaptation
usually assumes the data distribution changes across the domains, yet the feature spaces are the same, which is evidently
different from the setting of feature evolvable learning.
These conventional feature evolvable learning methods all
assume that a label can be revealed in each round. However,
in real applications, labels may be rarely given during the
whole learning process. For example, in an object detecting
system, a robot takes high-frame rate pictures to learn the
name of different objects. Like a child learning in real world,
the robot receives names rarely from human. Thus we will
face the online semi-supervised learning problem. We focus
on manifold regularization which assumes that similar samples should have the same label and has been successfully
applied in many practical tasks (Zhu, Lafferty, and Rosenfeld 2005). However, this method needs to store previous
samples and render a challenge on storage. Besides, different devices have different storage budget limitations, or even
the available storage in the same device could be different at
different times. Thus it is important to make our method adjust its behavior to fit for different storage budgets (known
as storage-fit issues) (Zhou et al. 2009; Hou, Zhang, and
Zhou 2017b) which means the method should fully exploit
the storage budget to optimize its performance.
In this paper, we propose a new setting: Storage-Fit
Feature-Evolvable streaming Learning (SF2 EL) which concerns both the lack of labels and the storage-fit issue
in the feature evolvable learning scenario. We focus on
FESL (Hou, Zhang, and Zhou 2017a), and other feature
evolvable learning methods based on online learning technique can also adapt to our framework since our framework
is not affected by specific forms of feature evolution. Due to
the lack of labels, the loss function of FESL cannot be used

Feature evolvable learning has been widely studied in recent
years where old features will vanish and new features will
emerge when learning with streams. Conventional methods
usually assume that a label will be revealed after prediction at
each time step. However, in practice, this assumption may not
hold whereas no label will be given at most time steps. A good
solution is to leverage the technique of manifold regularization to utilize the previous similar data to assist the refinement of the online model. Nevertheless, this approach needs
to store all previous data which is impossible in learning with
streams that arrive sequentially in large volume. Thus we
need a buffer to store part of them. Considering that different devices may have different storage budgets, the learning
approaches should be flexible subject to the storage budget
limit. In this paper, we propose a new setting: Storage-Fit
Feature-Evolvable streaming Learning (SF2 EL) which incorporates the issue of rarely-provided labels into feature evolution. Our framework is able to fit its behavior for different
storage budgets when learning with feature evolvable streams
with unlabeled data. Besides, both theoretical and empirical
results validate that our approach can preserve the merit of
the original feature evolvable learning i.e., can always track
the best baseline and thus perform well at any time step.

Introduction
Over the last several years, feature evolvable learning has
drawn extensive attentions (Zhang et al. 2016; Hou, Zhang,
and Zhou 2017a; Hou and Zhou 2018; Ye et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020), where old features will vanish and new features will emerge when data streams come continuously or
in an online manner. There are various problem settings
proposed in previous studies. For instance, in FESL (Hou,
Zhang, and Zhou 2017a), there is an overlapping period
where old and new features exist simultaneously when feature space switches. Hou and Zhou (2018) investigate the
scenario when old features disappear, part of them will survive and continue to exist with new arriving features. Zhang
et al. (2016) study that features of new samples are always
equal to or larger than the old samples so as to render trapezoidal data streams. Subsequent works consider the situation that features could vary arbitrarily at different time
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7729

