The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Re-TACRED: Addressing Shortcomings of the TACRED Dataset
George Stoica 1 , Emmanouil Antonios Platanios 2 , Barnabas Poczos 1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Semantic Machines
gis@cs.cmu.edu, emplata@microsoft.com, bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
TACRED is one of the largest and most widely used sentencelevel relation extraction datasets. Proposed models that are
evaluated using this dataset consistently set new state-of-theart performance. However, they still exhibit large error rates
despite leveraging external knowledge and unsupervised pretraining on large text corpora. A recent study suggested that
this may be due to poor dataset quality. The study observed
that over 50% of the most challenging sentences from the
development and test sets are incorrectly labeled and account
for an average drop of 8% f1-score in model performance.
However, this study was limited to a small biased sample of
5k (out of a total of 106k) sentences, substantially restricting
the generalizability and broader implications of its findings. In
this paper, we address these shortcomings by: (i) performing
a comprehensive study over the whole TACRED dataset, (ii)
proposing an improved crowdsourcing strategy and deploying it to re-annotate the whole dataset, and (iii) performing a
thorough analysis to understand how correcting the TACRED
annotations affects previously published results. After verification, we observed that 23.9% of TACRED labels are incorrect.
Moreover, evaluating several models on our revised dataset
yields an average f1-score improvement of 14.3% and helps
uncover significant relationships between the different models (rather than simply offsetting or scaling their scores by
a constant factor). Finally, aside from our analysis we also
release Re-TACRED, a new completely re-annotated version
of the TACRED dataset that can be used to perform reliable
evaluation of relation extraction models.

1

Introduction

Many applications ranging from medical diagnostics to
search engines rely on the ability to uncover relationships
between diverse concepts. Relation extraction (RE) is a
popular learning task aimed at extracting such relationships between entities in plain text. For example, given
the sentence “[William Shakespeare]SUB was born in
[England]OBJ ,” where “William Shakespeare” and
“England” are the subject and object entities respectively,
the objective of a RE method is to infer the correct relation
(e.g., PERSON:BORN IN COUNTRY) between the subject and
the object. Developing successful RE methods requires robust
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13843

ways to evaluate their qualities. TACRED (Zhang et al. 2017)
is one of the largest and most widely used such datasets.
TACRED consists of 106,264 sentences of varied complexity that were annotated using Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT). Although just three years-old, a multitude of approaches have been proposed and evaluated using the TACRED dataset. These approaches typically leverage an assortment of different knowledge: (i) auxiliary named entity
recognition (NER) and part-of-speech (POS) tag information
(e.g., Zhang et al. 2017; Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Guo,
Zhang, and Lu 2019), (ii) sentence dependency parses (e.g.,
Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019),
(iii) fine-tuned pre-trained language representations (e.g., Baldini Soares et al. 2019; Peters et al. 2019; Alt, Hübner, and
Hennig 2019; Joshi et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2019), or (iv) even external training data (e.g., Baldini Soares
et al. 2019; Peters et al. 2019). Recently, at the time of writing, methods have converged to ∼71.5% f1-score on the test
data, which raises the question of whether we have reached
the maximum possible attainable performance on the TACRED dataset, and if so, why? Alt, Gabryszak, and Hennig
(2020) investigated these questions by performing a comprehensive review of the 5,000 most misclassified TACRED
development and test split sentences among 49 existing RE
methods. They observed that over 50% of the sentences were
in fact labeled incorrectly, leading to an average model performance improvement of 8% after correcting these labels.
Furthermore, they identified several error categories that describe model mistakes on their revised test split. However,
the broader impact of their work is limited by two key factors.
First, they restricted their dataset revisions to a small and
biased sample of TACRED. Thus, it is not clear whether their
findings would be true for the full TACRED dataset. Second,
even after their revisions, the majority of TACRED remained
uncorrected, making it challenging to identify if new errors
made by the methods were primarily due to model capacity,
data error, or a mixture of both.
In this paper, we aim to address these shortcomings by
performing a re-annotation of the entire TACRED dataset.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
– Annotation: We propose an improved and cost-efficient
crowdsourcing annotation strategy that we subsequently
deploy to re-annotate the full TACRED dataset. Our task
design tackles an important flaw in the original TACRED

