The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Compound Word Transformer: Learning to Compose Full-Song Music
over Dynamic Directed Hypergraphs
Wen-Yi Hsiao,1 Jen-Yu Liu,1 , Yin-Cheng Yeh,1 Yi-Hsuan Yang2
1

Yating Team, Taiwan AI Labs, Taiwan
2
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{wayne391, jyliu, yyeh, yhyang}@ailabs.tw
Abstract
To apply neural sequence models such as the Transformers to
music generation tasks, one has to represent a piece of music
by a sequence of tokens drawn from a finite set of pre-defined
vocabulary. Such a vocabulary usually involves tokens of various types. For example, to describe a musical note, one needs
separate tokens to indicate the note’s pitch, duration, velocity
(dynamics), and placement (onset time) along the time grid.
While different types of tokens may possess different properties, existing models usually treat them equally, in the same
way as modeling words in natural languages. In this paper, we
present a conceptually different approach that explicitly takes
into account the type of the tokens, such as note types and
metric types. And, we propose a new Transformer decoder architecture that uses different feed-forward heads to model tokens of different types. With an expansion-compression trick,
we convert a piece of music to a sequence of compound words
by grouping neighboring tokens, greatly reducing the length
of the token sequences. We show that the resulting model can
be viewed as a learner over dynamic directed hypergraphs.
And, we employ it to learn to compose expressive Pop piano
music of full-song length (involving up to 10K individual tokens per song), both conditionally and unconditionally. Our
experiment shows that, compared to state-of-the-art models,
the proposed model converges 5 to 10 times faster at training
(i.e., within a day on a single GPU with 11 GB memory), and
with comparable quality in the generated music.

Figure 1: Illustration of the main ideas of the proposed compound word Transformer: (left) compound word modeling
that combines the embeddings (colored gray) of multiple tokens {wt−1,k }K
k=1 , one for each token type k, at each time
step t − 1 to form the input ~xt−1 to the self-attention layers,
and (right) toke type-specific feed-forward heads that predict
the list of tokens for the next time step t at once at the output.
aspect of music (e.g., melody, harmony, rhythm, timbre) and
cannot faithfully represent a music piece.
As different types of (musical) tokens may have different
properties, modeling the dependency of these tokens might
not be the same as modeling words in text. However, to our
best knowledge, little work has been done to explicitly account for the heterogeneity of tokens in music. The tokens
are mostly treated equally, in the same way as words in text
(Huang et al. 2019; Payne 2019; Huang and Yang 2020).
We are therefore motivated to study in this paper whether
we can improve sequence modeling of music by highlighting
the role of token types. Our first proposal is to customize the
prediction heads for tokens of different types. Specifically,
using the Transformer as the main architecture of the underlying sequence model, we approach this by using different
feed-forward heads for tokens of different types.
Our second proposal is to group consecutive and related
tokens in a token sequence into “compound words,” and then
perform sequence modeling over the resulting sequence of
compound words. This is to capture the co-occurrence relationship of tokens—e.g., to generate a new musical note,
we may need at least two consecutive tokens to indicate its
pitch and duration; to change the tempo in the middle of a
piece of music, we need a token to indicate the target tempo
value, and an co-occurring time-related token to indicate the

Introduction
To apply neural sequence models such as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) or Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to
automatic music composition (a.k.a., symbolic-domain music generation), one has to represent a piece of music as a
sequence of tokens drawn from a pre-defined vocabulary
(Oore et al. 2018). Unlike the case in text, such a vocabulary usually involves tokens of various types. For example, to
represent a musical score, we may need tokens that describe
the content of the musical notes (e.g., pitch and duration),
their placement along time, the instrument that plays each
note, as well as indicators of metrical events such as the beginning of a new beat, bar (measure), or musical phrase (Wu
and Yang 2020). We need such a diverse set of tokens as
music is multifaceted; a type alone captures only a certain
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

178

