The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Mechanism Design for Classification with Partial Verification
Hanrui Zhang,1 Yu Cheng, 2 Vincent Conitzer 1
1

Duke University
University of Illinois at Chicago
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu, yucheng2@uic.edu, conitzer@cs.duke.edu
2

Abstract

the type does not encode the agent’s preferences: in the examples above, typically any agent has the same preferences
over outcomes, regardless of the agent’s true type. Instead,
the type is relevant to the objective function of the principal
(the entity doing the classification), who wants to classify
the agents into a class that fits their type.
Often, in mechanism design, it is assumed that an agent
of any type can report any other type (e.g., bid any value in
an auction), and outcomes are based on these reports. Under this assumption, our problem would be hopeless: every
agent would always simply report whatever type gives the
most favorable outcome, so we could not at all distinguish
agents based on their true type. But in our context this assumption is not sensible: while an agent may be able to take
some actions that affect how its financial situation appears, it
will generally not be possible for a person in significant debt
and without a job to successfully imitate a wealthy person
with a secure career. This brings us into the less commonly
studied domain of mechanism design with partial verification (Green and Laffont 1986; Yu 2011), in which not every
type can misreport every other type. That is, each type has
certain other types that it can misreport. A standard example
in this literature is that it is possible to have arrived later than
one really did, but not possible to have arrived earlier. (In
that case, the arrival time is the type.) In this paper, however,
we are interested in more complex misreporting (in)abilities.
What determines which types can misreport (i.e., successfully imitate) which other types? This is generally specific
to the setting at hand. Zhang, Cheng, and Conitzer (2019b)
consider settings in which different types produce “samples”
(e.g., timely payments, grades, admissions rates, ...) according to different distributions. They characterize which types
can distinguish themselves from which other types in the
long run, in a model in which agents can either (1) manipulate these samples before they are submitted to the principal,
by either withholding transforming some of them in limited
ways, or (2) choose the number of costly samples to generate (Zhang, Cheng, and Conitzer 2019b,a, 2021). In this paper, we will take as given which types can misreport which
other types; this relation may result from applying the above
characterization result, or from some other model.
Our goal is: given the misreporting relation, agents’ preferences, and the principal’s objective, can we efficiently
compute the optimal (single-agent) mechanism/classifier,

We study the problem of automated mechanism design with
partial verification, where each type can (mis)report only a
restricted set of types (rather than any other type), induced
by the principal’s limited verification power. We prove hardness results when the revelation principle does not necessarily hold, as well as when types have even minimally different
preferences. In light of these hardness results, we focus on
truthful mechanisms in the setting where all types share the
same preference over outcomes, which is motivated by applications in, e.g., strategic classification. We present a number
of algorithmic and structural results, including an efficient
algorithm for finding optimal deterministic truthful mechanisms, which also implies a faster algorithm for finding optimal randomized truthful mechanisms via a characterization
based on convexity. We then consider a more general setting,
where the principal’s cost is a function of the combination of
outcomes assigned to each type. In particular, we focus on the
case where the cost function is submodular, and give generalizations of essentially all our results in the classical setting
where the cost function is additive. Our results provide a relatively complete picture for automated mechanism design with
partial verification.

1

Introduction

Agents are often classified into a variety of categories, some
more desirable than others. Loan applicants might be classified in various categories of risk, determining the interest
they would have to pay. University applicants may be classified into categories such as “rejected,” “wait list,” “regular
accept,” and “accept with honors scholarship.” Meanwhile
universities might themselves be classified into categories
such as “most competitive,” “highly competitive,” etc. In
line with the language of mechanism design (often considered part of game theory), we assume that each agent (i.e.,
the entity being classified) has a type, corresponding to the
agent’s true financial situation, ability as a student, or competitiveness as a university. This type is information that is
private to the agent. In most applications of mechanism design, the type encodes the agent’s preferences. For example,
in an auction, an agent’s type is how much he values the outcome where he wins the auction. In contrast, in our setting,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5789

