The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Undergraduate Games Corpus:
A Dataset for Machine Perception of Interactive Media
Barrett R. Anderson, Adam M. Smith
Design Reasoning Lab, University of California Santa Cruz
barander@ucsc.edu, amsmith@ucsc.edu

Abstract

of machine perception techniques that directly address the
unique features of interactive media.
This paper contributes a new, annotated corpus of 755
games. We provide full game source code and assets, in
many cases licensed for reuse, that were collected with informed consent for their use in AI research. In comparison
to lab-created game clones intended as AI testbeds, these
games are complete works intended as human experiences,
and they represent a range of design polish rather than being
filtered to only commercially successful games. By offering
games for a variety of platforms (from micro-games in Bitsy
and text-oriented stories in Twine to the heavyweight games
built in the Godot Engine), we set up future research with a
wide range of technical challenges.
In the following sections, we place machine perception of
interactive media into the context of emerging work on information retrieval for interactive media, humanist theories
of the meaning of interactive media, and automated gameplaying. We then compare our corpus with other sources of
games and game-like artifacts, and quantitatively characterize the scale and variety of the corpus. To demonstrate the
usefulness of just one slice of this data (interactive narratives), we setup a metadata tag prediction task and compare
the performance of a system that reduces an interactive story
to plain text with one that exploits knowledge of the connectivity between scenes by player selected choices. The complete data and metadata for the new corpus are available at
https://github.com/barrettrees/undergraduate games corpus.

Machine perception research primarily focuses on processing static inputs (e.g. images and texts). We are interested
in machine perception of interactive media (such as games,
apps, and complex web applications) where interactive audience choices have long-term implications for the audience
experience. While there is ample research on AI methods for
the task of playing games (often just one game at a time), this
work is difficult to apply to new and in-development games
or to use for non-playing tasks such as similarity-based retrieval or authoring assistance. In response, we contribute a
corpus of 755 games and structured metadata, spread across
several platforms (Twine, Bitsy, Construct, and Godot), with
full source and assets available and appropriately licensed
for use and redistribution in research. Because these games
were sourced from student projects in an undergraduate game
development program, they reference timely themes in their
content and represent a variety of levels of design polish
rather than only representing past commercial successes. This
corpus could accelerate research in understanding interactive
media while anchoring that work in freshly-developed games
intended as legitimate human experiences (rather than labcreated AI testbeds). We validate the utility of this corpus by
setting up the novel task of predicting tags relevant to the
player experience from the game source code, showing that
representations that better exploit the structure of the media
outperform a text-only baseline.

Introduction
There is an extensive history of research into machine perception for many kinds of non-interactive media (e.g. text,
images, video), but interactivity remains comparatively understudied. Interactivity is an important component of many
modern media, including apps, complex web applications,
and games. Games in particular are almost pathologically interactive. Many games are not just incidentally but primarily
interactive. Further, the meaning of text, images, and other
observations made while interacting with a game can be conditioned on the activity leading up to those observations. A
screen that reads “game over, try again?” comments on the
players’s recent choices and suggests the possibility of alternate outcomes with different choices. We conjecture that a
large collection of games could accelerate the development

Background
Towards a future of search engines that could search within
as well as across games, Zhang et al. recently introduced
the challenge of crawling, indexing, and retrieving moments
from the vast space of interactivity contained within each
game (Zhang et al. 2018). This requires representing and
reasoning about what makes one moment different from another or more or less relevant to a user-provided query. Preliminary work in this area made progress by representing
moments as vectors in a space where proximity of points in
space approximated their semantic similarity. By training a
neural network to predict the state of a videogame’s working memory from the pixels in the screenshot of a moment,
the Pix2Mem technique induces an intermediate vector representation that implicitly represented spatial and temporal

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3

