The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explaining Convolutional Neural Networks through Attribution-Based Input
Sampling and Block-Wise Feature Aggregation
Sam Sattarzadeh,1 Mahesh Sudhakar,1 Anthony Lem,2
Shervin Mehryar,1 Konstantinos N Plataniotis,1 Jongseong Jang,3 Hyunwoo Kim,3
Yeonjeong Jeong,3 Sangmin Lee,3 Kyunghoon Bae3
1

The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Division of Engineering Science, University of Toronto
3
LG AI Research
sam.sattarzadeh, mahesh.sudhakar@mail.utoronto.ca; j.jang, hwkim@lgresearch.ai
Abstract

As an emerging field in Machine Learning, Explainable AI
(XAI) has been offering remarkable performance in interpreting the decisions made by Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). To achieve visual explanations for CNNs, methods
based on class activation mapping and randomized input sampling have gained great popularity. However, the attribution
methods based on these techniques provide low-resolution
and blurry explanation maps that limit their explanation ability. To circumvent this issue, visualization based on various
layers is sought. In this work, we collect visualization maps
from multiple layers of the model based on an attributionbased input sampling technique and aggregate them to reach
a fine-grained and complete explanation. We also propose a
layer selection strategy that applies to the whole family of
CNN-based models, based on which our extraction framework is applied to visualize the last layers of each convolutional block of the model. Moreover, we perform an empirical analysis of the efficacy of derived lower-level information
to enhance the represented attributions. Comprehensive experiments conducted on shallow and deep models trained on
natural and industrial datasets, using both ground-truth and
model-truth based evaluation metrics validate our proposed
algorithm by meeting or outperforming the state-of-the-art
methods in terms of explanation ability and visual quality,
demonstrating that our method shows stability regardless of
the size of objects or instances to be explained.

Figure 1: Comparison of conventional XAI methods with
SISE (our proposed) to demonstrate SISE’s ability to generate class discriminative explanations on a ResNet-50 model.

quences (e.g., healthcare) or where regulations force automotive decision-making systems to provide users with explanations (e.g., criminal justice) (Lipton 2018).
This work particularly addresses the problem of visual explainability, which is a branch of post-hoc XAI. This field
aims to visualize the behavior of models trained for image
recognition tasks (Barredo Arrieta et al. 2019). The outcome
of these methods is a heatmap in the same size as the input
image named “explanation map”, representing the evidence
leading the model to decide.
Prior works on visual explainable AI can be broadly
categorized
into
‘approximation-based’
(Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016), ‘backpropagation-based’,
‘perturbation-based’, and ‘CAM-based’ methodologies.
In backpropagation-based methods, only the local attributions are represented, making them unable to measure
global sensitivity. This drawback is addressed by image
perturbation techniques used in recent works such as RISE
(Petsiuk, Das, and Saenko 2018), and Score-CAM (Wang
et al. 2020). However, feedforwarding several perturbed
images in these works makes them very slow. On the other
hand, explanation maps produced by CAM-based methods
suffer from a lack of spatial resolution as they are formed
by combining the feature maps in the last convolutional
layer of CNNs, which lack spatial information regarding the
captured attributions.
In this work, we delve deeper into providing a solution
for interpreting CNN-based models by analyzing multiple

Introduction
Deep Neural models based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have rendered inspiring breakthroughs in a
wide variety of computer vision tasks. However, the lack
of interpretability hurdles the understanding of decisions
made by these models. This diminishes the trust consumers
have for CNNs and limits the interactions between users and
systems established based on such models. Explainable AI
(XAI) attempts to interpret these cumbersome models (Hoffman et al. 2018). The offered interpretation ability has put
XAI in the center of attention in various fields, especially
where any single false prediction can cause severe conseCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11639

