The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Teaching Tech to Talk: K-12 Conversational Artificial Intelligence
Literacy Curriculum and Development Tools
Jessica Van Brummelen, Tommy Heng, Viktoriya Tabunshchyk
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
jess@csail.mit.edu, theng@mit.edu, vikt@mit.edu
Abstract

particular competencies. This is largely due to the nascency
of the K-12 AI education field: Researchers have only recently developed relevant AI literacy frameworks, like the
Big AI Ideas (Touretzky et al. 2019), AI Competencies
and Design Considerations (Long and Magerko 2020), the
Machine Learning Education Framework (Lao 2020) and
AI extensions to computational thinking (CT) frameworks
(Van Brummelen, Shen, and Patton 2019).

With children talking to smart-speakers, smart-phones and
even smart-microwaves daily, it is increasingly important to
educate students on how these agents work—from underlying
mechanisms to societal implications. Researchers are developing tools and curriculum to teach K-12 students broadly
about artificial intelligence (AI); however, few studies have
evaluated these tools with respect to AI-specific learning outcomes, and even fewer have addressed student learning about
AI-based conversational agents. We evaluated our Conversational Agent Interface for MIT App Inventor and workshop
curriculum with respect to 8 AI competencies from the literature. Furthermore, we analyze teacher (n=9) and student
(n=47) feedback from workshops with the interface and recommend that future work (1) leverages design considerations
to optimize engagement, (2) collaborates with teachers, and
(3) addresses a range of student abilities through pacing and
opportunities for extension. We found evidence for student
understanding of all 8 competencies, with the most difficult
concepts being AI ethics and machine learning. We recommend emphasizing these topics in future curricula.

One recent work which used the AI literacy framework
(Long and Magerko 2020) to develop its curriculum, teaches
AI competencies with Teachable Machine (von Wangenheim, Marques, and Hauck 2020). Nevertheless, it has not
been analyzed for student learning outcomes. One work
that does assess student learning of AI competencies involves teaching linear regression and gradient descent under
three different conditions (Register and Ko 2020). However,
this activity is for undergraduate students rather than K-12.
Other works using the Big AI Ideas as a framework to structure K-12 curricula include reinforcement learning activities
in Snap! (Jatzlau et al. 2019), AI ethics curriculum (Payne
2020) and Zhorai (Lin et al. 2020), but very few seem to
directly assess student understanding of particular ideas.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) literacy is becoming increasingly
important in a world where what we see, hear and learn is
often dictated by algorithms. Children decide what to watch
based on AI recommendations; they talk to Siri or Alexa for
help with math homework; they use online path planning algorithms to navigate to friends’ houses. Technology’s inner
workings are often masked by simple user interfaces, and
few users truly know how computers provide them with the
information they receive (Eslami et al. 2016).
Recent calls to action to create tools and curriculum
to teach K-12 students about AI have produced easy-touse classification model development tools, like Teachable
Machine (Carney et al. 2020) and Machine Learning for
Kids (Lane 2020); day- to year-long AI curricula (Sabuncuoglu 2020; Wan et al. 2020); and interactive activities
(Zimmermann-Niefield et al. 2020; Williams, Park, and
Breazeal 2019) to teach students about AI. However, very
few of these have been analyzed with respect to AI literacy frameworks to determine how well they teach students

In this work, we build on K-12 AI curriculum from (Van
Brummelen 2019), in which students develop conversational
agents using an interface in MIT App Inventor (Wolber,
Abelson, and Friedman 2015). We add presentations, interactive activities and student assessments developed according to Long and Magerko’s AI literacy design recommendations and competencies. Students are assessed on eight competencies from the AI literacy framework during two weeklong workshops. Through results from these workshops, we
investigate two main research questions:
RQ1: How does building and learning about conversational agents in a remote workshop affect K-12 students’
understanding of AI and conversational AI competencies?
RQ2: What are effective teaching methods and curriculum content for remote K-12 AI literacy workshops?
To address these questions, we present the conversational
agent development interface, AI curriculum, results from assessments/feedback from 9 teachers and 47 students, and
recommendations for future AI literacy tools and curricula.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15655

