The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Decoder Attention Model with Embedding Glimpse for Solving Vehicle
Routing Problems
Liang Xin,1 * Wen Song,2 * Zhiguang Cao,3† Jie Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Shandong University, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
XINL0003@e.ntu.edu.sg, wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn, zhiguangcao@outlook.com, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

predicts the probabilities of selecting each valid node at every construction step. To improve solution quality, different methods (e.g. sampling (Kool, van Hoof, and Welling
2019a) or beam searching (Nazari et al. 2018)) are used to
generate a set of solutions from the trained construction policy to get the best one.
Though showing promising results, existing works suffer
from two major limitations. First, the generated solutions
are not diverse enough. Intuitively, a more diverse set of
solutions could potentially lead to better ones. This is because for VRP and many other COPs, multiple optimal solutions exist and trying to find different ones will increase
the chance of finding at least one. In addition, with the same
number of solutions, generating less diverse and partially
identical solutions will leave less space for the potentially
better ones. Existing methods train only one constructive
policy discriminatively, and the solutions are created using
sampling or beam search from this same policy. The only
source of diversity comes from the relatively deterministic
probability distribution, which is far from enough. The second limitation, as pointed out in (Xin et al. 2020), is regarding the training of construction policy itself. The construction process can be viewed as a sequence of node selection
sub-tasks, where the already visited node is irrelevant to the
future decisions. However, most existing models for learning
construction heuristic (Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019a;
Bello et al. 2017) use the same node embeddings to decode
at each step, without eliminating irrelevant nodes. Therefore,
the node embeddings are based on the original graph for the
whole task, not the graphs for each sub-task, and may deteriorate the quality of the trained policy.
In this paper, we address the above limitations simultaneously. First, to improve diversity, we propose the MultiDecoder Attention Model (MDAM) to train multiple construction policies. It employs a Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017) to encode the node information, and multiple identical attention decoders with unshared parameters to sample different trajectories. During training, each of the decoders learns distinct solution patterns, and is regularized by
a Kullback-Leibler divergence loss to force the decoders to
output dissimilar probability distribution of selecting nodes.
Based on MDAM, we propose a novel beam search scheme
where separate beams are maintained for each decoder. This

We present a novel deep reinforcement learning method to
learn construction heuristics for vehicle routing problems.
In specific, we propose a Multi-Decoder Attention Model
(MDAM) to train multiple diverse policies, which effectively
increases the chance of finding good solutions compared with
existing methods that train only one policy. A customized
beam search strategy is designed to fully exploit the diversity
of MDAM. In addition, we propose an Embedding Glimpse
layer in MDAM based on the recursive nature of construction,
which can improve the quality of each policy by providing
more informative embeddings. Extensive experiments on six
different routing problems show that our method significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art deep learning based models.

Introduction
Routing problems, such as the Travelling Salesman Problem
(TSP) and Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP),
are a family of combinatorial optimization problems (COP)
that have extensive real-world applications in many domains
(Toth and Vigo 2014). Due to the combinatorial nature,
routing problems are NP-hard in general (Applegate et al.
2006). Exact approaches, such as branch-and-bound algorithms (Fischetti, Toth, and Vigo 1994), have nice theoretical guarantee of optimality, but the (worst-case) computation complexity is exponential. In contrast, approximate
algorithms guided by heuristics can find near-optimal solutions with polynomial computation complexity, therefore are
often preferred, especially for large-scale problems.
Traditional approaches design hand-crafted rules as the
heuristics. Instead, as modern approaches, deep learning
models learn the heuristics from data samples (Bello et al.
2017; Dai, Dai, and Song 2016; Nazari et al. 2018; Kool,
van Hoof, and Welling 2019a; Chen and Tian 2019). Most
of these deep learning methods follow the encoder-decoder
structure, and learn construction heuristics by repeatedly
adding nodes (or locations) into an empty or partial solution
until completion. Particularly, the encoder maps the information of nodes into feature embeddings, and the decoder
* Liang Xin and Wen Song contributed equally.
†

Zhiguang Cao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12042

