The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unanswerable Question Correction
in Question Answering over Personal Knowledge Base
An-Zi Yen,1 Hen-Hsen Huang,2,3 Hsin-Hsi Chen1,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
azyen@nlg.csie.ntu.edu.tw, hhhuang@nccu.edu.tw, hhchen@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract

is a hypothetical system for organizing the knowledge of a
person in her/his life time. The system is aimed at serving
as memory assistance to an individual for querying her/his
lifelog in a flexible and effective manner. In our previous
work (Yen, Huang, and Chen 2019a,b), we propose a multimodal joint learning approach to construct a personal KB of
an individual by extracting personal life events from social
media posts. Based on our public personal KB,1 we address
the topic of constructing a system that allows a user to query
past experiences in natural language over personal KB. For
instance, a user forgets the name of the place he visited last
year. The service tries to identify the name of the place by
searching the KB about the individual’s life events.
In a real application scenario, however, people might ask
questions that are unanswerable since people cannot remember each piece of information in her/his past experiences and
form a correct question. The reasons why questions cannot
be answered over KBs may include (1) KB is incomplete to
cover all facts required by the questions (Xiong et al. 2019),
(2) the user-generated questions are ill-formed, such as entities or predicates are missing, and contain ungrammatical
phrases (Christmann et al. 2019), (3) questions are ambiguous and have more than one interpretation, since different
entities may be mapped to the same surface form, and a
predicate expressed in natural language may be mapped to
various relations (Yahya et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2019), and (4)
entities and/or relations mentioned in the question are inconsistent with the facts in the KB. In this paper, we focus on
tackling the unanswerable questions caused by the last reason, i.e., the events expressed in the question inconsistent
with the facts in the personal KB.
The issue of unanswerable questions has attracted attention in recent years. Rajpurkar et al. (2018) release a machine reading comprehension dataset named SQuAD 2.0,
which contains both answerable and unanswerable questions. In SQuAD 2.0, the answer of a question is a span
in the given paragraph. The unanswerable questions are defined as a scenario where the answer is not a part of the context. Therefore, the model has no way to select a text span
to the question. Different from SQuAD 2.0, the questions in
this work require reasoning across multiple facts in the KB,
instead of finding the answer span from sentences in a sin-

People often encounter situations where they need to recall
past experiences from their daily life. In this paper, we aim to
construct a question answering system that enables human to
query their past experiences over personal knowledge base.
Previous works on knowledge base question answering focus on finding answers for answerable questions. In the real
world applications, however, people often muddle up facts
and ask those questions that cannot be answered with knowledge base. This work presents a novel system consisting of
question answering model and question generation model.
It not only answers answerable questions, but also corrects
unanswerable questions if necessary. Our question answering
model recognizes the question that is inconsistent with the
state of the personal knowledge base and suggests facts that
can form a feasible question. Then, the facts are converted to
an answerable question by the question generation model. For
refining question, we propose a question generation model
based on the reinforcement learning (RL) with question editing mechanism. Experimental results show that our proposed
system is effective for correcting unanswerable questions in
personal knowledge base question answering.

Introduction
Knowledge base question answering (KBQA) is a task that
takes a natural language question as input and returns a factual answer using structured knowledge bases such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007).
Previous researches in KBQA (Bordes et al. 2015; Bao et al.
2016; Iyyer, Yih, and Chang 2017; Sorokin and Gurevych
2018; Luo et al. 2018) focus on retrieving information over
knowledge base (KB) about world knowledge. An application of human living support that enables people to retrieve
personal knowledge, such as daily life experiences and the
facts about themselves, remains to be explored.
Question answering over personal knowledge base
(PKBQA) is an emerging research topic that provides support for people who may have difficulty recalling past experiences. People often forget something over time, and encounter the situations where they need to recall past experiences in their daily life. Forgetting the names of exact entities from their life is common. Memex (Bush 1945), a concept of lifelogging introduced by Vannevar Bush in 1945,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14266

http://nlg.csie.ntu.edu.tw/nlpresource/LiveKB/

