The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Point Cloud Semantic Scene Completion from RGB-D Images
Shoulong Zhang1 , Shuai Li1,2, * , Aimin Hao1,2 , Hong Qin3, *
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Stony Brook University (SUNY), Stony Brook, USA
{shoulong.zhang, lishuai, ham}@buaa.edu.cn, qin@cs.stonybrook.edu
2

Abstract
In this paper, we devise a novel semantic completion network, called point cloud semantic scene completion network
(PCSSC-Net), for indoor scenes solely based on point clouds.
Existing point cloud completion networks still suffer from
their inability of fully recovering complex structures and contents from global geometric descriptions neglecting semantic
hints. To extract and infer comprehensive information from
partial input, we design a patch-based contextual encoder to
hierarchically learn point-level, patch-level, and scene-level
geometric and contextual semantic information with a divideand-conquer strategy. Consider that the scene semantics afford a high-level clue of constituting geometry for an indoor
scene environment, we articulate a semantics-guided completion decoder where semantics could help cluster isolated
points in the latent space and infer complicated scene geometry. Given the fact that real-world scans tend to be incomplete as ground truth, we choose to synthesize scene dataset
with RGB-D images and annotate complete point clouds as
ground truth for the supervised training purpose. Extensive
experiments validate that our new method achieves the stateof-the-art performance, in contrast with the current methods
applied to our dataset.

Figure 1: The input of our model (PCSSC-Net) is a partial
scene point cloud generated by single view of RGB-D images. PCSSC-Net predicts a complete scene point cloud with
semantic labels as output.

Introduction and Motivation
In our everyday life, we acquaint a new 3D indoor environment where the objects frequently occlude each other via
our visual perception system routinely. Human beings could
easily speculate the full geometry of invisible parts based
on the semantic knowledge accumulated from our prior experiences. Motivated by this insight, semantic scene completion (SSC) has become a very active research area in 3D
scene understanding in recent years. Thanks to the critical
demand for high-quality 3D scene representation equipped
with real-world scenario analysis, the SSC task promises its
significance in robot navigation, auto-driving, and virtual &
augmented reality (VR/AR) applications. However, due to
the tremendous computational expenses brought by humongous 3D volumetric representation and the lack of favorable
annotation datasets, the SSC research still suffers from its
intrinsic challenges.

Previous SSC works adopt a volumetric representation (Song et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2018; Wang, Liu, and
Tong 2020) and attempt to predict the occupancy and semantic category of each voxel grid. However, the volumetric map suffers from the low-resolution problem due to the
high computational cost of the 3D convolution operation.
In addition, the discretization causes the loss of geometric
and semantic information. To ameliorate, the point cloud is
a more favorable representation for complex structure and
content (e.g., indoor scene environment involving many furnitures) thanks to its simplicity. Compared with the welldeveloped point cloud semantic segmentation techniques,
existing point cloud deep generative models (Achlioptas
et al. 2018; Lin, Kong, and Lucey 2018; Yang et al. 2018)
are still less capable of recovering a complex and delicate
structure from partial input in the indoor scene environment.
Most of the available methods encode the incomplete point
cloud into a global feature vector and generate the full geometry from a holistic decoder as a less meaningful point

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3385

