The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Boosting Multi-task Learning Through Combination of Task Labels
- with Applications in ECG Phenotyping
Ming-En Hsieh,1 Vincent S. Tseng1,2
1

Institute of Data Science and Engineering, National Chiao Tung University
2
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University
mingen@cs.nctu.edu.tw, vtseng@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

by learning all the tasks together, enabling the tasks to transfer knowledge between each other concurrently and help
regularize the model to prevent overfitting on a single task,
which leads to more generalized and robust models.
Multi-task learning methods has shown benefits in a variety of different domains, including computer vision (Xu
et al. 2018; Liang et al. 2019), natural language processing
(Liu et al. 2019), time series analysis (Cirstea et al. 2018),
recommendation systems (Zhao et al. 2019) and medical
data analysis (Harutyunyan et al. 2019). Multi-task learning in the deep learning era appeals to a variety of different
application domains for three main reasons. First, in many
application scenarios, we are not only interested in a single task, but we are also interested in a set of related tasks.
Second, multi-task learning can improve the performance
of individual tasks by sharing the knowledge learned between different tasks. This knowledge-sharing process helps
harder tasks or tasks with fewer training data to learn faster
and achieve better results. Learning multiple tasks together
also regularizes the model to prevent overfitting on individual tasks. Third, by sharing part of the network to form
shared representations, the multi-task model results in reduced memory footprint and faster inference speed, essential
to edge-devices and large-scale deployment of the models.
Unlike research that focuses on achieving better results
under a predefined set of tasks, various studies have shown
that adding auxiliary tasks to train in parallel can help improve the performance of targeted tasks (Liebel and Körner
2018; Standley et al. 2020). These tasks act as hints to what
shall be learned and regularize the model to prevent it from
learning incorrect relationships between the input and output. Most research still requires labeled data to generate auxiliary tasks, which limits the usefulness of this method in
practical scenarios. Automatic methods to generate useful
auxiliary tasks for a targeted task (Liu, Davison, and Johns
2019) has become a challenging new direction.
In recent years, there is an increased interest in applying multi-task learning methods in the medical domain. A
patient can be diagnosed with multiple diseases, so phenotyping can be treated as a multi-task learning problem, with
each disease label being a unique task (Razavian, Marcus,
and Sontag 2016). Combining multiple phenotyping tasks
from different datasets (Tellez et al. 2020) and learning phenotyping tasks with auxiliary tasks (Ding et al. 2019) using

Multi-task learning has increased in importance due to its superior performance by learning multiple different tasks simultaneously and its ability to perform several different tasks using a single model. In medical phenotyping, task labels are
costly to acquire and might contain a certain degree of label noise. This decreases the efficiency of using additional
human labels as auxiliary tasks when applying multi-task
learning to medical phenotyping. In this work, we proposed
an effective multi-task learning framework, CO-TASK, to
boost multi-task learning performance by generating auxiliary tasks through COmbination of TASK Labels. The proposed CO-TASK framework generates auxiliary tasks without additional labeling effort, is robust to a certain degree of
label noise, and can be applied in parallel with various multitask learning techniques.
We evaluated our performance using the CIFAR-MTL dataset
and demonstrated its effectiveness in medical phenotyping
using two large-scale ECG phenotyping datasets, an 18 diseases multi-label ECG-P18 dataset and an echocardiogram
diagnostic from electrocardiogram dataset ECG-EchoLVH.
On the CIFAR-MTL dataset, we doubled the average pertask performance gain of the multi-task learning model from
4.38% to 9.78%. With the proposed task-aware imbalance
data sampler, the CO-TASK framework can effectively deal
with the different imbalance ratios for the different tasks
in electrocardiogram phenotyping datasets. The proposed
framework combined with noisy annotations as minor tasks
increased the sensitivity by 7.1% compared to the single-task
model while maintaining the same specificity as the doctor
annotations on the ECG-EchoLVH dataset.

Introduction
In the rise of deep learning and large-scale datasets, pretraining models and transferring their knowledge to downstream tasks have become the go-to method to utilize knowledge learned from those large-scale datasets for improved
results in downstream tasks. With the great success of transfer learning methods, multi-task learning tries to take a step
further and learn multiple different tasks simultaneously instead of the traditional setting of learning one task at a time.
Multi-task learning methods aim to improve individual tasks
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7771

