The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AutoLR: Layer-wise Pruning and Auto-tuning of Learning Rates
in Fine-tuning of Deep Networks
Younmgin Ro1,2 , Jin Young Choi1 *
1

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Samsung SDS, Korea
youngmin.ro@samsung.com, jychoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Source Task Pre-training

Existing fine-tuning methods use a single learning rate over
all layers. In this paper, first, we discuss that trends of layerwise weight variations by fine-tuning using a single learning rate do not match the well-known notion that lowerlevel layers extract general features and higher-level layers
extract specific features. Based on our discussion, we propose an algorithm that improves fine-tuning performance
and reduces network complexity through layer-wise pruning and auto-tuning of layer-wise learning rates. The proposed algorithm has verified the effectiveness by achieving
state-of-the-art performance on the image retrieval benchmark datasets (CUB-200, Cars-196, Stanford online product, and Inshop). Code is available at https://github.com/
youngminPIL/AutoLR.

Target Task

Layer 1

Layer 1

Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4

Layer 2

Knowledge
Transfer

Layer 3
Layer 4

Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 7

Layer 5

Pruning

Layer 6

“specific”

Layer 7

low

Introduction

“general”

high

Learning rate tuning

The ability to collect large amounts of data has allowed deep
learning to advance dramatically over the last decade. In
particular, deep neural network architectures have evolved
by targeting large datasets such as ImageNet (2009). However, in actual computer vision applications, large amounts
of data such as those contained ImageNet, cannot be easily
obtained. Thus, for applications such as image retrieval or
fine-grained classification, for which only small datasets are
available, the use of pre-trained networks has become essential (Fu, Zheng, and Mei 2017; Zheng et al. 2017; Suh
et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019). To utilize the
pre-trained network for a target task, we use a fine-tuning
scheme that initially takes pre-trained weights and adjusts
them in whole or in part.
The performance of the fine-tuning depends highly on the
following factors: similarity between the source and target
tasks (Azizpour et al. 2015; Cui et al. 2018), choice of deep
network model (Kornblith, Shlens, and Le 2018), and tuning strategy (Tajbakhsh et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2019; Ro
et al. 2019). From among these factors, our paper focuses
on enhancement of tuning strategy. Many efforts have been
made to enhance the capability of tuning the network for a
given target task. Partial tuning (Tajbakhsh et al. 2016) has

Figure 1: The conceptual figure of the proposed algorithm:
Conducting layer-wise pruning and auto-tuning of layerwise learning rates on the target task according to role of
each layer.
been proposed to tune only the higher-level layers. Weightreverting methods were proposed in some studies (Guo et al.
2019; Ro et al. 2019), where the tuned weights are reverted
to the initial (pre-trained) weights during fine-tuning. In addition, some researchers adjusted the learning rate (LR) periodically to ensure efficient learning by adjusting it to follow
a triangular waveform (Smith 2017), and even proposing an
exponentially decaying shape of LR (Loshchilov and Hutter
2016). However, most existing fine-tuning methods adopt a
single LR regardless of layers.
In this paper, instead of using a single LR, we propose an
algorithm for layer-wise auto-tuning of LRs where the LR
in each layer is automatically tuned according to its role. In
addition, we propose a layer-wise pruning algorithm that removes layers according to the usefulness of each pre-trained
layer to the new task as illustrated in Figure 1. Our work
is inspired by our observation that the trends of layer-wise
weight variations by conventional fine-tuning using a single
LR, contradict previous studies (Yosinski et al. 2014; Zeiler
and Fergus 2014), which claim that low-level layers extract

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2486

