The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Parameterized Complexity of Clustering Incomplete Data
Eduard Eiben,1 Robert Ganian,2 Iyad Kanj,3 Sebastian Ordyniak,4 Stefan Szeider2
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, UK
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
3
School of Computing, DePaul University, Chicago, USA
4
University of Leeds, School of Computing, Leeds, UK
{eduard.eiben,rganian}@gmail.com, ikanj@cdm.depaul.edu, sordyniak@gmail.com, stefan@szeider.net
Abstract

computing, including data mining, machine learning, pattern recognition, and recommender systems (Aggarwal and
Reddy 2013; Gan, Ma, and Wu 2007; Leskovec, Rajaraman,
and Ullman 2014; Mirkin 2005).
In many cases, the goal of clustering is to optimize the
number of clusters and/or the degree of similarity within
a cluster (intra-cluster similarity). To measure the intracluster similarity, apart from using an aggregate measure
(e.g., the variance in k-means clustering), two measures that
have been studied use the radius (maximum distance to a selected “center” vector) and diameter (maximum distance between any two cluster-vectors) of the cluster (Charikar and
Panigrahy 2004; Dyer and Frieze 1985; Feder and Greene
1988; Ga̧sieniec, Jansson, and Lingas 1999, 2004; Gonzalez
1985; Gramm, Niedermeier, and Rossmanith 2003). The radius is computed either with respect to a vector in the cluster
itself or an arbitrary d-dimensional vector (Leskovec, Rajaraman, and Ullman 2014).
Regardless of which of the above measures of intracluster similarity is used, the vast majority of the clustering problems that arise are NP-hard. Consequently, heuristics are often used to cope with the hardness of clustering
problems, trading in a suboptimal clustering for polynomial
running time. In this paper we take a different approach: we
maintain the optimality of the obtained clustering by relaxing the notion of tractability from polynomial-time to fixedparameter tractability (FPT) (Cygan et al. 2015; Downey
and Fellows 2013; Gottlob and Szeider 2008), where the
running time is polynomial in the instance size but may involve a super-polynomial factor that depends only on some
problem parameter, which is assumed to be small for certain instances of interest. In the context of clustering, two
natural parameters that are desirable to be small are upper
bounds on the number of clusters and the radius/diameter.

We study fundamental clustering problems for incomplete
data. Specifically, given a set of incomplete d-dimensional
vectors (representing rows of a matrix), the goal is to complete the missing vector entries in a way that admits a partitioning of the vectors into at most k clusters with radius
or diameter at most r. We give tight characterizations of the
parameterized complexity of these problems with respect to
the parameters k, r, and the minimum number of rows and
columns needed to cover all the missing entries. We show
that the considered problems are fixed-parameter tractable
when parameterized by the three parameters combined, and
that dropping any of the three parameters results in parameterized intractability. A byproduct of our results is that, for
the complete data setting, all problems under consideration
are fixed-parameter tractable parameterized by k + r.

Introduction
We study fundamental clustering problems for incomplete
data. In this setting, we are given a set of d-dimensional
Boolean vectors (regarded as rows of a matrix), some of
whose entries might be missing. The objective is to complete the missing entries in order to enable a “clustering”
of the d-dimensional vectors such that elements in the same
cluster are “similar.”
There is a wealth of research on data completion problems (Candès and Plan 2010; Candès and Recht 2009;
Candès and Tao 2010; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Ganian
et al. 2018; Hardt et al. 2014) due to their ubiquitous applications in recommender systems, machine learning, sensing, computer vision, data science, and predictive analytics,
among others. In these areas, data completion problems naturally arise after observing a sample from the set of vectors,
and attempting to recover the missing entries with the goal
of optimizing certain criteria. Some of these criteria include
minimizing the number of clusters into which the completed
vectors can be partitioned, or forming a large cluster, where
the definition of what constitutes a cluster varies from one
application to another (Balzano et al. 2012; Elhamifar 2016;
Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Yi et al. 2012). Needless to say,
the clustering problem itself (i.e., for complete data) is a fundamental problem whose applications span several areas of

Contributions. Motivated by the above, we consider several fundamental clustering problems in the incomplete data
setting. Namely, we consider the following three problems, referred to as I N -C LUSTERING -C OMPLETION, A NYC LUSTERING -C OMPLETION, and D IAM -C LUSTERING C OMPLETION, that share a similar setting: In all three problems, the input is a (multi)set M of d-dimensional vectors
over the Boolean domain1 , some of whose entries might be

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7296

We view M as the (multi)set of rows of a Boolean matrix.

