The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Accelerating Continuous Normalizing Flow with Trajectory Polynomial
Regularization
Han-Hsien Huang,1,2 Mi-Yen Yeh 1
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
hanhsien.huang@tamu.edu, miyen@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

iteration can need up to hundreds of function evaluations,
which is equivalent to running a neural network with hundreds of layers. Moreover, the number of function evaluations required per training iteration can gradually grow up
throughout the training process. The reason is that CNF uses
ODE solvers with adaptive steps. The step sizes of solving
ODEs are determined based on the truncation errors. Such
error usually grows as the training goes and thus the number
of steps becomes larger.
To make training of CNF faster, we propose Trajectory
Polynomial Regularization (TPR). TPR is an additional loss
function which regularizes the trajectories of the ODE solutions. It penalizes the difference between the trajectory of
solution and its fitted polynomial regression. Therefore, TPR
enforces the solutions to approximate polynomial curves,
which can reduce the truncation error of solving the ODEs
of CNF. Despite adding the regularization, we argue that the
method does not harm the testing loss much. We prove that
the optimal solutions of the modified loss are still optimal
solutions for the original task. The detail of the proofs and
argument are in Section 3. In experiments, we find that for
both density estimation and variational inference tasks, our
model can save as much as 71% of number of function evaluations (NFE), which is the number of evaluating the ODEs.
Furthermore, our method barely affect the testing errors. Our
code is published in our Github repository1 .
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
first introduce the background and related work of CNF in
Section 2. In Section 3, we describe the intuition and mathematics of TPR and provide two proofs to argue the power
of its quality. In Section 4, we conduct experiments on two
tasks, density estimation and VAE. We visualize the effect
of our model with simple 2D toy data. And then we evaluate
the efficiency and quality of our model on real data.

In this paper, we propose an approach to effectively accelerating the computation of continuous normalizing flow (CNF),
which has been proven to be a powerful tool for the tasks such
as variational inference and density estimation. The training time cost of CNF can be extremely high because the
required number of function evaluations (NFE) for solving
corresponding ordinary differential equations (ODE) is very
large. We think that the high NFE results from large truncation errors of solving ODEs. To address the problem, we
propose to add a regularization. The regularization penalizes
the difference between the trajectory of the ODE and its fitted
polynomial regression. The trajectory of ODE will approximate a polynomial function, and thus the truncation error will
be smaller. Furthermore, we provide two proofs and claim
that the additional regularization does not harm training quality. Experimental results show that our proposed method can
result in 42.3% to 71.3% reduction of NFE on the task of
density estimation, and 19.3% to 32.1% reduction of NFE on
variational auto-encoder, while the testing losses are not affected.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed 2015) are a kind
of invertible neural networks that have an efficient calculation of Jacobian determinant. They can be used as generative
models, density estimation or posterior distribution of variational auto-encoders (VAE). However, their two requirements, invertibility and easy Jacobian determinant calculation, put a great restriction on the design of corresponding
neural network architecture.
Recently, continuous normalizing flow (CNF) (Chen et al.
2018; Grathwohl et al. 2019) is proposed that can avoid such
design restriction. CNF describes the transformation of hidden states with ordinary differential equations (ODE), instead of layer-wise function mappings. In this way, the invertibility becomes trivial and the determinant of Jacobian
becomes simply a trace. With the freedom of network architecture design, CNF has been shown to outperform normalizing flow with discrete layers in terms of lower testing
loss.
However, running a CNF model, which is equal to solving
a series of ODEs, may take a lot of time. A single training

2
2.1

Preliminaries

Background

Normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed 2015) are models that can be used to represent a wide range of distributions. They consist of an invertible function. Let f : Rd →
Rd be an invertible function, i.e., z = f (x) and x = f −1 (z).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7832

https://github.com/hanhsienhuang/CNF-TPR

