The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PHASE: PHysically-grounded Abstract Social Events
for Machine Social Perception
Aviv Netanyahu* , Tianmin Shu* , Boris Katz, Andrei Barbu, Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
{avivn, tshu, boris, abarbu, jbt}@mit.edu

A

Abstract

Agents
Objects

The ability to perceive and reason about social interactions
in the context of physical environments is core to human social intelligence and human-machine cooperation. However,
no prior dataset or benchmark has systematically evaluated
physically grounded perception of complex social interactions that go beyond short actions, such as high-fiving, or
simple group activities, such as gathering. In this work, we
create a dataset of physically-grounded abstract social events,
PHASE, that resemble a wide range of real-life social interactions by including social concepts such as helping another
agent. PHASE consists of 2D animations of pairs of agents
moving in a continuous space generated procedurally using a
physics engine and a hierarchical planner. Agents have a limited field of view, and can interact with multiple objects, in an
environment that has multiple landmarks and obstacles. Using PHASE, we design a social recognition task and a social
prediction task. PHASE is validated with human experiments
demonstrating that humans perceive rich interactions in the
social events, and that the simulated agents behave similarly
to humans. As a baseline model, we introduce a Bayesian inverse planning approach, SIMPLE (SIMulation, Planning and
Local Estimation), which outperforms state-of-the-art feedforward neural networks. We hope that PHASE can serve as
a difficult new challenge for developing new models that can
recognize complex social interactions.

Landmarks
Walls
Field of View

B

C

Figure 1: Demonstrating the PHASE physical-social simulation. (A) The elements of the simulation: agents (with a
limited conical field of view), objects with different colors
and sizes, landmarks with different colors, and immovable
walls. (B) Frames from a video depicting an abstract social
event sampled in the PHASE simulator. The green agent is
weak, therefore has difficulty moving the pink object, which
the red agent eventually helps with. (C) Frames from a video
depicting the opposite situation, where a green agent is moving an object when the red agent steps in and takes it away.

Introduction
Humans make spontaneous and robust judgments of others’
mental states (e.g., goals, beliefs, and desires), characteristics (e.g., physical strength), and relationships (e.g., friend,
opponent) by watching how other agents interact with the
physical world and with each other. These judgements are
critical to engaging socially with other agents. AI and robots
that cooperate with humans will similarly need to engage
with us socially, and by extension make these same judgements about both physical notions, like strength, and social
notions, like mental states.
Prior work has looked at recognizing social interactions,
but evaluations and benchmarks have been limited to the artifacts of social interactions, like high-fives, hand shakes, or
hugging. Here, we create the first benchmark for reasoning

about the underlying mechanisms and beliefs of social interactions, instead of these overt actions that are correlated
with certain types of interactions. Take a common interaction like helping. It is true that picking up an object next to
someone and carrying it in the direction that they are walking towards is likely to be helping, but it might not be. This
depends entirely on the intent of the other person and the relationship between these two persons. In the same way that
one action does not imply a certain type of social interaction, a certain type of social interaction is also not signaled
by a single action. E.g., helping can take a virtually unlimited number of forms. Therefore, we propose a novel dataset,
PHASE (PHysically-grounded Abstract Social Events), that

*

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

845

