The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Global Occlusion-Aware Approach to Self-Supervised
Monocular Visual Odometry
Yao Lu1,2 , Xiaoli Xu1,2 , Mingyu Ding3 , Zhiwu Lu1,2∗ , Tao Xiang4
1
2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing 100872, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China
4
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
luyao777@ruc.edu.cn, luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn, t.xiang@surrey.ac.uk
Abstract

Self-Supervised monocular visual odometry (VO) is often
cast into a view synthesis problem based on depth and camera pose estimation. One of the key challenges is to accurately and robustly estimate depth with occlusions and moving objects in the scene. Existing methods simply detect and
mask out regions of occlusions locally by several convolutional layers, and then perform only partial view synthesis in
the rest of the image. However, occlusion and moving object
detection is an unsolved problem itself which requires global layout information. Inaccurate detection inevitably results
in incorrect depth as well as pose estimation. In this work,
instead of locally detecting and masking out occlusions and
moving objects, we propose to alleviate their negative effects
on monocular VO implicitly but more effectively from two
global perspectives. First, a multi-scale non-local attention
module, consisting of both intra-stage augmented attention
and cascaded across-stage attention, is proposed for robust
depth estimation given occlusions, alleviating the impacts of
occlusions via global attention modeling. Second, adversarial
learning is introduced in view synthesis for monocular VO.
Unlike existing methods that use pixel-level losses on the
quality of synthesized views, we enforce the synthetic view
to be indistinguishable from the real one at the scene-level.
Such a global constraint again helps cope with occluded and
moving regions. Extensive experiments on the KITTI dataset
show that our approach achieves new state-of-the-art in both
pose estimation and depth recovery.

Figure 1: Example depth estimation obtained using our model. Top tow to bottom row: sample image, estimated depth,
single-channel attention map, overlay of the sample image
and attention map, attention maps extracted by our cascaded across-stage attention module at each stage of the depth
decoder. Since the car is driving forward, most of the occlusions occur at the edge of the object.
texture, complex scene structures and occlusions. Moreover,
they suffer from the problem of large-scale drift and the need
for hand-crafted feature design. Recent methods (Xue et al.
2019; Henriques and Vedaldi 2018; Clark et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2017) utilize deep neural networks (DNNs) to solve
the VO problem, because they are able to learn scale priors
from large amounts of data and jointly learn the optimal feature representation. However, data annotation for VO is very
costly, which limits the scalability of these supervised methods. As a result, self-supervised monocular VO (SSM-VO)
has attracted increasing attention lately.
SSM-VO is often cast into a view synthesis problem based
on solving two closely intertwined problems: monocular
depth estimation and relative camera pose regression. The
key challenge faced by an SSM-VO method is the presence of occlusions and moving objects in the scene (Figure 1). Existing SSM-VO approaches (Bian et al. 2019; Luo
et al. 2018) typically leverage multiple frames and additional
models (e.g., optical flow models) to estimate an occlusion
mask. With the mask, partial view synthesis is performed
by excluding the masked regions. However, occlusion and
moving object detection itself is an unsolved problem. Inaccurate detection inevitably results in incorrect depth as well
as pose estimation. These methods thus choose to use more

Introduction
Visual odometry (VO) aims to estimate the relative camera poses from image sequences. It has found applications in a variety of computer vision fields including autonomous driving (Engel, Stückler, and Cremers 2015; Engel, Schöps, and Cremers 2014; Mur-Artal, Montiel, and
Tardos 2015), augmented reality (Yang et al. 2013; Davison
et al. 2007), and interactive collaborative robotics (Geiger,
Ziegler, and Stiller 2011). Early geometric-based approaches (Engel, Koltun, and Cremers 2018; Leutenegger et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2018; Engel, Sturm, and Cremers 2013) exploit artificially designed rigid transformation for VO. This
results in sub-optimal performance when dealing with low
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2260

