The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sub-Seasonal Climate Forecasting via Machine Learning:
Challenges, Analysis, and Advances
Sijie He * 1 , Xinyan Li * 1 , Timothy DelSole 2 , Pradeep Ravikumar 3 , Arindam Banerjee 4
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
2
Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Earth Science, George Mason University
3
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{hexxx893, lixx1166}@umn.edu, tdelsole@gmu.edu, pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu, arindamb@illinois.edu

Abstract

2016). Skillful climate forecasts at sub-seasonal time scales
would be of immense societal value, and would have an
impact in a wide variety of domains including agricultural
productivity, water resource management, and emergency
planning for extreme weather events, etc. (Pomeroy et al.
2002; Klemm and McPherson 2017). The importance of
sub-seasonal climate forecasting (SSF) has been discussed
in great detail in two recent high profile reports from the
National Academy of Sciences (National Research Council 2010; National Academies of Sciences 2016). Despite
the scientific, societal, and financial importance of SSF,
progress on the problem has been limited (Braman et al.
2013; de Perez and Mason 2014), partly because it has attracted less attention compared to weather and seasonal climate prediction. Also, SSF is arguably more difficult compared to weather or seasonal forecasting due to limited predictive information from land and ocean, and virtually no
predictability from the atmosphere (Uccellini and Jacobs
2018), which forms the basis of numerical weather prediction (Simmons and Hollingsworth 2002) (Figure 1(a)).
There exists great potential to advance sub-seasonal prediction using Machine Learning (ML) techniques. Due in
large part to this potential promise, a recently concluded
real-time forecasting competition called the Sub-Seasonal
Climate Forecast Rodeo was sponsored by the Bureau of
Reclamation in partnership with NOAA, USGS, and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Raff et al. 2017; Hwang
et al. 2019). However, a direct application of standard blackbox ML approaches to SSF can run into challenges due to
the high-dimensionality and strong spatial correlation of the
raw data from atmosphere, ocean, and land, e.g., Figure 1(c)
shows that popular approaches such as Fully connected Neural Networks (FNN) and Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) do not perform so well when directly applied to the
raw data. One reason is that sub-seasonal forecasting does
not lie in the big data regime: about 40 years of reliable data
exists for all climate variables, with each day corresponding
to one data point, which totals less than 20,000 data points.
Additionally, different seasons may have different predictive relations, and many climate variables have strong temporal correlations at daily time scales, further reducing the
effective data size. Therefore, it is worth carefully and sys-

Sub-seasonal forecasting (SSF) focuses on predicting key
variables such as temperature and precipitation on the 2-week
to 2-month time scale. Skillful SSF would have immense societal value in such areas as agricultural productivity, water
resource management, and emergency planning for extreme
weather events. However, SSF is considered more challenging than either weather prediction or even seasonal prediction, and is still a largely understudied problem. In this paper, we carefully investigate 10 Machine Learning (ML) approaches to sub-seasonal temperature forecasting over the
contiguous U.S. on the SSF dataset we collect, including
a variety of climate variables from the atmosphere, ocean,
and land. Because of the complicated atmosphere-land-ocean
couplings and the limited amount of good quality observational data, SSF imposes a great challenge for ML despite the
recent advances in various domains. Our results indicate that
suitable ML models, e.g., XGBoost, to some extent, capture
the predictability on sub-seasonal time scales and can outperform the climatological baselines, while Deep Learning (DL)
models barely manage to match the best results with carefully
designed architecture. Besides, our analysis and exploration
provide insights on important aspects to improve the quality of sub-seasonal forecasts, e.g., feature representation and
model architecture. The SSF dataset and code 1 are released
with this paper for use by the broader research community.

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, major advances have been made
in weather forecasts on time scales of days to about a
week (Lorenc 1986; Simmons and Hollingsworth 2002; National Research Council 2010). Similarly, major advances
have been made in seasonal forecasts on time scales of 29 months (Barnston et al. 2012). However, making highquality forecasts of key climate variables such as temperature and precipitation on sub-seasonal time scales, defined
as the time range between 2-8 weeks, has long been a gap
in operational forecasting (National Academies of Sciences
* The first two authors have equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The SSF dataset and codebase are publicly available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/ssf-ml/home.

169

