The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fully Exploiting Cascade Graphs for Real-time Forwarding Prediction
Xiangyun Tang1 , Dongliang Liao2 * , Weijie Huang2 , Jin Xu2† , Liehuang Zhu1† , Meng Shen13†
1

School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Data Quality Team, WeChat, Tencent Inc., China
3
Cyberspace Security Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
xiangyunt@bit.edu.cn, {brightliao, wainhuang, jinxxu}@tencent.com, {liehuangz, shenmeng}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-time forwarding prediction for predicting online contents’ popularity is beneficial to various social applications
for enhancing interactive social behaviors. Cascade graphs,
formed by online contents’ propagation, play a vital role in
real-time forwarding prediction. Existing cascade graph modeling methods are inadequate to embed cascade graphs that
have hub structures and deep cascade paths, or they fail to
handle the short-term outbreak of forwarding amount. To
this end, we propose a novel real-time forwarding prediction
method that includes an effective approach for cascade graph
embedding and a short-term variation sensitive method for
time-series modeling, making the best of cascade graph features. Using two real world datasets, we demonstrate the significant superiority of the proposed method compared with
the state-of-the-art. Our experiments also reveal interesting
implications hidden in the performance differences between
cascade graph embedding and time-series modeling.

Figure 1: An example of cascade graphs. The social hubs
are circled by the red boxes. The thickened cascade relation
lines mark the deep propagation paths. Please note that the
cascade graph here is presented as tree pattern to illustrate
its features, which generally has DAG pattern.

Introduction

for improving forwarding prediction (Gao et al. 2019; Zhou
et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2020). However, it is still pending to
reach a competent cascade graph embedding methods and
challenging to facilitate real-time forwarding prediction by
leveraging cascade graphs.
On the one hand, existing graph embedding methods such
as random walk based methods (Li et al. 2017; Grover and
Leskovec 2016; Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014) and
Graph Convolution Networks (GCN) based methods (Cao
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019b; Kipf and Welling 2016;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) are inappropriate for
cascade graphs. As visualized in Fig. 1, cascade graphs are
generally evolving directed acyclic graphs (DAG) where a
directed path represents a content diffusion process through
social networks. Information diffusion on social networks
is formed as social reinforcement and hub patterns (Weng,
Menczer, and Ahn 2013), which makes hub structures and
deep cascade paths arise in cascade graphs. Even though
GCN based methods can finally travel through all nodes by
repeatedly aggregating neighbor node features and updating
node features, it is circuitous and rigmarole for modeling
deep cascade paths. Random walk based methods randomly
select partial pieces of cascade paths, which may lose information about social hubs.
On the other hand, cascade graph embedding tends to

The dramatic growth of mobile Internet and social media facilitates the fast propagation of online contents, such
as tweets on Twitter, images on Instagram and videos on
YouTube. Popularity prediction of online contents is beneficial to many social applications such as recommendation
and advertising, drawing wide attentions (Kipf and Welling
2016; Liao et al. 2019; Saito, Nakano, and Kimura 2008).
Forwarding amount, the number of times that an online content has been forwarded (or retweeted/reposted) through social media, is one of the most important measurement for
measuring the popularity of online contents (Gao et al. 2019;
Zhou et al. 2021; Li et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019b,a), Realtime forwarding prediction aims to model preceding propagation process of online contents and predicts its forwarding
amount at the next specific observation time.
In social media, users share and exchange an interesting
online content with their friends, thus the propagation of an
online content generally starts with the author and spreads
through social networks, forming a cascade graph. Many
methods exploited and innovated cascade graph embedding
* The first two authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

582

