The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Classification with Adaptive KNN
Puning Zhao and Lifeng Lai
University of California Davis
{pnzhao, lflai}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an adaptive kNN method for classification, in which different k are selected for different test
samples. Our selection rule is easy to implement since it is
completely adaptive and does not require any knowledge of
the underlying distribution. The convergence rate of the risk
of this classifier to the Bayes risk is shown to be minimax
optimal for various settings. Moreover, under some special
assumptions, the convergence rate is especially fast and does
not decay with the increase of dimensionality.

Introduction
k Nearest Neighbor (kNN) method is a simple and popular
approach to nonparametric classification. In this setup, we
have N identical and independently distributed (i.i.d) training
samples (Xi , Yi ), i = 1, . . . , N , which are all drawn from a
pair of random variables (X, Y ) with an unknown distribution. Given any new test sample x, the kNN classifier assigns
label Y that is determined by the majority vote of the k nearest neighbors of this new sample among the training dataset
(Fix 1951). In the standard kNN method, k is fixed for all test
samples. It has been proved that if k grows with N and k/N
goes to zero, then as the sample size N increases, the risk of
kNN classifier converges to the Bayes risk, which is defined
as the minimum possible error probability among all classifiers (Cover and Hart 1967; Biau and Devroye 2015; Stone
1977; Devroye et al. 1994; Devroye, Györfi, and Lugosi 2013;
Cérou and Guyader 2006). To maximize the convergence rate,
the growth rate of k needs to be properly selected to achieve
a desirable bias and variance tradeoff. It has been shown that,
if the support set of the distribution of the feature vector X is
bounded and the probability density function (pdf) of X is
bounded away from zero, then the risk of the standard kNN
classifier converges to the Bayes risk with the best rate among
all classifiers in the minimax sense, if the growth rate of k is
properly selected (Audibert 2004; Kohler and Krzyzak 2007;
Györfi 1981; Audibert and Tsybakov 2007; Chaudhuri and
Dasgupta 2014; Döring, Györfi, and Walk 2017; Mammen
and Tsybakov 1999). On the contrary, if the distribution of
X has tails, then the convergence rate of the standard kNN
classifier is no longer minimax optimal (Gadat, Klein, and
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11007

Marteau 2016; Zhao and Lai 2019). This can be explained
by the fact that the bias and the variance of the prediction
vary among different locations, and hence the optimal k that
achieves the best bias and variance tradeoff also depends on
the feature vector. If we use the same k for all test samples,
then the selected k may not be universally optimal. Therefore,
to improve the performance of kNN classifier, it is necessary
to design a rule such that k is selected adaptively based on
the locations of test samples (Ougiaroglou et al. 2007; Sun
and Huang 2010; Balsubramani et al. 2019; Kpotufe 2011).
Several adaptive kNN classifiers have been designed and
analyzed in (Gadat, Klein, and Marteau 2016; Cannings,
Berrett, and Samworth 2017; Zhao and Lai 2019). In (Gadat,
Klein, and Marteau 2016), a ‘sliced nearest neighbor’ method
was proposed. This method divides the whole support into
several regions depending on the pdf of X, and uses different k in different regions. Moreover, it is shown in (Gadat,
Klein, and Marteau 2016) that this adaptive kNN method is
minimax rate optimal for distributions with tails. However,
this classifier requires the precise knowledge of the pdf f (x),
which is usually unavailable. If we use an estimate of pdf fˆ,
then the theoretical guarantee of this classifier has not been
established after we take the estimation error into consideration. (Cannings, Berrett, and Samworth 2017) proposed
a method for semi-supervised learning, which means that,
apart from the labeled training samples, we also have a much
larger set of unlabeled samples. The pdf f (x) can be estimated using these unlabeled samples, and then the optimal k can
be selected based on the estimated pdf. A new adaptive kNN
method was proposed in (Zhao and Lai 2019), which relies
entirely on the training dataset, without requiring the precise
knowledge of the pdf f (x), or a large number of unlabeled
samples. In particular, for each test sample, the adaptive kNN
method in (Zhao and Lai 2019) selects k according to the
number of training samples that fall in a ball centered at the
test sample with a fixed radius, so that one can achieve a
desirable bias and variance tradeoff. Moreover, theoretical
analysis shows that this method is minimax rate optimal for a
broad range of distributions, under some tail, smoothness and
margin assumptions. However, there are some design parameters of this method that need to be carefully tuned, and the
optimal values of these parameters depend on the properties
of the underlying joint distributions of the feature X and the
label Y . Therefore, the implementation of this method still

