The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Solution Concepts in Hierarchical Games Under Bounded Rationality With
Applications to Autonomous Driving
Atrisha Sarkar 1 , Krzysztof Czarnecki 2
1

David R Cheriton School of Computer Science 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
atrisha.sarkar,k2czarne@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

problem with game-theoretic solutions to AV decision making (Fisac et al. 2019; Sadigh et al. 2016; Camara et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018). Such approaches can account for heterogeneous objectives in a group of vehicles in a traffic scene
and identify equilibrium solutions that guide the actions of
the AV. Given that the movement dynamics of a vehicle is
in continuous domain, it is intuitive to model the dynamics as a differential game, an approach adopted by multiple
models in the literature (Fridovich-Keil et al. 2019; Sadigh
et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019). However, the applicability
of such games as a general purpose planner is limited by
the trade off between the computational burden and expressivity; cases where efficient solutions exist in a multi-agent
setting restrict the behavior of the agents to only linear dynamics (Fridovich-Keil et al. 2019). As an alternative, (Fisac
et al. 2019) introduced the concept of a hierarchical game for
AV planning where the game is decomposed into two levels;
a long-horizon strategic game that can model richer agent
behavior and a short-horizon tactical game with simplified
information structure. Although hierarchical games are well
suited and show promising results for planning in AV, for
the models to be applicable in real world situations, we need
to understand how well the stationary concepts in the game
match naturalistic human driving behavior. It is well known
that in many realistic settings, the theoretical fixed point of
Nash equilibrium is a poor predictor of human behavior (Goeree and Holt 2001); therefore, it is necessary to investigate
if the same is true for human driving behavior too. In absence of that information, we do not know what to optimize
for.

With autonomous vehicles (AV) set to integrate further into
regular human traffic, there is an increasing consensus of
treating AV motion planning as a multi-agent problem. However, the traditional game theoretic assumption of complete
rationality is too strong for the purpose of human driving, and
there is a need for understanding human driving as a bounded
rational activity through a behavioral game theoretic lens. To
that end, we adapt three metamodels of bounded rational behavior; two based on Quantal level-k and one based on Nash
equilibrium with quantal errors. We formalize the different
solution concepts that can be applied in the context of hierarchical games, a framework used in multi-agent motion planning, for the purpose of creating game theoretic models of
driving behavior. Furthermore, based on a contributed dataset
of human driving at a busy urban intersection with a total
of ~4k agents and ~44k decision points, we evaluate the behavior models on the basis of model fit to naturalistic data,
as well as their predictive capacity. Our results suggest that
among the behavior models evaluated, modeling driving behavior as pure strategy Nash Equilibria with quantal errors at
the level of maneuvers with bounds sampling of actions at the
level of trajectories provides the best fit to naturalistic driving
behavior, and there is a significant impact of situational factors on the performance of behavior models.

Introduction
Motion planners are a critical component of autonomous vehicle (AV) architecture, and the decisions made by the algorithms impact the safety of road users, such as pedestrians,
cyclists, and other human-driven vehicles. Traditional approaches to motion planning have typically treated the problem as a single-agent problem; in this perspective, a vehicle
interacts with the environment (in simulation or on-field setting), possibly with the help of recorded human-driven trajectories, and plans its actions by optimizing over its objectives while taking into account the dynamic obstacles in the
vicinity (Schwarting, Alonso-Mora, and Rus 2018; Ilievski
et al. 2019). However, in reality human driving is a complex
system with a symbiotic relation among agents, where actions of a vehicle influence the future actions of other road
users and vice versa. More recently, there has been a focus
towards treating motion planning of AVs as a multi-agent

Behavioral game theory provides a framework to analyse decision making in a naturalistic setting and models
of behavior that often have higher predictive power than
Nash equilibria (Camerer 2011). A key element in behavioral game theory is bounded rationality, where the conventional game-theoretic notion of agents as fully rational is relaxed to allow for sub-optimal behavior. Such behavior may
arise from limitations in cognitive reasoning, or error-prone
actions (Samuelson 1995). Driving is a cognitively demanding job that requires situational awareness and sophisticated
visuomotor co-ordination, added on to individual habits, biases, and preferences; and it is not hard to imagine that driving at its core is a bounded rational activity. Consequently,
it becomes essential for AV game theoretic planners to be

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5698

