The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Encoder-Decoder Based Unified Semantic Role Labeling with Label-Aware Syntax
Hao Fei, Fei Li, Bobo Li, Donghong Ji*
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of
Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{hao.fei, boboli, dhji}@whu.edu.cn, foxlf823@gmail.com

Abstract

A0

Currently the unified semantic role labeling (SRL) that
achieves predicate identification and argument role labeling
in an end-to-end manner has received growing interests. Recent works show that leveraging the syntax knowledge significantly enhances the SRL performances. In this paper,
we investigate a novel unified SRL framework based on the
sequence-to-sequence architecture with double enhancement
in both the encoder and decoder sides. In the encoder side,
we propose a novel label-aware graph convolutional network
(LA-GCN) to encode both the syntactic dependent arcs and
labels into BERT-based word representations. In the decoder
side, we creatively design a pointer-network-based model for
detecting predicates, arguments and roles jointly. Our pointernet decoder is able to make decisions by consulting all the input elements in a global view, and meanwhile it is syntacticaware by incorporating the syntax information from LAGCN. Besides, a high-order interacted attention is introduced
into the decoder for leveraging previously recognized triplets
to help the current decision. Empirical experiments show that
our framework significantly outperforms all existing graphbased methods on the CoNLL09 and Universal Proposition
Bank datasets. In-depth analysis demonstrates that our model
can effectively capture the correlations between syntactic and
SRL structures.

1

A0
AM-GOL

AM-LOC
A1

you can click here to view it online .
aux
nsubj

mark

advmod
advcl

obj
advmod

Root

Figure 1: An example of unified SRL. Above/below are the
SRL/dependency structures, respectively. Same color refers
to the propositions under the same predicate.

propagation in the pipeline scheme, meanwhile achieving an
overall simplified procedure.
Moreover, many prior work has revealed that syntax features are extraordinarily effective for SRL (Roth and Lapata 2016; Marcheggiani and Titov 2017; Zhang, Wang, and
Si 2019). Intuitively, the predicate–argument structure in
SRL shares many common connections with the underlying
syntactic structure (i.e., dependency tree), as illustrated in
Figure 1. Nevertheless, most of prior syntactic dependencyaware SRL models are limited to the merely use of dependency arcs (e.g., clicky you), while neglecting dependency labels (e.g., nsubj) (Jin, Kawahara, and Kurohashi
2015; Roth and Lapata 2016; Strubell et al. 2018; Xia et al.
2019). Actually, dependency labels carry crucial evidences
for SRL, since the information from the neighboring nodes
under distinct types of arcs contributes in different degrees
(Kasai et al. 2019). In Figure 1, dependent arcs with nominal attributes (e.g., nsubj, obj) are more associated with core
roles (e.g., A0-A5) in SRL, while the arcs with modifying
attributes (e.g., advmod) relate more to modifier roles (e.g.,
AM-*). On this basis, another line of works has considered
both dependent arcs and labels via graph convolutional networks (GCN) (Marcheggiani and Titov 2017).
In this work, we propose a novel unified SRL framework,
which is fully orthogonal to the existing graph-based methods. The system leverages the encoder-decoder architecture
(cf. Figure 2), being able to jointly produce all the possible predicate-argument-role triplets. In the encoder side, we
newly propose a label-aware GCN (namely LA-GCN) for
encoding word representations, dependency arcs and labels
(cf. Figure 2 left). The syntax GCN encoders in existing
SRL works (Marcheggiani and Titov 2017) model depen-

Introduction

Semantic role labeling (SRL), as a shallow semantic parsing for extracting the predicate–argument structure in sentences, has long been a fundamental natural language processing (NLP) task (Gildea and Jurafsky 2000; Pradhan et al.
2005; Zhao et al. 2009; Fei, Ren, and Ji 2020). Traditional
SRL is divided into two pipeline subtasks: predicate identification (Scheible 2010) and argument role labeling (Pradhan
et al. 2005). Recently, great efforts have been paid for constructing unified SRL systems, solving two pipeline steps in
one shot via one unified model (He et al. 2018), as illustrated in Figure 1. Most current unified SRL models employ
graph-based models by exhaustively enumerating all potential predicates and their corresponding arguments jointly (He
et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). Graph-based
models improve the SRL performances by reducing the error
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12794

