The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sequential Attacks on Kalman Filter-based Forward Collision Warning Systems
Yuzhe Ma, Jon A. Sharp, Ruizhe Wang, Earlence Fernandes, Xiaojin Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison
{yzm234, sharp-jr, ruizhe, earlence, jerryzhu}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

tance and velocity) of road objects using Kalman filter (KF).
Downstream logic uses this tracking output to detect unsafe
situations before they happen. We focus our efforts on Forward Collision Warning (FCW), a popular ADAS deployed
on production vehicles today. FCW uses KF state predictions to detect whether the ego vehicle (vehicle employing
the ADAS system) is about to collide with the most important object in front of it and will alert the human driver in a
timely manner. Thus, our concrete attack goal is to trick the
KF that FCW uses and make it output incorrect state predictions that would induce false or delayed alerts depending on
the specific physical situation.
Recent work has examined the robustness of road object state tracking for autonomous vehicles (Jia et al. 2020).
Their attacks create an instantaneous manipulation to the
Kalman filter inputs without considering its sequential nature, the downstream logic that depends on filter output,
or the physical dynamics of involved vehicles. This leads
to temporarily hijacked Kalman filter state predictions that
are incapable of ensuring that downstream logic is reliably
tricked into producing false alerts. By contrast, we adopt an
online planning view of attacking KFs that accounts for: (1)
their sequential nature where current predictions depend on
past measurements; and (2) the downstream logic that uses
KF output to produce warnings. Our attack technique also
considers a simplified model of human reaction to manipulated FCW warning lights.
We propose a novel Model Predictive Control (MPC)based attack that can sequentially manipulate measurement
inputs to a KF with the goal of stealthily hijacking its behavior. Our attacks force FCW alerts that mask the true nature
of the physical situation involving the vehicles until it is too
late for a distracted human driver to take corrective actions.
We evaluate our attack framework by creating a highfidelity driving simulation using CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al.
2017), a popular tool for autonomous vehicle research and
development. We create test scenarios based on real-world
driving data (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 2011; European New Car Assessment Programme
2018) and demonstrate the practicality of the attack in
causing crashes involving the victim vehicle. Anonymized
CARLA simulation videos of our attacks are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/attack-kalman-filter.
Main Contributions:

Kalman Filter (KF) is widely used in various domains to perform sequential learning or variable estimation. In the context
of autonomous vehicles, KF constitutes the core component
of many Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS), such
as Forward Collision Warning (FCW). It tracks the states (distance, velocity etc.) of relevant traffic objects based on sensor
measurements. The tracking output of KF is often fed into
downstream logic to produce alerts, which will then be used
by human drivers to make driving decisions in near-collision
scenarios. In this paper, we study adversarial attacks on KF as
part of the more complex machine-human hybrid system of
Forward Collision Warning. Our attack goal is to negatively
affect human braking decisions by causing KF to output incorrect state estimations that lead to false or delayed alerts.
We accomplish this by sequentially manipulating measurements fed into the KF, and propose a novel Model Predictive
Control (MPC) approach to compute the optimal manipulation. Via experiments conducted in a simulated driving environment, we show that the attacker is able to successfully
change FCW alert signals through planned manipulation over
measurements prior to the desired target time. These results
demonstrate that our attack can stealthily mislead a distracted
human driver and cause vehicle collisions.

Introduction
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) are hybrid human-machine systems that are widely deployed on
production passenger vehicles (National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration 2020). They use sensing, traditional
signal processing and machine learning to detect and raise
alerts about unsafe road situations and rely on the human
driver to take corrective actions. Popular ADAS examples
include Forward Collision Warning (FCW), Adaptive Cruise
Control and Autonomous Emergency Braking (AEB).
Although ADAS hybrid systems are designed to increase
road safety when drivers are distracted, attackers can negate
their benefits by strategically tampering with their behavior.
For example, an attacker could convince an FCW or AEB
system that there is no imminent collision until it is too late
for a human driver to avoid the crash.
We study the robustness of ADAS to attacks. The core
of ADAS typically involves tracking the states (e.g., disCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8865

