The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stabilizing Q Learning Via Soft Mellowmax Operator
Yaozhong Gan, Zhe Zhang, Xiaoyang Tan
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{yzgancn, zhangzhe, x.tan}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

practice the deep RL is sensitive to both the initial condition and the underlying training dynamics (Henderson et al.
2017).
Theoretically the max-operator in Bellman equation and
temporal difference (TD) can keep most linear or nonlinear approximation schemes from converging (Tsitsiklis
and Van Roy 1997). One possible reason behind this is that
the non-differentiable property of max-operator has a discretization effect during the TD target estimation - that is,
small changes in value function may cause large policy variation, making a suboptimal policy being incorrectly reinforced. This issue is termed overestimation phenomenon in
literatures (Thrun and Schwartz 1993), which turns out to be
a major source of instability of the original deep Q-network
(DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015). To address this issue, double
DQN (DDQN) adopts a heuristic approach by decoupling
the action selection and the TD target estimation (van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016).
Recently there has been increasing interest in stablizing
the training procedure of non-linear function approximator by replacing the max function with softmax operators
with better theoretical properties. In (Anschel, Baram, and
Shimkin 2017), a method named Averaged-DQN is proposed by basing their max-operator on a running average
function over previously learned Q-values estimates. They
show that this is beneficial to alleviate the overestimation
issue by controlling its upper bound. To encourage exploration and improve robustness, several authors investigate
using the technique of entropy regularization to smooth policy (Fox, Pakman, and Tishby 2016; Mei et al. 2019; Dai
et al. 2018; Lee, Choi, and Oh 2017), this leads to softmax
operators. (Song, Parr, and Carin 2019) revisit the softmax
Bellman operator and show that it can consistently outperform its max counterpart on several Atari games.
Along this line of research, an alternative mellowmax operator is proposed in (Asadi and Littman 2017). This is a
differentiable and non-expansion softmax operator that allows a convergent behavior in learning and planning. Unfortunately, the performance bound for the fixed point it converges to remains unclear, and in practice, its parameter is
sensitive to various domains and has to be tuned case by case
(Kim et al. 2019). Finally, the Mellowmax operator may suffer from oversmoothing as it ignores the probability being
taken for each action when aggregating them.

Learning complicated value functions in high dimensional
state space by function approximation is a challenging task,
partially due to that the max-operator used in temporal difference updates can theoretically cause instability for most
linear or non-linear approximation schemes. Mellowmax is
a recently proposed differentiable and non-expansion softmax operator that allows a convergent behavior in learning
and planning. Unfortunately, the performance bound for the
fixed point it converges to remains unclear, and in practice,
its parameter is sensitive to various domains and has to be
tuned case by case. Finally, the Mellowmax operator may
suffer from oversmoothing as it ignores the probability being
taken for each action when aggregating them. In this paper
we address all the above issues with an enhanced Mellowmax operator, named SM2 (Soft Mellowmax). Particularly,
the proposed operator is reliable, easy to implement, and has
provable performance guarantee, while preserving all the advantages of Mellowmax. Furthermore, we show that our SM2
operator can be applied to the challenging multi-agent reinforcement learning scenarios, leading to stable value function
approximation and state of the art performance.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn an optimal mapping from states to actions, through experience obtained by
interacting with the underlying environment, in terms of
some accumulated performance criteria. One major challenge of RL is that in many real-world scenarios (e.g., Atari
games (Mnih et al. 2015), continuous control task (Dhariwal
et al. 2017), and robot control (Lillicrap et al. 2016)), one
has to explore the optimal control in high dimensional state
and/or action space, leading to the so-called ’Curse of Dimensionality’ problem. Among others, one popular and successful approach to address this tractability issue is to rely on
suitable approximate representations. For example, in value
function-based RL, it is required that a target value function can be sufficiently precisely captured by some generalpurpose function approximators, such as a deep neural network (Mnih et al. 2015). However, training such a value
function approximator is in general difficult and can diverge
even in some simple cases (Sutton 1996). It is found that in
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7501

