The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Data Augmentation for Graph Neural Networks
Tong Zhao1 * , Yozen Liu2 , Leonardo Neves2 , Oliver Woodford2 , Meng Jiang1 , Neil Shah2
1

University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
2
Snap Inc., Santa Monica, CA 90405
{tzhao2, mjiang2}@nd.edu, {yliu2, lneves, oliver.woodford, nshah}@snap.com

Abstract

tasks such as node classification, link prediction and graph
representation learning.
Despite the complementary nature of GNNs and data
augmentation, few works present strategies for combining
the two. One major obstacle is that, in contrast to other
data, where structure is encoded by position, the structure
of graphs is encoded by node connectivity, which is irregular. The hand-crafted, structured, data augmentation operations used frequently in CV and NLP therefore cannot be
applied. Furthermore, this irregularity does not lend itself to
easily defining new augmentation strategies. The most obvious approaches involve adding or removing nodes or edges.
For node classification tasks, adding nodes poses challenges
in labeling and imputing features and connectivity of new
nodes, while removing nodes simply reduces the data available. Thus, edge addition and removal appears the best augmentation strategy for graphs. But the question remains,
which edges to change.
Three relevant approaches have recently been proposed.
D ROP E DGE (Rong et al. 2019) randomly removes a fraction
of graph edges before each training epoch, in an approach
reminiscent of dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014). This, in principle, robustifies test-time inference, but cannot benefit from
added edges. In approaches more akin to denoising or prefiltering, A DA E DGE (Chen et al. 2019) iteratively add (remove) edges between nodes predicted to have the same (different) labels with high confidence in the modified graph.
This ad-hoc, two-stage approach improves inference in general, but is prone to error propagation and greatly depends
on training size. Similarly, BGCN (Zhang et al. 2019b) iteratively trains an assortative mixed membership stochastic block model with predictions of GCN to produce multiple denoised graphs, and ensembles results from multiple
GCNs. BGCN also bears the risk of error propagation.
Present work. Our work studies new techniques for graph
data augmentation to improve node classification. Section 3
introduces motivations and considerations in augmentation
via edge manipulation. Specifically, we discuss how facilitating message passing by removing “noisy” edges and
adding “missing” edges that could exist in the original graph
can benefit GNN performance, and its relation to intra-class
and inter-class edges. Figure 1 demonstrates, on a toy dataset
(a), that while randomly modifying edges (b) can lead to
lower test-time accuracy, strategically choosing ideal edges

Data augmentation has been widely used to improve generalizability of machine learning models. However, comparatively little work studies data augmentation for graphs. This
is largely due to the complex, non-Euclidean structure of
graphs, which limits possible manipulation operations. Augmentation operations commonly used in vision and language
have no analogs for graphs. Our work studies graph data
augmentation for graph neural networks (GNNs) in the context of improving semi-supervised node-classification. We
discuss practical and theoretical motivations, considerations
and strategies for graph data augmentation. Our work shows
that neural edge predictors can effectively encode classhomophilic structure to promote intra-class edges and demote inter-class edges in given graph structure, and our main
contribution introduces the GAUG graph data augmentation
framework, which leverages these insights to improve performance in GNN-based node classification via edge prediction. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks show
that augmentation via GAUG improves performance across
GNN architectures and datasets.

1

Introduction

Data driven inference has received a significant boost in generalization capability and performance improvement in recent years from data augmentation techniques. These methods increase the amount of training data available by creating plausible variations of existing data without additional
ground-truth labels, and have seen widespread adoption in
fields such as computer vision (CV) (DeVries and Taylor
2017; Cubuk et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; Ho et al. 2019),
and natural language processing (NLP) (Fadaee, Bisazza,
and Monz 2017; Şahin and Steedman 2019). Such augmentations allow inference engines to learn to generalize better
across those variations and attend to signal over noise. At the
same time, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling 2016a; Veličković
et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018a; Zhang et al. 2019a; Chen, Ma,
and Xiao 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2018;
Xu et al. 2018b) have emerged as a rising approach for datadriven inference on graphs, achieving promising results on
* Our work was done during first author’s internship at Snap Inc.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11015

