The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MARTA: Leveraging Human Rationales for Explainable Text Classification
Ines Arous1 , Ljiljana Dolamic2 , Jie Yang3 ,
Akansha Bhardwaj1 , Giuseppe Cuccu1 , Philippe Cudré-Mauroux1
1

University of Fribourg, Switzerland,
2
armasuisse, Switzerland,
3
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
{ines.arous,akansha.bhardwaj,giuseppe.cuccu,pcm}@unifr.ch,
Ljiljana.Dolamic@armasuisse.ch, j.yang-3@tudelft.nl
Abstract

Attention-based models have resulted in impressive performance across many NLP tasks including text classification,
question-answering, and entity recognition (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014; Parikh et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017); in
particular, the self-attention mechanism that underlies the
Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al.
2018) has been playing a central role in many NLP systems.
Despite that, recent studies have shown that the learned
attention weights are often uncorrelated with the importance of input components measured by other explainability
methods (e.g., gradients (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2013)), and that one can identify different attention distributions that nonetheless yield equivalent predictions (Jain and
Wallace 2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019).
A promising approach to enhance the explainability of
attention-based models is integrating human rationales as
extra supervision information for attention learning. Prior
research (Zaidan, Eisner, and Piatko 2007; Zhang, Marshall,
and Wallace 2016) has shown that human rationales represent valuable input for improving model performance and
for identifying explainable input features in model prediction (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Mohankumar et al.
2020). Coincidentally, recent studies in human computation (McDonnell et al. 2016) have demonstrated that asking
workers to provide annotation rationales – by highlighting
supporting text excerpts from the given text – brings no extra
annotation efforts. Human rationales are, therefore, easy-toobtain information with great potential in improving model
explainability and performance. Existing work (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014; Mohankumar et al. 2020), however,
takes human rationales as gold information that is entirely
trustworthy, which is typically not the case in practice; indeed, studies from human computation have found the reliability of human-contributed rationales to be a key problem
that requires careful treatment (Zaidan, Eisner, and Piatko
2007; Ramı́rez et al. 2019).
In this work, we tackle the problem of rationale reliability by introducing a human-AI computational approach that
integrates human rationales into an attention-based model
while weighing individual reliability. We crowdsource the
task of annotating documents and ask workers to justify
their labels using text excerpts from the document. We introduce MARTA, a Bayesian framework that jointly learns
the workers’ reliability and the attention-based model pa-

Explainability is a key requirement for text classification in
many application domains ranging from sentiment analysis
to medical diagnosis or legal reviews. Existing methods often
rely on “attention” mechanisms for explaining classification
results by estimating the relative importance of input units.
However, recent studies have shown that such mechanisms
tend to mis-identify irrelevant input units in their explanation.
In this work, we propose a hybrid human-AI approach that incorporates human rationales into attention-based text classification models to improve the explainability of classification
results. Specifically, we ask workers to provide rationales for
their annotation by selecting relevant pieces of text. We introduce MARTA, a Bayesian framework that jointly learns
an attention-based model and the reliability of workers while
injecting human rationales into model training. We derive a
principled optimization algorithm based on variational inference with efficient updating rules for learning MARTA parameters. Extensive validation on real-world datasets shows
that our framework significantly improves the state of the art
both in terms of classification explainability and accuracy.

Introduction
Text classification is a fundamental task in natural language
processing (NLP) (Zhang, Marshall, and Wallace 2016;
Yang et al. 2016; Arras et al. 2017). State-of-the-art methods
are dominated by neural network models, which are generally considered as “black boxes” by end-users. The opaqueness of those models has become a major obstacle for their
development, deployment, and improvement, particularly in
critical tasks such as medical diagnosis (Lakkaraju, Bach,
and Leskovec 2016) and legal document review (Chhatwal
et al. 2018; Mahoney et al. 2019). Explainable text classification has, therefore, emerged as an important topic, where
the goal is to present end-users with human-readable descriptions of the classification rationale (Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Camburu
et al. 2018; Liu, Yin, and Wang 2019).
Among existing explainability methods, a popular approach is the attention mechanism, which identifies important parts of the input for the prediction task by providing a
distribution over attended-to input units (e.g., tokens or sentences) (Xu et al. 2015; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5868

