The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

C MAX ++ : Leveraging Experience in Planning and Execution using Inaccurate
Models
Anirudh Vemula1 , J. Andrew Bagnell2 , Maxim Likhachev1
1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Aurora Innovation
vemula@cmu.edu, dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu, maxim@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given access to accurate dynamical models, modern planning approaches are effective in computing feasible and optimal plans for repetitive robotic tasks. However, it is difficult to model the true dynamics of the real world before execution, especially for tasks requiring interactions with objects whose parameters are unknown. A recent planning approach, C MAX, tackles this problem by adapting the planner
online during execution to bias the resulting plans away from
inaccurately modeled regions. C MAX, while being provably
guaranteed to reach the goal, requires strong assumptions on
the accuracy of the model used for planning and fails to improve the quality of the solution over repetitions of the same
task. In this paper we propose C MAX ++, an approach that
leverages real-world experience to improve the quality of resulting plans over successive repetitions of a robotic task.
C MAX ++ achieves this by integrating model-free learning
using acquired experience with model-based planning using
the potentially inaccurate model. We provide provable guarantees on the completeness and asymptotic convergence of
C MAX ++ to the optimal path cost as the number of repetitions increases. C MAX ++ is also shown to outperform baselines in simulated robotic tasks including 3D mobile robot
navigation where the track friction is incorrectly modeled,
and a 7D pick-and-place task where the mass of the object is
unknown leading to discrepancy between true and modeled
dynamics.

Figure 1: (left) PR2 lifting a heavy dumbbell, that is modeled as light, to a goal location that is higher than the start
location resulting in dynamics that are inaccurately modeled (right) Mobile robot navigating around a track with
icy patches with unknown friction parameters leading to the
robot skidding. In both cases, any path to the goal needs to
contain a transition (pink) whose dynamics are not modeled
accurately.

repetitions. Thus, we need a planning approach that can use
potentially inaccurate models while leveraging experience
from past executions to complete the task in each repetition,
and improve performance across repetitions.
A recent planning approach, C MAX, introduced in (Vemula et al. 2020) adapts its planning strategy online to account
for any inaccuracies in the forward model without requiring
any updates to the dynamics of the model. C MAX achieves
this online by inflating the cost of any transition that is found
to be incorrectly modeled and replanning, thus biasing the
resulting plans away from regions where the model is inaccurate. It does so while maintaining guarantees on completing the task, without any resets, in a finite number of executions. However, C MAX requires that there always exists
a path from the current state of the robot to the goal containing only transitions that have not yet been found to be
incorrectly modeled. This is a strong assumption on the accuracy of the model and can often be violated, especially in
the context of repetitive tasks.
For example, consider the task shown in Figure 1(left)
where a robotic arm needs to repeatedly pick a heavy object, that is incorrectly modeled as light, and place it on top
of a taller table while avoiding an obstacle. As the object

Introduction
We often require robots to perform tasks that are highly
repetitive, such as picking and placing objects in assembly
tasks and navigating between locations in a warehouse. For
such tasks, robotic planning algorithms have been highly
effective in cases where system dynamics is easily specified by an efficient forward model (Berenson, Abbeel, and
Goldberg 2012). However, for tasks involving interactions
with objects, dynamics are very difficult to model without
complete knowledge of the parameters of the objects such
as mass and friction (Ji and Xiao 2001). Using inaccurate
models for planning can result in plans that are ineffective
and fail to complete the task (McConachie et al. 2020). In
addition for such repetitive tasks, we expect the robot’s task
performance to improve, leading to efficient plans in later
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6147

