The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Transfer for Reinforcement Learning
via Wasserstein Domain Confusion
Josh Roy and George Konidaris
Brown University
joshnroy@gmail.com, gdk@cs.brown.edu

Abstract

2014), and regularization (Ng 2004). However, these methods are insufficient for generalization in Deep RL (Cobbe
et al. 2019b). Unlike supervised learning, where all datapoints are drawn from the same distribution, transferring between differing RL tasks is akin to that of supervised domain
adaptation where datapoints from source and target tasks are
drawn from different distributions (Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin
et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2015).
Previous work such as Domain Randomization or MetaLearning takes a brute force approach to this problem, training on many source domains before fine tuning on the target
domain for 0 or k episodes, referred to as zero-shot or k-shot
transfer, respectively. These methods require a large number
of source domains before they can transfer or adapt to the
target domain. Domain Randomization learns a representation sufficient to solve all source domains, implicitly aligning the distributions of features extracted from each domain.
It then assumes the features extracted from the target domain will fall into a similar distribution (Tobin et al. 2017;
Andrychowicz et al. 2020; Akkaya et al. 2019). Some recent work has attempted to more explicitly align the feature
distributions across domains but assumes access to pairwise
correlations of states across domains (Slaoui et al. 2019;
Gupta et al. 2017a; Tzeng et al. 2020). Other work relies
upon style-transfer networks to “translate” target domain
states to source domain states before processing (Zhang
et al. 2019). This adds additional computational complexity during both training and inference and relies upon the
quality of the translation network. Further work attempts to
learn the causal structure underlying such a family of visual Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), leading to a causal
representation independent of domain and successful transfer (Zhang et al. 2020). Both translation and causal methods
require modeling of variables unrelated to the task given,
leading to additional complexity (Zhang et al. 2019, 2020).
We introduce a novel algorithm that explicitly learns to
align distributions of extracted features between a source
and target task without adding additional computation during inference or assuming access to pairwise correlations
of observations. By simultaneously training an RL agent to
solve a source task and minimize the distance between distributions of extracted features from the source and target
domains, our algorithm enables seamless transfer to the target domain. Specifically, we train an adversary network to

We introduce Wasserstein Adversarial Proximal Policy Optimization (WAPPO), a novel algorithm for visual transfer in
Reinforcement Learning that explicitly learns to align the distributions of extracted features between a source and target
task. WAPPO approximates and minimizes the Wasserstein-1
distance between the distributions of features from source and
target domains via a novel Wasserstein Confusion objective.
WAPPO outperforms the prior state-of-the-art in visual transfer and successfully transfers policies across Visual Cartpole
and both the easy and hard settings of of 16 OpenAI Procgen
environments.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has enabled agents to
autonomously solve difficult, long horizon problems such
as Atari games from pixel inputs (Sutton and Barto 2018;
Mnih et al. 2015). However, in high risk domains such as
robotics and autonomous vehicles, RL agents lack the ability to learn from their mistakes without destroying equipment or harming humans. Instead, it would be preferable to
train in simulated domains and transfer to the real world.
However, Deep model-free Reinforcement Learning agents
trained on one environment often fail on environments that
require solving the same underlying problem but different
visual input (Cobbe et al. 2019b,a). When transferring from
a simulated source domain to a real-world target domain,
this is known as the reality gap (Sadeghi et al. 2018; Tobin et al. 2017; Sadeghi and Levine 2016). This challenge is
known as visual generalization in RL and is studied by transferring between simulated domains (Cobbe et al. 2019b,a;
Zhang et al. 2018; Justesen et al. 2018; Juliani et al. 2019).
The main reason for such difficulty in generalization is the
tendency of deep networks to overfit to a single task (Zhang
et al. 2018; Justesen et al. 2018; Cobbe et al. 2019b; Dubey
et al. 2018). For example, an agent that learns to balance the
cartpole depicted on the left of Figure 1 will fail to generalize to the cartpole on the right due to visual differences
alone. In deep supervised learning, this can be addressed by
smoothing the learned function using methods such as data
augmentation (Simard et al. 2003), dropout (Srivastava et al.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9454

