The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Label Confusion Learning to Enhance Text Classification Models
Biyang Guo * , Songqiao Han * , Xiao Han * , Hailiang Huang* † , Ting Lu*
AI Lab, School of Information Management and Engineering,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China, 200433
guobiyang2020@gmail.com, {han.songqiao, xiaohan, hlhuang}@shufe.edu.cn, luting@189.cn

Abstract

the same learning paradigm: a deep model for text representation, a simple classifier to predict the label distribution and
a cross-entropy loss between the predicted probability distribution and the one-hot label vector. However, this learning paradigm have at least two problems: (1) In general text
classification tasks, one-hot label representation is based on
the assumption that all categories are independent with each
other. But in real scenarios, labels are often not completely
independent and instances may relate to multiple labels, especially for the confused datasets that have similar labels.
As a result, simply representing the true label by a one-hot
vector fails to take the relations between instances and labels into account, which further limits the learning ability
of current deep learning models. (2) The success of deep
learning models heavily relies on large annotated data, noisy
data with labeling errors will severely diminish the classification performance, but it is inevitable in human-annotated
datasets. Training with one-hot label representation is particularly vulnerable to mislabeled samples as full probability is
assigned to a wrong category. In brief, the limitation of current learning paradigm will lead to confusion in prediction
that the model is hard to distinguish some labels, which we
refer as label confusion problem (LCP). A label smoothing
(LS) method is proposed to remedy the inefficiency of onehot vector labeling (Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019),
however, it still fails to capture the realistic relation among
labels, therefore not enough the solve the problem.

Representing a true label as a one-hot vector is a common
practice in training text classification models. However, the
one-hot representation may not adequately reflect the relation between the instances and labels, as labels are often not
completely independent and instances may relate to multiple labels in practice. The inadequate one-hot representations
tend to train the model to be over-confident, which may result in arbitrary prediction and model overfitting, especially
for confused datasets (datasets with very similar labels) or
noisy datasets (datasets with labeling errors). While training models with label smoothing (LS) can ease this problem
in some degree, it still fails to capture the realistic relation
among labels. In this paper, we propose a novel Label Confusion Model (LCM) as an enhancement component to current popular text classification models. LCM can learn label
confusion to capture semantic overlap among labels by calculating the similarity between instances and labels during
training and generate a better label distribution to replace the
original one-hot label vector, thus improving the final classification performance. Extensive experiments on five text classification benchmark datasets reveal the effectiveness of LCM
for several widely used deep learning classification models.
Further experiments also verify that LCM is especially helpful for confused or noisy datasets and superior to the label
smoothing method.

Introduction
Text classification is one of the fundamental tasks in natural
language processing (NLP) with wide applications such as
sentiment analysis, news filtering, spam detection and intent
recognition. Plenty of algorithms, especially deep learningbased methods, have been applied successfully in text classification, including recurrent neural networks (RNN), convolutional networks (CNN) (Kim 2014). More recently, large
pre-training language models such as ELMO (Peters et al.
2018), BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), Xlnet (Yang et al. 2019)
and so on have also shown their outstanding performance in
all kinds of NLP tasks, including text classification.
Although numerous deep learning models have shown
their success in text classification problems, they all share

In this work, we propose a novel Label Confusion Model
(LCM) as an enhancement component to current deep learning text classification models and make the model stronger
to cope with label confusion problem. In particular, LCM
learns the representations of labels and calculates their semantic similarity with input text representations to estimate
their dependency, which is then transferred to a label confusion distribution (LCD). After that, the original one-hot label
vector is added to the LCD with a controlling parameter and
normalized by a softmax function to generate a simulated label distribution (SLD). We use the obtained SLD to replace
the one-hot label vector and supervise the training of model
training. With the help of LCM, a deep model not only capture s the relations between instances and labels, but also
learns the overlaps among different labels, thus, performs
better in text classification tasks. We conclude our contributions as follows:

* All authors contribute equally and are listed alphabetically.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12929

