The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Aligning Artificial Neural Networks and Ontologies towards Explainable AI
Manuel de Sousa Ribeiro, João Leite
NOVA LINCS, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, Portugal
mad.ribeiro@campus.fct.unl.pt, jleite@fct.unl.pt

Abstract

As these systems begin to act autonomously and start being responsible for decisions previously taken by humans,
like self-driving cars (Bojarski et al. 2016) and unmanned
aerial vehicles (Radovic, Adarkwa, and Wang 2017), or start
being applied in sensitive domains, such as medical diagnosis and treatment recommendation (Topol 2019), the need
for humans to understand their reasoning becomes evident.
Explanations of how a system behaves and why it outputs
a certain result are known to allow users to build trust in a
system and its results (Pieters 2011), to increase the chances
of users taking action based on a system’s output (Ye and
Johnson 1995), and for a better assessment of when a system is right or wrong (Biran and McKeown 2017; Gkatzia,
Lemon, and Rieser 2016).
However, since neural networks generally only use representations based on high-dimensional Euclidean space, i.e.,
real-valued vectors, matrices, etc., which possess no obvious
associated declarative meaning (Hitzler et al. 2020), there
is no direct human interpretable indication of why a specific output was given. Hence, to justify the output of a neural network, a language containing human-understandable
concepts and meaningful relations between those concepts
is needed, allowing for a comprehensible description of the
reasoning that led the neural network to attain its output.
The level of abstraction and detail of the justifications is dependent on the defined language. For example, when faced
with a picture of a representation of a train, c.f. Figure 1, we
might expect a justification as to why this train is of some
particular type, e.g., a passenger train, to refer to the particular lines, squares, and circles that can be identified as
constituting the train representation, or we might expect a
justification to be based on high-level concepts such as the
existence of passenger wagons or freight wagons. For each
domain of interest, even though there are relationships between the different levels of abstraction, we, humans, are
typically interested in a given particular level, where we can
conveniently justify ourselves to other humans.
The field of knowledge representation and reasoning provides many formalisms that allow the description of domains
of interest, such as ontologies. An ontology is the conceptualization of a domain, through the use of concepts and
axioms, and is usually specified using a logic-based language with a precise semantics. Among the most important
formalisms in which to describe ontologies are Description

Neural networks have been the key to solve a variety of different problems. However, neural network models are still regarded as black boxes, since they do not provide any humaninterpretable evidence as to why they output a certain result.
We address this issue by leveraging on ontologies and building small classifiers that map a neural network model’s internal state to concepts from an ontology, enabling the generation of symbolic justifications for the output of neural network models. Using an image classification problem as testing ground, we discuss how to map the internal state of a neural network to the concepts of an ontology, examine whether
the results obtained by the established mappings match our
understanding of the mapped concepts, and analyze the justifications obtained through this method.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate whether it is possible to relate
the activations of a neural network with human-defined concepts from an ontology, with the prospect of finding symbolic justifications for the output of that neural network
through automated reasoning. Our results suggest that this
is possible for concepts that are relevant to the task of the
neural network with little overhead, requiring only a small
amount of labeled data and the training of small classifiers.
In the last few years, artificial neural network-based machine learning methods have allowed the field of Artificial Intelligence to successfully address multiple complex
tasks, such as image (Sultana, Sufian, and Dutta 2019), video
(Karpathy et al. 2014) and speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), translation (Huang et al. 2013)
and text analysis (Lai et al. 2015), helping with drug design and discovery (Segler et al. 2018), and reconstruction
of brain circuits (Lee et al. 2019), to name a few. Some of
the systems developed by these methods outperformed humans in tasks like facial recognition (Schroff, Kalenichenko,
and Philbin 2015) or playing strategic games (Berner et al.
2019; Silver et al. 2017). The successes achieved by neural
network-based methods rendered them a widespread solution with innumerous applications, ranging from intelligent
cameras with object recognition (Redmon et al. 2016) to predicting river discharges and floods (Kratzert et al. 2019).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4932

