The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reasoning in Dialog:
Improving Response Generation by Context Reading Comprehension
Xiuying Chen1,2 , Zhi Cui3 , Jiayi Zhang3 , Chen Wei3 ,
Jianwei Cui3 , Bin Wang3 , Dongyan Zhao1,2 , and Rui Yan4,5∗
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University,Beijing,China
2
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University,Beijing,China
3
Xiaomi AI Lab
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
xy-chen@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

dialogue systems tend to use succinct language which often omits entities or concepts made in previous utterances.
To make appropriate responses, dialogue systems must be
equipped with the ability to understand these incomplete utterances. This naturally leads to the reading comprehension
task, where correctly answering questions about the context requires understanding of natural language of the dialog
context (Rajpurkar et al. 2016).
Take Example 2 in Table 1 for example, contents in parentheses are information omitted in the utterance. Humans are
capable of comprehending such missing utterances dependent based on previous utterances and commonsense. For instance, A3 means sending an MV to B instead of a gift. However, though of high importance, it is difficult for models to
capture the implicit dependency between utterances without
specific design, and that is why the reading comprehension
task is proposed (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Reddy, Chen, and
Manning 2019). In this case, by reasoning and correctly answering the question with keyword “MV”, the model learns
that the dialog is focused on MV, which leads to a proper
response that is also concentrated on music. Such cases that
require dependency on the previous context to fully comprehend current utterance takes up about 60% according to
a survey in Pan et al. (2019). This inspires us to come up
with a multi-task framework that generates the response and
answers reading comprehension question at the same time,
which can boost the performance of each task.
Our Multi-task Response Generator (MRG) augments
the previously proposed Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al. 2017) with the ability to encode multiple utterances
in a question-aware fashion. The proposed model first uses
a cross-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) between
the question and dialog words to identify representative
words in dialog with the help of question. Concretely, we
propose a memory updater, which updates its memory state
using both the current inputs and previous memory state.
The memory state can be interpreted as a container of the
highly summarized dialog history information. During the
cross-attention process, the current dialog representation is
enhanced with the memory state from the previous step.

In multi-turn dialog, utterances do not always take the full
form of sentences (Carbonell 1983), which naturally makes
understanding the dialog context more difficult. However,
it is essential to fully grasp the dialog context to generate
a reasonable response. Hence, in this paper, we propose to
improve the response generation performance by examining
the model’s ability to answer a reading comprehension question, where the question is focused on the omitted information in the dialog. Enlightened by the multi-task learning
scheme, we propose a joint framework that unifies these two
tasks, sharing the same encoder to extract the common and
task-invariant features with different decoders to learn taskspecific features. To better fusing information from the question and the dialog history in the encoding part, we propose
to augment the Transformer architecture with a memory updater, which is designed to selectively store and update the
history dialog information so as to support downstream tasks.
For the experiment, we employ human annotators to write and
examine a large-scale dialog reading comprehension dataset.
Extensive experiments are conducted on this dataset, and the
results show that the proposed model brings substantial improvements over several strong baselines on both tasks. In this
way, we demonstrate that reasoning can indeed help better response generation and vice versa. We release our large-scale
dataset for further research1 .

Introduction
In recent years, text generation has made impressive
progress (Chen et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021), and open-domain dialogue
generation has become a research hotspot in Natural Language Processing due to its broad application prospect, including chatbots, virtual personal assistants (Qiu et al. 2019;
Debnath, Sengupta, and Wabgaonkar 2018; Li et al. 2019),
etc. However, studies (Carbonell 1983) show that users of
∗
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (email: ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/yingtaomj/Reasoning-in-Dialog

12683

