The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable Affinity Propagation for Massive Datasets
Hiroaki Shiokawa
Center for Computational Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Japan
shiokawa@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

1.1

Abstract
Affinity Propagation (AP) is a fundamental algorithm to identify clusters included in data objects. Given a similarities
among objects, it iteratively performs message updates between all data object pairs until convergence. Although AP
yields a higher clustering quality compared with other methods, it is computationally expensive. Hence, it has difficulty
handling massive datasets that include numerous data objects.
This is because the message updates require a quadratic cost
of the number of data objects. Here, we propose a novel fast
algorithm, ScaleAP, which outputs the same clusters as AP
but within a shorter computation time. ScaleAP dynamically
excludes unnecessary message updates without sacrificing its
clustering accuracy. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate
that ScaleAP outperforms existing AP algorithms in terms of
running time by up to two orders of magnitude.

1

Existing Approaches and Challenges

Many studies have strived to overcome the expensive cost.
One major approach is message sampling (Jia et al. 2008;
Sun et al. 2017). AP updates the real-valued messages for
all object pairs, but it is more reasonable to update only essential pairs that are potentially included in the same cluster. To specify such pairs, the message sampling drops off
unpromising message updates before the message-passing.
For instance, FSAP (Jia et al. 2008) constructs a k-nearest
neighbor (kNN) graph from object similarities to prune unnecessary object pairs. Similarly, FastAP (Sun et al. 2017)
extracts important messages by previously finding microclusters. Although these methods are faster than AP, they
have two drawbacks. First, they still have high costs for
sampling messages, e.g., O(N 2 ) time. Second, they sacrifice clustering accuracy, which makes it difficult to realize
truly effective applications.
Instead of sampling methods, Fujiwara et al. proposed
message bounding techniques (Fujiwara, Irie, and Kitahara
2011). They found that the real-valued messages converge
as increasing the number of iterations, and they theoretically derived the upper and lower bounds of the messages.
Based on these bounds, Fujiwara et al. designed incremental
message-pruning algorithms, including GraphAP (Fujiwara,
Irie, and Kitahara 2011) and F-AP (Fujiwara et al. 2015).
GraphAP and F-AP guarantee that their pruning methods
do not sacrifice clustering accuracy. Unlike other AP algorithms, GraphAP and F-AP can reduce the running time
while maintaining the same clustering results as AP.
Although the bounding methods have improved the efficiency, they still suffer from large computational costs to
handle massive datasets (Matsushita, Shiokawa, and Kitagawa 2018). In the bounding methods, the upper and lower
bounds estimation requires O(N 2 ) time. That is, they have a
total time complexity of O(N 2 +M T ) time, where M is the
number of non-pruned pairs of data objects. Furthermore,
the bounding methods fail to prune unnecessary messages
if the datasets include many large clusters since the bounds
becomse loose in such cases. This incurs O(M ) ≈ O(N 2 )
time in the worst case. Consequently, the bounding methods
still require almost the same cost as AP, e.g., O(N 2 T ) time.
Hence, it is a challenging task to develop a scalable AP algorithm that guarantees the same results as AP.

Introduction

Affinity Propagation (AP) (Frey and Dueck 2007) is one of
the most successful clustering methods to overview complicated data objects in an unsupervised way. AP detects
clusters and their corresponding representative data objects
called exemplars by message-passing processes between all
pairs of data objects. AP can (1) have lower clustering errors
compared to other methods and (2) support any similarity
that does not satisfy the triangle inequality (Sun and Guo
2014; Fujiwara et al. 2015). Hence, AP has been employed
in many applications (Dueck and Frey 2007; Ambrogi et al.
2008; Kazantseva and Szpakowicz 2011).
Although AP is useful in many applications, it has a
quadratic cost to identify clusters since the message-passing
iteratively updates real-valued messages for all object pairs.
If N is the number of data objects and T is the number
of iterations, AP needs O(N 2 T ) time. In the late-2000s,
AP was applied to only small datasets composed of a few
thousand data objects (e.g., social networks and location
datasets). However, recent AI-powered applications handle
massive datasets with numerous data objects because dataset
resources are not only becoming larger but also more prevalent (Shiokawa, Fujiwara, and Onizuka 2013, 2015). Hence,
current AP algorithms require several days to obtain clusters
from massive datasets.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9639

