The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BT Expansion: a Sound and Complete Algorithm for Behavior Planning of
Intelligent Robots with Behavior Trees
Zhongxuan Cai,1 Minglong Li,1 Wanrong Huang,2 Wenjing Yang∗1
1

Institute for Quantum Information & State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, College of Computer,
National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Artifcial Intelligence Research Center, National Innovation Institute of Defense Technology, China
{caizhongxuan, liminglong10, huangwanrong12, wenjing.yang}@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract

Behavior Trees (BTs) have attracted much attention in the
robotics field in recent years, which generalize existing control architectures and bring unique advantages for building
robot systems. Automated synthesis of BTs can reduce human workload and build behavior models for complex tasks
beyond the ability of human design, but theoretical studies are
almost missing in existing methods because it is difficult to
conduct formal analysis with the classic BT representations.
As a result, they may fail in tasks that are actually solvable.
This paper proposes BT expansion, an automated planning
approach to building intelligent robot behaviors with BTs,
and proves the soundness and completeness through the statespace formulation of BTs. The advantages of blended reactive
planning and acting are formally discussed through the region
of attraction of BTs, by which robots with BT expansion are
robust to any resolvable external disturbances. Experiments
with a mobile manipulator and test sets are simulated to validate the effectiveness and efficiency, where the proposed algorithm surpasses the baseline by virtue of its soundness and
completeness. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time
to leverage the state-space formulation to synthesize BTs with
a complete theoretical basis.

Figure 1: An example of blended reactive planning and acting of a BT-based robot which aims to grasp the blue cargo.
If a red obstacle blocks the way, the BT can be expanded at
runtime to clear the way first. If someone reverses the action
by putting the obstacle back again, the robot will clear the
way again without replanning. If someone helps to clear the
way, the robot will skip the clear action without replanning.

Although BTs were originally created to facilitate the
manual design of agent behaviors, its properties are beneficial for both manual and automated synthesis (Iovino et al.
2020). Besides the intrinsic advantages of automated synthesis, e.g. reducing human workload and exploiting behaviors
beyond the ability of human design in complex tasks (Neupane and Goodrich 2019), BTs also bring the advantage of
blended reactive planning and acting for intelligent robots
(Colledanchise, Almeida, and Ögren 2019), which are robust to external disturbances, as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, due to the gap between the BT representation and formal analysis, existing methods either massively modify the
definition of BTs with the loss of BT’s advantages and compatability, or do empirical demonstrations without theoretical guarantees, which may fail in actually solvable tasks.
In this paper, we propose BT expansion, a sound and complete algorithm for behavior planning of intelligent robots
with BTs. The behavior planning is theoretically studied
based on the STRIPS-style planning (Fikes and Nilsson
1971) and the state-space formulation of BTs (Colledanchise
and Ögren 2017). The algorithm starts with a primary BT
and expands this initial BT to find a solution, which terminates in finite time and a solution is guaranteed as long as
the problem is solvable. The advantages of blended reactive planning and acting are formally discussed though BT’s
region of attraction, by which robots are robust to external
disturbances. With the aid of completeness, BT expansion
yields a stronger property that robots are guaranteed to successfully perform tasks under any resolvable disturbances.

Introduction
Behavior Trees (BTs) originate from the computer games industry to control non-player characters (NPCs) (Millington
and Funge 2009), e.g. computer controlled opponents, and
become a popular control architecture for intelligent robots
in recent years due to their unique properties (Colledanchise
and Ögren 2018): (1) Generality. BTs are proven to generalize many well-known control architectures including finite
state machines, the subsumption architecture (Brooks 1986),
teleo-reactive programs (Nilsson 1994) and so on. (2) Modularity. Each subtree of a BT is also a BT that can run independently as a modular sub-behavior. (3) Reactivity. BTs
can react to unexpected environment changes by frequent
ticks to activate behaviors in runtime. BTs have been used
in a wide range of the robotic field, including robot manipulation (Rovida et al. 2018), unmanned aerial vehicles (Lan
et al. 2018), mobile robots (Banerjee 2018) and so on.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6058

