The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DAST: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation Based on
Discriminator Attention and Self-Training
Fei Yu 1 , Mo Zhang 1,2 , Hexin Dong 1 , Sheng Hu 1 , Bin Dong 1,2,3 , Li Zhang 1,2
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Center for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research(BICMR), Peking University, Beijing, China
{yufei1900, zhangmo007, donghexin, hs95, zhangli pku}@pku.edu.cn dongbin@math.pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

source and the target domains, the difficulty of implementation varies with adapting features for different regions in
an image. For example, the adaption is easier in the case of
sky than in the cases of buildings, traffic lights, and sidewalks, because the regions of the sky are similar regardless
of the images while the latter group is characterized with different architectural styles or traffic rules. (Luo et al. 2019b)
believes that aligning the source domain and the target domain globally leads to negative transfer of information and
undermines the performance of the model in the originally
well-aligned regions. Therefore, they propose to generate a
local alignment score map and allow different weights for
regions with different local alignment scores.
Following the spirit of (Luo et al. 2019b), in this work, we
propose a strategy called discriminator attention (DA), to directly evaluate whether the local features are hard-adapted.
The proposed DA strategy includes two stages of adversarial
learning — discovering and correcting. In the discovering
phase, a discriminator network (also known as the discoverer, D) aligns the intermediate features of the segmentation network and uses the confidence of local alignment to
form an attention map that reweights the feature maps for label prediction. In the correcting stage, another discriminator
network (called corrector, C) further aligns the output of the
segmentation network based on the previous attention map.
As illustrated in Figure 1 (b), the model pays more attention
to hard-adapted regions for domain alignment.
Considering that the distribution of real-world data (target domain) is over-complex, we further introduce a selftraining strategy to guarantee that the decision boundary of
the model is suitable for the target domain. As shown in Figure 1 (c), the decision boundary of the segmentation network
after UDA still tends to favor the distribution of source domain data, but the tendency is corrected after we apply the
self-training strategy. Specifically, we adaptively improve
the model’s decision boundary by training the segmentation
network with pseudo labels generated from the previous predictions.
In summary, we propose an effective and intuitive unsupervised domain adaptation method for semantic segmentation, combining the strategies of discriminator attention and
self-training (DAST). The main contributions can be summarized as follows:

Unsupervised domain adaption has recently been used to reduce the domain shift, which would ultimately improve the
performance of semantic segmentation on unlabeled realworld data. In this paper, we follow the trend to propose
a novel method to reduce the domain shift using strategies
of discriminator attention and self-training. The discriminator attention strategy contains a two-stage adversarial learning process, which explicitly distinguishes the well-aligned
(domain-invariant) and poorly-aligned (domain-specific) features, and then guides the model to focus on the latter.
The self-training strategy adaptively improves the decision
boundary of the model for target domain, which implicitly facilitates the extraction of domain-invariant features. By combining the two strategies, we find a more effective way to reduce the domain shift. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method on numerous benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a classic computer vision task that
aims to predict a semantic label for each pixel in an image.
Despite the notable progress in this field driven by the rapid
development of deep learning (Chen et al. 2018; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015; Wei et al. 2018), it remains challenging to apply segmentation model trained on the labeled source data to the
unlabeled target/real-world data, which vary substantially
in their illumination, style, and the context in different domains. One possible solution draws on supervised learning
to retrain or fine-tune the pre-trained model, which however
requires expensive and time-consuming pixel-level manual
annotations. An alternative way is to use unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) to reduce the domain shift, so as to
train a model that is able to segment the target images without labels.
The key component of semantic segmentation using UDA
methods is to align the features from different domains
(Chen et al. 2019; Hoffman et al. 2018; Tsai et al. 2018;
Vu et al. 2019). Although the main idea is straightforward
— matching the overall feature-level distributions of the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel two-stage adversarial learning (DA),
10754

