The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enabling Fast and Universal Audio Adversarial Attack Using Generative Model
Yi Xie1 , Zhuohang Li2 , Cong Shi1 , Jian Liu2 , Yingying Chen1 , Bo Yuan1
1

Rutgers University
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville
yi.xie@rutgers.edu, zli96@vols.utk.edu, cs1421@winlab.rutgers.edu,
jliu@utk.edu, yingche@scarletmail.rutgers.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu
2

Abstract

Considering the rapidly increasing use of DNNs in modern audio-domain applications and systems, such as smart
speaker (e.g., Apple Homepod, Amazon Echo) and voice
assistant (e.g., Siri, Google Assistant, Alexa), recently both
machine learning and cybersecurity communities have begun to study the possibility of adversarial attack in the audio
domain. Some pioneering efforts (Carlini and Wagner 2018;
Neekhara et al. 2019) in this topic have demonstrated that
the idea of injecting inconspicuous perturbations into benign
voice inputs to mislead the DNN-based audio systems is not
just conceptually attractive but also practically feasible. To
date, several works have reported the successful adversarial
attacks in different audio-domain applications, including but
not limited to speaker verification (Kreuk et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2019), speech command recognition (Alzantot, Balaji,
and Srivastava 2018; Gong et al. 2019), speech-to-text transcription (Carlini and Wagner 2018; Yuan et al. 2018), and
environmental sound classification (Abdoli et al. 2019).
Limitations of Prior Work. Although the existing work
have already demonstrated the feasibility of audio adversarial attack, they are still facing several challenges. More
specifically, the state-of-the-art audio adversarial attack approaches make several idealized assumptions on the attacking setting: 1) Having large time budget for generating adversarial perturbation. In practical audio applications, the
benign inputs are typically quickly-streaming voice input.
Therefore, due to such temporal constrain, the existing audio adversarial attacks, which rely on time-consuming iterative optimization approaches such as C&W (Carlini and
Wagner 2018) or genetic algorithms (Alzantot, Balaji, and
Srivastava 2018), are too slow to launch the attack against
these real-time audio processing systems; 2) Owning authorization to observe the context of the benign input. Since
the existing perturbation generation methods require to preknow the full content of the ongoing voice input, the inherent sequential nature of audio signals makes it impossible for the adversary to generate adversarial perturbation
during input-streaming phase. Consequently, the current audio adversarial attack can only be performed against the
recorded or playback voice instead of real-time audio signals, thereby making them impractical for various real-world
audio-domain attacking scenarios.
Technical Preview and Contributions. To overcome
these limitations, in this paper we propose to use genera-

Recently, the vulnerability of deep neural network (DNN)based audio systems to adversarial attacks has obtained increasing attention. However, the existing audio adversarial
attacks allow the adversary to possess the entire user’s audio input as well as granting sufficient time budget to generate the adversarial perturbations. These idealized assumptions, however, make the existing audio adversarial attacks
mostly impossible to be launched in a timely fashion in
practice (e.g., playing unnoticeable adversarial perturbations
along with user’s streaming input). To overcome these limitations, in this paper we propose fast audio adversarial perturbation generator (FAPG), which uses generative model to
generate adversarial perturbations for the audio input in a single forward pass, thereby drastically improving the perturbation generation speed. Built on the top of FAPG, we further
propose universal audio adversarial perturbation generator
(UAPG), a scheme to craft universal adversarial perturbation
that can be imposed on arbitrary benign audio input to cause
misclassification. Extensive experiments on DNN-based audio systems show that our proposed FAPG can achieve high
success rate with up to 214× speedup over the existing audio
adversarial attack methods. Also our proposed UAPG generates universal adversarial perturbations that can achieve much
better attack performance than the state-of-the-art solutions.

Introduction
As the current most powerful artificial intelligence (AI)
technique, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely
adopted in many practical applications. Despite their current success and popularity, DNNs suffer from several severe limitations, especially the inherent high vulnerability to adversarial attack (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017), a very harmful attack approach that imposes well-crafted adversarial perturbation on
the benign input of DNNs to cause misclassification. Being originally discovered in the image classification applications, to date the vulnerability of DNNs, especially various
types of adversarial perturbation generation methods (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Poursaeed et al. 2018;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017), has been extensively investigated in many image-domain applications.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14129

