The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing Unsupervised Video Representation Learning
by Decoupling the Scene and the Motion
Jinpeng Wang1, 2 * , Yuting Gao2 * , Ke Li2 , Jianguo Hu1 , Xinyang Jiang2 , Xiaowei Guo2 , Rongrong
Ji3 , Xing Sun2†
1

Sun Yat-sen University, Guang Zhou, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
winfredsun@tencent.com

Abstract
One significant factor we expect the video representation
learning to capture, especially in contrast with the image representation learning, is the object motion. However, we found
that in the current mainstream video datasets, some action
categories are highly related with the scene where the action happens, making the model tend to degrade to a solution
where only the scene information is encoded. For example, a
trained model may predict a video as playing football simply
because it sees the field, neglecting that the subject is dancing as a cheerleader on the field. This is against our original
intention towards the video representation learning and may
bring scene bias on a different dataset that can not be ignored.
In order to tackle this problem, we propose to decouple the
scene and the motion (DSM) with two simple operations, so
that the model attention towards the motion information is
better paid. Specifically, we construct a positive clip and a
negative clip for each video. Compared to the original video,
the positive/negative is motion-untouched/broken but scenebroken/untouched by Spatial Local Disturbance and Temporal Local Disturbance. Our objective is to pull the positive
closer while pushing the negative farther to the original clip in
the latent space. In this way, the impact of the scene is weakened while the temporal sensitivity of the network is further
enhanced. We conduct experiments on two tasks with various backbones and different pre-training datasets, and find
that our method surpass the SOTA methods with a remarkable 8.1% and 8.8% improvement towards action recognition
task on the UCF101 and HMDB51 datasets respectively using the same backbone.

Figure 1: Relative Top-1 accuracy improvement using the
normal video over the artificially constructed static video.
Each dot represents a semantic category. It can be seen
from (a) that for some of the categories, i.e., dots below and
around the red line, using a normal video does not help the
model to give better prediction. This means that the scene
and the motion are coupled together and models can give
correct prediction by merely learning the scene. This phenomenon is relieved by our DSM method in (b) and (d),
where the average relative improvement is notably lifted,
meaning that the motion information is better exploited by
the model. For a fair comparison, a MoCo baseline is given
in (c).

Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning has received
widespread attention in the last few years. In the field
of image representation learning, recent approaches(He
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020) have nearly surpassed their
supervised counterparts. Nevertheless, in the field of video
representation learning, there still exists a gap between

unsupervised methods and supervised methods. In contrast
with the image representation learning, one significant
factor we expect video representation learning to capture is
the object motion, since a video usually contains continuous
states of an object. While most commonly used image
classification datasets are object-dominated, i.e., object
occupies a major part of the image, video datasets are
usually scene-dominated, i.e., object is relatively small
and the discriminative information contained in the object
motion is sometimes overwhelmed by statistics of the scene.
To verify the side effect of this phenomenon, we conduct

* The first two authors contributed equally. This work was done

during Jinpeng Wang’s internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10129

