The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-modal Multi-label Emotion Recognition with Heterogeneous Hierarchical
Message Passing
Dong Zhang,1 Xincheng Ju,1 Wei Zhang,2 Junhui Li,1
Shoushan Li,1 Qiaoming Zhu,1 Guodong Zhou1*
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
dzhang@suda.edu.cn, xcju@stu.suda.edu.cn, zhangweinus@gmail.com, {jhli, lishoushan, qmzhu, gdzhou}@suda.edu.cn
Abstract
As an important research issue in affective computing community, multi-modal emotion recognition has become a hot
topic in the last few years. However, almost all existing
studies perform multiple binary classification for each emotion with focus on complete time series data. In this paper,
we focus on multi-modal emotion recognition in a multilabel scenario. In this scenario, we consider not only the
label-to-label dependency, but also the feature-to-label and
modality-to-label dependencies. Particularly, we propose a
heterogeneous hierarchical message passing network to effectively model above dependencies. Furthermore, we propose a
new multi-modal multi-label emotion dataset based on partial time-series content to show predominant generalization
of our model. Detailed evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1: Two examples of multi-modal multi-label (a) complete time series instance and (b) partial time series instance.

to various dependencies among emotion labels (label-tolabel dependency), we should admit that the features from
different modalities contribute differentially to each potential emotion (feature-to-label and modality-to-label dependencies). Therefore, we believe that a well-behaved approach should be unified to simultaneously model all dependencies at feature-to-label, modality-to-label and labelto-label levels for multi-modal multi-label emotion recognition (MMER).
On the other hand, conventional studies normally employ sequential modeling (Zhang et al. 2020b) for multimodal inputs (i.e., language, audio and video sequences) as
shown in Figure 1(a). However, some utterances in multimodal emotion analysis data may have no sequential relationships. As a result, the approaches with sequential modeling cannot be directly extended to this type of data, leading
to performance loss. As shown in Figure 1(b), each piece of
comment is independent, and there is no contextual relation.
Therefore, we believe that a well-behaved approach should
be applied to both complete time series data and partial time
series data.
To handle above issues, we propose a novel heterogeneous hierarchical approach based on a neural message passing mechanism. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

Introduction
Multi-modal Emotion Recognition has drawn more and
more attention in natural language processing (Wang et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2020a), speech analysis (Albanie et al.
2018; Priyasad et al. 2020), computer vision (Ruan et al.
2020; Deng et al. 2020) and multimedia analysis (Zhang
et al. 2019a; Mai, Hu, and Xing 2020) communities. This
is mainly due to not only its great facility to relevant tasks,
such as emotional response generation and recommendation
(Tsai et al. 2019), but also its wide applications, such as chatbot and sentiment systems (Chauhan et al. 2020).
Although a considerable amount of approaches have been
proposed to handle multi-modal emotion recognition, there
still exist two issues for this task:
On the one hand, conventional studies normally either
perform multi-modal emotion recognition based on a dominant emotion or perform binary relevance for multiple emotions of a sample (Ju et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020a). However, an utterance of people or the contents of music tends
to show multiple co-occurring emotions with potential correlations. Intuitively, multi-modal emotion recognition in a
multi-label scenario brings greater challenges. In addition
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a unified MMER approach, namely Hetero14338

