The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

OpEvo: An Evolutionary Method for Tensor Operator Optimization
Xiaotian Gao, Wei Cui, Lintao Zhang, Mao Yang
Microsoft Research
xiaotian.gao, weicu, lintaoz, maoyang@microsoft.com

Abstract

as a configuration space or search space. Unlike many typical problems of this type, such as travelling salesman problem, the objective function of tensor operator optimization
is a black box and expensive to sample. One has to compile a device code with a specific configuration and run it on
real hardware to get the corresponding performance metric.
Therefore, a desired method for optimizing tensor operators
should find the best configuration with as few samples as
possible.
The expensive objective function makes solving tensor
operator optimization problem with traditional combinatorial optimization methods, for example, simulated annealing
(SA) (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, and Vecchi 1983) and evolutionary algorithms (EA) (Bäck and Schwefel 1993), almost impossible. Although these algorithms inherently support combinatorial search spaces (Youssef, Sait, and Adiche 2001),
they do not take sample-efficiency into account, thus thousands of or even more samples are usually needed, which
is unacceptable when tuning tensor operators in product
environments. On the other hand, sequential model based
optimization (SMBO) methods are proved sample-efficient
for optimizing black-box functions with continuous search
spaces (Srinivas et al. 2009; Hernández-Lobato, Hoffman,
and Ghahramani 2014; Wang and Jegelka 2017). However,
when optimizing ones with combinatorial search spaces,
SMBO methods are not as sample-efficient as their continuous counterparts (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011),
because there is lack of prior assumptions about the objective functions, such as continuity and differentiability in the
case of continuous search spaces. For example, if one could
assume an objective function with a continuous search space
is infinitely differentiable, a Gaussian process with a radial
basis function (RBF) kernel could be used to model the objective function. In this way, a sample provides not only a
single value at a point but also the local properties of the
objective function in its neighborhood or even global properties, which results in a high sample-efficiency. In contrast,
SMBO methods for combinatorial optimization suffer from
poor sample-efficiency due to the lack of proper prior assumptions and corresponding surrogate models.
Besides sample-efficiency, another weakness of SMBO
methods is the extra burden introduced by training and optimizing surrogate models. Although it can be safely ignored
for many ultra-expensive objective functions, such as hy-

Training and inference efficiency of deep neural networks
highly rely on the performance of tensor operators on hardware platforms. Manually optimizing tensor operators has
limitations in terms of supporting new operators or hardware
platforms. Therefore, automatically optimizing device code
configurations of tensor operators is getting increasingly attractive. However, current methods for tensor operator optimization usually suffer from poor sample-efficiency due to
the combinatorial search space. In this work, we propose
a novel evolutionary method, OpEvo, which efficiently explores the search spaces of tensor operators by introducing a
topology-aware mutation operation based on q-random walk
to leverage the topological structures over the search spaces.
Our comprehensive experiment results show that compared
with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods OpEvo can find the best
configuration with the lowest variance and least efforts in the
number of trials and wall-clock time. All code of this work is
available online.

1

Introduction

Abundant applications raise the demands of training and
inference deep neural networks (DNNs) efficiently on diverse hardware platforms ranging from cloud servers to embedded devices. Moreover, computational graph-level optimization of deep neural network, like tensor operator fusion (Wang, Lin, and Yi 2010), may introduce new tensor operators. Thus, manually optimized tensor operators
provided by hardware-specific libraries have limitations in
terms of supporting new operators or hardware platforms, so
automatically optimizing tensor operators on diverse hardware platforms is essential for large-scale deployment and
application of deep learning technologies in the real-world
problems.
Tensor operator optimization is essentially a combinatorial optimization problem. The objective function is the performance of a tensor operator on specific hardware platform, which should be maximized with respect to the hyperparameters of corresponding device code, such as how to tile
a matrix or whether to unroll a loop. Thereafter, we will refer to a tuple of hyper-parameters determining device code
as a configuration, and the set of all possible configurations
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12320

