The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fast and Compact Bilinear Pooling by Shifted Random Maclaurin
Tan Yu, Xiaoyun Li, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{tanyuuynat,lixiaoyun996, pingli98}@gmail.com
Abstract

it usually requires a large number of training samples to
suppress over-fitting. To tackle the existing limitations of
high-dimensional bilinear features, compact bilinear pooling
(CBP) (Gao et al. 2016) seeks to reduce the feature dimensionality. It discovers the connection between bilinear pooling and polynomial kernel, and exploits methods used for
polynomial kernel approximation (Kar and Karnick 2012;
Pham and Pagh 2013) to obtain low-dimension bilinear features. More specifically, it re-formulates bilinear pooling as

Bilinear pooling has achieved an excellent performance in
many computer vision tasks. However, the high-dimension
features from bilinear pooling can sometimes be inefficient
and prone to over-fitting. Random Maclaurin (RM) is a
widely used GPU-friendly approximation method to reduce
the dimensionality of bilinear features. However, to achieve
good performance, huge projection matrices are usually required in practice, making it extremely costly in computation and memory. In this paper, we propose a Shifted Random Maclaurin (SRM) strategy for fast and compact bilinear
pooling. With merely negligible extra computational cost, the
proposed SRM provides an estimator with a provably smaller
variance than RM, which benefits accurate kernel approximation and thus the learning performance. Using a small projection matrix, the proposed SRM achieves a comparable estimation performance as RM based on a large projection matrix, and thus considerably boosts the efficiency. Furthermore,
we upgrade the proposed SRM to SRM+ to further improve
the efficiency and make the compact bilinear pooling compatible with fast matrix normalization. Fast and Compact Bilinear Network (FCBN) built upon the proposed SRM+ is devised, achieving an end-to-end training. Systematic experiments conducted on four public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed FCBN.

Bx =

N
X

h(xi ),

(1)

i=1
d×d
where h(x) = xi x>
is the explicit feature map of
i ∈ R
the second-order polynomial kernel. CBP finds an approxi2
mation function φw : Rd 7→ RD with D  d2 , such that

Ehφw (x), φw (y)i = hvec(h(x)), vec(h(y))i,

(2)

where w contains random variables and E(·) denotes the expectation with respect to w. Here, vec(·) denotes the operation which unrolls a matrix into a vector by concatenating the columns. Given two images, CBP obtains their
PN
compact bilinear features B̂x =
i=1 φw (xi ) and B̂y =
PN
φ
(y
).
Based
on
Eq.
(2),
it
is
straightforward to get
i
i=1 w

Introduction
Bilinear pooling has achieved excellent performance in
many computer vision tasks such as fine-grained classification (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015; Gao et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2016), generic image recognition (Li et al. 2018),
semantic segmentation (Ionescu, Vantzos, and Sminchisescu
2015) and video recognition (Wang, Li, and Zhang 2017;
Koniusz, Cherian, and Porikli 2016; Cherian, Koniusz, and
Gould 2017). Given N local features X = [x1 , · · · , xN ] ∈
Rd×N (e.g. local features from a convolution layer of a
CNN), bilinear pooling obtains the matrix

E(hB̂x , B̂y i) =

N X
N
X

E(hφw (xi ), φw (yj )i) = hBx , By i.

i=1 j=1

That is, the inner product of CBP features hB̂x , B̂y i is an unbiased estimator of that of bilinear features hBx , By i, which
is the pivotal quantity used in subsequent learning models.
Tensor Sketch (TS) (Pham and Pagh 2013) and Random
Maclaurin (RM) (Kar and Karnick 2012) are two popular
methods that admit Eq. (2). TS leverages sketching functions
and Fast Fourier Transform to improve the efficiency, while
RM relies on random projections. Importantly, although TS
has a lower computation cost than RM in theory, it requires
sparse matrix-vector product, which is not friendly for the
GPU. In fact, the GPU time cost of TS is larger than RM.
In contrast, RM relies on dense matrix-vector product and
element-wise product, which are very suited for the GPU.
Recall that the inner product between compact features
hB̂x , B̂y i is an unbiased estimator of hBx , By i. For the unbiased estimation, the variance controls the estimation accuracy. In general, we need a huge number of projections to

Bx = XX> ,
where Bx ∈ Rd×d . The matrix Bx is reshaped into a vector
2
vec(Bx ) ∈ Rd as the holistic image/video representation.
Since the bilinear feature vec(Bx ) is typically highdimensional, it brings high memory and computation cost
in many practical applications. Another consequence is that,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3243

