The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

S CRUPLES: A Corpus of Community Ethical Judgments
on 32,000 Real-life Anecdotes
Nicholas Lourie,1 Ronan Le Bras,1 Yejin Choi 1,2
1

2

Allen Institute for AI, WA, USA,
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, WA, USA
{nicholasl, ronanlb, yejinc}@allenai.org

Abstract

Title. Closing the door in a salespersons face?
Text. The other day a salespersons knocked on our door and

As AI systems become an increasing part of people’s everyday lives, it becomes ever more important that they understand people’s ethical norms. Motivated by descriptive ethics,
a field of study that focuses on people’s descriptive judgments
rather than theoretical prescriptions on morality, we investigate a novel, data-driven approach to machine ethics.
We introduce S CRUPLES, the first large-scale dataset with
625,000 ethical judgments over 32,000 real-life anecdotes.
Each anecdote recounts a complex ethical situation, often
posing moral dilemmas, paired with a distribution of judgments contributed by the community members. Our dataset
presents a major challenge to state-of-the-art neural language
models, leaving significant room for improvement. However, when presented with simplified moral situations, the results are considerably more promising, suggesting that neural
models can effectively learn simpler ethical building blocks.
A key take-away of our empirical analysis is that norms are
not always clean-cut; many situations are naturally divisive.
We present a new method to estimate the best possible performance on such tasks with inherently diverse label distributions, and explore likelihood functions that separate intrinsic from model uncertainty. Data and code are available at
https://github.com/allenai/scruples.

it was obvious he was about to sell something (insurance
company uniform with flyers). I already have insurance that
I’m happy with so I already knew I would’ve said no to any
deals (although I would probably say no to any door to door
salesperson)
I opened the door and before he could get a word out I just
said “Sorry, not interested” and closed the door and went
about my day.
My friend thinks that I was rude and should’ve let him at
least introduce himself, whereas I feel like I saved us both
time - he doesn’t waste time trying to push a sale he won’t
get and I don’t waste time listening to the pitch just to say
“no thanks”.
So, AITA?

1

Type. HISTORICAL
Label. OTHER
Scores. AUTHOR: 0, OTHER: 7, EVERYBODY: 0, NOBODY: 0,
INFO : 0

Figure 1: An example from the dev set. Labels describe who
the community views as in the wrong (i.e., the salesperson).
Table 2 describes the labels in detail.

Introduction
norms, for safe and fair deployment in human-centric realworld applications. Past experiences with dialogue agents,
for example, motivate the dire need to teach neural language models the ethical implications of language to avoid
biased and unjust system output (Wolf, Miller, and Grodzinsky 2017; Schlesinger, O’Hara, and Taylor 2018).
However, machine ethics poses major open research challenges. Most notably, people must determine what norms to
build into systems. Simultaneously, systems need the ability
to anticipate and understand the norms of the different communities in which they operate. Our work focuses on the
latter, drawing inspiration from descriptive ethics, the field
of study that focuses on people’s descriptive judgements, in
contrast to prescriptive ethics which focuses on theoretical
prescriptions on morality (Gert and Gert 2017).
As a first step toward computational models that predict
communities’ ethical judgments, we present a study based
on people’s diverse ethical judgements over a wide spectrum

State-of-the-art techniques excel at syntactic and semantic
understanding of text, reaching or even exceeding human
performance on major language understanding benchmarks
(Devlin et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2019). However, reading between the lines with pragmatic understanding of text still remains a major challenge, as it requires understanding social, cultural, and ethical implications. For example, given “closing the door in a salesperson’s face” in
Figure 1, readers can infer what is not said but implied, e.g.,
that perhaps the house call was unsolicited. When reading
narratives, people read not just what is stated literally and
explicitly, but also the rich non-literal implications based on
social, cultural, and moral conventions.
Beyond narrative understanding, AI systems need to
understand people’s norms, especially ethical and moral
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13470

