The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Looking Wider for Better Adaptive Representation in Few-Shot Learning
Jiabao Zhao1, 2 , Yifan Yang3 , Xin Lin1, 2 , * , Jing Yang2 , Liang He1, 2 , †
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, ECNU, Shanghai, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Transwarp Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd, China
jiabao.zhao@ica.stc.sh.cn, yifan.yang@transwarp.io, {xlin, jyang, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

2

Class 0

Class 1

Support Set

Abstract

Query Set

Building a good feature space is essential for the metric-based
few-shot algorithms to recognize a novel class with only a
few samples. The feature space is often built by Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). However, CNNs primarily focus
on local information with the limited receptive field, and the
global information generated by distant pixels is not well used.
Meanwhile, having a global understanding of the current task
and focusing on distinct regions of the same sample for different queries are important for the few-shot classification. To
tackle these problems, we propose the Cross Non-Local Neural Network (CNL) for capturing the long-range dependency
of the samples and the current task. CNL extracts the taskspecific and context-aware features dynamically by strengthening the features of the sample at a position via aggregating
information from all positions of itself and the current task.
To reduce losing important information, we maximize the mutual information between the original and refined features as
a constraint. Moreover, we add a task-specific scaling to deal
with multi-scale and task-specific features extracted by CNL.
We conduct extensive experiments for validating our proposed
algorithm, which achieves new state-of-the-art performances
on two public benchmarks.

Task 1

Do they belong to
Class 0 or Class 1?

Task 2

Figure 1: There are two 2-way 1-shot tasks. For different
queries, the model should focus on different regions of the
same images in support set. In addition to local features, the
global understanding of the current task is also essential.

Introduction
Traditional deep neural networks for recognization tasks require large-scale and category-balanced data for training, and
the categories are fixed. However, the model needs to train
from scratch when new categories emerge. Few-shot learning
addresses this problem by recognizing the novel category
(unseen during training) based on a few labeled samples
(Vinyals et al. 2016; Chelsea et al. 2017). Recently, several
few-shot algorithms have been proposed for various tasks
in CV (ComputerVision) and NLP (Natural Language Processing) domains. Metric-based methods achieve excellent
performances on multiple tasks with the simplicity (Vinyals
et al. 2016; Snell et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020). This method
learns to build an appropriate feature space, where similar
samples are close and different samples are distant. Then
it measures the similarities of the samples for prediction.
The key to metric-based approaches is relying on extracting
* Corresponding author: Xin Lin
†

Corresponding author: Liang He
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10981

high-quality representation and choose an appropriate metric
function.
Extracting context-aware features dynamically by considering the current task’s global information is essential for
few-shot tasks, especially for the samples containing multiple objects. As shown in Figure 1, there is a need to focus
on distinct regions of the same samples in the support set
for different queries because the correlativity between the
distant pixels in an image and the relationship between the
labeled sample and the query are valuable. Hence, capturing
long-range dependency (Zhao et al. 2017) plays a crucial
role in few-shot image classification. However, most metricbased approaches take the CNNs as the backbone. It cannot
cover distant areas with correlativity and transmit a message
between distant positions efficiently due to the limited receptive field. Non-local neural network (Wang et al. 2018) was
proposed for capturing the long-range dependency, which
computes the response at a position as a weighted sum of
the features at all positions of the image. However, it only
captures the global context and cannot extract adaptive representation based on various tasks. Besides, some essential
local features are likely to be lost during the refinement.
To address the above problems, we propose a Cross NonLocal Neural Network (CNL) for capturing the long-range
dependency of the samples and its related task, as shown
in Figure 4. CNL aims to learn different attention weights

