The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncovering Latent Biases in Text: Method and Application to Peer Review
Emaad Manzoor∗ , Nihar B. Shah†
∗

Carnegie Mellon University
emaad@cmu.edu, † nihars@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

letters of recommendation for women were more likely to
contain “doubt-raising” phrases. In the context of managerial feedback provided during employee appraisals, Correll
et al. (2020) find that “women were more likely to receive
vague feedback that did not offer specific details of what
they had done well and what they could do to advance”.
Such biases in text can have severe economic consequences. For example, differences in the media framing of
natural disasters were found to be associated with large disparities in the amount of allocated foreign aid (Strömberg
2007; Kweifio-Okai 2014). Similarly, online reviews of
Asian and Indian restaurants declared them “unauthentic”
when they defied the negative stereotypes of uncleanliness,
leading to significant losses in revenue (Kay 2019).
Biases in text are more prevalent than those in numerical
feedback due to the absence of enforced structure (Mackenzie, Wehner, and Correll 2019), and are more difficult to
detect due to their subtle manner of expression (Morstatter
et al. 2018). In addition, the inherently unstructured nature
of text makes it challenging to quantify the biases it contains. Without the ability to quantify and provide credible
evidence of such biases, society remains at risk of widening
socioeconomic gaps fueled by the unchecked expression of
prejudices in written feedback.
In this work, we propose a framework to quantify biases
in text, provided data from time periods both before and after an identity-hiding policy change. Our proposed framework extends the difference-in-differences causal inference methodology introduced by Card and Krueger (1994)
(which compares differences in numerical quantities over
time) to handle differences in unstructured text over time.
We motivate and evaluate our framework in the setting of
scholarly peer review, which is a key mechanism of feedback and quality assurance in scientific research. Specifically, we assemble a dataset of peer reviews from the International Conference of Learning Representations (ICLR),
which switched from single-blind to double-blind reviewing
in 2018. We test for biases in the peer review text, which
is prone to prejudice due to the lack of enforced structure.
Importantly, our dataset enables estimating “ground truth”
biases using the peer review ratings (a numerical quantity).
The goal of our proposed framework is to quantify biases
in the peer review text that are consistent with the “ground
truth”, without having access to the review ratings.

Quantifying systematic disparities in numerical quantities
such as employment rates and wages between population subgroups provides compelling evidence for the existence of societal biases. However, biases in the text written for members
of different subgroups (such as in recommendation letters for
male and non-male candidates), though widely reported anecdotally, remain challenging to quantify. In this work, we introduce a novel framework to quantify bias in text caused by
the visibility of subgroup membership indicators. We develop
a nonparametric estimation and inference procedure to estimate this bias. We then formalize an identification strategy to
causally link the estimated bias to the visibility of subgroup
membership indicators, provided observations from time periods both before and after an identity-hiding policy change.
We identify an application wherein “ground truth” bias can
be inferred to evaluate our framework, instead of relying on
synthetic or secondary data. Specifically, we apply our framework to quantify biases in the text of peer reviews from a reputed machine-learning conference before and after the conference adopted a double-blind reviewing policy. We show
evidence of biases in the review ratings that serves as “ground
truth”, and show that our proposed framework accurately detects the presence (and absence) of these biases from the review text without having access to the review ratings.

Introduction
Societal biases against individuals based on race, gender,
and other attributes can lead to disparities in hiring (Bertrand
and Mullainathan 2004), wages (Blau and Kahn 2017) and
incarceration rates (Alesina and La Ferrara 2014), among
other socioeconomic outcomes. Uncovering evidence of
such biases informs the creation of policies to eliminate
long-standing gaps between different population subgroups.
Many important socioeconomic outcomes are influenced
by written feedback, such as academic hiring that is influenced by reference letters, and employee appraisals that
rely on managerial performance reviews. Previous studies
have reported biases in the text of such feedback (Mitchell
and Martin 2018; Madera et al. 2019; Correll et al. 2020).
Mitchell and Martin (2018) find that student evaluations of
female faculty teaching were more likely to focus on communication ability. Madera et al. (2019) find that academic
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4767

