The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Longitudinal Deep Kernel Gaussian Process Regression
Junjie Liang, Yanting Wu, Dongkuan Xu, Vasant G Honavar
Pennsylvania State University
{jul672, yxw514, dux19, vhonavar}@psu.edu

Abstract

data can lead to misleading statistical inferences (Gibbons
and Hedeker 1997; Liang et al. 2020). It can be non-trivial
to choose a suitable correlation structure that reflects the correlations present in the data. The relationships between the
covariates and outcomes of interest can be highly complex
and non-linear. Furthermore, modern applications often call
for LDA methods that scale gracefully with increasing number of variables, the number of individuals, and the number
of longitudinal observations per individual.

Gaussian processes offer an attractive framework for predictive modeling from longitudinal data, i.e., irregularly sampled,
sparse observations from a set of individuals over time. However, such methods have two key shortcomings: (i) They rely
on ad hoc heuristics or expensive trial and error to choose the
effective kernels, and (ii) They fail to handle multilevel correlation structure in the data. We introduce Longitudinal deep
kernel Gaussian process regression (L-DKGPR) to overcome
these limitations by fully automating the discovery of complex multilevel correlation structure from longitudinal data.
Specifically, L-DKGPR eliminates the need for ad hoc heuristics or trial and error using a novel adaptation of deep kernel
learning that combines the expressive power of deep neural
networks with the flexibility of non-parametric kernel methods.
L-DKGPR effectively learns the multilevel correlation with
a novel additive kernel that simultaneously accommodates
both time-varying and the time-invariant effects. We derive
an efficient algorithm to train L-DKGPR using latent space
inducing points and variational inference. Results of extensive experiments on several benchmark data sets demonstrate
that L-DKGPR significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
longitudinal data analysis (LDA) methods.

Related Work
Conventional LDA Methods LDA methods have been extensively studied for decades (Hedeker and Gibbons 2006;
Verbeke et al. 2014). Conventional LDA methods fall into
two broad categories: (i) marginal models and (ii) conditional models. Marginal models rely on assumptions about
the marginal association among the observed outcomes. The
generalized estimating equations (GEE) (Liang and Zeger
1986), where a working correlation matrix is specified to
model the marginal association among the observed outcomes, offer an example of marginal models. The parameters
of marginal models are often shared by all individuals in
the population, yielding population-averaged effects or fixed
effects. Conditional models on the other hand avoid directly
specifying the full correlation matrix by distinguishing random effects, i.e., parameters that differ across individuals,
from fixed effects, so as to estimate the individual parameters
conditioned on the population parameters. A popular example
of conditional models is the generalized linear mixed-effects
models (GLMM) (McCulloch 1997). Despite much work on
both marginal and conditional models (Fitzmaurice, Laird,
and Ware 2012; Wang 2014; Xiong, Kim, and Singh 2019;
Liang et al. 2020), many of the challenges, especially the
choice of correlation structure, and the selection of variables
to model random versus fixed effects, and the scalability of
the methods remain to be addressed.

Introduction
Longitudinal studies, which involve repeated observations,
taken at irregularly spaced time points, for a set of individuals over time, are ubiquitous in many applications, e.g.,
in health, cognitive, social, and economic sciences. Such
studies are used to identify the time-varying as well as
the time-invariant factors associated with a particular outcome of interest, e.g., health risk (Hedeker and Gibbons
2006), air pollution (Tang et al. 2020; Hsieh et al. 2020),
etc. Longitudinal data typically exhibit longitudinal correlation (LC), i.e., correlations among the repeated observations of a given individual over time; and cluster correlation
(CC), i.e., correlations among observations across individuals, e.g., due to the characteristics that they share among themselves e.g., age, demographics factors; or both, i.e., multilevel
correlation (MC). In general, the structure of MC can be complex and a priori unknown. Failure to adequately account for
the structure of MC in predictive modeling from longitudinal

Non-parametric LDA Methods More recently, there is a
growing interest in Gaussian processes (GP) (Quintana et al.
2016; Cheng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019) for LDA because
of their advantages over conventional parametric LDA methods: (i) GP make fewer assumptions about the underlying
data distribution by dispensing with the need to choose a
particular parametric form of the nonlinear predictive model;

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8556

