The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpreting Deep Neural Networks with Relative Sectional Propagation
by Analyzing Comparative Gradients and Hostile Activations
Woo-Jeoung Nam,1 Jaesik Choi,3 Seong-Whan Lee1,2 *
1

Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
nwj0612@korea.ac.kr, jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr, sw.lee@korea.ac.kr
Abstract

The clear transparency of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is
hampered by complex internal structures and nonlinear transformations along deep hierarchies. In this paper, we propose a new attribution method, Relative Sectional Propagation (RSP), for fully decomposing the output predictions
with the characteristics of class-discriminative attributions
and clear objectness. We carefully revisit some shortcomings of backpropagation-based attribution methods, which are
trade-off relations in decomposing DNNs. We define hostile
factor as an element that interferes with finding the attributions of the target and propagate it in a distinguishable way to
overcome the non-suppressed nature of activated neurons. As
a result, it is possible to assign the bi-polar relevance scores of
the target (positive) and hostile (negative) attributions while
maintaining each attribution aligned with the importance. We
also present the purging techniques to prevent the decrement
of the gap between the relevance scores of the target and hostile attributions during backward propagation by eliminating
the conflicting units to channel attribution map. Therefore,
our method makes it possible to decompose the predictions
of DNNs with clearer class-discriminativeness and detailed
elucidations of activation neurons compared to the conventional attribution methods. In a verified experimental environment, we report the results of the assessments: (i) Pointing Game, (ii) mIoU, and (iii) Model Sensitivity with PASCAL VOC 2007, MS COCO 2014, and ImageNet datasets.
The results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing backward decomposition methods, including distinctive
and intuitive visualizations.

Figure 1: Relative Sectional Propagation (RSP) aims to fully
decompose the network predictions with taking advantages
of i) strong objectness, ii) class-discriminativeness, and iii)
detailed descriptions of neuron activations.

and its high performance for localizing the primary objects.
Despite these advantages, there is a limitation that the feature extraction stage of DNNs cannot be decomposed (Rebuffi et al. 2020). Also, detailed information about the neuron activation is lost due to the interpolation of the class
activation map. To fully interpret the network, many studies based on the modified backpropagation algorithm (Bach
et al. 2015; Kindermans et al. 2017; Montavon et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018; Nam et al. 2019) attempted to identify
the significant parts in the input image with each of their
own perspectives by decomposing the output predictions in
a backward manner. By visualizing attributions as saliency
maps, the important objects are highlighted as the basis for
the predictions. Despite many studies on such methods, it
is challenging to address the class-discriminativeness, incorrect distribution of attributions that are derived in unrelated objects, and model sensitivity. Furthermore, the different mechanisms among various types of DNNs and the variations of feature attention according to the layer depth make
the interpretation of the network more difficult.
The class discriminative issue was addressed in recent
papers, and the contrastive perspective was presented as a
countermeasure (Zhang et al. 2018; Gu, Yang, and Tresp
2018). The idea of contrasting is erasing the duplicated attributions among classes by backpropagating twice from the
target and all other classes. By efficiently removing the duplicate relevance of the activated neurons, it is possible to
obtain the attributions of the target class within the object
area. However, unreasonable positive or negative attributions in irrelevant regions, such as background and watermark, are easily found in the results of this concept.
In this paper, we propose an attribution method, Rela-

Introduction
As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown a remarkable performance in various fields, many studies have attempted to resolve the basis of network predictions. However, it still lacks clear transparency about the myriad of
components and the complex inner structure of DNNs. The
problem of attribution, also called relevance, seeks the most
relevant factors with respect to the predictions of DNNs and
characterizes them as a supporting basis for the decision.
Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017) is the most popular and
widely used method in the field of weakly supervised segmentation and detection due to the easily applicable property
* Corresponding author: Seong-Whan Lee
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11604

