The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DSLR: Dynamic to Static LiDAR Scan Reconstruction Using Adversarially
Trained Autoencoder
*

*

Prashant Kumar 1 , Sabyasachi Sahoo 1 , Vanshil Shah1 , Vineetha Kondameedi1 , Abhinav Jain1 ,
Akshaj Verma1 , Chiranjib Bhattacharyya1 , and Vinay Viswanathan 23
1 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
2 AMIDC Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India
3 Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai, India

{prshnttkmr, ssahoo.iisc, vanshilshah, vineetha.knd92, abhinav98jain, akshajverma7}@gmail.com, chiru@iisc.ac.in,
vinay@atimotors.com
Abstract
Accurate reconstruction of static environments from LiDAR
scans of scenes containing dynamic objects, which we refer
to as Dynamic to Static Translation (DST), is an important
area of research in Autonomous Navigation. This problem
has been recently explored for visual SLAM, but to the best of
our knowledge no work has been attempted to address DST
for LiDAR scans. The problem is of critical importance due
to wide-spread adoption of LiDAR in Autonomous Vehicles.
We show that state-of the art methods developed for the visual
domain when adapted for LiDAR scans perform poorly.
We develop DSLR, a deep generative model which learns
a mapping between dynamic scan to its static counterpart
through an adversarially trained autoencoder. Our model
yields the first solution for DST on LiDAR that generates
static scans without using explicit segmentation labels. DSLR
cannot always be applied to real world data due to lack
of paired dynamic-static scans. Using Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation, we propose DSLR-UDA for transfer to real world
data and experimentally show that this performs well in real
world settings. Additionally, if segmentation information is
available, we extend DSLR to DSLR-Seg to further improve
the reconstruction quality.
DSLR gives the state of the art performance on simulated and
real-world datasets and also shows at least 4× improvement.
We show that DSLR, unlike the existing baselines, is a practically viable model with its reconstruction quality within the
tolerable limits for tasks pertaining to autonomous navigation
like SLAM in dynamic environments.

1

Figure 1: Static background points are shown in black.
1) Left: Dynamic LiDAR scan with occluding dynamic
points in red. 2) Center: Static LiDAR scan reconstructed
by DSLR. Although DSLR reconstructs complete scan only
in-painted dynamic points are shown in red. 3) Right: Reconstructed static LiDAR scan shown from a different angle to highlight reconstruction quality of 3D structures like
walls.

and Valada 2020), and point-clouds (Wu et al. 2020). DST
for LiDAR has also been attempted using geometric (nonlearning-based) methods (Kim and Kim 2020; Biasutti et al.
2017). To the best of our knowledge, no learning-based
method has been proposed to solve DST for LiDAR scans.
We show that existing techniques for non-LiDAR data produce sub-optimal reconstructions for LiDAR data (Caccia
et al. 2018; Achlioptas et al. 2017; Groueix et al. 2018).
However, downstream tasks such as SLAM in a dynamic environment require accurate and high-quality LIDAR scans.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a Dynamic
to Static LiDAR Reconstruction (DSLR) algorithm. It
uses an autoencoder that is adversarially trained using a
discriminator to reconstruct corresponding static frames
from dynamic frames. Unlike existing DST based methods,
DSLR doesn’t require specific segmentation annotation to
identify dynamic points. We train DSLR using a dataset that
consists of corresponding dynamic and static scans of the
scene. However, these pairs are hard to obtain in a simulated
environment and even harder to obtain in the real world.
To get around this, we also propose a new algorithm to
generate appropriate dynamic and static pairs which makes
DSLR the first DST based model to train on a real-world
dataset.

Introduction

The problem of dynamic points occluding static structures is
ubiquitous for any visual system. Throughout the paper, we
define points falling on movable objects (e.g. cars on road)
as dynamic points and the rest are called static points (Chen
et al. 2019; Ruchti and Burgard 2018). Ideally we would
like to replace the dynamic counterparts by corresponding
static ones. We call this as Dynamic to Static Translation
problem. Recent works attempt to solve DST for the following modalities: Images (Bescos et al. 2019), RGBD (Bešić
* denotes equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We now summarize the contributions of our paper:
1836

