The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Segatron: Segment-Aware Transformer for
Language Modeling and Understanding
He Bai,1 Peng Shi,1 Jimmy Lin,1, 2 Yuqing Xie,1 Luchen Tan,2 Kun Xiong,2 Wen Gao,3 Ming Li1, 2
1

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
2
RSVP.ai
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{he.bai, peng.shi, jimmylin, yuqing.xie, mli}@uwaterloo.ca, {lctan, kun}@rsvp.ai, wgao@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

different sentences and paragraphs for language modeling.
Although vanilla position encoding can help the transformer
be aware of the token position by assigning a unique index
to each token, the token index in a sentence, sentence index in a paragraph, and paragraph index in a document are
all implicit. Such segmentation information is essential for
language modeling, as tokens in different segments of context hold different significance for next token prediction. If
the Transformer model can be aware of the segment position of each context token, we hypothesize that the Transformer model will model language more efficiently and successfully, and will generate better context representations. It
should be noticed that, although punctuations and paragraph
breakers can provide boundary information to some extent,
the boundary is not as straightforward as segment position,
especially for the self-attention’s dot-product operation in
Transformer.

Transformers are powerful for sequence modeling. Nearly
all state-of-the-art language models and pre-trained language
models are based on the Transformer architecture. However,
it distinguishes sequential tokens only with the token position index. We hypothesize that better contextual representations can be generated from the Transformer with richer positional information. To verify this, we propose a segmentaware Transformer (Segatron), by replacing the original token position encoding with a combined position encoding
of paragraph, sentence, and token. We first introduce the
segment-aware mechanism to Transformer-XL, which is a
popular Transformer-based language model with memory
extension and relative position encoding. We find that our
method can further improve the Transformer-XL base model
and large model, achieving 17.1 perplexity on the WikiText103 dataset. We further investigate the pre-training masked
language modeling task with Segatron. Experimental results
show that BERT pre-trained with Segatron (SegaBERT) can
outperform BERT with vanilla Transformer on various NLP
tasks, and outperforms RoBERTa on zero-shot sentence representation learning. Our code is available on GitHub.1

Hence, we propose a novel segment-aware Transformer (Segatron), which encodes paragraph index in a document, sentence index in a paragraph, and token index in a
sentence all together for the input sequence. We first verify the proposed method with relative position encoding on
the language modeling task. By applying the segment-aware
mechanism to Transformer-XL (Dai et al. 2019), our base
model trained with the WikiText-103 dataset (Merity et al.
2017) outperforms Transformer-XL base by 1.5 points in
terms of perplexity. Our large model achieves a perplexity of
17.1, the same score as Compressive Transformer (Rae et al.
2020), which is a more complicated model with longer input
context and additional training objectives. We also pre-train
masked language models with Transformer (BERT-base− )
and Segatron (SegaBERT-base− ) with English Wikipedia
for 500K training steps. According to experimental results,
SegaBERT outperforms BERT on both general language understanding (GLUE) and machine reading comprehension
tasks. We further pre-trained a large model SegaBERT-large
with the same data used in BERT. Experimental results show
that SegaBERT-large not only outperforms BERT-large on
all the above tasks, but also outperforms RoBERTa-large on
zero-shot Semantic Textual Similarity tasks, where we use
less data and no more than 10% computational resources of
RoBERTa. These results demonstrate the value of segment
encodings in Transformers.

Introduction
Language modeling (LM) is a traditional sequence modeling task which requires learning long-distance dependencies
for next token prediction based on the previous context. Recently, large neural LMs trained on a massive amount of text
data have shown great potential for representation learning
and transfer learning, and also achieved state-of-the-art results in various natural language processing tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, state-of-the-art language
models (Dai et al. 2019; Baevski and Auli 2019; Rae et al.
2020) and pre-trained language models (Radford 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020) all use
a multi-layer Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). The Transformer network was initially used in the seq2seq architecture for machine translation, whose input is usually a sentence. Hence, it is intuitive to distinguish each token with
its position index in the input sequence. However, the input length can grow to 1024 or more tokens and come from
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/rsvp-ai/segatron aaai

12526

