The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Enhanced Advising Model In Teacher-Student Framework Using State
Categorization
Daksh Anand * 1 , Vaibhav Gupta ∗ 1 , Praveen Paruchuri 1 , Balaraman Ravindran 2
1

Machine Learning Lab, IIIT Hyderabad
Robert Bosch Center for Data Science and AI, IIT Madras
daksh.anand@research.iiit.ac.in, gupta.vaibhav@research.iiit.ac.in, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in, ravi@cse.iitm.ac.in
2

Abstract

action to take in a given state. Recently, there have been
several enhancements to this framework. Many extensions
model the teacher as an RL agent solving an MDP to make
the student learn as fast as possible (Fachantidis, Taylor, and
Vlahavas 2019; Omidshafiei et al. 2019; Zimmer, Viappiani,
and Weng 2014). In all these approaches, the teacher transfers the information in the form of action advice.
Although such guided exploration helps the student to
converge faster, real-world teachers typically do not guide
the student only about the best possible action in a particular situation. Instead, they may also provide a qualitative
assessment of how preferable the given situation is (Gupta
et al. 2019). Such richer advising can help the student relate better to the environment by learning about favorable
states and making better use of this knowledge in the future. Using this insight, we believe that all the above advising frameworks can benefit via better utilization of the
teacher’s knowledge. In particular, the proposal is to make
the information provided by the teacher richer by advising
the student not just on the best action to take in a state but
also about how promising that state is.
One way the teacher can provide such information is by
partitioning the state space into a set of (qualitative) categories. On being queried, along with the optimal action to
take, the teacher can inform the student about the state’s category as per the teacher’s estimate. To utilize the advice of
this nature, the student will have to process the advice into
a form that is compatible with its learning algorithm. The
student is an RL agent, learning to optimize its performance
using numerical feedback. Hence we assume that it can interpret and adapt to numerical values. Therefore, the student
would need to map the space of qualitative classes to a numerical space using a well-defined mathematical function.
Since many RL agents use value function approximators to
model their policies, it would be beneficial to define this
function as an approximation to V(s) (the state’s value). In
the case of Q-learning agents, this would directly provide
the value of the optimal action, which is Q(s, a) where a is
the optimal action in the given state s. The student can use
these mapped values to guide its learning.
In this paper, we use these values to move the student’s
Q-Network in the right direction. This means, the student
moves its V (s) (Q(s, a) for the optimal action a) values in
the direction of this approximate value. Due to the spatial

The teacher-student framework aims to improve the sample
efficiency of RL algorithms by deploying an advising mechanism in which a teacher helps a student by guiding its exploration. Prior work in this field has considered an advising
mechanism where the teacher advises the student about the
optimal action to take in a given state. However, real-world
teachers can leverage domain expertise to provide more informative signals. Using this insight, we propose to extend the
current advising framework wherein the teacher would provide not only the optimal action but also a qualitative assessment of the state. We introduce a novel architecture, namely
Advice Replay Memory (ARM), to effectively reuse the advice provided by the teacher. We demonstrate the robustness
of our approach by showcasing our experiments on multiple
Atari 2600 games using a fixed set of hyper-parameters. Additionally, we show that a student taking help even from a suboptimal teacher can achieve significant performance boosts
and eventually outperform the teacher. Our approach outperforms the baselines even when provided with comparatively
suboptimal teachers and an advising budget, which is smaller
by orders of magnitude. The contributions of our paper are 4fold (a) supplementing student’s knowledge by providing the
state category (b) introduction of ARM to effectively reuse
the advice throughout learning (c) ability to achieve significant performance boost even with a coarse state categorization (d) enabling the student to outperform the teacher.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning and their combination
with conventional Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques
have shown promising results in solving complex decisionmaking problems. Although there have been many successful RL applications, scaling up to large state spaces remains
a challenge. In many real-world settings like autonomous
driving (Michels, Saxena, and Ng 2005) and robot navigation (Matarić 1997), learning time is very expensive. Transfer Learning (Taylor and Stone 2009) alleviates this problem
by using domain expertise to accelerate the learning speed.
The Teacher-Student framework (Torrey and Taylor 2013)
is one such paradigm, where a domain expert (teacher) helps
accelerate the student’s learning by providing advice on the
* Both authors contributed equally
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6653

