The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Minimum Robust Multi-Submodular Cover for Fairness
Lan N. Nguyen

My T. Thai

Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611
lan.nguyen@ufl.edu mythai@cise.ufl.edu

Abstract

many applications (e.g. broadening participants in STEM),
it is important to ensure the diversity and fairness among
different ethnics and genders. Therefore, those applications
aim to find a minimum seed set such that the information can
reach to each group in a fair manner.
Items Recommendation for Multiple Users. Recommendation systems aim to make a good recommendation,
e.g. a set of items, which can match users’ preferences. In
many situations, an item can be served for multiple users,
e.g. a family. In this problem, a user’s utility level to a set of
items is modelled under a monotone submodular function.
The objective, therefore, is to find the smallest set of items,
from which we can design a recommendation for all users in
a way that all reach a certain utility level.
Additionally, these problems require robustness in the solution set, in the sense that the solution satisfies all the constraints even if some elements were removed. Those removal
can be from various reasons. For instance, in information
propagation, a subset of users may decide not to spread the
information (Bogunovic et al. 2017). Or in recommendation
systems, due to the uncertainty of underlying data, information of some items may not be accurate (Orlin, Schulz, and
Udwani 2018).
Achieving a reasonable prior distribution on the removed
elements may not be practical in many situations. Or even
when the distribution is known, it is critical to obtain a robust
solution with a high level of certainty, in a way that all goals
are still achieved under the worst-case removal. Motivated
by that observation, in this work, we study a novel problem,
Minimum Robust Multi-Submodular Cover for Fairness
(M IN RF), defined as follows.
Definition 1. (M IN RF) Given a finite set V ; m monotone
submodular functions f1 , ...fm where fi : 2V → R≥ ; m
non-negative numbers T1 , ..., Tm , and a non-negative integer
r, find a set S ⊆ V of minimum size such that ∀ i ∈ [m],
min|X|≤r fi (S \ X) ≥ Ti .
M IN RF’s objective can also be understood as finding S
of minimum size such that for all X ⊆ V that |X| ≤ r and
i ∈ [m], fi (S \ X) ≥ Ti . Beside two applications as stated
early, M IN RF can also be applied in many other applications, such as Sensor Placement (Orlin, Schulz, and Udwani
2018; Ohsaka and Yoshida 2015), which guarantees each
measurement (e.g. temperature, humidity) reaches a certain
information gain while being robust against sensors’ failure;

In this paper, we study a novel problem, Minimum Robust
Multi-Submodular Cover for Fairness (M IN RF), as follows: given a ground set V ; m monotone submodular functions f1 , ..., fm ; m thresholds T1 , ..., Tm and a non-negative
integer r, M IN RF asks for the smallest set S such that for all
i ∈ [m], min|X|≤r fi (S \ X) ≥ Ti . We prove that M IN RF is
inapproximable within (1 − ) ln m; and no algorithm, taking
fewer than exponential number of queries in term of r, is able
to output a feasible set to M IN RF with high certainty. Three
bicriteria approximation algorithms with performance guarantees are proposed: one for r = 0, one for r = 1, and one for
general r. We further investigate our algorithms’ performance
in two applications of M IN RF, Information Propagation for
Multiple Groups and Movie Recommendation for Multiple
Users. Our algorithms have shown to outperform baseline
heuristics in both solution quality and the number of queries
in most cases.

Introduction
In a minimum submodular cover, given a ground set V , a
monotone submodular set function f : 2V → R and a number T , the problem asks for a set S ⊆ V of minimum size
such that f (S) ≥ T . This problem was studied extensively in
the literature because of its wide-range applications, e.g. data
summarization (Mirzasoleiman et al. 2015; Mirzasoleiman,
Zadimoghaddam, and Karbasi 2016), active set selection
(Norouzi-Fard et al. 2016), recommendation systems (Guillory and Bilmes 2011), information propagation in social
networks (Kuhnle et al. 2017), and network resilience assessment (Nguyen and Thai 2019; Dinh and Thai 2014).
However, a single objective function f may not well model
several practical applications where achieving multiple goals
is required, especially when group fairness is considered. Let
us consider the following two representative applications.
Information Propagation in Social Network for Multiple Groups. Social networks are cost-effective tools for
information spreading by selecting a set of highly influential people (called seed set) that, through the word-of-mouth
effects, the information will be reached to a large number
of population (Kuhnle et al. 2017; Nguyen, Zhou, and Thai
2019; Zhang et al. 2014; Nguyen, Thai, and Dinh 2016). For
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9109

