The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Multi-step-ahead Markov Conditional Forward Model with Cube Perturbations
for Extreme Weather Forecasting
Chia-Yuan Chang,* Cheng-Wei Lu,* Chuan-Ju Wang
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{cychang, cwlu, cjwang}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

due to the heavily skewed distribution of such rare events, extreme weather prediction remains one of the most challenging
tasks in climate science and meteorology.
Traditionally, numerical weather prediction and generic
circulation models are key tools to forecast the evolution
of atmospheric states over time (Scher 2018). Both types
of models acquire their predictions by solving discretized
physical equations of the physics of the atmosphere. In recent years, combinations of machine learning models and
physics formulation have been proposed for more accurate
predictions (Reichstein et al. 2019; Krasnopolsky and FoxRabinovitz 2006; Holden et al. 2015; Scher and Messori
2018). For example, (Holden et al. 2015) learn relations between orbital parameters and climate fields from a climate
model, whereas (Scher and Messori 2018) seek to predict the
uncertainty of weather forecasts. Although such techniques
are valuable for climate science and meteorology, they are
focused on either extracting certain information from models or on combining information from different models, for
which machine learning is thus regarded as a complement to
traditional physical models.
Of late, pure machine learning and data-driven methods
have found their way to weather analysis and prediction.
Starting from simple regression to complicated neural network models, machine learning techniques have been applied to various weather tasks, including predicting hurricane
routes (Kim 2019) and estimating precipitation (Hwang et al.
2019). As weather data are usually presented as an image
with multiple weather features, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) are usually used; for example, CNN has been applied
to predict the bounding box of extreme weather (Racah et al.
2017) and to emulate the complete physics and dynamics of
generic circulation models (Scher 2018).
On the other hand, multi-step-ahead (MSA) prediction,
rather than single-step, is more common in applications. For
decades, the time-series literature has formulated MSA prediction with various training strategies, including direct and
recursive strategies (Al-Qahtani and Crone 2013; Bontempi,
Le Borgne, and De Stefani 2017; Chang, Chiang, and Chang
2007; Cheng et al. 2006; Hussein, Chandra, and Sharma
2016; Koesdwiady, El Khatib, and Karray 2018; Sorjamaa
et al. 2007; Taieb and Atiya 2015; Taieb et al. 2012). For
the direct strategy, separate prediction models are trained
to directly predict each h-step ahead, whereas for recursive

Predicting extreme weather events such as tropical and extratropical cyclones is of vital scientific and societal importance.
Of late, machine learning methods have found their way to
weather analysis and prediction, but mostly, these methods use
machine learning merely as a complement to traditional numerical weather prediction models. Although some pure machine
learning and data-driven approaches for weather prediction
have been developed, they mainly formulate the problem similar to pattern recognition or follow the train of thought of
traditional time-series models for extreme weather event forecasting; for the former, this usually yields only single-step
ahead prediction, and for the latter, this lacks the flexibility to
account for observed weather features as such methods concern only the patterns of the extreme weather occurrences. In
this paper, we depart from the typical practice of pattern recognition and time-series approaches and focus on employing machine learning to estimate the probabilities of extreme weather
occurrences in a multi-step-ahead (MSA) fashion given information on both weather features and the realized occurrences
of extreme weather. Specifically, we propose a Markov conditional forward (MCF) model that adopts the Markov property
between the occurrences of extreme weather for MSA extreme
weather forecasting. Moreover, for better long-term prediction,
we propose three novel cube perturbation methods to address
error accumulation in our model. Experimental results on a
real-world extreme weather dataset show the superiority of
the proposed MCF model in terms of prediction accuracy for
both short-term and long-term forecasting; moreover, the three
cube perturbation methods successfully increase the fault tolerance and generalization ability of the MCF model, yielding
significant improvements for long-term prediction.

1

Introduction

Extreme weather forecasting is vital for efficient resource
management and active warning systems (Rolnick et al.
2019). The further ahead that predictions can be made, the
more beneficial in terms of allowing time for adjustment and
reduction of damage due to the event. An accurate prediction
of extreme weather is therefore crucial for both damage control and optimizing the management of government resources.
However, extreme weather occurrences are by nature rare;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
These authors contributed equally to this work.

6948

