The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable Equilibrium Computation in Multi-agent Influence Games on Networks
Fotini Christia,1 Michael Curry,2 Constantinos Daskalakis,1 Erik Demaine,1 John P. Dickerson,2
MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi,2 Adam Hesterberg,1 Marina Knittel,2 Aidan Milliff1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of Maryland, College Park
cfotini@mit.edu, curry@cs.umd.edu, costis@csail.mit.edu, edemaine@mit.edu, john@cs.umd.edu, hajiaghayi@gmail.com,
achesterberg@gmail.com, mknittel@cs.umd.edu, milliff@mit.edu
2

Abstract

Kuran and Sandholm 2008; Hagenbach and Koessler 2010;
Jackson 2010; Montanari and Saberi 2010; Acemoglu et al.
2011; Acemoglu and Ozdaglar 2011; Bhawalkar, Gollapudi,
and Munagala 2013; Bindel, Kleinberg, and Oren 2015), but
note that this literature is vast and we cannot do it justice
here.
Clearly, the outcome of the opinion spreading dynamics,
be it a limiting state, a stationary distribution, or a transient
measure over beliefs or expressed beliefs, is intimately related to the “seeding” of the network’s nodes with initial
beliefs. This naturally suggests an algorithmic challenge.
Given a network, an objective function assigning payoffs to
different configurations of beliefs on the network’s nodes,
and a seeding budget, how should this budget be allocated
to influence the initial beliefs of the nodes so as to maximize the objective function in the outcome of the opinion
spreading dynamics? This problem has been studied intensively in the literature, leading to efficient algorithms attaining (approximately) optimal solutions under various instantiations of our problem; see e.g. (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Chen, Yuan, and Zhang 2010; Gionis, Terzi, and
Tsaparas 2013; Ahmadinejad et al. 2014, 2015).
Of course, many settings involve multiple entities competing for influence in a network. These could be different brands selling competing products. They could be different political parties competing for voters. They could be
different social network influencers competing for followers. Examples abound, suggesting a natural extension of
the afore-described optimization problem to the following
game-theoretic challenges: How should a strategic agent optimally spend their budget to seed the network in order to
maximize their final influence, in anticipation of not only
how their seeding will affect the opinion spreading dynamics
but also in anticipation of the strategies of other agents who
are simultaneously seeding the network and may have competing objectives? What are the resulting equilibria? And
how do the optimal strategies depend on the structure of
the network, which nodes are deemed most valuable by the
agents’ objectives, and what the initial beliefs of the nodes
are?
These are the challenges that we target in this paper. We
study multi-agent influence games over networks, using a
natural extension, to multidimensional beliefs, of Friedkin
and Johnsen’s extension (Friedkin and Johnsen 1990) of

We provide a polynomial-time, scalable algorithm for equilibrium computation in multi-agent influence games on networks, extending work of Bindel, Kleinberg, and Oren (2015)
from the single-agent to the multi-agent setting. In games of
influence, agents have limited advertising budget to influence
the initial predisposition of nodes in some network towards
their products, but the eventual decisions of the nodes are determined by the stationary state of DeGroot opinion dynamics on the network, which takes over after the seeding (Ahmadinejad et al. 2014, 2015). In multi-agent systems, how
should agents spend their budgets to seed the network to maximize their utility in anticipation of other advertising agents
and the network dynamics? We show that Nash equilibria of
this game are pure and (under weak assumptions) unique, and
can be computed in polynomial time; we test our model by
computing equilibria using mirror descent for the two-agent
case on random graphs.

1

Introduction

Opinion formation and spreading dynamics over networks
are important and well-researched topics in sociology, economics, probability, and a variety of other applied and theoretical fields. They are related to a variety of other problems on networks, such as the spreading of technologies or
epidemics, and are becoming increasingly important from
a computational standpoint as much of economic activity,
advertising, and political influencing takes place on online
social networks. There is an array of models for how opinions spread over networks, but the basic premise is simple: at the beginning of time, nodes in the network have
some initial beliefs, reflecting political opinions, affiliation
to groups, technologies that they use, or proclivity to buy different products; from time zero onward, network spreading
dynamics determine how nodes express and update their beliefs as a function of their own state and the expressed beliefs
of the other nodes in the network. A long line of work investigates how different types of belief spaces, state spaces,
expressed beliefs, update rules, and, importantly, the structure of the network influence the opinion spreading dynamics and its final outcomes; see, e.g. (DeGroot 1974; Friedkin and Johnsen 1990; Ellison 1993; Gale and Kariv 2003;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5277

