The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Gradient Flow with Unrolled Highway Expectation Maximization
Chonghyuk Song, Eunseok Kim, Inwook Shim*
Ground Technology Research Institute, Agency for Defense Development
{chonghyuk.song, a18700, iwshim}@add.re.kr

Abstract

Jointly training this combined architecture discriminatively
allows one to leverage the expressive power of deep neural
networks and the ability of model-based methods to incorporate prior knowledge of the task at hand, resulting in potentially many benefits (Hershey, Roux, and Weninger 2014).
First, unrolled EM iterations are analogous to an attention mechanism when the underlying latent variable model
is a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) (Hinton, Sabour, and
Frosst 2018; Li et al. 2019). The Gaussian mean estimates
capture long-range interactions among the inputs, just like
in the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2018). Furthermore, EM attention (Li
et al. 2019) is computationally more efficient than the original self-attention mechanism, which computes representations as a weighted sum of every point in the input, whereas
EM attention computes them as a weighted sum of a smaller
number of Gaussian means. The EM algorithm iteratively
refines these Gaussian means such that they monotonically
increase the log-likelihood of the input features, increasingly
enabling them to attend to the fundamental semantics of the
input while suppressing its irrelevant noise and details.
Despite the beneficial effects EM has on the forward pass,
jointly training a backbone neural network with EM layers is challenging as they are prone to the vanishing gradient problem (Li et al. 2019). This phenomenon, which
was first introduced in (Vaswani et al. 2017), is a problem
shared by all attention mechanisms that employ the dotproduct softmax operation in the computation of attention
maps. Skip connections have shown to be remarkably effective at resolving vanishing gradients for a variety of deep
network architectures (Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber
2015; He et al. 2016b; Huang et al. 2017; Gers, Schmidhuber, and Cummins 1999; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997;
Cho et al. 2014), including attention-based models (Vaswani
et al. 2017; Bapna et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019). However,
the question remains as how to incorporate skip connections
in a way that maintains the underlying EM procedure of converging to a (local) optimum of the data log-likelihood.
In this paper, we aim to address the vanishing gradient
problem of unrolled EM iterations while preserving the EM
algorithm, thereby retaining its efficiency and convergence
properties and the benefits of end-to-end learning. Instead of
unrolling EM iterations, we unroll generalized EM (GEM)
iterations, where the M-step is replaced by one step of the

Integrating model-based machine learning methods into deep
neural architectures allows one to leverage both the expressive power of deep neural nets and the ability of model-based
methods to incorporate domain-specific knowledge. In particular, many works have employed the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm in the form of an unrolled layerwise structure that is jointly trained with a backbone neural network. However, it is difficult to discriminatively train
the backbone network by backpropagating through the EM
iterations as they are prone to the vanishing gradient problem. To address this issue, we propose Highway Expectation Maximization Networks (HEMNet), which is comprised
of unrolled iterations of the generalized EM (GEM) algorithm based on the Newton-Rahpson method. HEMNet features scaled skip connections, or highways, along the depths
of the unrolled architecture, resulting in improved gradient
flow during backpropagation while incurring negligible additional computation and memory costs compared to standard
unrolled EM. Furthermore, HEMNet preserves the underlying EM procedure, thereby fully retaining the convergence
properties of the original EM algorithm. We achieve significant improvement in performance on several semantic segmentation benchmarks and empirically show that HEMNet
effectively alleviates gradient decay.

1

Introduction

The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster,
Laird, and Rubin 1977) is a well-established algorithm in
the field of statistical learning used to iteratively find the
maximum-likelihood solution for latent variable models. It
has traditionally been used for a variety of problems, ranging from unsupervised clustering to missing data imputation. With the dramatic rise in adoption of deep learning in
the past few years, recent works (Jampani et al. 2018; Hinton, Sabour, and Frosst 2018; Li et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020; Greff, Van Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2017) have
aimed to combine the model-based approach of EM with
deep neural networks. These two approaches are typically
combined by unrolling the iterative steps of the EM as layers
in a deep network, which takes as input the features generated by a backbone network that learns the representations.
* Inwook Shim is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9704

