The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Meta-Curriculum Learning for Domain Adaptation
in Neural Machine Translation
Runzhe Zhan* , Xuebo Liu* , Derek F. Wong† , Lidia S. Chao
NLP2 CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
nlp2ct.{runzhe,xuebo}@gmail.com, {derekfw,lidiasc}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Meta-learning has been sufficiently validated to be beneficial
for low-resource neural machine translation (NMT). However, we find that meta-trained NMT fails to improve the
translation performance of the domain unseen at the metatraining stage. In this paper, we aim to alleviate this issue by proposing a novel meta-curriculum learning for domain adaptation in NMT. During meta-training, the NMT
first learns the similar curricula from each domain to avoid
falling into a bad local optimum early, and finally learns
the curricula of individualities to improve the model robustness for learning domain-specific knowledge. Experimental results on 10 different low-resource domains show that
meta-curriculum learning can improve the translation performance of both familiar and unfamiliar domains. All the codes
and data are freely available at https://github.com/NLP2CT/
Meta-Curriculum.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) has become the de facto
method for automatic translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al.
2017). Despite its successes in mainstream language pairs
(e.g., English to/from French) and domains (e.g., News),
its potential in the translation of low-resource domains remains underexplored (Koehn and Knowles 2017). Metalearning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), which adapts a
meta-trained model to a new domain by using a minimal
amount of training instances, becomes an intuitive appeal
for improving the translation quality of low-resource domains (Gu et al. 2018; Li, Wang, and Yu 2020).
The basic idea of meta-learning for NMT is meta-training
a domain-agnostic teacher model containing a set of highly
robust parameters as initialization for fine-tuning domainspecific student models. The degree of the robustness determines the performance ceilings of these student models.
Sharaf, Hassan, and Daumé III (2020) propose Meta-MT,
which meta-trains the training instances of all used domains,
and find that the learned initialization can generalize to these

Figure 1: (a): Traditional fine-tuning favors high-resource
domains (Green) over low-resource domains (Pink) and unseen domains (Orange). (b): Meta-MT partially alleviates
the issue but is still biased in unseen domains. (c): Metacurriculum learning performs well on all domains.

domains that improve the translation performance after individually fine-tuning. Unfortunately, as shown in Figure 1,
for those domains (e.g., COVID-19) which are not trained
during meta-training, their fine-tuning performances fail to
gain improvements over traditional fine-tuning. This significantly reduces the transferability of Meta-MT, and also limits its applicability.
In this paper, we aim to alleviate the above limitations by
further improving the robustness of a meta-trained teacher
model. Motivated by curriculum learning for NMT (Bengio
et al. 2009; Platanios et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020), which
arranges the learning curricula from easy to difficult during
NMT training, we propose a novel learning strategy for lowresource domain translation, called meta-curriculum learning. During meta-training, our proposed method learns the
curricula of commonalities from different domains at the beginning, and those curricula of individualities at last. The be-

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14310

