The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Relation Detection Using Hybrid Analogical Learning
Kezhen Chen and Ken Forbus

Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
kzchen@u.northwestern.edu, forbus@northwestern.edu

Abstract

(Samek, Wiegand, and Muller, 2017; Buhrmester, Munch,
and Arens, 2019). This paper introduces a new hybrid system that combines deep learning models and analogical generalization to get the best features of both: the broad coverage of deep learning models and the high training-efficiency
and explainability of probabilistic symbolic representations
produced by analogical generalization.
Cognitive psychology provides evidence that analogy
plays important roles in human vision (Sagi et al., 2012; Anderson et al., 2018). Moreover, computational models of
analogy, combined with computational models of high-level
vision using relational representations, have been successful
in modeling a variety of psychological phenomena. For example, (Kandaswamy et al., 2014) showed that the Structure
Mapping Engine (SME), an analogical matching model, can
model learning forced-choice tasks with visual stimuli. Similarly, (Lovett and Forbus, 2013) showed that CogSketch
1
(Forbus et al., 2011), a model of human visual perception
that relies on analogical matching and relational structure,
can solve mental rotation and paper folding tasks using
SME, and performs better than most adult Americans on Raven’s Progressive Matrices (Lovett and Forbus, 2017).
These models have been used in performance-oriented systems as well: Analogical generalization has been used to
perform visual tasks such as object recognition (Chen et al.,
2019) and link plausibility (Liang & Forbus, 2015) to perform training-efficient learning with explainability.
Given an image, we use off-the-shelf deep-learning models to detect object categories, object bounding boxes and
object masks. Object bounding boxes provide positional and
spatial information. Object masks show the pose information of objects. For most object pairs, the visual semantic
relations can be recognized using the positional information,
pose information and category information. Therefore, we
encode these qualitative representations for each object pair.
The qualitative representations of object pairs are passed to
analogical generalization to learn and classify the possible

Visual Relation Detection is currently one of the most popular problems for visual understanding. Many deep-learning
models are designed for relation detection on images and
have achieved impressive results. However, deep-learning
models have several serious problems, including poor training-efficiency and lack of understandability. Psychologists
have ample evidence that analogy is central in human learning and reasoning, including visual reasoning. This paper introduces a new hybrid system for visual relation detection
combining deep-learning models and analogical generalization. Object bounding boxes and masks are detected using
deep-learning models and analogical generalization over
qualitative representations is used for visual relation detection between object pairs. Experiments on the Visual Relation Detection dataset indicates that our hybrid system gets
comparable results on the task and is more training-efficient
and explainable than pure deep-learning models.

Introduction
When performing visual understanding, people tend to encode relations between pairs of recognized objects. Visual
relation detection is thus an important task for artificial intelligence and computer vision. Given an image, the goal of
this task is to visually detect objects and predict relational
predicates between them. Deep-learning models have
achieved impressive results, mostly using two stages for this
task: object detection followed by pairwise relation recognition. Most of the deep-learning models operate end-to-end,
combining the two stages into one single neural network.
They have broad coverage on the input data, especially on
visual data. However, given the single neural network, models have some serious problems such as low training-efficiency and lack of understandability. For example, (Ciresan
et al., 2011) uses data-augmentation to increase the training
samples to learn a classification model with many epochs on
MNIST dataset. Many researchers have argued that neural
networks are hard to trust because they lack explainability
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

CogSketch can be downloaded at https://www.qrg.northwestern.edu/software/software_index.html.

1

801

