The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Perception Score: A Learned Metric for Open-ended Text Generation Evaluation
Jing Gu1 , Qingyang Wu1 , Zhou Yu2
1

University of California, Davis
2
Columbia University
{jkgu,wilwu}@ucdavis.edu, zy2461@columbia.edu

Context of Conversation
Speaker A: I usually drink soda or milk in the morning.
Speaker B: Cool, what do you want today?
Model Response
I prefer the latter this morning.
Reference Response
I would like some milk today.
Context of Story
I tried going to the park the other day. The weather
seemed nice enough for a walk. Within minutes of
getting there I started sneezing. My eyes were watery
and it was hard to breathe.
Model Generated Ending
My allergies were too bad and I had to go back home.
Reference Ending
I took my allergy pill and felt better afterwards.

Abstract
Automatic evaluation for open-ended natural language generation tasks remains a challenge. We propose a learned evaluation metric: Perception Score. It utilizes a pre-trained model
and considers context information for conditional generation.
Perception Score assigns a holistic score along with uncertainty measurement. We conduct experiments on three openended conditional generation tasks and two open-ended unconditional generation tasks. Perception Score achieves stateof-the-art results on all the tasks consistently in terms of correlation with human evaluation scores.

Introduction
With the recent advances in natural language generation
(NLG) (Radford et al. 2019; Vaswani et al. 2017), automatic
evaluation has drawn more attention from the research community. However, current automatic evaluation metrics often
have limitations in measuring the actual generation quality.
In contrast, human evaluation is considered more reliable
than the automatic evaluation metrics, but it is expensive and
time-consuming, especially for the generation tasks that require extensive domain expertise (Celikyilmaz, Clark, and
Gao 2020). Therefore, it is important to have an evaluation
metric that provides an acceptable proxy for quality and is
relatively affordable.
N-gram overlapping such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002)
and ROUGE (Lin 2004) are the most widely used metrics
across NLG tasks. However, these metrics only consider
word-form variation and often fail to capture the deeper semantic meaning. Thus, these metrics usually have a low correlation with human judgment on open-ended NLG tasks
(Lowe et al. 2017; Zhou and Xu 2020; Cui et al. 2018; Chaganty, Mussmann, and Liang 2018).
Recently, various metrics have also been proposed to measure the similarity between the references and the generations beyond the lexical level. BERTScore (Zhang* et al.
2020) and MoverScore (Zhao et al. 2019) are proposed to
use the contextual embedding from a large pre-trained neural model to measure the semantic similarity. BLEURT (Sellam, Das, and Parikh 2020) mixes various existing metrics to
improve the robustness. While these metrics obtain a good

Figure 1: Demonstrations of the importance of incorporating context into sentence quality evaluation process. First
example: similar semantics but different surface forms. Second example: different semantics but both reasonable.

result on machine translation tasks, they may have a less satisfactory performance in open-ended natural language generation tasks because a sentence could be of high quality but
different from the given reference in semantic level.
Another problem in current metrics is that they usually do
not incorporate context information into the evaluation process (Celikyilmaz, Clark, and Gao 2020). The context may
be important when evaluating a generation model’s quality
in open-ended natural language generation tasks, as exemplified in Figure 1. First, the semantic meaning of a sentence
could be context-dependent. Taking context into consideration would lead to a more accurate similarity measurement
between the generated sentence and the reference one. Secondly, there can exist multiple valid target sentences in openended generation tasks given the same context. Therefore
previous metrics with only one reference sentence may lead
to misjudgment of other reasonable endings.
We propose Perception Score, an automatic evaluation
metric for open-ended text generation tasks. Perception
Score is a learned metric that measures the overall quality
of a generative model via assigning a single holistic score

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12902

