The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RSPNet: Relative Speed Perception for
Unsupervised Video Representation Learning
Peihao Chen,1,5∗† Deng Huang,1† Dongliang He,2 Xiang Long,2 Runhao Zeng,1
Shilei Wen,2 Mingkui Tan,1,4‡ Chuang Gan3
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education, 5 Pazhou Laboratory
{phchencs, im.huangdeng, runhaozeng.cs, ganchuang1990}@gmail.com,
{hedongliang01, longxiang, wenshilei}@baidu.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

We study unsupervised video representation learning that
seeks to learn both motion and appearance features from unlabeled video only, which can be reused for downstream
tasks such as action recognition. This task, however, is extremely challenging due to 1) the highly complex spatialtemporal information in videos and 2) the lack of labeled data
for training. Unlike representation learning for static images,
it is difficult to construct a suitable self-supervised task to effectively model both motion and appearance features. More
recently, several attempts have been made to learn video representation through video playback speed prediction. However, it is non-trivial to obtain precise speed labels for the
videos. More critically, the learned models may tend to focus on motion patterns and thus may not learn appearance
features well. In this paper, we observe that the relative playback speed is more consistent with motion patterns and thus
provides more effective and stable supervision for representation learning. Therefore, we propose a new way to perceive
the playback speed and exploit the relative speed between
two video clips as labels. In this way, we are able to effectively perceive speed and learn better motion features. Moreover, to ensure the learning of appearance features, we further propose an appearance-focused task, where we enforce
the model to perceive the appearance difference between two video clips. We show that jointly optimizing the two tasks
consistently improves the performance on two downstream
tasks (namely, action recognition and video retrieval) w.r.t
the increasing pre-training epochs. Remarkably, for action
recognition on the UCF101 dataset, we achieve 93.7% accuracy without the use of labeled data for pre-training, which
outperforms the ImageNet supervised pre-trained model. Our
code, pre-trained models, and supplementary materials can be
found at https://github.com/PeihaoChen/RSPNet.

1

Different speed labels
but similar content

Same speed label
but different content

Abstract

1x speed

1x speed

2x speed

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: An illustrative example of content-label inconsistency. In existing speed perception-based methods (Benaim
et al. 2020), 1) both video clips (a) and (b) are labeled as 1x
speed, i.e., sampled consecutively, but the contents of these
two clips are dissimilar. The left player shoots the ball more
slowly, while the middle player has finished shooting within
the same time period. 2) Although clip (c) is labeled as 2x
speed, i.e., the sampling interval is set to 2 frames, it appears
similar to the middle clip with different speed labels.

action recognition (Wu et al. 2021; Long et al. 2018), event
detection (Gan et al. 2015), action localization (Chen et al.
2020a; Zeng et al. 2019, 2020), audio-visual scene analysis (Gan et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020b; Gan et al. 2020),
video question answering (Huang et al. 2020), etc. Compared with static images, videos often contain more complex spatial-temporal content and have a larger data volume,
making them very challenging to annotate and analyze. How
to learn effective video representations with a few annotations or even without annotations represents an important yet
challenging task (Gan et al. 2016a, 2018; Fan et al. 2018).
Recently, unsupervised video representation learning,
which seeks to learn appearance and motion features from
unlabeled videos, has attracted great attention (Cho et al.
2020; Benaim et al. 2020; Epstein, Chen, and Vondrick
2020; Gan et al. 2016b). This task, however, is very difficult
due to several challenges: 1) The downstream video understanding tasks, such as action recognition, rely on both appearance features (e.g., texture and shape of objects, background scene) and motion features (e.g., the movement of

Introduction

Video analysis has been a prominent research topic in computer vision due to its vast potential applications, including
∗

This work was done when Peihao Chen was a research intern
at Baidu.
†
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1045

