The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Second Order Techniques for Learning Time-series With Structural Breaks
Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research - Tokyo
osogami@jp.ibm.com

Abstract

gradient methods also follow this idea when they are applied
to online learning for time-series.
Although forgetting the past is essential in dealing with
structural breaks, it involves two difficulties in practice.
First, one needs to set (and adaptively tune) the forgetting
rate appropriately. If we do not forget sufficiently, we cannot
adapt to changes. If we forget too much, we might overreact to noise and trivial changes. Second, the size of effective
data is small when we forget the past. Without appropriate
regularization, our models can overfit to the small data.
We propose a technique for adaptively changing the forgetting rate and the strength of regularization to deal with
structural breaks. We simultaneously train a small number
of models with varying forgetting rates and regularizationcoefficients. We then track the predictive errors of those
models with multiple values of the hyper forgetting rate,
placing higher weight on more recent predictive errors. Our
key idea is to first choose the best performing hyper forgetting rate and then choose the best performing model based
on the best hyper forgetting rate at each (time) step. The best
model is then used to make a prediction.
Notice that, in the standard literature, the forgetting rate
is a hyperparameter of an objective function and cannot be
tuned in a way similar to the hyperparameters of machine
learning models and algorithms. We need a criteria to determine what forgetting rates are good, but the forgetting rate is
a part of the objective function. We introduce hyper forgetting rate as a means to determine what forgetting rates are
good. With a hyper forgetting rate, the forgetting rate can
now be considered as a hyperparameter of a model.
Our approach is primarily targeted at industrial timeseries that can exhibit structural breaks but have small to
medium dimensions (after feature engineering and variable
selection). For such time-series, a compact linear model having at most n = 1, 000 weights often suffices or even works
best, as complex models either overfit to latest data or fail to
adapt to changes. We thus design our approach by allowing
O(n2 ) computational time (and space) in updating our models and making a prediction at each (time) step. However,
we keep the computational time per step independent of the
length of time-series, which may be indefinitely long.
The O(n2 ) time per step is sufficient to optimize the
weights for a linear model with a given forgetting rate and
no regularization (by recursive least squares). However, this

We study fundamental problems in learning nonstationary
time-series: how to effectively regularize time-series models
and how to adaptively tune forgetting rates. The effectiveness of L2 regularization depends on the choice of coordinates, and the variables need to be appropriately normalized.
In nonstationary environment, however, what is appropriate
can vary over time. Proposed regularization is invariant to
the invertible linear transformation of coordinates, eliminating the necessity of normalization. We also propose an ensemble learning approach to adaptively tuning the forgetting
rate and regularization-coefficient. We train multiple models
with varying hyperparameters and evaluate their performance
by the use of multiple hyper forgetting rates. At each step, we
choose the best performing model on the basis of the best performing hyper forgetting rate. The effectiveness of the proposed approaches is demonstrated with real time-series.

Introduction
Time-series data is ubiquitous in industries, where the quality and efficiency of services rely on learning from such data
for forecasting, anomaly detection, and decision making.
For example, financial institutions are eager to make better
forecast in stock markets. Early detection of anomaly from
sensor data is critical in complex industrial products.
Learning time-series in industries is often hard due to nonstationarity, or structural breaks in particular. For example,
financial markets change drastically with economic bubbles
and major exogenous events. Sensor data from industrial
products is often susceptible to changes in their environment and deterioration of their components. Thus, there has
been a significant amount of research to deal with structural
breaks in time-series in the field of artificial intelligence,
statistics, signal processing (Farhang-Boroujeny 2013), and
economics (Granger and Newbold 1986).
A common idea in the literature is not only to incorporate
latest data but also to gradually forget past data. The most
celebrated is the method of recursive least squares, which recursively updates the weights (coefficients) of a linear model
in a way that the weighted squared error of prediction is minimized, where the weight on the past data gets smaller exponentially with time (Farhang-Boroujeny 2013). Stochastic
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9259

