The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dialog Policy Learning for Joint Clarification and Active Learning Queries
Aishwarya Padmakumar, 1 Raymond J. Mooney 2
1

Amazon Alexa AI *
University of Texas at Austin
padmakua@amazon.com, mooney@cs.utexas.edu
2

Abstract

Padmakumar, Thomason, and Mooney 2017), or active
learning (Woodward and Finn 2017; Padmakumar, Stone,
and Mooney 2018). The primary contributions of this work
are introducing a dialog task that combines both clarification
and active learning, and learning a corresponding dialog policy for this setting that outperforms a static baseline policy.
Specifically, we train a hierarchical dialog policy to jointly
learn to choose clarification and active learning queries in
interactive image retrieval for a fashion domain.
A sample interaction is shown in Figure 1. We consider
an application where a dialog system is combined with a
retrieval system to help a customer find an article of clothing.
Instead of just showing a large number of retrieved results,
the dialog system attempts to use clarifications to refine the
search query, and active learning questions to obtain labelled
examples for novel concepts unseen during training.
Task-oriented dialog often requires the system to identify
one or more user goals using a slot-filling model (Young
et al. 2013). These systems learn to choose between a set
of clarification questions that confirm or acquire the value
of various slots. However, for tasks such as natural language image retrieval, it is difficult to extend the slot-filling
paradigm for clarification, as there is no standard set of
slots into which descriptions of images can be divided. Also,
learned models are needed to identify aspects such as objects
or attributes, which are difficult to pre-enumerate.
Some tasks such as GuessWhat?! (De Vries et al. 2017) or
discriminative question generation (Li et al. 2017) allow the
system to ask unconstrained natural language clarification
questions. However they require specially designed models
to ensure that learned questions actually decrease the search
space (Lee, Heo, and Zhang 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). Such
open ended questions are also difficult to answer in simulation, which is often necessary for learning good dialog policies. Hence, in these tasks, the system often learns to ask
“easy” questions that can be reliably answered by a learned
answering module (Zhu, Zhang, and Metaxas 2017).
In this work, we explore a middle-ground approach with
a form of attribute-based clarification (Farhadi et al. 2009).
We use the term “attribute” to refer to a mix of concepts
including categories such as “shirt” or “dress”, more conventional attributes such as colors, and domain specific attributes such as “sleeveless” and “V-neck”. Although we
work with a dataset that contains a fixed set of attributes an-

Intelligent systems need to be able to recover from mistakes,
resolve uncertainty, and adapt to novel concepts not seen during training. Dialog interaction can enable this by the use of
clarifications for correction and resolving uncertainty, and active learning queries to learn new concepts encountered during operation. Prior work on dialog systems has either focused on exclusively learning how to perform clarification/
information seeking, or to perform active learning. In this
work, we train a hierarchical dialog policy to jointly perform
both clarification and active learning in the context of an interactive language-based image retrieval task motivated by
an online shopping application, and demonstrate that jointly
learning dialog policies for clarification and active learning is
more effective than the use of static dialog policies for one or
both of these functions.

1

Introduction

The ability to understand and communicate in natural language can improve the accessibility of systems such as
robots, home devices and computers to non-expert users.
Since language is often be ambiguous, it is desirable for such
systems to engage in a dialog with the user to clarify their
intentions and obtain missing information. We use clarification to refer to any dialog act that enables the system to better
understand an ongoing user request. Common clarification
questions obtain or clarify the value of a slot or argument
that is part of a goal the user is trying to communicate.
A particular application may also contain domain-specific
vocabulary or concepts that were not encountered during
training. For example, a system in a shopping domain may
need to be updated with the introduction of new clothing
styles. Hence, it is desirable for a system to adapt to the operating environment using information from user interactions.
We use the term active learning to refer to dialog acts used
to obtain such knowledge with the primary purpose of improving the underlying language understanding model and
thereby improving performance on future interactions.
Prior work on dialog and user interaction typically focuses either exclusively on clarification (Young et al. 2013;
* This work was done as a part of the first author’s PhD at the
University of Texas at Austin
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13604

