The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Reinforcement Learning: A Case Study in Linear Quadratic Regulation
Bo Pang, Zhong-Ping Jiang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University, Six Metrotech Center, Brooklyn, NY 11201
{bo.pang, zjiang}@nyu.edu

Abstract

In reality, policy evaluation or policy improvement can
hardly be implemented precisely, because of the existence of
various errors, which may be induced by function approximation, state estimation, sensor noise, external disturbance
and so on. Therefore, a natural question to ask is: when is
a policy iteration algorithm robust to errors in the learning
process? In other words, under what conditions on the errors, does the policy iteration still converge to (a neighbourhood of) the optimal solution? And how to quantify the size
of this neighbourhood? In spite of the popularity and empirical successes of policy iteration, its robustness issue has
not been fully understood yet in theory, due to the inherent
nonlinearity of the process (Bertsekas 2011). The problem
becomes more complex when the state and action spaces are
unbounded and continuous, which are common in RL problems of physical systems such as robotics and autonomous
cars (Lillicrap et al. 2016). Indeed, in this case the stability
issue needs to be addressed, to avoid the selection of destabilizing policies that drive the states of the closed-loop system
into the infinity or an unsafe region.

This paper studies the robustness of reinforcement learning algorithms to errors in the learning process. Specifically, we revisit the benchmark problem of discrete-time linear quadratic regulation (LQR) and study the long-standing
open question: Under what conditions is the policy iteration method robustly stable from a dynamical systems perspective? Using advanced stability results in control theory, it is shown that policy iteration for LQR is inherently
robust to small errors in the learning process and enjoys
small-disturbance input-to-state stability: whenever the error in each iteration is bounded and small, the solutions of
the policy iteration algorithm are also bounded, and, moreover, enter and stay in a small neighbourhood of the optimal
LQR solution. As an application, a novel off-policy optimistic
least-squares policy iteration for the LQR problem is proposed, when the system dynamics are subjected to additive
stochastic disturbances. The proposed new results in robust
reinforcement learning are validated by a numerical example.

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate the robustness of policy iteration for the discrete-time linear quadratic regulator (LQR)
problem, which was firstly proposed in (Hewer 1971). Even
if the LQR is the most basic and important optimal control
problem with unbounded, continuous state and action spaces
(Bertsekas 1995), the robustness of its associated policy iteration to errors in the learning process has not been fully
investigated. The main idea of this paper is to regard the
policy iteration as a dynamical system, and then utilize the
concepts of exponential stability and input-to-state stability
in control theory to analyze its robustness (Sontag 2008). To
be more specific, we firstly prove that the optimal LQR solution is a locally exponentially stable equilibrium of the exact
policy iteration (see Lemma 1). Then based on this observation, we show that the policy iteration with errors is locally
input-to-state stable, if the errors are regarded as the disturbance input (see Lemma 2). That is, if the policy iteration
starts from an initial solution close to the optimal solution,
and the errors are small and bounded, the discrepancies between the solutions generated by the policy iteration and the
optimal solution will also be small and bounded. Thirdly,
we demonstrate that for any initial stabilizing control gain,
as long as the errors are small, the approximate solution
given by policy iteration will eventually enter a small neigh-

As an important and popular method in reinforcement learning (RL), policy iteration has been widely studied by researchers and utilized in different kinds of real-life applications by practitioners (Bertsekas 1995; Sutton and Barto
2018). Policy iteration involves two steps, policy evaluation
and policy improvement. In policy evaluation, a given policy is evaluated based on a scalar performance index. Then
this performance index is utilized to generate a new control policy in policy improvement. These two steps are iterated in turn, to find the solution of the RL problem at hand.
When all the information involved in this process is exactly
known, the convergence to the optimal solution can be provably guaranteed, by exploiting the monotonicity property
of the policy improvement step. That is, the performance
of the newly generated policy is no worse than that of the
given policy in each iteration. Over the past decades, various versions of policy iteration have been proposed, for diverse optimal control problems, see (Bertsekas 1995; Sutton
and Barto 2018; Lewis, Vrabie, and Syrmos 2012; Jiang and
Jiang 2017; Jiang, Bian, and Gao 2020) and the references
therein.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9303

