The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Asynchronous Teacher Guided Bit-wise Hard Mining for Online Hashing
Sheng Jin 1,2 , Qin Zhou2 , Hongxun Yao∗1 , Yao Liu2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2
1

The Harbin Institute of Technology,
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
jsh.hit.doc@gmail.com, h.yao@hit.edu.cn.

2

Abstract
Online hashing for streaming data has attracted increasing
attention recently. However, most existing algorithms focus
on batch inputs and instance-balanced optimization, which is
limited in the single datum input case and does not match the
dynamic training in online hashing. Furthermore, constantly
updating the online model with new-coming samples will inevitably lead to the catastrophic forgetting problem. In this
paper, we propose a novel online hashing method to handle the above-mentioned issues jointly, termed Asynchronus
Teacher-Guided Bit-wise Hard Mining for Online Hashing.
Firstly, to meet the needs of datum-wise online hashing, we
design a novel binary codebook that is discriminative to separate different classes. Secondly, we propose a novel semantic
loss (termed bit-wise attention loss) to dynamically focus on
hard samples of each bit during training. Last but not least, we
design an asynchronous knowledge distillation scheme to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting problem, where the teacher
model is delaying updated to maintain the old knowledge,
guiding the student model learning. Extensive experiments
conducted on two public benchmarks demonstrate the favorable performance of our method over the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: Illustration of the accumulated probability density for a certain bit during training along the timeline.
With more and more training iterations, we can obtain a
more compact distribution (with smaller standard deviation),
which indicates the improvement of the fitting degree.

paper, to better adapt to the practical scenario, we focus on
the task of datum-wise online hashing.
Existing datum-wise online hashing generally follows a
two-stage protocol. Firstly, a codeword is generated for each
class, then a hashing function is learned to fit this codeword. Therefore, the retrieval performance is closely related
to the predefined codewords. In the early stage, OSH (Cakir,
Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017) adopts random construction to
generate codewords which degenerates the retrieval performance. Intuitively, a good codebook should be well separated among the codewords in the hamming space. From
this perspective, the Hadamard (Lin et al. 2018) is proposed
to maintain orthogonality among codewords. Orthogonality
guarantees a good separability among the codewords, significantly boosting the recognition performance. However, the
Hadamard is limited by the dimension constraint, which is
strictly restricted as the power of 2. To extend it into flexible dimensions, LSH (Andoni and Indyk 2006) is introduced
to project the initialized codewords, damaging the discriminative property of Hadamard. In addition to online hashing,
the codebook is also adopted in some offline hashing methods. For example, Central Similarity Quantization (Yuan
et al. 2020) constructs codewords by randomly sampling
from Bernoulli distributions, maintaining sufficient mutual
distances among codewords in expectation.
To construct well-spreading codewords in the binary
space, in this paper, we propose to generate codewords by
utilizing the singular matrix, which avoids the dimension
constraints. Since the singular matrix is mutually orthogonal among rows and columns, it naturally preserves good
separability among different codewords.

Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale image retrieval is widely used
in many practical applications. One promising family of
these retrieval methods is based on hashing, which merits in
both low storage and efficient computation (Andoni and Indyk 2006; Zhang et al. 2014; Cao et al. 2018). Most existing
methods are designed for offline training with a given collection of data, which may not well adapt to online streaming data. To address this issue, online hashing has emerged
as a hot topic for its capacity in processing streaming data.
Representative works include Online Kernel-based Hashing
(OKH) (Huang, Yang, and Zheng 2013, 2017), Online Supervised Hashing (OSH) (Cakir, Bargal, and Sclaroff 2017),
Mutual Information Hashing (MIH) (Cakir et al. 2017),
Hadamard Codebook based Online Hashing (HCOH) (Lin
et al. 2018), Balanced Similarity for Online Discrete Hashing (BSODH) (Lin et al. 2019), and Online Hashing with
Efficient Updating (OHWEU) (Weng and Zhu 2020). In this
∗

Correspondence Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1717

