The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EMLight: Lighting Estimation via Spherical Distribution Approximation
Fangneng Zhan ∗ 1 , Changgong Zhang ∗ 2 , Yingchen Yu 1 , Yuan Chang 3 ,
Shijian Lu † 1 , Feiying Ma 2 , Xuansong Xie 2
1

Nanyang Technological University
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{fnzhan,shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg, yingchen001@e.ntu.edu.sg, changyuan@bupt.edu.cn,
{changgong.zcg,feiying.mfy}@alibaba-inc.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com
2

Ground Truth

Prediction

Abstract
Illumination estimation from a single image is critical in 3D
rendering and it has been investigated extensively in the computer vision and computer graphic research community. On
the other hand, existing works estimate illumination by either
regressing light parameters or generating illumination maps
that are often hard to optimize or tend to produce inaccurate predictions. We propose Earth Mover’s Light (EMLight),
an illumination estimation framework that leverages a regression network and a neural projector for accurate illumination
estimation. We decompose the illumination map into spherical light distribution, light intensity and the ambient term,
and define the illumination estimation as a parameter regression task for the three illumination components. Motivated
by the Earth Mover’s distance, we design a novel spherical
mover’s loss that guides to regress light distribution parameters accurately by taking advantage of the subtleties of spherical distribution. Under the guidance of the predicted spherical
distribution, light intensity and ambient term, the neural projector synthesizes panoramic illumination maps with realistic
light frequency. Extensive experiments show that EMLight
achieves accurate illumination estimation and the generated
relighting in 3D object embedding exhibits superior plausibility and fidelity as compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1

2

3

Move

4

1
2

3

5

Moving Plan
1

1
2
3

2
4
5

3

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed Earth Mover’s Light
(EMLight): EMLight treats two illumination maps as two
discrete spherical distributions. Motivated by the idea of
Earth Mover’s distances, we design a spherical mover’s loss
(SML) to measure the distance between two spherical distributions by calculating the minimum distance of moving
one distribution to another along the spherical surface. SML
aims to find the best Moving Plan (with minimum total distance) as illustrated by connections between the two distributions. The thickness of connecting lines denotes the
amount of ‘Earth’ moved between the two points.

Introduction
Lighting estimation aims to recover illumination from a single image with limited field of view. It has a wide range of
applications in various computer vision and computer graphics tasks such as high-dynamic-range (HDR) relighting in
mixed reality, etc. However, lighting estimation is an underconstrained problem as it aims to recover a 360-degree fullview illumination map from an image with limited field of
view. In addition, high-dynamic-range (HDR) illumination
is required to be inferred from low-dynamic-range (LDR)
observations for the purpose of realistic object relighting.
Lighting estimation has been tackled through direct generation of illumination maps (Gardner et al. 2017; Song and
Funkhouser 2019; Srinivasan et al. 2020) or regression of

parameters of representative illumination functions such as
spherical harmonics function (Cheng et al. 2018; Garon et al.
2019) and spherical Gaussian function (Gardner et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2020). However, the functional representation methods struggles to regress accurate frequency information (especially high-frequency information) that often leads to inaccurate shading and shadow effects in relighting (Garon
et al. 2019) or require complex optimization steps (Gardner et al. 2019). Directly generating illumination maps can
preserve some high-frequency information, but it can hardly
recover other information of the light sources such as light
directions and sizes (Chen et al. 2020).

∗

equal contribution
corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3287

