The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Open-Set Recognition with Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders
Alexander Cao,1 Yuan Luo,2 Diego Klabjan1
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences
2
Department of Preventive Medicine
Northwestern University
a-cao@u.northwestern.edu, {yuan.luo, d-klabjan}@northwestern.edu

Abstract

thus is best represented by a single centroid (Bendale and
Boult 2016; Hassen and Chan 2020; Lee et al. 2018; Yoshihashi et al. 2019). This provides further flexibility in capturing complementary structure and classifier information.
Our contributions are as follows. In §3, we derive GMVAE to learn the embedding and amend its objective function to make open-set recognition more amenable. We also
present a new and simple open-set classification algorithm
that utilizes an “uncertainty” threshold on the learned embedding. Following in §4, we present analytical results regarding the number of subclusters and the resulting heuristic
procedure for identifying the appropriate number of subclusters in each class. Finally in §5, we conduct open-set classification experiments on three standard datasets. Our findings from experiments are two-fold. First, GMVAE outperforms a state-of-the-art classification-reconstruction-based,
deep open-set classifier both in terms of accuracy and robustness to an increasing number of unknown classes. Second, the use of extreme value theory (EVT) to infer classbelongingness (Bendale and Boult 2016; Yoshihashi et al.
2019) may be ill-suited in this classification-reconstruction
open-set framework as we find that ours and another simple
algorithm consistently beat it.

In inference, open-set classification is to either classify a
sample into a known class from training or reject it as an
unknown class. Existing deep open-set classifiers train explicit closed-set classifiers, in some cases disjointly utilizing reconstruction, which we find dilutes the latent representation’s ability to distinguish unknown classes. In contrast, we train our model to cooperatively learn reconstruction
and perform class-based clustering in the latent space. With
this, our Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder (GMVAE)
achieves more accurate and robust open-set classification results, with an average F1 increase of 0.26, through extensive
experiments aided by analytical results.

1

Introduction

Until recently, nearly all classification algorithms have been
designed for closed-set evaluation. This means that all testing classes are seen in training. However, real-world applications necessitate open-set evaluation where unknown
classes, not seen in training, appear during testing. For instance, computer vision systems in self-driving cars must
classify and navigate around many different objects. Given
the countless number of such possible objects, it is infeasible for all classes to be seen in training (Sünderhauf et al.
2018). Open-set recognition addresses this generalization of
the classification task.
While there are several facets of open-set learning, in
this paper we focus on training from C known classes for
(C + 1)-class classification. This (C + 1)-th class catches
all unknown test samples not belonging to any of the known
classes. The training and validation data have no unseen
classes from class C + 1. To this end, we present a novel
supervised, Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder (GMVAE). The bottleneck latent layer simultaneously learns reconstruction and performs class-based clustering (preserving closed-set classification ability). This allows the latent
representation to capture complementary structure and classifier information. Furthermore, the latent layer has the explicit capability to form multiple subclusters per class. This
challenges the implicit assumption made by many classification methods that a class’s embedding is a convex set and

2

Related Work

While closed-set classification has been well-studied, openset recognition has been gaining more attention in recent
years. Outlier or novelty detection is a precursor but, unlike
the problem studied herein, is not generally concerned with
distinguishing between the known classes (Geng, Huang,
and Chen 2020; Zhou and Paffenroth 2017). Such methods
may also rely on the use of synthetic, outlier training datasets
(Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019) whereas we focus on training with only known classes. Earlier works that
study (C + 1)-class classification utilize, for example, SVM
scores (Scheirer et al. 2013; Jain, Scheirer, and Boult 2014)
or sparse representation (Zhang and Patel 2017) to fit EVTbased densities to predict classes. The use of deep networks
in open-set recognition appears even more recently in studies such as Bendale and Boult (2016) and Yoshihashi et al.
(2019). Both use similar procedures of fitting EVT-based
densities to the distances between a class’s embedding and
its centroid to approximate probability of class inclusion.
Finally, Oza and Patel (2019) also use a class conditioned

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6877

