The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Frivolous Units: Wider Networks Are Not Really That Wide
∗

∗

Stephen Casper, 1,2 Xavier Boix, 1,2,3
3
Vanessa D’Amario, Ling Guo,4 Martin Schrimpf,2,3 Kasper Vinken,1,2 Gabriel Kreiman1,2
1

Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
2
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM)
3
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
4
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California San Francisco, USA
scasper@college.harvard.edu, xboix@mit.edu
Abstract

convolutional layers by a size factor. The test errors of wider,
more overparameterized networks do not degrade relative to
thinner ones, despite a greater potential for overfitting.
Frankle and Carbin (2019) find that in certain DNNs,
the crucial computations are performed by weight-sparse
subnetworks with initializations primed for the learning
task, ie. such subnetworks have won the “initialization lottery.” They suggest that wide networks may perform as well
as or better than thin ones because they “buy more lottery
tickets” and more reliably contain these fortuitously initialized subnetworks. However, regarding subnetworks that are
not part of a winning ticket, it remains unclear why they do
not have a harmful effect on test performance. Some clues
may come from recent works involving compression-based
performance bounds (Arora et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019;
Suzuki, Abe, and Nishimura 2020), suggesting a link between compressibility and non-overfitting. This leads to our
central question: what neural mechanisms facilitate increases
in network width without decreases in accuracy?
A promising strand of research inspired from neuroscience
has aimed to understand network representations at the individual unit level (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Zhou et al. 2018).
Units have been referred to as the “building blocks of interpretability” (Olah et al. 2018), as analyzing them allows for
simple interpretations of DNNs. In this paper, we investigate
the ways in which unit-level properties evolve as network
width increases. Several signs point to compressible units.
One example is the success of dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014).
Other clues come from biological brains which develop redundancies and are remarkably robust to neuronal death, suggesting that many neurons are not necessary for short-term
performance (Strehler and Freeman 1980; Glassman 1987).
Here, we identify two types of frivolous units which
emerge in greater proportions when the network’s width is
increased: prunable units which can be dropped out of the network without significant change to the output, and redundant
units whose activities can be expressed as a linear combination of others in the same layer. These units are complexity
constraints because the function the network represents could
be expressed by a thinner network without them. We show
that the rate at which these frivolous units appear consistently
outpaces the growth of the network as a whole. This suggests
that they play a major role in how DNNs constrain their complexity as width is increased. Furthermore, these results add

A remarkable characteristic of overparameterized deep neural
networks (DNNs) is that their accuracy does not degrade when
the network width is increased. Recent evidence suggests that
developing compressible representations allows the complexity of large networks to be adjusted for the learning task at
hand. However, these representations are poorly understood.
A promising strand of research inspired from biology involves
studying representations at the unit level as it offers a more
granular interpretation of the neural mechanisms. In order to
better understand what facilitates increases in width without
decreases in accuracy, we ask: Are there mechanisms at the
unit level by which networks control their effective complexity? If so, how do these depend on the architecture, dataset,
and hyperparameters?
We identify two distinct types of “frivolous” units that proliferate when the network’s width increases: prunable units which
can be dropped out of the network without significant change
to the output and redundant units whose activities can be expressed as a linear combination of others. These units imply
complexity constraints as the function the network computes
could be expressed without them. We also identify how the
development of these units can be influenced by architecture
and a number of training factors. Together, these results help
to explain why the accuracy of DNNs does not degrade when
width is increased and highlight the importance of frivolous
units toward understanding implicit regularization in DNNs.

1

Introduction

A striking feature of deep neural networks (DNNs) is that
wider networks with more units in each layer tend to generalize as well or better than thinner ones, even when trained
without explicit regularization. In practice, these networks
are typically overparameterized, ie. the number of free parameters is often several orders of magnitude greater than the
number of training examples, yet wide versions avoid overfitting relative to thinner ones (Neyshabur et al. 2017, 2019;
Novak et al. 2018; Poggio et al. 2017). This phenomenon is
demonstrated in Fig. 1, in which we plot the testing accuracy
of common overparameterized architectures while varying
each network’s width (see section 4 for details). We vary
the number of units in fully connected layers and filters in
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6921

