The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation by Content Transfer
Suhyeon Lee, Junhyuk Hyun, Hongje Seong, Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{hyeon93, jhhyun, hjseong, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

and synthetic image is a major problem. That is, if we completely adapt the real and synthetic domains, learning with
synthetic data would be the same as learning with real data.
We address this problem by forcing networks to extract content and style from an image separately.
An image includes content and style (Gatys, Ecker, and
Bethge 2016; Isola et al. 2017). The content has cues for semantic segmentation regardless of style. The style is a cue to
represent a characteristic for a domain of an image regardless of content. The style makes a domain gap, so separating
style from content further enhances the alignment between
the two domains in the content space. However, separating
content and style in an image is challenging because we cannot directly supervise what content or style is. In this paper,
we introduce zero-style loss to capture content and style separately. To do this, we set one content encoder and two style
encoders. By learning with our proposed zero-style loss,
the content encoder and style encoders can capture domaininvariant content feature and domain-specific style features,
respectively.
With the UDA for semantic segmentation, we can provide a large number of additional labeled synthetic images
for training. However, this method overlooks a serious problem. In the urban scene dataset, the number of samples per
class is not equally distributed. Head classes (e.g., road,
sky) exist in most of the data, but tail classes (e.g., traffic sign, bicycle) are rarely shown. The model learned with
the class-imbalanced dataset would be biased toward head
classes (Cui et al. 2019).
To further boost the performance on the target (real) domain, the self-training strategy has recently been applied to
the UDA methods (Li, Yuan, and Vasconcelos 2019; French,
Mackiewicz, and Fisher 2018). This strategy generates the
target pseudo labels using the segmentation model, which is
trained with labeled source (synthetic) data. The class imbalance problem is further accelerated when using this selftraining technique. Since the segmentation model is already
biased toward the head classes, we cannot expect the correct
generation of pseudo labels for the tail classes. Thus, selftraining makes networks to be further biased toward head
classes.
To solve this problem, we propose the tail-class content
transfer. Since we trained our model to separate the content
and style from an image, our model can extract the content

In this paper, we tackle the unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) for semantic segmentation, which aims to segment the
unlabeled real data using labeled synthetic data. The main
problem of UDA for semantic segmentation relies on reducing the domain gap between the real image and synthetic image. To solve this problem, we focused on separating information in an image into content and style. Here, only the content has cues for semantic segmentation, and the style makes
the domain gap. Thus, precise separation of content and style
in an image leads to effect as supervision of real data even
when learning with synthetic data. To make the best of this
effect, we propose a zero-style loss. Even though we perfectly
extract content for semantic segmentation in the real domain,
another main challenge, the class imbalance problem, still exists in UDA for semantic segmentation. We address this problem by transferring the contents of tail classes from synthetic
to real domain. Experimental results show that the proposed
method achieves the state-of-the-art performance in semantic
segmentation on the major two UDA settings.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a task of classifying each pixel
of an image into semantic categories (e.g., sky, road, traffic sign, etc.). Training the segmentation model (Chen
et al. 2017) requires large amounts of pixel-level annotated data, but pixelwise image labeling is extremely laborintensive and time-consuming. To reduce the labeling cost,
the model learned with automatically labeled synthetic
datasets (Richter et al. 2016; Ros et al. 2016) can be used
in real-world environments (Cordts et al. 2016). In this case,
the domain gap between synthetic data and real data causes
the model to behave poorly in real-world environments, so
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods have been
proposed to solve this problem (Chang et al. 2019; Du et al.
2019; Lin et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2019).
UDA for semantic segmentation aims to train a segmentation model that performs on the real domain by using unlabeled real images and labeled synthetic images. Since the
supervision of semantic information comes only from synthetic data, reducing the domain gap between the real image
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8306

