The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Decentralised Learning from Independent Multi-Domain Labels for Person
Re-Identification
Guile Wu, Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
guile.wu@qmul.ac.uk, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

1 Train local model
2 Upload updates
3 Aggregation

Deep learning has been successful for many computer vision tasks due to the availability of shared and centralised
large-scale training data. However, increasing awareness of
privacy concerns poses new challenges to deep learning, especially for human subject related recognition such as person
re-identification (Re-ID). In this work, we solve the Re-ID
problem by decentralised learning from non-shared private
training data distributed at multiple user sites of independent
multi-domain label spaces. We propose a novel paradigm
called Federated Person Re-Identification (FedReID) to construct a generalisable global model (a central server) by simultaneously learning with multiple privacy-preserved local
models (local clients). Specifically, each local client receives
global model updates from the server and trains a local model
using its local data independent from all the other clients.
Then, the central server aggregates transferrable local model
updates to construct a generalisable global feature embedding
model without accessing local data so to preserve local privacy. This client-server collaborative learning process is iteratively performed under privacy control, enabling FedReID
to realise decentralised learning without sharing distributed
data nor collecting any centralised data. Extensive experiments on ten Re-ID benchmarks show that FedReID achieves
compelling generalisation performance beyond any locally
trained models without using shared training data, whilst inherently protects the privacy of each local client. This is
uniquely advantageous over contemporary Re-ID methods.

4 Download updates
Data not accessible
Client # n

Client # 1
1
Model #1
2
Server

4

1

…

Model #n
2

3 Model #S

4
Out-of-the-box
deployment

Figure 1: An illustration of FedReID decentralised learning.
A client refers to a user site with private local training data,
while a server refers to a centralised global model without
any training data. Each client uses private local data to train
a local model, while a server aggregates local model updates
to construct a global model without accessing local training
data. This client-server collaborative learning is iterative to
yield a global feature representation for out-of-the-box deployment with privacy protection.

Person re-identification (Re-ID) on urban streets at citywide scales is useful in smart city design (e.g. population
flow management) and for public safety (e.g. find a missing person) (Liu, Chang, and Shen 2020; Dong, Gong, and
Zhu 2019; Wu, Zhu, and Gong 2020, 2019b). Existing ReID methods follow either supervised learning by collecting
large-scale datasets for model training (Chen et al. 2020;
Liu, Chang, and Shen 2020) or unsupervised learning by
assembling both labelled source domain data for model initialisation and unlabelled target domain data for model finetuning (Wang and Zhang 2020; Yang et al. 2019b). Although these methods have achieved promising results, they
are based on a centralised learning paradigm, which is inherently flawed when source datasets cannot be shared in a
centralised training protocol due to privacy protection. This
requires a new Re-ID paradigm for learning a generalisable
global model with distributed collections of non-shared data
from independent multi-domain label spaces.
In this work, we propose a fundamentally novel paradigm
called Federated Person Re-Identification (FedReID) for de-

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural network learning has achieved
incredible success in many computer vision tasks. However,
it relies heavily upon the assumption that a large volume of
data can be collected from source domains and stored on a
centralised database for model training. Despite the current
significant focus on centralised data centres to facilitate big
data machine learning drawing from shared data collections,
the world is moving increasingly towards localised and private distributed data analysis at-the-edge. This differs inherently from the current assumption of ever-increasing availability of centralised data and poses new challenges to deep
learning, especially for human subject related recognition
such as person re-identification (Gong et al. 2014).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2898

