The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Optimal Efficiency of A∗ with Dominance Pruning
Álvaro Torralba
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
alto@cs.aau.dk

In this paper, we address the question of whether the expansion order of A∗ is good to minimize the number of expansions when dominance pruning is used. Prioritizing the
expansion of states with lower f -value is not necessarily an
obvious choice anymore, since states that are more promising according to the heuristic function are not necessarily
better according to the dominance relation. Furthermore,
previous results proving the optimal efficiency of A∗ are no
longer valid due to having a new source of information.
Indeed, we show that there are cases where A∗ with dominance pruning is not optimally efficient, and that different expansion orderings, or even expanding some states that
could be pruned may lead to a globally higher number of
expansions in some cases. However, this can be attributed to
“inconsistencies” in the information provided by the heuristic function and the dominance relation. We extend the notion of consistent heuristics to consistent heuristic and dominance relation pairs, and prove that A∗ with dominance
pruning is indeed optimally efficient, meaning that there is a
tie-breaking for A∗ that expands the lowest number of nodes
among all admissible algorithms with dominance pruning.
We also analyze which tie-breaking strategies remain optimally efficient up to the last f -layer, i.e., when we ignore
the expansions of nodes with an f -value equal to the solution
cost. This is relevant because when consistent heuristics are
used, the choice of tie-breaking rule in A∗ is only relevant
for the last layer, since all nodes with an f -value lower than
the optimal solution cost must be expanded regardless of
the expansion order. Therefore, most implementations of A∗
choose tie-breaking strategies in favor of nodes with lower
h-value, which are expected to find a solution faster in the
last f -layer. We show that with dominance pruning this is no
longer the case, as tie-breaking strategies in favor of nodes
with lower g-value are preferable up to the last layer.

Abstract
A well known result is that, given a consistent heuristic and
no other source of information, A∗ does expand a minimal
number of nodes up to tie-breaking. We extend this analysis
for A∗ with dominance pruning, which exploits a dominance
relation to eliminate some nodes during the search. We show
that the expansion order of A∗ is not necessarily optimally
efficient when considering dominance pruning with arbitrary
dominance relations, but it remains optimally efficient under
certain restrictions for the heuristic and dominance relation.

Introduction
Heuristic best-first search algorithms are a fundamental tool
for problem solving whenever the problem can be modeled as finding paths in graphs. Heuristic functions guide
the search towards the goal by estimating the distance from
any given state to the goal. Whenever an optimal solution
of minimum cost is required, A∗ search is often the algorithm of choice (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968). This is
well supported by the well known result that, given a consistent heuristic h and no other source of information, A∗
does expand a minimal number of nodes up to tie-breaking
among all algorithms that guarantee finding the optimal solution (Dechter and Pearl 1985).
Dominance pruning is a technique to eliminate nodes during the search if they can be proven to be dominated by another state (Hall et al. 2013; Torralba and Hoffmann 2015).
This exploits an additional source of information in the form
of a dominance relation , which compares two states to
determine whether one can be proven to be as close to the
goal as the other. This type of dominance appears naturally
on problems that have to deal with resources, (i.e., removing states that have strictly less resources than another), and
can also be applied on other kinds of problems (e.g., in gridworlds being at a central square can sometimes be proven
better than being at a corner if the set of reachable squares
in one step is strictly larger). This can be exploited by any
search algorithm to reduce the number of nodes explored
while retaining any solution optimality guarantees. This has
been mainly used in the context of cost-optimal planning, as
an enhancement for the A∗ algorithm.

Background
A transition system (TS) is a tuple Θ = hS, L, T, sI , S G i
where S is a finite set of states, L is a finite set of labels
each associated with a label cost c(l) ∈ R+
0 , T ⊆ S ×L×S
is a set of transitions, sI ∈ S is the start state, and S G ⊆ S
l
is the set of goal states. We write s −
→ t as a shorthand for
(s, l, t) ∈ T . A plan for a state s is a path from s to any
sG ∈ S G . We use h∗ (s) to denote the cost of a cheapest

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12007

