The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Preferred Explanations for Ontology-Mediated Queries under Existential Rules
İsmail İlkan Ceylan1 , Thomas Lukasiewicz1 , Enrico Malizia2 ,
Cristian Molinaro3 , Andrius Vaicenavičius1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
3
DIMES, University of Calabria, Italy
{ismail.ceylan, thomas.lukasiewicz, andrius.vaicenavicius}@cs.ox.ac.uk, enrico.malizia@unibo.it, cristian.molinaro@unical.it
Abstract

port OMQA and related tasks (Calvanese et al. 2017; Nenov
et al. 2015; Bellomarini, Sallinger, and Gottlob 2018).
Broadly speaking, a major challenge in artificial intelligence systems is in explaining the various conclusions drawn
by such systems. One advantage of logic-based systems is
that they are well-suited to explain various logical inferences
in a principled manner. In fact, this can be achieved in various ways, depending on the desired form of an explanation.
Given a conclusion, derived from a knowledge base, an explanation could be a proof relative to the underlying deduction
calculi, or alternatively, it could be a set of axioms and/or
facts, responsible for the derived conclusion.
There is a large body of work for deriving explanations
in DLs, which can be dated back to earlier works in the
literature (McGuinness and Borgida 1995; Borgida, Franconi, and Horrocks 2000). Explanations for classical reasoning tasks (Kalyanpur et al. 2007; Baader and Suntisrivaraporn 2008; Peñaloza and Sertkaya 2017) as well as for
OMQA (Borgida, Calvanese, and Rodriguez-Muro 2008;
Ceylan et al. 2020b) have been widely studied ever since.
Contrastingly, literature for existential rules is very sparse,
which motivated recent work (Ceylan et al. 2019), aiming
at explaining OMQA under existential rules. The idea is to
view every explanation as an inclusion-minimal subset of a
given database that, together with the ontology, entails the
query. Defining explanations as subsets of the database that
entail an OMQ is particularly suitable for monotone queries.
In this work, we take a step further for explaining OMQA
under existential rules, and consider cardinality- and weightminimal explanations. A cardinality-minimal (resp., weightminimal) explanation is a database subset that is smallest in
size (resp., has the smallest weight w.r.t. to a weight function), and together with the ontology entails the query. In the
weight case, we assume the weight function to be given by
annotating every database fact with a weight, representing a
penalization degree for the corresponding fact, i.e., the higher
the weight of a fact the less it is to be preferred in an explanation. Observe that cardinality-minimal explanations are a
special case of weight-minimal explanations, when all facts
have the same weight. Clearly, every cardinality-minimal
explanation is also an inclusion-minimal explanation. Finally,
we note that the study of different minimality criteria, based
on e.g. weights and cardinality, is common in other contexts,
including consistent query answering (Bienvenu, Bourgaux,

Recently, explanations for query answers under existential
rules have been investigated, where an explanation is an
inclusion-minimal subset of a given database that, together
with the ontology, entails the query. In this paper, we take a
step further and study explanations under different minimality
criteria. In particular, we first study cardinality-minimal explanations and hence focus on deriving explanations of minimum
size. We then study a more general preference order induced
by a weight distribution. We assume that every database fact
is annotated with a (penalization) weight, and we are interested in explanations with minimum overall weight. For both
preference orders, we study a variety of explanation problems,
such as recognizing a preferred explanation, all preferred explanations, a relevant or necessary fact, and the existence of
a preferred explanation not containing forbidden sets of facts.
We provide a detailed complexity analysis for all the aforementioned problems, thereby providing a more complete picture
for explaining query answers under existential rules.

Introduction
Ontology-based data access (Poggi et al. 2008) emerged as
a paradigm for better means of querying data sources, and
has become one of the focal points of research in knowledge
representation and reasoning. The core idea is to enrich user
queries with an ontology, which encodes the background
knowledge over the application domain. Intuitively, ontological knowledge provides a conceptual abstraction over
the domain, and it helps to deduce more facts from (possibly incomplete) data sources, resulting in more complete
sets of answers to user queries. It is common practice to
view the ontology and the user query as a composite query,
called ontology-mediated query (OMQ). The task of evaluating such queries is then called ontology-mediated query
answering (OMQA) (Bienvenu et al. 2014).
Description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2007) and existential rules (a.k.a. Datalog± ) (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Kifer 2013;
Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012) are two families of
logic-based knowledge representation languages, which are
commonly used to formulate ontologies. OMQA relative to
languages in these families is extensively studied and wellunderstood. Numerous systems have been developed to supCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6262

