The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Hybrid Bandit Framework for Diversiﬁed Recommendation
Qinxu Ding,1 Yong Liu,1,2∗ Chunyan Miao,3 Fei Cheng,4 Haihong Tang4
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY)
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
Alibaba Group
{qding001@e., stephenliu@, ascymiao@}ntu.edu.sg, hongyuan.cf@alibaba-inc.com, piaoxue@taobao.com
2

Abstract

In practice, the user’s implicit feedback (e.g., click) is
commonly used to build the recommender systems, as it can
be easily collected (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014). Especially, for online applications, this type of feedback becomes
an increasingly important source of data to study the user
behaviors (Liu et al. 2015, 2018; Yang et al. 2018). However, the implicit feedback does not explicitly describe the
user preferences. Thus, it is difﬁcult for non-interactive recommender systems to accurately estimate the user’s interests. In IRS, the recommendation agents can interact with
the users. They can explore the user’s interests by sequentially recommending a set of items to her and collecting her
implicit feedback in multiple rounds.
Previous contextual bandit based IRS mainly focus on optimizing the accuracy of recommendation results by learning
the user preferences on the relevance features of items (Chu
et al. 2011; Li et al. 2010). They usually ignore the diversity of recommendation results, thus are more likely to result
in similar item recommendations. A relevant but redundant
item set would make the user feel bored with the recommendation result. On the other hand, although there exist
some IRS considering diversity in bandit frameworks (Liu
et al. 2020; Qin, Chen, and Zhu 2014), they do not learn the
user’s personalized preferences on the diversity properties
of a set of items. In fact, different users may have different
preferences with the diversity properties of an item set. For
example, a user with speciﬁc interest may prefer a relevant
item set than a diverse item set, while a user without speciﬁc
interest may prefer a diverse item set to explore her interests.
In this paper, we propose a novel bandit learning framework for IRS, which considers the user’s preferences on both
the item relevance features and the diversity features of the
item set. The objective is to achieve a good trade-off between the accuracy and diversity of recommendation results.
Speciﬁcally, we use modular functions and dispersion functions to model the relevance features and diversity features,
respectively. The dispersion function has been shown to be
effective in describing the item set diversity when building
the non-interactive recommender system (Sha, Wu, and Niu
2016). We employ it in our bandit framework to develop the
diversiﬁed IRS. In summary, the main contributions made in
this work are as follows: (1) we propose a novel bandit learning framework, namely Linear Modular Dispersion Bandit
(LMDB), for diversiﬁed interactive recommendation; (2) we

The interactive recommender systems involve users in the
recommendation procedure by receiving timely user feedback to update the recommendation policy. Therefore, they
are widely used in real application scenarios. Previous interactive recommendation methods primarily focus on learning
users’ personalized preferences on the relevance properties
of an item set. However, the investigation of users’ personalized preferences on the diversity properties of an item set
is usually ignored. To overcome this problem, we propose
the Linear Modular Dispersion Bandit (LMDB) framework,
which is an online learning setting for optimizing a combination of modular functions and dispersion functions. Specifically, LMDB employs modular functions to model the relevance properties of each item, and dispersion functions to
describe the diversity properties of an item set. Moreover,
we also develop a learning algorithm, called Linear Modular
Dispersion Hybrid (LMDH) to solve the LMDB problem and
derive a gap-free bound on its n-step regret. Extensive experiments on real datasets are performed to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed LMDB framework in balancing
the recommendation accuracy and diversity.

Introduction
The development of interactive recommender systems (IRS)
is necessary to capture user’s preferences in time. One of the
powerful tools is the multi-armed bandit (MAB) which has
been extensively studied and applied in different machine
learning tasks (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012). MAB models an agent that simultaneously attempts to acquire knowledge and optimizes its decisions based on existing knowledge about the environment, during a sequential decisionmaking process. Assume there are m arms (or actions) presented to a decision-maker on every of n rounds. The objective of the decision-maker is to maximize the sum of rewards over all the n rounds (Agrawal, Hedge, and Teneketzis 1988). Contextual bandit is a type of MAB framework,
where each arm is represented by a feature vector (Chu et al.
2011; Li et al. 2010). In the literature, contextual bandit has
been proven to be powerful for solving large scale interactive recommendation problems (Li et al. 2010; Wen, Kveton,
and Ashkan 2015) by adopting the user’s timely feedback.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4036

