The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Better Bounds on the Adaptivity Gap of Influence Maximization under
Full-adoption Feedback
Gianlorenzo D’Angelo, Debashmita Poddar, and Cosimo Vinci
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
{gianlorenzo.dangelo, debashmita.poddar, cosimo.vinci}@gssi.it

Abstract

set of 𝑘 nodes, called seeds, that maximize their spread of
influence, which is the expected number of nodes reached
by a cascade of influence diffusion generated by the seeds
according to the given diffusion model. One of the most studied model for influence diffusion is the Independent Cascade
(IC), where each edge is associated with an independent
probability of transmitting influence from the source node
to the tail node. In the IC model the spread of influence is
a monotone submodular function of the seed set, therefore a
greedy algorithm guarantees a 1 − 𝑒1 approximation factor for
the IM problem (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2015). Since
his definition (Domingos and Richardson 2001; Richardson
and Domingos 2002) and formalization as an optimization
problem (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003, 2015), the
IM problem and its variants have been extensively investigated, motivated by applications in viral marketing (Chen,
Wang, and Wang 2010), adoption of technological innovations (Goldberg and Liu 2013), and outbreak or failure detection (Leskovec et al. 2007). See Chen, Lakshmanan, and
Castillo (2013); Li et al. (2018) for surveys on the IM problem.
Recently, Golovin and Krause (2011) initiated the study of
the IM problem under the framework of adaptive optimization, where, instead of selecting all the seeds at once at the
beginning of the process, we can select one seed at a time and
observe, to some extent, the portion of the network reached
by a new selected seed. The advantage is that the decision
on the next seed to choose can be based on the observed
spread of previously selected seeds, usually called feedback.
Two main feedback models have been introduced: in the fulladoption feedback the whole spread from each seed can be
observed, while in the myopic feedback one can only observe
the direct neighbors of each seed.
Golovin and Krause considered the Independent Cascade
model and showed that, under full-adoption feedback, the
objective function satisfies the property of adaptive submodularity (introduced in the same paper) and therefore a greedy
algorithm achieves a 1 − 𝑒1 approximation for the adaptive
IM problem. They also conjectured that there exists a constant factor approximation algorithm for the myopic feedback model, which has been
 indeed
 found by Peng and Chen
1
1
(2019) who proposed a 4 1 − 𝑒 -approximation algorithm.

In the influence maximization (IM) problem, we are given
a social network and a budget 𝑘, and we look for a set of 𝑘
nodes in the network, called seeds, that maximize the expected
number of nodes that are reached by an influence cascade generated by the seeds, according to some stochastic model for
influence diffusion. Extensive studies have been done on the
IM problem, since his definition by Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos (2003). However, most of the work focuses on the nonadaptive version of the problem where all the 𝑘 seed nodes
must be selected before that the cascade starts. In this paper we
study the adaptive IM, where the nodes are selected sequentially one by one, and the decision on the 𝑖-th seed can be based
on the observed cascade produced by the first 𝑖 − 1 seeds. We
focus on the full-adoption feedback in which we can observe
the entire cascade of each previously selected seed and on
the independent cascade model where each edge is associated
with an independent probability of diffusing influence.
Previous works showed that there are constant upper bounds
on the adaptivity gap, which compares the performance of
an adaptive algorithm against a non-adaptive one, but the
analyses used to prove these bounds only works for specific
graph classes such as in-arborescences, out-arborescences,
and one-directional bipartite graphs. Our main result is the first
sub-linear upper bound that holds for any graph. Specifically,
√
we show that the adaptivity gap is upper-bounded by 3 𝑛 + 1,
where 𝑛 is the number of nodes in the graph. Moreover we
improve over the known upper bound for in-arborescences
from 2𝑒/(𝑒 − 1) ≈ 3.16 to 2𝑒 2 /(𝑒 2 − 1) ≈ 2.31. Finally, we
study 𝛼-bounded graphs, a class of undirected graphs in which
the sum of node degrees higher than two is at most
√ 𝛼, and
show that the adaptivity gap is upper-bounded by 𝛼 + 𝑂 (1).
Moreover, we show that in 0-bounded graphs, i.e. undirected
graphs in which each connected component is a path or a
cycle, the adaptivity gap is at most 3𝑒 3 /(𝑒 3 − 1) ≈ 3.16.
To prove our bounds, we introduce new techniques to relate
adaptive policies with non-adaptive ones that might be of their
own interest.

Introduction
In the Influence Maximization (IM) problem, we are given
a social network, a stochastic model for diffusion of influence over the network, and a budget 𝑘, and we ask to find a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

However, the approximation ratio for the adaptive IM prob12069

