The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Cycle-Consistent Cooperative Networks via Alternating MCMC
Teaching for Unsupervised Cross-Domain Translation
∗

Jianwen Xie 1 , Zilong Zheng 2* , Xiaolin Fang 3 , Song-Chun Zhu 2,4,5 , Ying Nian Wu 2
1

Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research, Bellevue, USA
2
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Peking University, Beijing, China
jianwen@ucla.edu, z.zheng@ucla.edu, xiaolinf@csail.mit.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu
Abstract

with their corresponding paintings for training. Therefore,
unsupervised cross-domain translation is considered more
applicable since different domains of independent data collections are easily accessible, yet it is also regarded as a
harder problem due to the lack of supervision on instancelevel correspondence between different domains. This paper
focuses on unsupervised cross-domain translation problem
where paired training examples are not available.
With the recent success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (??) in image generation (???), researchers
have proposed unsupervised cross-domain translation networks based on GANs and obtained compelling results
(???). For the sake of learning probability distribution, instead of maximizing the data likelihood, GANs introduce
the concept of adversarial learning between a generator and
a discriminator. Specifically, the generator is the desired implicit data distribution that maps the Gaussian prior on a lowdimensional latent space to the data space via a non-linear
transformation, while the discriminator aims at distinguishing the real examples and the “fake” examples synthesized
by the generator. The generator gets improved in terms of the
capacity of data generation, by learning to deceive the discriminator which also evolves against the generator in such
an adversarial learning scheme.
Recently, learning energy-based models (EBMs), with energy functions parameterized by modern convolutional neural networks, for explicit data probability distributions has
received significant attention in the fields of computer vision
and machine learning. ?????? suggest that highly realistic
examples can be generated by Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) sampling from the learned EBMs. ? propose the
Cooperative Networks (CoopNets) framework to learn the
EBM simultaneously with a generator model in a cooperative learning scheme, where the generator plays the role
of a fast sampler to initialize the MCMC sampling of the
EBM, while the EBM teaches the generator via a finite-step
MCMC. Within this cooperative learning process, the EBM
learns from the training data, while the generator learns from
the MCMC sampling of the EBM. In other words, the EBM
distills the MCMC into the generator, such that the generator
becomes the amortized sampler of the EBM.
Compared to adversarial learning, the energy-based co-

This paper studies the unsupervised cross-domain translation
problem by proposing a generative framework, in which the
probability distribution of each domain is represented by a
generative cooperative network that consists of an energybased model and a latent variable model. The use of generative cooperative network enables maximum likelihood learning of the domain model by MCMC teaching, where the
energy-based model seeks to fit the data distribution of domain and distills its knowledge to the latent variable model
via MCMC. Specifically, in the MCMC teaching process, the
latent variable model parameterized by an encoder-decoder
maps examples from the source domain to the target domain,
while the energy-based model further refines the mapped results by Langevin revision such that the revised results match
to the examples in the target domain in terms of the statistical
properties, which are defined by the learned energy function.
For the purpose of building up a correspondence between two
unpaired domains, the proposed framework simultaneously
learns a pair of cooperative networks with cycle consistency,
accounting for a two-way translation between two domains,
by alternating MCMC teaching. Experiments show that the
proposed framework is useful for unsupervised image-toimage translation and unpaired image sequence translation.

1

Introduction

Cross-domain translation, such as image-to-image translation, has shown its importance over the last few years on numerous computer vision and computer graphics tasks which
require translating an example from one domain to another,
for example, neural style transfer, photo enhancing, etc. This
problem can be solved by learning a conditional generative model as a mapping from source domain to target domain in a supervised manner, when paired training examples between two domains are available. However, manually
pairing up examples between two domains is costly in both
time and efforts, and in some cases it is even impossible.
For example, learning to translate a photo to a Van Gogh
style painting requires plenty of real scene photos paired
∗

Equal contributions
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10430

