The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Copy Coherent Knowledge for Response Generation
Jiaqi Bai1 , Ze Yang2 , Xinnian Liang2 , Wei Wang3 , Zhoujun Li1,2∗
1

2

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
China Resources Group, Shenzhen, China
{bjq, tobey, xnliang, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn, ww.cs.tj@gmail.com

Abstract
Knowledge-driven dialog has shown remarkable performance
to alleviate the problem of generating uninformative responses in the dialog system. However, incorporating knowledge coherently and accurately into response generation is
still far from being solved. Previous works dropped into
the paradigm of non-goal-oriented knowledge-driven dialog,
they are prone to ignore the effect of dialog goal, which has
potential impacts on knowledge exploitation and response
generation. To address this problem, this paper proposes a
Goal-Oriented Knowledge Copy network, GOKC. Specifically, a goal-oriented knowledge discernment mechanism is
designed to help the model discern the knowledge facts that
are highly correlated to the dialog goal and the dialog context. Besides, a context manager is devised to copy facts not
only from the discerned knowledge but also from the dialog
goal and the dialog context, which allows the model to accurately restate the facts in the generated response. The empirical studies are conducted on two benchmarks of goal-oriented
knowledge-driven dialog generation. The results show that
our model can significantly outperform several state-of-theart models in terms of both automatic evaluation and human
judgments.

Knowledge
Facts

Dialog

Forrest
Gump

Type

Feature Movie

Honor

Academy Award for Best Picture

Director

Robert Zemeckis

Wish
Dragon

Type

Cartoon

Director

Chris Appelhans

User

It’s so boring. Let’s talk about movies.
#1: Have you ever seen a feature movie directed by Chris Appelhans?

Bot

#2: Okay, have you ever seen a feature movie
directed by Robert Zemeckis? This movie won
the Academy Award for Best Picture!

Figure 1: An illustrative example. #1 shows the response
with conflict knowledge facts. #2 shows the response with
coherent knowledge facts.

The retrieval methods select a best-matched response from
the response candidates that are obtained from the database
(Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Sun et al. 2020), while the generative methods utilize the dialog context to select knowledge at first, then the selected knowledge will participate
into the generation of responses (Long et al. 2017; Liu et al.
2018). In this paper, we focus on the generative-based methods since it shows much flexibility and efficiency on knowledge selection and response generation in knowledge-driven
dialog systems.
It is crucial to discern appropriate knowledge facts for response generation. Although great progress has been made,
common issues still exist in knowledge driven conversations. Specifically, the models are difficult to use coherent knowledge facts in response generation. Figure 1 shows
an example to illustrate this problem. Here, the knowledge
facts are given as the triplets form. The dialog is conducted
between user and bot, the bot is required to select appropriate knowledge from knowledge facts, then generate responses to interact with users. However, if a model makes
an inappropriate choice of conflict facts, the generated response will contain these contradict facts. In our example,
the fact “feature movie” contradicts with the fact “Chris Appelhans” in generated response. To tackle this problem, pre-

Introduction
Generating informative and attractive responses have been
demonstrated as a long-standing challenge in open-domain
dialog systems. Multifarious models are proposed based on
the sequence-to-sequence structure (Li et al. 2016; Serban
et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2018) and obtain promising results.
However, these models are still subjected to generate generic
and uninformative responses, such as “I am Okay”; “You
are right”. These bland responses will tend to degrade the
experience of users.
Recently, large-scale knowledge-driven datasets have
been proposed (Ghazvininejad et al. 2018; Dinan et al. 2018;
Moon et al. 2019), to deal with the aforementioned problem,
where the knowledge is linked with utterances to accelerate the research of knowledge-driven conversation models.
Existing methods based on knowledge-driven datasets are
either generative-based methods or retrieve-based methods.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12535

