The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Step-Ahead Error Feedback
for Distributed Training with Compressed Gradient
An Xu,1 Zhouyuan Huo,2 Heng Huang1,3
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
{an.xu, heng.huang}@pitt.edu, zhouyuan.huo@gmail.com
Abstract

non-negligible performance loss resulting from SignSGD
via adding the compression error at the current iteration to
the next iteration. Note that for SignSGD, we need to scale it
by a factor before applying the local error feedback method
because it does not satisfy the Assumption 4 described at
later section, which is crucial in the theoretical analysis of
local error feedback.
Methods other than gradient compression to accelerate
distributed training include asynchronous methods (Lian
et al. 2015; Ho et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2019; Xu, Huo,
and Huang 2020a), local SGD (Stich 2019) which is also
a natural fit for solving federated learning (Konečnỳ et al.
2016) problem, and communication scheduling such as the
lazy aggregation of gradients (Sun et al. 2019; Hashemi,
Jyothi, and Campbell 2018; Chen et al. 2018). Specifically,
asynchronous distributed training avoids the synchronization barrier and the worker node does not wait for each other.
The performance loss is related to the inconsistency between
the worker and server (staleness) allowed during training. In
local SGD, each worker node stores a copy of the model
and does several iterations of updating before communicating with all other nodes to average the updated model. The
more the number of local updating iterations is, the more
the model in different worker nodes will diverge, leading to
a larger performance loss.
We focus on the line of works with gradient compression.
Plain gradient compression has been well studied both in
centralized (Alistarh et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2017; Stich, Cordonnier, and Jaggi 2018) and decentralized training (Tang
et al. 2018a; Koloskova, Stich, and Jaggi 2019). Later works
incorporating local error feedback theoretically and empirically achieve superior performance in centralized (Basu
et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2018; Zheng, Huang, and Kwok 2019)
and decentralized training (Tang et al. 2019) than plain gradient compression. In this paper, we improve the local error feedback with theoretical analysis and empirical validation in centralized distributed training. When we studied the
coarse idea of adding the current compression error to the
next iteration as local error feedback does, we found that
this strategy could lead to a one-iteration outdated gradient.
This staleness may seem trivial at first glance, but theory
and practice show that it can be the reason why local error feedback is not always lossless. We summarize the main
contributions of our paper as follows:

Although the distributed machine learning methods can speed
up the training of large deep neural networks, the communication cost has become the non-negligible bottleneck to constrain the performance. To address this challenge, the gradient compression based communication-efficient distributed
learning methods were designed to reduce the communication cost, and more recently the local error feedback was incorporated to compensate for the corresponding performance
loss. However, in this paper, we will show that a new “gradient mismatch” problem is raised by the local error feedback in
centralized distributed training and can lead to degraded performance compared with full-precision training. To solve this
critical problem, we propose two novel techniques, 1) step
ahead and 2) error averaging, with rigorous theoretical analysis. Both our theoretical and empirical results show that our
new methods can handle the “gradient mismatch” problem.
The experimental results show that we can even train faster
with common gradient compression schemes than both the
full-precision training and local error feedback regarding the
training epochs and without performance loss.

Introduction
Distributed training is a common practice in training large
models with big datasets. The master-slave architecture is
the most common paradigm in centralized learning, where
the worker nodes compute gradients based on the local
dataset and communicate with the server node. While in
decentralized learning (Lian et al. 2018, 2017; Tang et al.
2018a,b), no server node is needed and each worker node
only communicates with its neighbors to avoid the heavy
traffic of the server node as in centralized training. In recent
research, the gradient compression techniques have been
widely used to reduce the communication cost in both centralized and decentralized training.
Mild gradient compression techniques (Alistarh et al.
2017; Xu, Huo, and Huang 2020b) offer a mild compression
ratio at the cost of negligible performance loss. However,
it is more attractive to use an aggressive compression technique such as SignSGD (Bernstein et al. 2018) which is even
more favorable for scaling up the number of worker nodes.
More recently, the local error feedback method (Karimireddy et al. 2019) was introduced to fix the corresponding
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10478

