The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Document Transformer for Personality Detection
Feifan Yang, Xiaojun Quan* , Yunyi Yang, Jianxing Yu
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
{yangff6, yangyy37}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {quanxj3, yujx26}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Post1

Encoder

Post2

Encoder

Postn

Encoder

…
Post1

MBTI

…

…

Personality detection aims to identify the personality traits
implied in social media posts. The core of this task is to put
together information in multiple scattered posts to depict an
overall personality profile for each user. Existing approaches
either encode each post individually or assemble posts arbitrarily into a new document that can be encoded sequentially
or hierarchically. While the first approach ignores the connection between posts, the second tends to introduce unnecessary
post-order bias into posts. In this paper, we propose a multidocument Transformer, namely Transformer-MD, to tackle
the above issues. When encoding each post, Transformer-MD
allows access to information in the other posts of the user
through Transformer-XL’s memory tokens which share the
same position embedding. Besides, personality is usually defined along different traits and each trait may need to attend
to different post information, which has rarely been touched
by existing research. To address this concern, we propose a
dimension attention mechanism on top of Transformer-MD
to obtain trait-specific representations for multi-trait personality detection. We evaluate the proposed model on the Kaggle and Pandora MBTI datasets and the experimental results
show that it compares favorably with baseline methods.

Post2

!"#

Encoder
MBTI

Postn

≠

…
Postn Postn-1

Encoder
Post1

MBTI

!$#

Figure 1: Existing approaches to combine multiple posts for
personality detection. (a) encodes each post individually. (b)
encodes posts by integrating them into a new document with
arbitrary order, where “[ ]” means the concatenation of posts
and “6=” means an inconsistent result for the posts containing the same personality information.

Introduction
Personality detection is a fundamental task in psychology
with wide applications in areas such as public health (Friedman and Kern 2014), personalized medicine (Matz et al.
2017), and mental health (Bagby et al. 1995). Besides, it can
provide insightful information for many natural language
processing (NLP) tasks. For example, Fung et al. (2016)
developed a virtual interactive dialogue system by incorporating the user’s emotion, sentiment, and personality. Lynn
et al. (2017) proposed a general NLP task by adapting user
factors such as age, gender, and personality traits.
Traditional questionnaire-based approaches to personality detection are time-consuming and laborious. Whereas in
the era of social media, users generate a tremendous number
of posts containing their behavior trace every day, providing new possibilities for personality detection research (Xue
et al. 2018; Keh, Cheng et al. 2019; Jiang, Zhang, and Choi

2020). The typical setting of this task is: for each user, multiple scattered posts are provided, and the objective is to piece
together information in the posts into a comprehensive user
personality profile.
Existing approaches to automatically combining multiple posts for personality detection can be broadly divided
into two categories. Firstly, as shown in Figure 1(a), each
post is first encoded independently and then averaged into
the user representation (Hernandez and Knight 2017; Keh,
Cheng et al. 2019). This approach simply ignores the fact
that the posts of a user may not be of equal importance and
they may also need to interact to complement the personality profile. Secondly, as shown in Figure 1(b), the posts are
integrated into a long flat sequence with an arbitrary post
order and then encoded hierarchically (Lynn, Balasubramanian, and Schwartz 2020; Xue et al. 2018) or sequentially
(Zhou et al. 2019; Jiang, Zhang, and Choi 2020; Yang et al.
2019b). However, models trained in this way may learn the
extra post-order bias, resulting in inconsistent results of each

* Xiaojun Quan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14221

