The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Highly-Parameterized Ensemble to Play Gin Rummy
Masayuki Nagai, Kavya Shrivastava, Kien Ta, Steven Bogaerts, Chad Byers
DePauw University
Greencastle, IN 46135, U.S.A.
{masayukinagai 2022, kshrivastava 2023, kienta 2022, stevenbogaerts, cbyers}@depauw.edu

Abstract

only draws a card when it can immediately form a meld, considers only the minimization of deadwood in forming melds,
and knocks as soon as possible.
Building upon the work in (Mark 2017), self tracks each
card’s current state in the round from its own perspective.
(Recall in Section 1 that a “game” consists of multiple
“rounds”.) For cards known by self to be held by a player,
the state includes which player holds the card, where it came
from (initial deal, stock, or discard pile), and whether opp
also knows about the card. For discarded cards, the state includes which is on top, which are irretrievable, and which
player discarded the card.
The remaining cards are in the unknown state. In that
case we also estimate the probability p(c) that c is in the
stock pile. Since an unknown card must be either in stock
or in opp’s hand, the probability that c is in opp’s hand is
1 − p(c). As the round progresses, adjustments to p(c) for
various c are made by observing opp’s actions.
Let St and Ot represent the set of cards in stock and the
set of cards in opp’s hand that self has not seen, respectively,
at turn t. The set Ut of cards in the unknown state can be
formed by Ut = St ∪ Ot . At the start of a round, |S0 | = 31
and |U0 | = 41, since self only knows about its own hand and
the single card in the discard pile. We therefore initialize the
probabilities: ∀c ∈ U0 , p(c) = |S0 |/|U0 | = 31/41.
For a given card c, define an adjacent card as one of the
same rank, or 1-2 ranks away of the same suit. Let Ac be the
set of cards adjacent to c that have state unknown. When
self observes certain actions involving c, adjacency updates
are made to the estimated probabilities of the cards in Ac .
If opp draws face-up card c, opp likely already has some
of the cards in Ac . Self therefore decreases the estimated
probability that the cards in Ac are in stock, corresponding
to an increased expectation that they are in opp’s hand:
∀a ∈ Ac , p(a) ← p(a) − p(a) · β
for a parameter1 β in (0, 1).
Similarly, opp may show disinterest in a card c, either by
declining to draw it when face-up, or by discarding it. In
either case, we may expect opp to be less likely to have cards
in Ac . Thus we increase our estimate that they are in stock:
∀a ∈ Ac , p(a) ← p(a) + (1 − p(a)) · β

This paper describes the design and training of a computer
Gin Rummy player. The system includes three main components to make decisions about drawing cards, discarding, and
ending the game, with numerous parameters controlling behavior. In particular, an ensemble approach is explored in the
discard decision. Finally, three sets of parameter tuning and
performance experiments are analyzed.

1

Introduction

Gin Rummy is a two-player card game played over a series of rounds. A round begins with each player receiving
10 cards from a standard deck. One additional card is placed
face-up to form the initial discard pile, with the remaining
placed face-down to form the stock pile. Players alternate
turns, drawing a card from either pile and then discarding a
card face-up in the discard pile, attempting to form melds in
their hand. A meld can be either a rank meld with 3+ cards
of the same rank, or a run meld with 3+ cards of the same
suit and consecutive ranks (with aces low). Unmelded cards
are called deadwood, with a cost equivalent to rank, with
aces worth 1 point and face cards worth 10. A player with
10 or fewer deadwood points can knock by revealing their
melds to the opponent. The total deadwood points of unmelded cards in each player’s hand is calculated. The player
with the least deadwood wins the round, with significant additional bonuses for having 0 deadwood (going gin) or having less deadwood than a knocking player (an undercut). For
more details about rules, see (McLeod 2020).
This paper describes a computer player for Gin Rummy.
We begin with a discussion of the system’s tracking of the
state of the round. Next, the measures of obtainability and
meldability are presented. We then describe the system components, and finally three sets of parameter tuning and performance experiments.

2

Tracking the State of a Round

Let self represent the computer player and opp the opponent.
In this paper, opp is always the same: the simple player that

1
β is actually a temporary placeholder for a more expressive
parameterization (Section 5).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15614

