The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Code Completion by Modeling Flattened Abstract Syntax Trees as Graphs
Yanlin Wang,1 Hui Li2∗
1

Microsoft Research Asia
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
yanlwang@microsoft.com, hui@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and it has been adopted in several IDEs (e.g., Visual Studio
Code IDE (Svyatkovskiy et al. 2019)). In this paper, the term
“code completion” refers to AST based code completion.
To model the tree structure of AST, most code completion methods opt to flatten the AST using pre-order depthfirst traversal (Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018). Then, powerful deep learning techniques (e.g., LSTMs and Transformer) can be adopted for learning the representation of
the flattened AST sequence for later use in code completion. In addition to code completion, recent works on learning program representations (Allamanis, Brockschmidt, and
Khademi 2018; Brockschmidt et al. 2019) for other downstream tasks (e.g., variable prediction and hole completion)
have shed some light on the benefits of modeling an AST
as a graph of which the representation can be learned using
Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Wu et al. 2020).
However, neither of the two paradigms can fully model
ASTs for the code completion task since they neglect the sequential and repetitive patterns of humans on writing code,
and the structural information of AST: (1) Firstly, when writing code, the skeleton (i.e., function declaration) is often
written first and other statements in the body of the function are written one by one just like the pre-order depth-first
traversal of AST (Yang 2020). Such sequential information
is important to code completion. (2) Moreover, code completions are surprisingly repetitive (Hellendoorn et al. 2019).
For example, the study of Aye and Kaiser (2020) on a codebase from GitHub shows that there is a 59.8% probability
that any keyword, identifier, or literal repeats one of the previous 100 tokens. Capturing such a repetitive pattern can
enhance code completion. (3) Lastly, the structural information of AST provides strong indications on the dependencies
between linked nodes which should be considered. Simple
sequential modeling ignores the repetitive pattern and the
structural information while the vanilla graph based modeling neglects the sequential and repetitive patterns. In addition to the problem of AST modeling, some code completion methods (Liu et al. 2016, 2020) model the sub-tasks
(i.e., value prediction and type prediction) via multi-task
learning (Vandenhende et al. 2020), but the task weights are
manually set. Therefore, these methods suffer from the task
imbalance which will impede proper training in multi-task
learning (Chen et al. 2018; Vandenhende et al. 2020).
To address the problems mentioned above, we propose an

Code completion has become an essential component of integrated development environments. Contemporary code completion methods rely on the abstract syntax tree (AST) to
generate syntactically correct code. However, they cannot
fully capture the sequential and repetitive patterns of writing code and the structural information of the AST. To alleviate these problems, we propose a new code completion approach named CCAG, which models the flattened sequence
of a partial AST as an AST graph. CCAG uses our proposed
AST Graph Attention Block to capture different dependencies in the AST graph for representation learning in code
completion. The sub-tasks of code completion are optimized
via multi-task learning in CCAG, and the task balance is automatically achieved using uncertainty without the need to tune
task weights. The experimental results show that CCAG has
superior performance than state-of-the-art approaches and it
is able to provide intelligent code completion.

1

Introduction

Code completion, which provides code suggestions for developers, is one of the most attractive features in integrated
development environments (IDEs). According to the study
of Murphy, Kersten, and Findlater (2006), users of Eclipse
IDE used the code suggestion of Eclipse as much as the
common editing commands (e.g., copy and paste) since it
reduces the required amount of typing and eliminates typos.
Hindle et al. (2012) firstly reduce code completion to
a natural language processing (NLP) problem. Thereafter,
many researchers leverage NLP techniques to design code
completion engines (Allamanis et al. 2018; Le, Chen, and
Babar 2020). Early works generate code as a sequence of
code tokens (Hindle et al. 2012). However, directly modeling tokens of code sequences sometimes fails to produce
syntactically correct code (Brockschmidt et al. 2019). Recent works (Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018) alleviate this
issue by using the target language’s grammar to generate
abstract syntax trees (ASTs) which are syntactically correct
by construction. They show that AST based code completion, which contains value prediction and type prediction
as sub-tasks, can provide more intelligent code suggestions,
∗

Hui Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14015

