The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Data Augmentation for Abstractive Query-Focused
Multi-Document Summarization
Ramakanth Pasunuru,1 Asli Celikyilmaz,2 Michel Galley,2 Chenyan Xiong,2
Yizhe Zhang,2 Mohit Bansal,1 Jianfeng Gao2
1

UNC Chapel Hill, 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond
{ram, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu, {aslicel, mgalley, Chenyan.Xiong, yizhe.zhang, jfgao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The progress in Query-focused Multi-Document Summarization (QMDS) has been limited by the lack of sufficient largescale high-quality training datasets. We present two QMDS
training datasets, which we construct using two data augmentation methods: (1) transferring the commonly used singledocument CNN/Daily Mail summarization dataset to create
the Q MDS C NN dataset, and (2) mining search-query logs to
create the Q MDS I R dataset. These two datasets have complementary properties, i.e., Q MDS C NN has real summaries
but queries are simulated, while Q MDS I R has real queries but
simulated summaries. To cover both these real summary and
query aspects, we build abstractive end-to-end neural network
models on the combined datasets that yield new state-of-theart transfer results on DUC datasets. We also introduce new
hierarchical encoders that enable a more efficient encoding
of the query together with multiple documents. Empirical results demonstrate that our data augmentation and encoding
methods outperform baseline models on automatic metrics,
as well as on human evaluations along multiple attributes.

1

Figure 1: Sample from our Q MDS I R dataset, which illustrates how a set of retrieved documents based on a query
can provide complementary information that can be used to
reconstruct the information in the answer passage (used as
gold summary).

Introduction

Query-focused multi-document summarization (QMDS)
aims at generating a short summary from a set of documents
that answers a query. Compared to the popular single document summarization (SDS) task (Rush, Chopra, and Weston
2015; Chopra, Auli, and Rush 2016; Nallapati et al. 2016;
Celikyilmaz et al. 2018; Chen and Bansal 2018; Gehrmann,
Deng, and Rush 2018), research in QMDS has received less
attention. This is partially due to the scarcity of large-scale
high-quality QMDS datasets. The SDS has variety of highquality datasets (Hermann et al. 2015; Grusky, Naaman, and
Artzi 2018) on different domains such as news (Napoles,
Gormley, and Durme 2012; Nallapati et al. 2016), scientific articles (Qazvinian and Radev 2008), etc., however,
not many high-quality datasets exist for QMDS training and
evaluation.
Another overlooked feature of QMDS is that it tries to
solve more realistic query-based scenarios than the SDS
or multi-document summarization (MDS) tasks. Different
from these tasks, QMDS task considers summarizing only
salient information that best answers the query in a logical

order. In fact, QMDS is more realistic for various applications such as personalized information retrieval (IR), conversational IR, and recommendation engines, in which search
results can be tailored to an information need. To support
research on challenging QMDS task, we introduce two data
augmentation methods and new neural models.
Two new data augmentation methods. Recently, multiple new MDS datasets have been introduced: A large-scale
dataset by Liu et al. (2018) named WikiSum, and a smaller
MDS by Fabbri et al. (2019). Even though WikiSum also
includes the topic of the article as query, it is mostly used
to train MDS models (Liu et al. 2018; Liu and Lapata
2019), since a topic is more generic to be used as an information seeking query. To this end, we introduce two new
data augmentation methods to enable large-scale training
of QMDS models. In the first method, we restructure the
single-document CNN/Daily Mail (CNN/DM) dataset (Hermann et al. 2015) to create a new QMDS dataset by chunking the documents into small documents of paragraphs and
use the title of the article as a query. We refer to this dataset

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13666

