The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Tree-Structured Decoder Training for Code Generation
via Mutual Learning
Binbin Xie1,2 , Jinsong Su1,2 * , Yubin Ge3 , Xiang Li4 , Jianwei Cui4 ,
Junfeng Yao1 and Bin Wang4
1. Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2. Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
4. Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
xdblb@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {jssu, yao0010}@xmu.edu.cn,
yubinge2@illinois.edu, {lixiang21, cuijianwei, wangbin11}@xiaomi.com,
learning in natural language processing, dominant models
have now evolved into neural models, which possess the
powerful capacity of feature learning and representation.
Among them, the most prevalent one is the sequence-to-tree
(Seq2Tree) models (Dong and Lapata 2016; Yin and Neubig 2017; Rabinovich, Stern, and Klein 2017; Dong and Lapata 2018; Shin et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020), all of which
are based on an encoder-decoder framework. Specifically,
an encoder learns the word-level semantic representations
of an input NL utterance, and then a tree-structured decoder
outputs a sequence of actions, which corresponds to the preorder traversal of an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and can
be further converted into the code, 1) the structure of AST
can be used to shrink the search space, ensuring the generation of well-formed code; and 2) the structural information
of AST helps to model the information flow within the neural network, which naturally reflects the recursive structure
of programming languages.
Despite the success of the above models, limited by the
decoding manner based on the pre-order traversal, there still
exists a serious defect in their decoders. Specifically, at each
timestep, the current action can be only predicted from the
vertical preceding actions. Since the dependencies of actions
may come from other directions, i.e. the actions in horizontal
direction, it may be insufficient to accurately predict the current action only with preceding actions in vertical direction.
This happens especially when an important action locates
in horizontal direction. Another possible case would be the
strength of the dependencies on preceding actions turn to be
weak with the increasing distances to those actions. Moreover, prediction errors in preceding actions sometimes even
hurt the prediction of current action. Therefore, it is worth
exploring the context in other direction to complement the
currect context of the pre-order traversal based decoder.
In this paper, we first explore the Seq2Tree model with
breadth-first traversal based decoding, and then analyze the
context modeling difference between different traversals
based decodings (pre-order traversal vs. breath-first traversal). More importantly, we propose to introduce a mutual
learning framework (Zhang et al. 2018b) to jointly train
two Seq2Tree models with different traversals based de-

Abstract
Code generation aims to automatically generate a piece of
code given an input natural language utterance. Currently,
among dominant models, it is treated as a sequence-to-tree
task, where a decoder outputs a sequence of actions corresponding to the pre-order traversal of an Abstract Syntax Tree. However, such a decoder only exploits the preorder traversal based preceding actions, which are insufficient
to ensure correct action predictions. In this paper, we first
throughly analyze the context modeling difference between
neural code generation models with different traversals based
decodings (preorder traversal vs breadth-first traversal), and
then propose to introduce a mutual learning framework to
jointly train these models. Under this framework, we continuously enhance both two models via mutual distillation, which
involves synchronous executions of two one-to-one knowledge transfers at each training step. More specifically, we alternately choose one model as the student and the other as
its teacher, and require the student to fit the training data and
the action prediction distributions of its teacher. By doing so,
both models can fully absorb the knowledge from each other
and thus could be improved simultaneously. Experimental
results and in-depth analysis on several benchmark datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. We release our
code at https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/CGML.

Introduction
As an indispensable text generation task, code generation
mainly focuses on automatically generating a snippet of
code given a natural language (NL) utterance. Due to its
great potential in facilitating software development and revolutionizing end-user programming, it has always been one
of hot research topics in the communities of natural language
processing and software engineering.
To achieve this goal, previous studies for code generation either require manually-designed grammar and lexicons (Zettlemoyer 2009; Zettlemoyer and Collins 2007)
or exploit features for candidate logical forms ranking
(Liang, Jordan, and Klein 2011). With the prosperity of deep
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14121

