The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Simple Framework for Cognitive Planning
Jorge Luis Fernandez Davila,1 Dominique Longin,2 Emiliano Lorini,2 Frédéric Maris1
1

IRIT, Toulouse University, France
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse University, France
Jorge.Fernandez@irit.fr, Dominique.Longin@irit.fr, Emiliano.Lorini@irit.fr, Frederic.Maris@irit.fr
2

Abstract

Epistemic planning is a generalization of classical planning that has been increasingly studied in AI in the last
years. The goal to be achieved is not necessarily a state of
the world but some belief states of one or more agents. This
requires a theory of mind by the planning agent (Goldman
2006). A typical goal in epistemic planning is to make a certain agent believe something. Such a belief of the persuadee
may be a higher-order belief, i.e., a belief about another
agents’ beliefs. The initial proposal was to use a standard
logic of knowledge or belief together with a representation
of actions in terms of event models of DEL (Bolander and
Andersen 2011; Löwe, Pacuit, and Witzel 2011). While the
DEL framework is very expressive, it turned out that the existence of a solution becomes quickly undecidable even for
very simple kinds of event models (Aucher and Bolander
2013; Bolander, Holm Jensen, and Schwarzentruber 2015;
Lê Cong, Pinchinat, and Schwarzentruber 2018). Kominis
and Geffner considered epistemic planning problems with
very simple event models leading to a decidable fragment
(Kominis and Geffner 2015). They distinguish three kinds
of actions: physical actions modifying the world, public updates (DEL-like public announcements), and sensing actions
by means of which an agent learns whether a formula is
true. Other researchers investigated another source of complexity, namely that of standard epistemic logic. There, reasoning is strictly more complex than in classical logic: the
satisfiability problem is at least in PSPACE (Halpern and
Moses 1992). Based on earlier work by Levesque, Muise
et al. studied epistemic planning in fragments of standard
epistemic logic (Muise et al. 2015). They considered state
descriptions in terms of conjunctions of epistemic literals:
formulas that do not contain any conjunction or disjunction.
Cooper et al. considered another fragment: boolean combinations of ‘knowing-whether’ operators followed by propositional variables (Cooper et al. 2016).

We present a novel approach to cognitive planning, i.e., an
agent’s planning aimed at changing the cognitive attitudes of
another agent including her beliefs and intentions. We encode
the cognitive planning problem in an epistemic logic with a
semantics exploiting belief bases. We study a NP-fragment of
the logic whose satisfiability problem is reduced to SAT. We
provide complexity results for the cognitive planning problem. Moreover, we illustrate its potential for applications in
human-machine interaction in which an artificial agent is expected to interact with a human agent through dialogue and
to persuade the human to behave in a certain way.

Introduction
In social sciences, influence is defined as “change in an individual’s thoughts, feelings, attitudes, or behaviors that results from interaction with another individual or a group”
(Rashotte 2009). It is conceived as tightly connected with
persuasion. The latter is the intentional form of influence in
which an agent (the persuader) tries to make someone (the
persuadee) do or believe something by giving her a good
reason (Cialdini 2001; Perloff 2003).
Models of persuasion in AI are mostly based on argumentation. (See (Prakken 2006) for a general introduction to the
research in this area.) Some of these models are built on
Walton & Krabbe’s notion of persuasion dialogue in which
one party seeks to persuade another party to adopt a belief
or point-of-view she does not currently hold (Walton and
Krabbe 1995). There exist models based on abstract argumentation (Bench-Capon 2003; Bonzon and Maudet 2011;
Amgoud, Maudet, and Parsons 2000) as well probabilistic
models where the persuader’s uncertainty about what the
persuadee knows or believes is represented (Hunter 2015).
There exist also models based on possibility theory in which
a piece of information is represented as an argument which
can be more or less accepted depending on the trustworthiness of the agent who proposes it (Da Costa Pereira, Tettamanzi, and Villata 2011). Persuasion has also been formalized with the support of logical tools, e.g., by combining
abstract argumentation with dynamic epistemic logic (DEL)
(Proietti and Yuste-Ginel 2019) and epistemic logic with dynamic logic (Budzyńska and Kacprzak 2008).

Our approach pushes the envelope of the above approaches to epistemic planning. Our main contribution is its
generalization to cognitive planning: it is not only some belief state of a target agent that is to be achieved, but more
generally a cognitive state. The latter could involve not only
beliefs, but also intentions. Cognitive planning makes clear
the distinction between persuasion on beliefs (i.e., inducing
someone to believe that a certain fact is true) and persuasion on intentions (i.e., inducing someone to form a certain

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6331

