The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Deep Generative Models for Queuing Systems
César Ojeda, 1 Kostadin Cvejosky, 2 3 Bogdan Georgiev, 2 3
Christian Bauckhage, 2 3 Jannis Schuecker, 5 Ramsés J. Sánchez 2 4
1

Berlin Center for Machine Learning and TU Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
2
Competence Center Machine Learning Rhine-Ruhr
3
Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning and Fraunhofer IAIS, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
4
B-IT, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
5
Bayer AG, Germany
ojedamarin@tu-berlin.de, jannis.schuecker@bayer.com, sanchez@bit.uni-bonn.de
{kostadin.cvejoski, bogdan.georgiev, christian.bauckhage}@iais.fraunhofer.de
Abstract

From the point of view of deep learning, recent research
has primarily focused on the client side of a service system. This research analyses Customer Dynamics through
Point Process Theory, in which user behavior is modeled via
parametric forms such as Poisson or Hawkes processes. In
cases where these parametric forms turn out to be restrictive,
some practitioners turn to models such as Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) in order to learn representations encoding
the customer dynamics, and use Maximum Likelihood to fit
them (Du et al. 2016; Mei and Eisner 2017; Jing and Smola
2017); while others dispense with density forms altogether,
and learn instead how to sample from the distribution of interest via Generative Adversarial schemes (Xiao et al. 2017,
2018).

Modern society is heavily dependent on large scale
client-server systems with applications ranging from Internet and Communication Services to sophisticated logistics and deployment of goods. To maintain and improve such a system, a careful study of client and server
dynamics is needed – e.g. response/service times, average number of clients at given times, etc. To this end,
one traditionally relies, within the queuing theory formalism, on parametric analysis and explicit distribution
forms. However, parametric forms limit the model’s expressiveness and could struggle on extensively large
datasets.
We propose a novel data-driven approach towards queuing systems: the Deep Generative Service Times. Our
methodology delivers a flexible and scalable model for
service and response times. We leverage the representation capabilities of Recurrent Marked Point Processes
for the temporal dynamics of clients, as well as Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network techniques, to
learn deep generative models which are able to represent complex conditional service time distributions. We
provide extensive experimental analysis on both empirical and synthetic datasets, showing the effectiveness of
the proposed models.

The other side of service system modelling deals with the
service itself, in particular with service times, and mainly
lies outside the scope of deep learning. This research typically resorts to Queuing Theory, in which a customer expresses a demand and the system responds, according to
the available servers and server load. Within this theory, the
customer arrival dynamics is modeled with a point process,
while the service system is specified through either a single
queue (with a given scheduling policy) or networks of them,
and, yet again, parametric forms are assumed for both arrival
and service time distributions. Results are usually limited to
moments of the system size distribution (Asmussen 2008;
Daw and Pender 2018; Boxma, Kella, and Mandjes 2019)
or are, in some cases, based on Bayesian inference (Sutton and Jordan 2011; Wang, Casale, and Sutton 2016; Perez,
Hodge, and Kypraios 2018). Yet, the latter often have strong
built-in assumptions (e.g. Poisson arrival processes) which
makes them too restrictive, and involve expensive sampling
schemes, which renders them not scalable enough to handle
the millions of customers in modern service systems.

Introduction
The ultimate success of any service provider rests on its ability to quickly and efficiently satisfy its customers: a mobility
system is only successful as long as its users arrive on time;
a block-chain is reliable provided low latency of its transaction times is ensured; Internet services can only retain users
if they provide quick and fast response. To operate systems
like these, one needs to understand not only when customers
will require a service but also how the system is able to react and respond to demands. Moreover, one should be able
to dynamically adapt the system to external events. Examples include sudden disruptions of a mobility system due to
car accidents or weather conditions, or financial crises and
breaking news affecting block-chain transactions.

The work presented here aims to provide a scalable algorithm for service time inference suitable to the large datasets
of modern systems, and a first bridge between queuing system modelling and deep learning through deep generative
models. In recent years Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have shown to be able to capture complex data distributions, achieving impressive results in image and text

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9214

