The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computationally Tractable Riemannian Manifolds for Graph Embeddings
Calin Cruceru1 , Gary Bécigneul1,2 , Octavian-Eugen Ganea1,2
1
2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT, USA
ccruceru@inf.ethz.ch, {garyb,oct}@mit.edu

Abstract
Representing graphs as sets of node embeddings in certain
curved Riemannian manifolds has recently gained momentum
in machine learning due to their desirable geometric inductive
biases (e.g., hierarchical structures benefit from hyperbolic
geometry). However, going beyond embedding spaces of constant sectional curvature, while potentially more representationally powerful, proves to be challenging as one can easily
lose the appeal of computationally tractable tools such as
geodesic distances or Riemannian gradients. Here, we explore
two computationally efficient matrix manifolds, showcasing
how to learn and optimize graph embeddings in these Riemannian spaces. Empirically, we demonstrate consistent improvements over Euclidean geometry while often outperforming
hyperbolic and elliptical embeddings based on various metrics
that capture different graph properties. Our results serve as
new evidence for the benefits of non-Euclidean embeddings
in machine learning pipelines.

1

Figure 1: A dense social network from Facebook (Leskovec
and Mcauley 2012) used in our experiments. It shows the
Ollivier-Ricci curvatures of edges and their averages for
nodes. More such drawings are included in Appendix H.

Introduction
them (Gu et al. 2018). While for the first two the choice can
be a priori justified – e.g., complex networks are intimately
related to hyperbolic geometry (Krioukov et al. 2010) – the
last one is motivated through the presumed flexibility coming
from its varying curvature. Our work takes that hypothesis
further by exploring the representation properties of several
irreducible spaces1 of non-constant sectional curvature. We
use, in particular, Riemannian manifolds where points are
represented as specific types of matrices and which are at the
sweet spot between semantic richness and tractability.
With no additional qualifiers, graph embedding is a
vaguely specified intermediary step used as part of systems
solving a wide range of graph analytics problems such as
link prediction (Trouillon et al. 2016; Zhang and Chen 2018)
and node classification (Li, Zhu, and Zhang 2016; Wang et al.
2017). What they all have in common is the representation of
certain parts of a graph as points in a continuous space. As a
particular instance of that general task, here we embed nodes
of graphs with structural information only (i.e., undirected
and without node or edge labels), as the one shown in Figure 1
in novel curved spaces, by leveraging the closed-form expressions of the corresponding Riemannian distance between

Before representation learning started gravitating around
deep representations (Bengio et al. 2009) in the last decade,
a line of research that sparked interest in the early 2000s
was based on the so called manifold hypothesis (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). According to it, real-world
data given in their raw format (e.g., pixels of images) lie on a
low-dimensional manifold embedded in the input space. At
that time, most manifold learning algorithms were based on
locally linear approximations to points on the sought manifold – LLE (Roweis and Saul 2000), Isomap (Tenenbaum,
De Silva, and Langford 2000) – or on spectral methods –
MDS (Hofmann and Buhmann 1995), graph Laplacian eigenmaps (Belkin and Niyogi 2002).
Back to recent years, two trends are apparent: (i) the use of
graph-structured data and their direct processing by machine
learning algorithms (Bruna et al. 2014; Henaff, Bruna, and
LeCun 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016), and (ii) the resurgence of the manifold hypothesis, but with a different flavor –
being explicit about the assumed manifold and, perhaps, the
inductive bias that it entails: hyperbolic spaces (Nickel and
Kiela 2017; Ganea, Becigneul, and Hofmann 2018), spherical spaces (Wilson et al. 2014), and Cartesian products of

1
Not expressible as Cartesian products of other manifolds, be
they model spaces, as in (Gu et al. 2018), or yet others.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7133

