The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Supervised Attention-Aware Reinforcement Learning
Haiping Wu,1, 2 Khimya Khetarpal,1, 2 Doina Precup 1, 2, 3
1

McGill University
2
Mila
3
Google DeepMind, Montreal.
{haiping.wu2, khimya.khetarpal}@mail.mcgill.ca, dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract

these methods are highly incumbent on the data distribution seen during training and generalize poorly to unseen
tasks. Instead, we resort to unsupervised learning methods
that do not need extra information and explicit supervision
in the form of labelled datasets. Specifically, we are interested in building reinforcement learning (RL) agents which
learn representations guided by an understanding of what is
important in a scene for sequential decision making.
One approach to learning such meaningful representations is via attention masks; as they create a bottleneck
where the gradients are driven by the final RL task objective
(specified via a reward signal). We refer to this approach as
top-down attention. However, the meaning and quality of the
learned masks via the top-down approach are typically taskspecific and therefore hard to generalize across unseen scenarios. Moreover, top-down attention masks are often used
as interpretation tools for understanding the learned policies (Yang et al. 2018; Shi et al. 2020). Contrary to the topdown attention methods, we propose an approach for generic
understanding of the scene regardless of the tasks or policies, and use it to guide the learning of policies as opposed
to explaining them (Greydanus et al. 2018).
Object-oriented representation is a long-standing approach to understanding and simplifying a scene (Eslami
et al. 2016; Greff, Van Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2017;
Kosiorek et al. 2018; Greff et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020). Recent works (Zhang et al. 2018; Jakab et al. 2018; Kulkarni et al. 2019; Minderer et al. 2019; Gopalakrishnan, van
Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2021) try to obtain object keypoints in an unsupervised manner. However, current unsupervised keypoints detection methods including the Transporter (Kulkarni et al. 2019) are limited in that they do not
deal with variable number of objects, scale, and classes of
objects. Furthermore, the use of object-oriented representation for deep RL has not been extensively explored. For instance, how to obtain a meaningful state representation given
these objects is not immediately clear and remains an open
question.
We here argue that attention masks are a better technique
to help the learning of policies given current tools. Attention
masks aim to find salient areas in a scene and account for
any number of regions in that they are not restricted to specific object categories or count. More importantly, since it
has the same form as that of the original image (i.e. a map of

Visual saliency has emerged as a major visualization tool for
interpreting deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents. However, much of the existing research uses it as an analyzing
tool rather than an inductive bias for policy learning. In this
work, we use visual attention as an inductive bias for RL
agents. We propose a novel self-supervised attention learning approach which can 1. learn to select regions of interest
without explicit annotations, and 2. act as a plug for existing deep RL methods to improve the learning performance.
We empirically show that the self-supervised attention-aware
deep RL methods outperform the baselines in the context of
both the rate of convergence and performance. Furthermore,
the proposed self-supervised attention is not tied with specific policies, nor restricted to a specific scene. We posit that
the proposed approach is a general self-supervised attention
module for multi-task learning and transfer learning, and empirically validate the generalization ability of the proposed
method. Finally, we show that our method learns meaningful object keypoints highlighting improvements both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Introduction
In recent years, deep reinforcement learning methods (Mnih
et al. 2013, 2015, 2016) have achieved great success in large
part driven by the revolution in convolution neural networks
(CNN) and feed-forward networks as function approximators. Most methods directly use the CNN extracted features
of entire images as state representation and then perform
reasoning over this representation. Humans, on the other
hand, tend to focus on salient areas of interest such as objects (Borji, Sihite, and Itti 2012) and faces (Judd et al. 2009)
for understanding a scene, allowing them to quickly process
most relevant parts of the observations during decision making (Wyart and Tallon-Baudry 2009).
Researchers (He et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2015; Zhao et al.
2015; Hou et al. 2017) have made significant efforts in scene
understanding by performing saliency detection via image
segmentation. However, most of these methods depend on
human-annotated training datasets (Liu et al. 2010; Alpert
et al. 2011). Collecting such datasets can be infeasible and
come at the expense of time and manual labor. Moreover,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10311

