The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Unified Framework for Planning with
Learned Neural Network Transition Models
Buser Say
Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
buser.say@monash.edu

Abstract

data (Say et al. 2017; Say and Sanner 2018b; Say, Sanner,
and Thiébaux 2019; Say and Sanner 2020; Say et al. 2020;
Wu, Say, and Sanner 2020; Say 2020).
Automated planning with neural network transition models is a two stage approach to solving planning problems
with unknown state transition models (Say et al. 2017). Assuming the availability of data, the first stage of the approach
learns the unknown transition model as a neural network
model, and the second stage of the approach represents the
learned planning problem either as a Mixed-Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) model (Say et al. 2017) or a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) model (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2020),
and optimize it using an off-the-shelf solver. As summarized
in Table 1, it has been shown that both models have their
advantages and disadvantages (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2020).
Specifically, the MILP model can be optimally solved using
a complete and sound branch-and-bound algorithm, but has
been shown not to scale well for neural networks with multiple hidden layers. In contrast, the RNN model can be solved
effectively using a gradient descent algorithm but works under very restrictive assumptions which include the ommission of the important parts of a planning problem and the
availability of a good starting point.

Automated planning with neural network transition models
is a two stage approach to solving planning problems with
unknown transition models. The first stage of the approach
learns the unknown transition model from data as a neural
network model, and the second stage of the approach compiles the learned model to either a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model or a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) model, and optimize it using an off-the-shelf solver.
The previous studies have shown that both models have their
advantages and disadvantages. Namely, the MILP model can
be solved optimally using a branch-and-bound algorithm but
has been experimentally shown not to scale well for neural
networks with multiple hidden layers. In contrast, the RNN
model can be solved effectively using a gradient descent algorithm but can only work under very restrictive assumptions.
In this paper, we focus on improving the effectiveness of solving the second stage of the approach by introducing (i) a novel
Lagrangian RNN architecture that can model the previously
ignored components of the planning problem as Lagrangian
functions, and (ii) a novel framework that unifies the MILP
and the Lagrangian RNN models such that the weakness of
one model is complemented by the strength of the other. Experimentally, we show that our unifying framework significantly outperforms the standalone MILP model by solving
80% more problem instances, and showcase the ability of our
unifying framework to find high quality solutions to challenging automated planning problems with unknown transition
models.

Model
MILP
RNN

Introduction
Planning is the reasoning side of acting in Artificial Intelligence (Nau, Ghallab, and Traverso 2004). It automates the
selection and ordering of actions to reach desired states of
the world as best as possible. An automated planning problem represents the dynamics of the world using a model,
which can either be manually encoded (Kautz and Selman 1992; Hoffmann and Nebel 2001; Helmert 2006; Pommerening et al. 2014; Davies et al. 2015), or learned from
data (Shen and Simon 1989; Gil 1992; Bennett and DeJong
1996; Benson 1997). In this paper, we focus on the latter
where we assume the transition model that governs the state
evolution is not known but it can be accurately learned from

(+) Advantages and (-) Disadvantages
+ Can be provably solved to optimality.
- Not scalable for deep neural networks.
+ Scalable for deep neural networks.
- Makes restrictive assumptions.
- Requires a good starting point.

Table 1: Summary of the MILP (Say et al. 2017) and the
RNN (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2020) models.
In this paper, we focus on improving the effectiveness
of solving the second stage of the learning and planning
approach with the introduction of (i) a novel Lagrangian
RNN architecture which can model the previously ignored
components of the planning problem as Lagrangian functions (Kuhn and Tucker 1951), and (ii) a novel framework
which unifies the MILP and the Lagrangian RNN models
such that the weaknesses of one model is complemented by
the strengths of the other. Specifically, our unified framework is implemented as an algorithm which solves the MILP

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5016

