The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Truthful Scheduling and Resource Allocation through Monitoring
Dimitris Fotakis, 1 Piotr Krysta, 2 Carmine Ventre 3
1

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
2
University of Liverpool, UK
3
King’s College London, UK
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr, pkrysta@liverpool.ac.uk, carmine.ventre@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

are known as machine scheduling, bottleneck network optimization and total (a.k.a. social) cost optimization, respectively; typically, the objective for the first two is interactivity,
whilst the third is an example of batch optimization.
The question of how P should allocate resources optimally in these (and other similar) contexts is fundamental
and has received significant attention by multiple research
communities, see, e.g., (Liao 2014; Leyton-Brown 2003;
Lombardi and Milano 2012) and the references therein. In
modern digital infrastructure, dominated by outsourcing and
distributed resource allocation, a notable additional obstacle
for P is the fact that the resources are often controlled by
self-interested entities, a.k.a. selfish agents, operating them
according to their own goals (e.g., to avoid resource overloading), not necessarily aligned with P ’s objective. This
is the standard setting of Algorithmic Mechanism Design
(Nisan et al. 2007), where we seek incentive compatibility,
in addition to the algorithmic objectives of computational
efficiency and optimal resource allocation. Specifically, we
aim at truthful mechanisms, that run in polynomial-time and
approximate as well as possible the objective function at
hand. A truthful mechanism guarantees that it is in each
agent’s interest to report to the mechanism her own private
information (i.e., the features of the hardware they control),
commonly termed type. In our examples above, a type could
be the speed of a machine for a particular job to execute; the
latency of a router, and, more generally, the hardware cost to
execute a customer’s task.
Unfortunately, for none of the problems of interest it is known how to design such mechanisms. The
renown Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanisms, see,
e.g., (Nisan et al. 2007, Chapter 9), are about the only general technique known to obtain truthfulness. They require
the computation of the optimum social cost solution, implying obvious limitations for their use. More specifically, for
NP-hard social cost optimization problems, VCG does not
run in polynomial-time, unless P = NP (when, as in our
case, there is no suitable “Maximal-in-Range” approximation). Moreover, even when they can be implemented in a
computationally efficient way, VCG mechanisms can return
bad approximations to the min-max objective of machine
scheduling and bottleneck network optimization (Nisan and
Ronen 2001), because their truthfulness crucially depends
on social cost optimization.

We study the power and limitations of the Vickrey-ClarkeGroves mechanism with monitoring (VCGmon ) for cost minimization problems with objective functions that are more
general than the social cost. We identify a simple and natural sufficient condition for VCGmon to be truthful for general objectives. As a consequence, we obtain that for any
cost minimization problem with non-decreasing objective µ,
VCGmon is truthful, if the allocation is Maximal-in-Range
and µ is 1-Lipschitz (e.g., µ can be the Lp -norm of the
agents’ costs, for any p ≥ 1 or p = ∞). We apply
VCGmon to scheduling on restricted-related machines and obtain a polynomial-time truthful-in-expectation 2-approximate
(resp. O(1)-approximate) mechanism for makespan (resp.
Lp -norm) minimization. Moreover, applying VCGmon , we
obtain polynomial-time truthful O(1)-approximate mechanisms for some fundamental bottleneck network optimization
problems with single-parameter agents. On the negative side,
we provide strong evidence that VCGmon could not lead to
computationally efficient truthful mechanisms with reasonable approximation ratios for binary covering social cost minimization problems. However, we show that VCGmon results
in computationally efficient approximately truthful mechanisms for binary covering problems.

Introduction
The effective use of resources is an important goal of any
digital system. For example, operating systems allocate the
hardware (e.g., RAM memory, CPU time, etc.) to the processes under execution to guarantee “good” performance.
However, there are cases in which the hardware is not directly available. Consider, for example, a cloud computing
service provider P . Ideally, P would like to allocate customer tasks to the cloud resources so as to provide the “best”
possible service. Relevant scenarios include the allocation
of programs (a.k.a., jobs) to machines; of packets to routers
or, more generally, the selection of a subset of resources
that would complete the customer’s task. The definition of
“best” service might vary and range from interactivity (i.e.,
the maximum completion time of customers’ tasks is minimized) to batch performance (i.e., the total completion time
is minimized). The aforementioned optimization problems
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5423

