The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepWriteSYN: On-Line Handwriting Synthesis
via Deep Short-Term Representations
Ruben Tolosana, 1 Paula Delgado-Santos, 1 Andres Perez-Uribe,2
Ruben Vera-Rodriguez,1 Julian Fierrez,1 Aythami Morales 1
1

Biometrics and Data Pattern Analytics Lab, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid
2
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland (HEIG-VD)
(ruben.tolosana, ruben.vera, julian.fierrez, aythami.morales)@uam.es, paula.delgadod@estudiante.uam.es
Andres.Perez-uribe@heig-vd.ch
Abstract

2018). However, when the scenarios considered are based
on time sequences, and not images, the synthesis of new
data seems to be a more challenging task (or at least less
developed). In this study we focus on the synthesis of timesequences data for on-line handwriting applications such as
signature and digit recognition.
Handwriting has been largely considered along the centuries as one of the most robust approaches to authenticate a
person (Faundez-Zanuy et al. 2020). Its application has been
extended to many different authentication scenarios such as
handwriting (Zhang et al. 2016), signature (Diaz et al. 2019),
password (Tolosana et al. 2020a), or doodles (MartinezDiaz, Fierrez, and Galbally 2016), among others. However,
a key aspect for the success of these authentication technologies is the amount of data available for subject modelling. Contrary to physiological biometric traits such as face
and fingerprint, handwriting is a behavioral biometric trait,
which implies that every handwritten execution is different (Jain, Nandakumar, and Ross 2016). As a result, the performance of handwriting-based authentication systems can
be critically affected under one-shot learning scenarios due
to the high intra-subject variability (Lai et al. 2020). This aspect is exacerbated by the restrictions to acquire and share
handwriting biometric information for improving the learning due to legal aspects.
This study proposes DeepWriteSYN, a novel on-line
handwriting synthesis approach via deep short-term representations in order to overcome the lack of existing data in
handwriting applications. Fig. 1 provides a graphical representation of DeepWriteSYN. It comprises two modules: i)
an optional short-term handwriting segmentation, which divides the handwriting into short segments (e.g., individual
strokes), and ii) on-line synthesis of those short segments,
which is based on deep learning technology. The main contributions of this study are:

This study proposes DeepWriteSYN, a novel on-line handwriting synthesis approach via deep short-term representations. It comprises two modules: i) an optional and interchangeable temporal segmentation, which divides the handwriting into short-time segments consisting of individual or
multiple concatenated strokes; and ii) the on-line synthesis
of those short-time handwriting segments, which is based on
a sequence-to-sequence Variational Autoencoder (VAE). The
main advantages of the proposed approach are that the synthesis is carried out in short-time segments (that can run from
a character fraction to full characters) and that the VAE can
be trained on a configurable handwriting dataset. These two
properties give a lot of flexibility to our synthesiser, e.g., as
shown in our experiments, DeepWriteSYN can generate realistic handwriting variations of a given handwritten structure
corresponding to the natural variation within a given population or a given subject. These two cases are developed experimentally for individual digits and handwriting signatures,
respectively, achieving in both cases remarkable results.
Also, we provide experimental results for the task of on-line
signature verification showing the high potential of DeepWriteSYN to improve significantly one-shot learning scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first synthesis
approach capable of generating realistic on-line handwriting
in the short term (including handwritten signatures) via deep
learning. This can be very useful as a module toward longterm realistic handwriting generation either completely synthetic or as natural variation of given handwriting samples.

The availability of large-scale public databases, together
with the remarkable progress of deep learning, have led to
the achievement of very impressive results in many different fields. However, there are still applications and scenarios
in which data are scarce, achieving in general poor results.
These scenarios are usually known in the literature as zero-,
one-, and few-shot learning (Wang et al. 2019, 2020).
Different approaches have been proposed in response to
the lack of data, being the synthesis of artificial data one
of the main research lines followed nowadays. This is of
special relevance in image-based scenarios due to the popular Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) and Transfer Learning techniques (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Tan et al.

• DeepWriteSYN, a novel on-line handwriting synthesiser
based on a Variational Autoencoder (VAE). One of the
main advantages of the approach is that the synthesis is
carried out in short-time segments, being able to synthesise both given handwriting structures from unseen subjects and natural handwriting variations of given subjects.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• An in-depth qualitative analysis of DeepWriteSYN over
600

