The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploring Auxiliary Reasoning Tasks for Task-oriented Dialog Systems with
Meta Cooperative Learning
Bowen Qin1,2 , Min Yang1 * , Lidong Bing, Qingshan Jiang1 , Chengming Li1 , Ruifeng Xu3
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{bw.qin, min.yang, qs.jiang, cm.li}@siat.ac.cn, binglidong@gmail.com, xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
Address
Distance
POI type
POI
434 arastradero rd 6 miles shopping center ravenswood shopping center
53 university av 8 miles
gas station
shell
481 amaranta ave 2 miles parking garage
palo alto garage r
753 university ave 3 miles
rest stop
comfort inn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Meta Cooperative Learning (MCL)
framework for task-oriented dialog systems (TDSs). Our
model consists of an auxiliary KB reasoning task for learning meta KB knowledge, an auxiliary dialogue reasoning task
for learning dialogue patterns, and a TDS task (primary task)
that aims at not only retrieving accurate entities from KB but
also generating natural responses, which are coordinated to
achieve collective success in both retrieving accurate KB entities and generating human-like responses via meta learning.
Concretely, the dialog generation model amalgamates complementary meta KB and dialog knowledge from two novel
auxiliary reasoning tasks that together provide integrated guidance to build a high-quality TDS by adding regularization
terms to force primary network to produce similar results to
auxiliary networks. While MCL automatically learns appropriate labels for the two auxiliary reasoning tasks from the
primary task, without requiring access to any further data. The
key idea behind MCL is to use the performance of the primary
task, which is trained alongside the auxiliary tasks in one iteration, to improve the auxiliary labels for the next iteration
with meta learning. Experimental results on three benchmark
datasets show that MCL can generate higher quality responses
compared to several strong baselines in terms of both automatic and human evaluations. Code to reproduce the results in
this paper is available at: https://github.com/siat-nlp/MCL.

1

Role
User
System (Gold)
Seq2seq
MLM
MCL
User
System (Gold)
Seq2seq

Turn
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1

MLM

1

MCL

1

Utterance
where can i get gas?
the nearest gas station is 8 miles away.
I have a away from would you like the address.
It is 8 miles away.
There is a gas station, Shell is 8 miles away.
what is the address?
shell is at 53 university av.
The is at at.
shopping center is located at 434 arasadero rd.
shell is located at 53 university av.
shell is located at 53 university av, i sent its
position to your screen.

Table 1: A dialog along with the KB information from the
CamRest dataset for restaurant reservation.

Introduction

Task-oriented dialog systems (TDSs), which aim at facilitating users to accomplish certain tasks with natural language,
have raised increasing interest due to their broad applicability,
such as weather inquiry and restaurant reservation. Different
from open-domain dialog systems which perform chit-chat,
the ability to query external KB is essential in TDSs since the
responses are guided not only by dialog context but also by
the query results (see Table 1). Conventional pipeline TDSs
decompose the dialog generation into separate modularized
pipelines, which rely on handcrafted labels, features and
templates. However, pipelining dialog system components
often leads to error propagation. In addition, these methods
* Min Yang is corresponding author (min.yang@siat.ac.cn).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13701

often require a large number of handcrafted features and labels, which may create a substantial barrier for adapting the
learned TDSs to new domains.
Recently, great efforts have been made in building
end-to-end TDSs with the sequence-to-sequence model
(Seq2Seq) (Bordes, Boureau, and Weston 2017; Eric and
Manning 2017; Eric et al. 2017), which bring the results of
good flexibility and quality. The primary idea behind the
Seq2Seq model is to leverage an encoder to create a vector
representation of dialog history and KB information, and
then feed the learned representation into a decoder to produce a response word by word. For example, GLMP (Wu,
Socher, and Xiong 2019) is a representative end-to-end TDS,
which incorporates KB information into the Seq2Seq model
by using a global memory pointer to filter the KB for relevant
information and instantiating the slots with a local memory
pointer. The end-to-end TDSs map dialog contexts into output responses directly without acquiring explicit dialog state
and dialog policy labels, thus reduce human effort and are
easily adapted to new domains.
Despite the remarkable progress of previous works, there
are still several challenges for extracting accurate entities
from KB and generating natural responses. First, the Seq2Seq
model struggles to effectively reason over the complex KB
and integrate the KB entities into dialog generation, making it unstable to generate the dialog responses (Wu, Socher,

