The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Forming Better Stable Solutions in Group Formation Games Inspired by
Internet Exchange Points (IXPs)
Elliot Anshelevich, Wennan Zhu
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
eanshel@cs.rpi.edu, zhuw5@rpi.edu

connect to the same facility must pay a cost w(i, j), but if
they share a facility then this cost disappears. Finally, the facilities themselves have costs c(fk ) which must be paid for
by the players using these facilities. In summary, the players
wish to join the same facilities as their “friends” in order to
avoid paying the costs w(i, j), but this is counterbalanced by
them not wanting to pay the cost of joining a facility.
While our game is quite general, and models general
group formation (e.g., facilities are clubs or groups people can join, and they wish to join the same clubs as their
friends), this game is specifically inspired by the formation
of IXPs in the Internet. IXPs are facilities where Internet
Service Providers (ISPs) can exchange Internet traffic with
high speed; a large fraction of total Internet traffic flows
through such hubs (Ager et al. 2012). If two ISPs join the
same IXP (and pay their cost for joining, which can depend
on many factors including the pricing scheme and the physical location(s) of the IXP), then they gain the benefit of mutual high speed communication. If, however, two ISPs do not
use the same IXP, they must use alternate means of exchanging traffic with each other (e.g., through their providers or
private peering), which we model by them incurring an extra cost w(i, j).
Coordination games have been widely studied in various
situations where agents gain utility by forming coalitions
with other agents. Even with the large amount of existing
work on both coordination games and group formation, the
questions we consider in this paper have not been studied
before for our game (see Related Work). Like many such
games, ours can be represented by a graph, in which each
node stands for a player and the edges between them have
weights representing the disconnection cost for them not belonging to the same facility. One major difference between
our game and much (although certainly not all) of existing
work is that the facilities (i.e., groups that players can join)
are not identical: their quality for a player i depends not
only on who else has joined the same group (as in hedonic games (Aziz and Savani 2016)), but also on the specific
facility being joined, as quantified by the cost w(i, fk ). This
immediately changes a lot about equilibrium structure: it is
no longer the case that everyone being in the same group is
an equilibrium solution which minimizes social cost; instead
equilibrium solutions involve players balancing their cost for
joining facilities with their cost of being separated from their

Abstract
We study a coordination game motivated by the formation
of Internet Exchange Points (IXPs), in which agents choose
which facilities to join. Joining the same facility as other
agents you communicate with has benefits, but different facilities have different costs for each agent. Thus, the players
wish to join the same facilities as their “friends”, but this is
balanced by them not wanting to pay the cost of joining a facility. We first show that the Price of Stability (P oS) of this
game is at most 2, and more generally there always exists
an α-approximate equilibrium with cost at most α2 of optimum. We then focus on how better stable solutions can be
formed. If we allow agents to pay their neighbors to prevent
them from deviating (i.e., a player i voluntarily pays another
player j so that j joins the same facility), then we provide a
payment scheme which stabilizes the solution with minimum
social cost s∗ , i.e. PoS is 1. In our main technical result, we
consider how much a central coordinator would have to pay
the players in order to form good stable solutions. Let ∆ denote the total amount of payments needed to be paid to the
players in order to stabilize s∗ , i.e., these are payments that a
player would lose if they changed their strategy from the one
in s∗ . We prove that there is a tradeoff between ∆ and the
2
∆
Price of Stability: cost(s
∗ ) ≤ 1− 5 P oS. Thus when there are
no good stable solutions, only a small amount of extra payment is needed to stabilize s∗ ; and when good stable solutions
already exist (i.e., P oS is small), then we should be happy
with those solutions instead. Finally, we consider the computational complexity of finding the optimum solution s∗ , and
design a polynomial time O(log n) approximation algorithm
for this problem.

Introduction
We study a coordination game motivated by the formation of
Internet Exchange Points (IXPs). In this game, there are m
facilities available, and the players (modeling ISPs, or more
generally entities which wish to exchange traffic with each
other) choose which facilities to join. Joining a facility fk
has a cost for player i, which we call the “connection cost”
and denote by w(i, fk ); this cost can be different for different players and facilities. The reason why players are willing
to pay such costs is because joining the same facility as other
players is beneficial: a pair of players i and j which do not
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5094

