The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Identity-aware Graph Neural Networks
Jiaxuan You, Jonathan M Gomes-Selman, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{jiaxuan, jgs8, rexy, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Message passing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) provide
a powerful modeling framework for relational data. However, the expressive power of existing GNNs is upper-bounded
by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) graph isomorphism test,
which means GNNs that are not able to predict node clustering
coefficients and shortest path distances, and cannot differentiate between different d-regular graphs. Here we develop a
class of message passing GNNs, named Identity-aware Graph
Neural Networks (ID-GNNs), with greater expressive power
than the 1-WL test. ID-GNN offers a minimal but powerful
solution to limitations of existing GNNs. ID-GNN extends
existing GNN architectures by inductively considering nodes’
identities during message passing. To embed a given node, IDGNN first extracts the ego network centered at the node, then
conducts rounds of heterogeneous message passing, where
different sets of parameters are applied to the center node than
to other surrounding nodes in the ego network. We further
propose a simplified but faster version of ID-GNN that injects
node identity information as augmented node features. Altogether, both versions of ID-GNN represent general extensions
of message passing GNNs, where experiments show that transforming existing GNNs to ID-GNNs yields on average 40%
accuracy improvement on challenging node, edge, and graph
property prediction tasks; 3% accuracy improvement on node
and graph classification benchmarks; and 15% ROC AUC improvement on real-world link prediction tasks. Additionally,
ID-GNNs demonstrate improved or comparable performance
over other task-specific graph networks.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) represent a powerful learning paradigm that have achieved great success (Scarselli et al.
2008; Li et al. 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Velickovic et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019;
You, Ying, and Leskovec 2020). Among these models, messaging passing GNNs, such as GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017),
GraphSAGE (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), and GAT
(Velickovic et al. 2018), are dominantly used today due to
their simplicity, efficiency and strong performance in realworld applications (Zitnik and Leskovec 2017; Ying et al.
2018; You et al. 2018a, 2019b, 2020a,b). The central idea
behind message passing GNNs is to learn node embeddings
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

via the repeated aggregation of information from local node
neighborhoods using non-linear transformations (Battaglia
et al. 2018).
Although GNNs represent a powerful learning paradigm, it
has been shown that the expressive power of existing GNNs is
upper-bounded by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test (Xu
et al. 2019). Concretely, a fundamental limitation of existing
GNNs is that two nodes with different neighborhood structure can have the same computational graph, thus appearing
indistinguishable. Here, a computational graph specifies the
procedure to produce a node’s embedding. Such failure cases
are abundant (Figure 1): in node classification tasks, existing GNNs fail to distinguish nodes that reside in d-regular
graphs of different sizes; in link prediction tasks, they cannot
differentiate node candidates with the same neighborhood
structures but different shortest path distance to the source
node; and in graph classification tasks, they cannot differentiate d-regular graphs (Chen et al. 2019; Murphy et al.
2019). While task-specific feature augmentation can be used
to mitigate these failure modes, the process of discovering
meaningful features for different tasks is not generic and can,
for example, hamper the inductive power of GNNs.
Several recent methods aim to overcome these limitations
in existing GNNs. For graph classification tasks, a collection
of works propose novel architectures more expressive than
the 1-WL test (Chen et al. 2019; Maron et al. 2019a; Murphy
et al. 2019). For link level tasks, P-GNNs are proposed to
overcome the limitation of existing GNNs (You, Ying, and
Leskovec 2019). While these methods have a rich theoretical
grounding, they are often task specific (either graph or link
level) and often suffer from increased complexity in computation or implementation. In contrast, message passing GNNs
have a track record of high predictive performance across
node, link, and graph level tasks, while being simple and
efficient to implement. Therefore, extending message passing
GNNs beyond the expressiveness of 1-WL test, to overcome
current GNN limitations, is a problem of high importance.
Present work. Here we propose Identity-aware Graph Neural Networks (ID-GNNs), a class of message passing GNNs
with expressive power beyond the 1-WL test1 . ID-GNN provides a universal extension and makes any existing message
passing GNN more expressive. ID-GNN embeds each node
1

10737

Project website with code: http://snap.stanford.edu/idgnn

