The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Graph Neural Networks
Huihui Liu, Yiding Yang, Xinchao Wang∗
Stevens Institute of Technology
{hliu79, yyang99, xinchao.wang}@stevens.edu

Abstract

Test accuracy (%)

Catastrophic forgetting refers to the tendency that a neural network “forgets” the previous learned knowledge upon
learning new tasks. Prior methods have been focused on
overcoming this problem on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), where the input samples like images lie in a grid
domain, but have largely overlooked graph neural networks
(GNNs) that handle non-grid data. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme dedicated to overcoming catastrophic
forgetting problem and hence strengthen continual learning
in GNNs. At the heart of our approach is a generic module,
termed as topology-aware weight preserving (TWP), applicable to arbitrary form of GNNs in a plug-and-play fashion. Unlike the main stream of CNN-based continual learning methods that rely on solely slowing down the updates
of parameters important to the downstream task, TWP explicitly explores the local structures of the input graph, and
attempts to stabilize the parameters playing pivotal roles in
the topological aggregation. We evaluate TWP on different
GNN backbones over several datasets, and demonstrate that
it yields performances superior to the state of the art. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/hhliu79/TWP.

100
90
80
70

task 1
task 2
task 3

60
50
40

Train task 1

Train task 2

Train task 3

Figure 1: Illustration of catastrophic forgetting on graph attention networks (GATs) models on the Corafull dataset
based on a CNN-based method, EWC (Kirkpatrick et al.
2017). Top: Blue, red, and yellow nodes are used for task
1, 2, and 3, respectively. Bottom: The test performance of
each task when learning new tasks gradually.
2017; Li and Hoiem 2017; Aljundi et al. 2018). Parameterisolation methods, on the other hand, focus on assigning different subsets of parameters for different tasks and reusing
knowledge from previous tasks (Rusu et al. 2016; Fernando
et al. 2017; Yoon et al. 2017).
Existing deep-learning-based continual learning methods,
in spite of their impressive results, have been focusing on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with the grid data
like images as input. However, many real-world data lie in
the non-grid domain and take the form of graphs. Examples include but are not limited to such as citation networks,
social networks (Newman and Girvan 2004), and biological reaction networks (Pavlopoulos et al. 2011). To handle data in the irregular domain, various graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed (Kipf and Welling 2016;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) to explicitly account
for the topological interactions between nodes in the graph.
Yet unfortunately, GNNs suffer from catastrophic forgetting as well. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the state-of-theart graph attention networks (GATs), when applied to a sequence of three node-classification tasks, significantly deteriorate as new tasks are learned. A straightforward solution towards handling this issue is to directly apply continual learning methods designed for CNNs on the graph
data, by treating each node as a single sample like an image
for CNNs. However, the CNN-based methods merely focus
on individual nodes of the graph but neglect the topological structure and the interconnections between nodes, which

Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated unprecedentedly
gratifying results in many artificial intelligence tasks. Despite the encouraging progress, in the continual learning
scenario where a model is expected to learn from a sequence
of tasks and data, deep models are prone to the catastrophic
forgetting problem (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Ratcliff
1990; McClelland, McNaughton, and O’Reilly 1995; French
1999).
Many recent endeavours have been made towards alleviating catastrophic forgetting or preserving the performance
on the older task upon learning newer ones. Earlier approaches rely on a rehearsal scheme, in which a part of samples from previous tasks are stored and replayed in learning
the new task (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Rebuffi et al.
2017). Regularization-based methods, as another popular
line of work, precludes the key parameters of the previous
tasks from undergoing dramatic changes (Kirkpatrick et al.
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8653

