The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual Distribution Alignment Network for Generalizable Person Re-Identification
Peixian Chen1 , Pingyang Dai1∗ , Jianzhuang Liu3 , Feng Zheng2 , Mingliang Xu4 ,
Qi Tian5 , Rongrong Ji1,6
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Tech
4
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
5
Cloud & AI, Huawei Tech.
6
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
pxchen@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {pydai, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn, {liu.jianzhuang, tian.qi1}@huawei.com,
zhengf@sustech.edu.cn, iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn
Abstract

2018). These approaches typically learn a model by mixing
data from both the labeled source domain and the unlabeled
target domain, hence fitting the target domain’s distribution
without the cost of labeling. Though being more practical
than supervised ones, existing endeavors have shown that
UDA approaches require training with many target data to
achieve good results (Peng et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2018;
Zhong et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2019).
Compared with UDA, Domain Generalization (DG) offers a preferable real-world setting, which learns a model using multiple source domain datasets and expects this model
to perform well in an unseen target domain without any
model updating, i.e., adaptation or retraining. An optimal
DG should learn a feature representation that is discriminative for the task and insensitive to the variation of domain
distributions. Therefore, DG is arguably preferable as it does
not need any data from the target domain. Unfortunately,
existing DG methods are designed explicitly for classification tasks (Li et al. 2018a,b), while Re-ID is a retrieval task,
which fundamentally differs. To explain, DG in classification tackles the same set of labels in all source domains. In
contrast, DG in retrieval should compare the feature similarity between different identities (corresponding to different
labels between source and target domains).
To this end, some works attempted to apply DG in person Re-ID by employing existing techniques, such as metalearning (Song et al. 2019) and normalization layers (Jia
et al. 2019), to learn discriminative features that are insensitive to domain variations. However, these approaches are
still not specific to person Re-ID. The variation among ReID datasets is usually massive, so directly applying classification DG methods with pair-wise domain alignment
can hurt the performance, as there is a statistical tradeoff between domain-invariance and classification accuracy
(Akuzawa, Iwasawa, and Matsuo 2019). Moreover, they
naively mix all source data without associating similar samples from different domains: two pedestrian features maybe
even closer than visually-similar ones solely because the
former ones are from the same domain. It contradicts realworld scenarios, as visually-similar pedestrians are more

Domain generalization (DG) offers a preferable real-world
setting for Person Re-Identification (Re-ID), which trains a
model using multiple source domain datasets and expects it to
perform well in an unseen target domain without any model
updating. Unfortunately, most DG approaches are designed
explicitly for classification tasks, which fundamentally differs from the retrieval task Re-ID. Moreover, existing applications of DG in Re-ID cannot correctly handle the massive
variation among Re-ID datasets. In this paper, we identify two
fundamental challenges in DG for Person Re-ID: domainwise variations and identity-wise similarities. To this end, we
propose an end-to-end Dual Distribution Alignment Network
(DDAN) to learn domain-invariant features with dual-level
constraints: the domain-wise adversarial feature learning and
the identity-wise similarity enhancement. These constraints
effectively reduce the domain-shift among multiple source
domains further while agreeing to real-world scenarios. We
evaluate our method in a large-scale DG Re-ID benchmark
and compare it with various cutting-edge DG approaches.
Quantitative results show that DDAN achieves state-of-theart performance.

1

Introduction

Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) aims to identify the same
pedestrian captured by different cameras under variant viewpoints, lighting, and locations. To date, approaches based on
deep Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
remarkable performance in this topic (Bak and Carr 2017;
Bai, Bai, and Tian 2017; Li, Zhu, and Gong 2017). Unfortunately, these approaches’ success heavily relies on the i.i.d.
assumption between labeled training and test data. In realworld applications, meeting this supervised i.i.d. assumption is prohibitively expensive, as it requires low-variation
datasets and extensive manual labeling. To this end, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) was introduced in person Re-ID (Wang et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018; Bak et al.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1054

