The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

When Hashing Met Matching:
Efficient Spatio-Temporal Search for Ridesharing
Chinmoy Dutta
Turing Research
chinmoy@turingresearch.ai

Abstract

its utility (reduced traffic congestion, reduced resource consumption, reduced air pollution, cheaper rides, use of highoccupancy lanes etc.). Thus, ability to match rides minimizing cost while maximizing utility is of paramount importance for the success of shared mobility.
However, the urban scale and real-time nature of this
combinatorial problem make it extremely difficult to tackle.
Among all the solution approaches, those based on the
graph-theoretic framework of shareability network, introduced in (Santi et al. 2014), have been most successful.
These approaches owe their success to the systematic modeling of the match pool in a graph-theoretic setting which
then unlocks a rich set of techniques from graph theory to
tackle the challenge. The nodes of the network are either
rides or driver routes. An edge between two ride nodes represents feasibility of matching them together while an edge
between a ride node and and a driver route node represents
feasibility of adding the ride to the driver route. Here, feasibility means that the platform-defined user experience constraints (e.g. maximum pickup wait, maximum detour etc.)
are satisfied for all the rides concerned.
The basic building block of shareability network is the
foundation for the highly influential work of (Alonso-Mora
et al. 2017) which provided a framework for high-capacity
ridesharing by computing cliques in the network and solving
an Integer Linear Program (ILP) over them. Their computationally prohibitive framework was subsequently simplified
in (Simonetto, Monteil, and Gambella 2019) relying on bipartite matching instead of solving an ILP, while still basing
their methodology on the shareability network. Subsequent
works of (Alonso-Mora, Wallar, and Rus 2017), (Yu and
Shen 2020) and (Shah, Lowalekar, and Varakantham 2020)
have all relied on the shareability network as their basis.
Computing the shareability network in real-time, however, is a computationally intensive task, and none of these
prior works effectively tackled this question in a principled
way. Comparing nodes pairwise for feasibility has a time
complexity of O(n2 ) and requires O(n2 ) calls to a routing
service for a match pool with n nodes. For a ridesharing
platform, it is common to have tens of thousands of nodes
in the match pool for a large urban region at peak commute
times. These platforms also employ several features to further thicken the match pool, such as batching of arriving ride
requests, swapping already made matches, etc. To generate

Shared on-demand mobility holds immense potential for urban transportation. However, finding ride matches in realtime at urban scale is a very difficult combinatorial optimization problem and mostly heuristic methods are applied. In this
work, we introduce a principled approach to this combinatorial problem. Our approach proceeds by constructing suitable
representations for rides and driver routes capturing their essential spatio-temporal aspects in an appropriate vector space,
and defining a similarity metric in this space that expresses
matching utility. This then lets us mathematically model the
problem of finding ride matches as that of Near Neighbor
Search (NNS). Exploiting this modeling, we devise a novel
randomized spatio-temporal search algorithm for finding ride
matches based on the theory of Locality Sensitive Hashing
(LSH). Apart from being highly efficient, our algorithm enjoys several practically useful properties and extension possibilities. Experiments with large real-world datasets show
that our algorithm consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
heuristic methods thereby proving its practical applicability.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider shared on-demand mobility. Its
importance for planning urban transportation lies in its
promise to provide a solution for the serious urban challenges of reducing excessive traffic congestion, resource
consumption and air pollution while providing efficient,
flexible and affordable mobility to people (Arnott and Small
1994; Caiazzo et al. 2013; Pant and Harrison 2013; Carrion
and Levinson 2012).
Real-time information and monitoring of urban mobility
and the ability to do large scale computation on the cloud
efficiently allow on-demand shared mobility platforms (e.g.
transportation network companies, on-demand microtransit
companies, etc., referred to as ridesharing platforms here) to
enable sharing of rides to unprecedented levels. A number of
works (Agatz et al. 2011; Santi et al. 2014; Friedrich, Hartl,
and Magg 2018) have studied urban traffic and confirmed the
tremendous potential of real-time urban-scale shared mobility to reduce the burden on urban transportation. In order to
exploit this potential, the cost of sharing (detours, increased
travel time, loss of privacy etc.) needs to be balanced with
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

90

