The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Encoding Syntactic Knowledge in Transformer Encoder for
Intent Detection and Slot Filling
Jixuan Wang1,2 * , Kai Wei3† , Martin Radfar3 , Weiwei Zhang3 , Clement Chung3
1

University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute
3
Amazon Alexa
jixuan@cs.toronto.edu, {kaiwe, radfarmr, wwzhang, chungcle}@amazon.com
O

O

O

O

B-fromloc O B-toloc I-toloc

Louis

SearchFlight

re
t_
Bc

os

Slots:

la

Figure 1: An example of NLU tasks.

de

Intent

St.

e

Slots

Utterance Show the flights from Toronto to

We propose a novel Transformer encoder-based architecture
with syntactical knowledge encoded for intent detection and
slot filling. Specifically, we encode syntactic knowledge into
the Transformer encoder by jointly training it to predict syntactic parse ancestors and part-of-speech of each token via
multi-task learning. Our model is based on self-attention and
feed-forward layers and does not require external syntactic
information to be available at inference time. Experiments
show that on two benchmark datasets, our models with only
two Transformer encoder layers achieve state-of-the-art results. Compared to the previously best performed model without pre-training, our models achieve absolute F1 score and
accuracy improvement of 1.59% and 0.85% for slot filling
and intent detection on the SNIPS dataset, respectively. Our
models also achieve absolute F1 score and accuracy improvement of 0.1% and 0.34% for slot filling and intent detection
on the ATIS dataset, respectively, over the previously best
performed model. Furthermore, the visualization of the selfattention weights illustrates the benefits of incorporating syntactic information during training.

tiv

Abstract

Introduction
Recent years have seen great success in applying deep learning approaches to enhance the capabilities of virtual assistants (VAs) such as Amazon Alexa, Google Home and Apple Siri. One of the challenges for building these systems
is mapping the meaning of users’ utterances, which are expressed in natural language, to machine comprehensible language (Allen 1995). An example is illustrated in Figure 1. In
this utterance “Show the cheapest flight from Toronto to St.
Louis”, the machine needs to map this utterance to an intent Airfare (intent detection) and to slots such as Toronto:
FromLocation (slot filling). In this work, we focus on intent
detection and slot filling and refer to these as Natural Language Understanding (NLU) tasks.
Previous works show that a simple deep neural architecture delivers better performance on NLU tasks when
compared to traditional models such as Conditional Random Fields (Collobert et al. 2011). Since then, deep neural architectures, predominantly recurrent neural networks,
* Work done during author’s internship at Amazon Alexa.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13943

B-

have become an O
indispensable
O
Opart
O of building NLU
O sys- O
tems (Zhang and Wang 2016; Goo et al. 2018; E et al.
Utterance:
How much is the cheapest flight from Toront
2019). Transformer-based architectures, as introduced more
recently
by (Vaswani et al. 2017), have shown Airfare
significant
Intent:
improvement over previous works on NLU tasks (Chen,
Zhuo, and Wang 2019; Qin et al. 2019). Recent studies
show that although the Transformer model can learn syntactic knowledge purely by seeing examples, explicitly feeding this knowledge to such models can significantly enhance their performance on tasks such as neural machine
translation (Sundararaman et al. 2019) and semantic role labeling (Strubell et al. 2018). While incorporating syntactic knowledge has been shown to improve performance for
NLU tasks (Tur et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2016), both of these
assume syntactic knowledge is provided by external models
during training and inference time.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Transformer encoderbased architecture for NLU tasks with syntactic knowledge
encoded that does not require syntactic information to be
available during inference time. This is accomplished, first,
by training one attention head to predict syntactic ancestors
of each token. The dependency relationship between each
token is obtained from syntactic dependency trees, where
each word in a sentence is assigned a syntactic head that is
either another word in the sentence or an artificial root symbol (Dozat and Manning 2016). Adding the objective of dependency relationship prediction allows a given token to attend more to its syntactically relevant parent and ancestors.
In addition to dependency parsing knowledge, we encode
part of speech (POS) information in Transformer encoders
because previous research shows that the POS information
can help dependency parsing (Nguyen and Verspoor 2018).
The closest work to ours is (Strubell et al. 2018). However,
they focused on semantic role labeling and trained one attention head to predict the direct parent instead of all ancestors.
We compare our models with several state-of-the-art neu-

