The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Infinite Gaussian Mixture Modeling
with an Improved Estimation of the Number of Clusters
Avi Matza and Yuval Bistritz
The school of electrical engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv
avimatza@mail.tau.ac.il, bistritz@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract

The IGMM parameters are typically obtained by unsupervised Bayesian inference techniques, in which a Dirichlet prior is assigned to the weights of the mixture. This approach falls within a family of modeling methods known
as Dirichlet process mixture (DPM) modeling, see Ferguson (1973) and Antoniak (1974), that was subsequently applied to modeling, clustering and classification (Bouguila
and Ziou 2009; Görür and Rasmussen 2010; Hu et al. 2013;
Davy and Tourneret 2010; Dai and Storkey 2014; Meilă and
Chen 2016) and others.
As a Dirichlet process mixture of Gaussians, the IGMM
is a consistent estimator of probability density functions
(PDF). Namely, given enough training data from a sufficiently regular PDF, the DPM model converges to the shape
of the density (Ghosal, Ghosh, and Ramamoorthi 1999;
Miller and Harrison 2013). However, consistency in estimating the shape of a density function does not necessarily mean
a proper estimation of the number of components (the order)
of the mixture (Miller and Harrison 2013, 2014, 2018; Lu
2017; Harshavardhan and Sreenivas 2010).
This inconsistency in order estimation is undesirable in
density estimation tasks, as it means wasting computation
effort on exploring insignificant regions in the parametric
space and creating a model with higher than necessary number of parameters. It becomes unacceptable in clustering applications where the main goal is to estimate the number of
clusters in some unfamiliar data.
It has been shown by West (1992) and Escobar and West
(1995), following the work of Antoniak (1974), that the
number of components in a DPM is affected mainly by a
specific parameter of the Dirichlet prior distribution called
the concentration parameter and denoted usually by α.
In spite of its significance, the selection of α has not received enough attention. Some studies simply set α to some
adhoc value. For example, it was set to 1 in Medvedovic and
Sivaganesan (2002) and in Shin, Sekora, and Byun (2009).
Some other works, like Escobar and West (1992) and Rasmussen (2000), selected α with a prior distribution having some fixed hyper-parameters. For some more elaborated
hyper-parameters selection methods of priors for α see Dorazio (2009) and Murugiah and Sweeting (2012).
This paper proposes a new training algorithm for IGMM,
one that achieves quite accurate estimation of the “correct”
number of components in synthetically generated data as

Infinite Gaussian mixture modeling (IGMM) is a modeling
method that determines all the parameters of a Gaussian mixture model (GMM), including its order. It has been well documented that it is a consistent estimator for probability density functions in the sense that, given enough training data
from sufficiently regular probability density functions, it will
converge to the shape of the original density curve. It is also
known, however, that IGMM provides an inconsistent estimation of the number of clusters. The current paper shows that
the nature of this inconsistency is an overestimation, and we
pinpoint that this problem is an inherent part of the training
algorithm. It stems mostly from a “self-reinforcing feedback”
which is a certain relation between the likelihood function of
one of the model hyperparameters (α) and the probability of
sampling the number of components, that sustain their mutual
growth during the Gibbs iterations. We show that this problem can be resolved by using informative priors for α and
propose a modified training procedure that uses the inverse χ2
for this purpose. The modified algorithm successfully recovers the “known” order in all the experiments with synthetic
data sets. It also demonstrates good results when compared
to other methods used to evaluate model order, using realworld databases. Furthermore, the improved performance is
attained without undermining the fidelity of estimating the
original PDFs and with a significant reduction in computational cost.

Introduction
The infinite Gaussian mixture model (IGMM) is a method
for modeling multimodal distributions in a non-parametric
Bayesian framework. It aims to provide a fully generative
Gaussian mixture model (GMM), for arbitrary data, without a presumed number of Gaussians. The fact that IGMM
is able to simultaneously infer both the number of Gaussian
components and their parameters, makes it particularly attractive for clustering applications, where the primary goal
is to determine the number of clusters in some unexplored
data. The IGMM has been used for this purpose in bioinformatics (Medvedovic and Sivaganesan 2002), astronomy
(Shin, Sekora, and Byun 2009), speech (Niekum and Barto
2011), (Kamper et al. 2014) and various other fields.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8921

