The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual Quaternion Knowledge Graph Embeddings
Zongsheng Cao 1,2 , Qianqian Xu 3,* , Zhiyong Yang 1,2 , Xiaochun Cao 1,2,6 , Qingming Huang 3,4,5,6,*
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{caozongsheng,yangzhiyong,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning representations
of entities and relations in the knowledge graph for the link prediction task. Our idea is based on the observation that the vast
majority of the related work only models the relation as a single geometric operation such as translation or rotation, which
limits the representation power of the underlying models and
makes it harder to match the complicated relations existed
in real-world datasets. To embrace a richer set of relational
information, we propose a new method called dual quaternion
knowledge graph embeddings (DualE), which introduces dual
quaternions into knowledge graph embeddings. Specifically, a
dual quaternion behaves like a “complex quaternion” with its
real and imaginary part all being quaternary. The core of DualE
lies a specific design of dual-quaternion-based multiplication,
which universally models relations as the compositions of a
series of translation and rotation operations. The major merits
of DualE are three-fold: 1) it is the first unified framework
embracing both rotation-based and translation-based models
in 3D space, 2) it expands the embedding space to the dual
quaternion space with a more intuitive physical and geometric
interpretation, 3) it satisfies the key patterns and the multiple
relations pattern of relational representation learning. Experimental results on four real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our DualE method.

Figure 1: An illustration of that DualE is a unified framework
of translation family and rotation family.
could be traced back to TransE (Bordes et al. 2013). A remarkable trait of the models belonging to this family is that
they provide a natural way to represent the hierarchical relations which are extremely common in KGs. And its variants
such as (Wang et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2015) can model the
multiple relations pattern. Meanwhile, rotation family refers
to the models in which the relations are modeled as rotation operations, which typically includes (Sun et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2019). As what is claimed in the representative
work RotatE (Sun et al. 2019), rotation can model all the
three fundamental patterns of relations in KG, i.e., symmetry/antisymmetry, inversion, and composition. A thorough
discussion of these methods is delayed to the next section.
With the efforts of the translation family and rotation family models, we have witnessed great success of KG-based
applications. Nonetheless, a single translation or rotation is
not always a better way to represent relations. For example,
translation family cannot model all the three fundamental
patterns (Sun et al. 2019); rotation family models have little
effect on hierarchical relations and multiple relations pattern.
See the motivation part for more detailed analysis on this
issue. As such, we find that the strengths of translation family and rotation family are essentially complementary. This
brings about the question that is there a way to unify both
translation and rotation in one framework?
Fortunately, we can seek out a solution by means of a
number field named dual quaternion, which is proposed by
William Kingdom Clifford (Clifford 1871). The dual quaternion has an intuitive geometric and physical interpretation:
(1) It can represent both translation and rotation. (2) It pro-

Introduction
Knowledge Graph (KG) represents a collection of interlinked
descriptions of entities, namely, real-world objects, events,
situations, or abstract concepts. During the past decade, KG
has been proven to be an indispensable build-block for a wide
spectrum of applications ranging from question answering,
knowledge inference to natural language processing. To effectively integrate KG into downstream AI applications, a key
step, known as Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE), then
comes into play as a powerful tool which encodes entities and
relations of the graph into low-dimensional representations.
We could roughly divide the vast majority of KGE methods into two general families based on how relations in KG are
formulated. As the name suggests, translation family refers
to the models which regard relations as translations, which
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6894

