The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-Supervised Metric Learning: A Deep Resurrection
Ujjal Kr Dutta,1,2 Mehrtash Harandi,3 C Chandra Sekhar2
1

Data Sciences, Myntra, India
Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, Australia
ukd@cse.iitm.ac.in, ujjal.dutta@myntra.com, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, chandra@cse.iitm.ac.in
2

Abstract

in nature. In order to provide constraints (pairs/ triplets/ tuples) for metric learning, they require manual annotations
(class labels). For large scale datasets, it is infeasible to obtain class labels for all the examples. In practical scenarios
where it is possible to have a few examples annotated, with
an abundance of additional unlabeled data, semi-supervised
learning (Oliver et al. 2018; Zhu 2005; Chapelle, Scholkopf,
and Zien 2009; Stretcu et al. 2019; Miyato et al. 2018; Iscen
et al. 2019) can be applied. Surprisingly, with the exception
of a few classical approaches that learn a linear Mahalanobis
metric (Liu et al. 2010; Hoi, Liu, and Chang 2010; Niu et al.
2014; Ying et al. 2017; Dutta and Sekhar 2018; Shen, Du,
and Li 2016), the problem of Semi-Supervised DML (SSDML) has not been studied in the recent years, not to mention
the lack of SSDML approaches in the deep DML scenario.
In this paper, we address this challenging problem, and revamp SSDML with respect to deep learning. To the best of
our knowledge, deep SSDML has been studied for the first
time (this is despite the presence of deep semi-supervised
approaches for classification losses).
As with any DML technique, our approach covers the following two major aspects of DML: 1. Constraint Mining:
To appropriately mine constraints of examples (eg., pairs or
triplets), and 2. DML Loss: An appropriate loss formulation
to learn a metric using the mined constraints. In the recent
years, a huge number of supervised, state-of-the-art DML
techniques have been proposed: Tuplet Margin (Yu and Tao
2019), Multi-Similarity (Wang et al. 2019), SNR (Yuan et al.
2019), Circle Loss (Sun et al. 2020), FastAP (Cakir et al.
2019), ArcFace (Deng et al. 2019), Soft Triple (Qian et al.
2019) etc. All of these approaches have made contributions
either in terms of constraint mining, or a novel loss.
However, recently (Musgrave, Belongie, and Lim 2020)
and (Roth et al. 2020) observed that when ran under the
exact same experimental protocol (network architecture,
embedding size, optimizers etc), classical metric learning
losses involving pairs (Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun 2005)
or triplets (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006) perform at par (and at times
better) with that of the state-of-the-art loss functions. For this
reason, we make use of a classical triplet based approach
(because of the fact that the pairwise loss still has the theoretical downside of applying the same distance threshold
to all the pairs, irrespective of variances in the similarities

Distance Metric Learning (DML) seeks to learn a discriminative embedding where similar examples are closer, and
dissimilar examples are apart. In this paper, we address the
problem of Semi-Supervised DML (SSDML) that tries to
learn a metric using a few labeled examples, and abundantly
available unlabeled examples. SSDML is important because
it is infeasible to manually annotate all the examples present
in a large dataset. Surprisingly, with the exception of a few
classical approaches that learn a linear Mahalanobis metric,
SSDML has not been studied in the recent years, and lacks
approaches in the deep SSDML scenario. In this paper, we
address this challenging problem, and revamp SSDML with
respect to deep learning. In particular, we propose a stochastic, graph-based approach that first propagates the affinities
between the pairs of examples from labeled data, to that of
the unlabeled pairs. The propagated affinities are used to mine
triplet based constraints for metric learning. We impose orthogonality constraint on the metric parameters, as it leads to
a better performance by avoiding a model collapse.

Introduction and Motivation
Distance Metric Learning (DML) seeks to learn a discriminative embedding where similar examples are closer, and
dissimilar examples are apart. The importance of DML is
evidenced by the plethora of recent approaches introduced at
the premier conferences in Computer Vision (CV) (Yu and
Tao 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020;
Cakir et al. 2019; Movshovitz-Attias et al. 2017; Deng et al.
2019; Qian et al. 2019), as well as Artificial Intelligence (AI)
(Dutta, Harandi, and Sekhar 2020; Gu and Ko 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Gong, Yuan, and Bao 2020) in general. In contrast to classification losses that learn a class logit
vector, embedding losses in DML capture the relationships
among examples. This makes embedding losses more general
in nature, because of their flexibility to provide supervisory
signals in the form of pairs (Chopra, Hadsell, and LeCun
2005), triplets (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006), tuples (Sohn 2016) etc.
Despite the presence of many exemplary, state-of-the-art
DML approaches as mentioned above, they are supervised
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7279

