The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal-Logic-Based Reward Shaping for Continuing
Reinforcement Learning Tasks
Yuqian Jiang1 , Suda Bharadwaj2 , Bo Wu2 , Rishi Shah1,3 , Ufuk Topcu2 , Peter Stone1,4
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, The University of Texas at Austin
3
Amazon
4
Sony AI
{jiangyuqian, suda.b}@utexas.edu, bowu86@gmail.com, rishihahs@gmail.com, utopcu@utexas.edu, pstone@cs.utexas.edu
2

Abstract

1994) is a common way to inject domain knowledge to
guide exploration, but requires care so as not to change
the underlying RL problem. (Randløv and Alstrøm 1998)
added an intuitive signal to the reward of an agent learning to ride a bicycle, but had the unintended effect of causing the agent to ride in circles. Ng et al. (1999) considered
additional rewards that are expressed as the difference of a
potential function between the agent’s current state and its
next state and showed that this so-called potential-based reward shaping (PBRS) does not affect the optimal policy.
Wiewiora et al. (2003) further extended PBRS to include
shaping functions of actions as well as states and Devlin &
Kudenko (2012) allow time-varying shaping functions. To
the best of our knowledge, all of the work in reward shaping
concentrates on the discounted-reward setting, and often for
Q-learning in particular. However, the reinforcement learning problem under discounted reward objectives is fundamentally incompatible with continuing learning tasks (Naik
et al. 2019) and requires a major modification to handle average reward objectives. In this paper, we develop a reward
shaping framework for average-reward RL.

In continuing tasks, average-reward reinforcement learning
may be a more appropriate problem formulation than the
more common discounted reward formulation. As usual,
learning an optimal policy in this setting typically requires
a large amount of training experiences. Reward shaping is
a common approach for incorporating domain knowledge
into reinforcement learning in order to speed up convergence
to an optimal policy. However, to the best of our knowledge, the theoretical properties of reward shaping have thus
far only been established in the discounted setting. This paper presents the first reward shaping framework for averagereward learning and proves that, under standard assumptions,
the optimal policy under the original reward function can be
recovered. In order to avoid the need for manual construction
of the shaping function, we introduce a method for utilizing
domain knowledge expressed as a temporal logic formula.
The formula is automatically translated to a shaping function that provides additional reward throughout the learning
process. We evaluate the proposed method on three continuing tasks. In all cases, shaping speeds up the average-reward
learning rate without any reduction in the performance of the
learned policy compared to relevant baselines.

In general, manually constructing a potential function is
difficult since it requires detailed knowledge of the task and
the reward structure (Grześ and Kudenko 2010). To address
this challenge, previous works provide methods of learning
shaping functions online (Grześ and Kudenko 2010) or offline (Marthi 2007). In contrast, our focus is on incorporating side-information or domain knowledge into the shaping
function. For example, a user may wish to advise a robot
tasked with cleaning to spend more time in one room compared to another. While this statement is intuitive for humans, it can be non-trivial to translate such a statement to
an appropriate shaping function. We introduce a method to
synthesize the shaping function directly from a temporal
logic formula representing the domain knowledge. Temporal
logic is a structured natural-like language designed to reason about temporal information, which makes it a suitable
choice for non-expert users to encode knowledge for continuing tasks, rather than directly interacting with a mathematical function. Furthermore, manually constructing a shaping
function requires taking into account the relative magnitudes
of rewards. In contrast, our proposed method allows for a
qualitative input of domain knowledge and does not depend
on knowledge of the original reward values and the underly-

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular method for autonomous agents to learn optimal behavior through repeated
interactions with the environment. Most RL algorithms aim
to optimize the total discounted reward received by the
learner. However, in cases involving infinite-horizon or continuing tasks, a discount factor can often lead to undesirable behaviors since the agent sacrifices long-term benefits
for short-term gains (Mahadevan 1996). Hence, the natural quantity to optimize for many continuing tasks is the
average reward. However, reinforcement learning with an
average reward objective has received very little attention
in the literature despite its importance in artificial intelligence (Wan, Naik, and Sutton 2020).
Many robotics applications for RL have delayed or sparse
rewards, slowing down learning significantly due to long
stretches of possibly uninformative exploration (Mahadevan
1996). Reward shaping (Gullapalli and Barto 1992; Mataric
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7995

