The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Reweight with Deep Interactions*
Yang Fan1 , Yingce Xia2 , Lijun Wu2 , Shufang Xie2 , Weiqing Liu2 , Jiang Bian2 , Tao Qin2 ,
Xiang-Yang Li1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
fyabc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
{yingce.xia, lijuwu, shufxi, Weiqing.Liu, Jiang.Bian, taoqin}@microsoft.com

Abstract

model. The teacher model takes the information from the
student model and the validation set as inputs and outputs
some signals to guide the training of the student model, e.g.,
adjusting the weights of training data (Fan et al. 2018; Shu
et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2018), generating
better loss functions (Wu et al. 2018), etc. These approaches
have shown promising results in image classification (Jiang
et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019), machine translation (Wu et al.
2018), and text classification (Fan et al. 2018). Among the
teaching methods, learning to reweight the data is widely
adopted due to its simplicity and effectiveness and we focus
on this direction in this work.

Recently, the concept of teaching has been introduced into machine learning, in which a teacher model is used to guide the
training of a student model (which will be used in real tasks)
through data selection, loss function design, etc. Learning to
reweight, which is a specific kind of teaching that reweights
training data using a teacher model, receives much attention due to its simplicity and effectiveness. In existing learning to reweight works, the teacher model only utilizes shallow/surface information such as training iteration number and
loss/accuracy of the student model from training/validation
sets, but ignores the internal states of the student model, which
limits the potential of learning to reweight. In this work, we
propose an improved data reweighting algorithm, in which the
student model provides its internal states to the teacher model,
and the teacher model returns adaptive weights of training
samples to enhance the training of the student model. The
teacher model is jointly trained with the student model using
meta gradients propagated from a validation set. Experiments
on image classification with clean/noisy labels and neural machine translation empirically demonstrate that our algorithm
makes significant improvement over previous methods.

Previously, the teacher model used for data reweighting
only utilizes surface information derived from the student
model. In (Fan et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019;
Jiang et al. 2018), the inputs of the teacher model include
training iteration number, training loss (as well as the margin (Schapire et al. 1998)), validation loss, the output of the
student model, etc. In those algorithms, the teacher model
does not leverage the internal states of the student model,
e.g., the values of the hidden neurons of a neural network
based student model. We notice that the internal states of a
model have been widely investigated and shown its effectiveness in deep learning algorithms and tasks. In ELMo (Peters
et al. 2018), a pre-trained LSTM provides its internal states,
which are the values of its hidden layers, for downstream
tasks as feature representations. In image captioning (Xu
et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2018), a faster RCNN (Ren et al.
2015) pre-trained on ImageNet provides its internal states
(i.e., mean-pooled convolutional features) of the selected regions, serving as representations of images (Anderson et al.
2018). In knowledge distillation (Romero et al. 2015; Aguilar
et al. 2020), a student model mimics the output of the internal layers of the teacher model so as to achieve comparable
performances with the teacher model. However, to the best
of our knowledge, this kind of deep information is not extensively investigated in learning to reweight algorithms. The
success of leveraging internal states in the above algorithms
and applications motivates us to investigate them in learning
to reweight, which leads to deep interactions between the
teacher and student model.

Introduction
Inspired by human education systems, the concept of teaching has been introduced into machine learning, in which a
teacher model is employed to teach and assist the training
of a student model. Previous work can be categorized into
two branches: (1) One is to transfer knowledge (e.g., image
classification, machine translation) from the teacher to student (Zhu 2015; Liu and Zhu 2016) and the teacher model
aims to teach the student model with minimal cost, like data
selection (Liu et al. 2017, 2018) in supervised learning and
action modification in reinforcement learning (Zhang et al.
2020). (2) The student model is used for real tasks (e.g.,
image classification, machine translation) and the teacher
is a meta-model that can guide the training the of student
* This work was done when Yang Fan was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia. Corresponding authors: Yingce Xia and Xiang-Yang
Li.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7385

