The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable Graph Networks for Particle Simulations
Karolis Martinkus,1 Aurelien Lucchi, 1 Nathanaël Perraudin 2
1

ETH Zürich
Swiss Data Science Center
martinkus@ethz.ch, aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch, nathanael.perraudin@sdsc.ethz.ch
2

Abstract

interact over long distances. Using only local interactions
would cause very high errors in such cases.
In this contribution, we focus in particular on the N-body
problem, since it cannot be solved to sufficient accuracy
with only local information. The nonlinearity of the interactions and the fact that the system is chaotic if the number
of particles N > 2 (Roy 2012) makes this problem particularly complicated. This complexity can be seen in the
original work on Hamiltonian Neural Networks (Greydanus,
Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019) where the performance on the
2-body problem was good, but significantly deteriorated on
the 3-body problem.
We propose a hierarchical model which builds on top of
existing graph network (GN) architectures such as (Battaglia
et al. 2018) and previous work on accurate physical simulations of a few particles (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2019). Our
hierarchical architecture is physically motivated by the multipole expansion and inspired by the fast multipole method
(FMM) (Greengard 1988). Our method allows us to extend
existing models and simulate complex systems that require
O(N 2 ) interactions with thousands of particles which we
have observed empirically to be infeasible when a fully connected graph is used. Importantly, models that use our hierarchical approach retain similar accuracy to models working
with a fully connected graph and a smaller particle count.
Finally, we note that the fast multipole method and
multipole expansion have been applied to various other
problems, such as flow simulations (Koumoutsakos and
Leonard 1995), acoustics (Gunda 2008), molecular dynamics (Board Jr et al. 1992; Ding, Karasawa, and Goddard III
1992) and even interpolation of scattered data (reconstruction of a 3D object mesh) (Carr et al. 2001). This suggests
that our hierarchical method should also facilitate learning
on a similarly wide range of problems.

Learning system dynamics directly from observations is a
promising direction in machine learning due to its potential to
significantly enhance our ability to understand physical systems. However, the dynamics of many real-world systems are
challenging to learn due to the presence of nonlinear potentials and a number of interactions that scales quadratically
with the number of particles N , as in the case of the N-body
problem. In this work, we introduce an approach that transforms a fully-connected interaction graph into a hierarchical one which reduces the number of edges to O(N ). This
results in linear time and space complexity while the precomputation of the hierarchical graph requires O(N log(N ))
time and O(N ) space. Using our approach, we are able to
train models on much larger particle counts, even on a single GPU. We evaluate how the phase space position accuracy
and energy conservation depend on the number of simulated
particles. Our approach retains high accuracy and efficiency
even on large-scale gravitational N-body simulations which
are impossible to run on a single machine if a fully-connected
graph is used. Similar results are also observed when simulating Coulomb interactions. Furthermore, we make several
important observations regarding the performance of this new
hierarchical model, including: i) its accuracy tends to improve
with the number of particles in the simulation and ii) its generalisation to unseen particle counts is also much better than
for models that use all O(N 2 ) interactions.

1

Introduction

The ability to simulate complex systems is invaluable to
many fields of science and engineering. Constructing simulators for such systems by hand can be very labour intensive
or even impossible if the underlying processes are not understood or no sufficiently precise and accurate approximations
of the interactions are known. To address this, various datadriven methods for learning system dynamics have been investigated (Battaglia et al. 2016; Mrowca et al. 2018; Li et al.
2018; Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019; SanchezGonzalez et al. 2019, 2020; Finzi et al. 2020). However, they
either use only local interactions between close-by particles
or they simulate systems with just a few particles. Unfortunately, this does not capture many real-world scenarios,
where systems are comprised of thousands of particles that

2

Related Work

Recent studies show that neural networks can successfully
learn to simulate complex physical processes (Battaglia et al.
2016; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2018; Mrowca et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2018; Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019;
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2019, 2020). Most of the existing
work focuses on introducing better physical biases such as
a relational model (Battaglia et al. 2016), conservation law
bias (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019), combining

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8912

