The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Human Uncertainty Inference via Deterministic Ensemble Neural Networks
Yujin Cha1 , Sang Wan Lee1,2,3
1

Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Program of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
3
Center for Neuroscience-inspired Artificial Intelligence, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{chayj, sangwan}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

human and probabilistic models in which different choices
can be made from the same input data. A challenge in these
applications is that sometimes an agent provides an accurate response by coincidence or, in another situation, it does
not provide reliable predictions even if it has learned adequately. It is, therefore, important to consider the uncertainty
as well as accuracy in the performance assessment of learning agents.
Although the information on uncertainty is available with
respect to humans and machine learning (ML) models, there
is a sharp contrast between them. First, quantifying the
amount of uncertainty in “deep” heavy ML models is a challenging task. The Bayesian neural network (BNN), which
uses the prior distribution of model parameters to calculate
their posterior distribution for the given data, can efficiently
estimate the uncertainty of deep neural networks (DNNs);
however, it is not highly scalable (Gal 2016). For nonBayesian ML models, the Monte-Carlo (MC) dropout and
ensemble methods could be pragmatic solutions (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell
2017; Liu et al. 2019). Thus, the amount of uncertainty can
be assessed at a low cost. In other words, ML models are
easily accessible despite poor interpretability.
Obtaining the uncertainty information in human decisionmaking is costly and labor-intensive. Also, other variables
like the average level of uncertainty may affect uncertainty
indicating that it is poorly accessible; however it is not difficult to interpret in comparison to the ML model (Barthelmé
and Mamassian 2009), posing a significant challenge in the
optimization of human-in-the-loop systems for smart healthcare, smart education, and human-computer interactions.
To resolve the poor accessibility of human uncertainty,
we exploit the high accessibility of deterministic ML algorithms. We propose a “proxy ensemble network” (PEN), a
neural network model that performs inference on human uncertainty from a small amount of data. We perform simulations to show the efficiency of learning and demonstrate
the applicability of the algorithm to real-world problems
through behavioral experiments. Note that while previous
studies have attempted to compare the information processing of artificial neural networks (ANNs) with human cortical information processing for image recognition, our study
shows that deterministic neural networks can accurately approximate the uncertainty of human experts such as physi-

The estimation and inference of human predictive uncertainty have great potential to improve the sampling efficiency
and prediction reliability of human-in-the-loop systems for
smart healthcare, smart education, and human-computer interactions. Predictive uncertainty in humans is highly interpretable, but its measurement is poorly accessible. Contrarily, the predictive uncertainty of machine learning models, albeit with poor interpretability, is relatively easily accessible.
Here, we demonstrate that the poor accessibility of human
uncertainty can be resolved by exploiting simple and universally accessible deterministic neural networks. We propose a
new model for human uncertainty inference, called proxy ensemble network (PEN). Simulations with a few benchmark
datasets demonstrated that the model can efficiently learn human uncertainty from a small amount of data. To show its
applicability in real-world problems, we performed behavioral experiments, in which 64 physicians classified medical
images and reported their level of confidence. We showed
that the PEN could predict both the uncertainty range and
diagnoses given by subjects with high accuracy. Our results
demonstrate the ability of machine learning in guiding human
decision making; it can also help humans in learning more
efficiently and accurately. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first study that explored the possibility of accessing human uncertainty via the lens of deterministic neural networks.

1

Introduction

Sample efficient learning involves the ability to distinguish
between “what it knows and what it does not.” This can be
quantified in the form of an uncertainty. An uncertainty is
caused by a limited amount of available data or the limited ability of the learning agent to glean information from
the given data. By assessing an uncertainty during decision
making, an agent can choose whether to decide by itself or
“go to oracle.”(Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan 1996). Furthermore, the evaluation of uncertainty enables the exploration of learning strategies for improving sample efficiency
under limited resource conditions.
Uncertainty in information is dealt with by various types
of learning such as active and one-shot learning (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani 2017; Lee, O’Doherty, and Shimojo
2015; Tong 2001; Peterson et al. 2019). Also, it is useful for
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5877

