The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Architecture Search as Sparse Supernet
Yan Wu1 * , Aoming Liu1 * , Zhiwu Huang1 , Siwei Zhang1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{wuyan, aoliu}@student.ethz.ch, siwei.zhang@inf.ethz.ch, {zhiwu.huang, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

of the final architecture. Based on the modeling of directed
acyclic graph, the cell comprises a set of nodes, each of
which corresponds to a feature map, as well as their associated edges that represent single operations such as convolution and max-pooling. The resulting neural networks are
limited to Single-Path architectures where each intermediate feature map is processed by a single operation. On the
other hand, while Multi-Path architecture search methods
like (Chu et al. 2020a) search for a more flexible architecture
with multiple paths between nodes, they generally require to
fix the number of paths in advance. Moreover, both the existing Single-Path and Multi-Path Search methods have to
manually fix the node number, which is another strong constraint for architecture search.
In this paper, we target for a more automated NAS which
can automatically optimize the mixture of paths as well as a
changeable set of nodes. In other words, the target of automated Mixed-Path Architecture Search is to reduce unnecessary constraints on the structure of the searched architecture
so as to explore in a more broad and general search space.
For this purpose, we model the automated NAS problem as
a one-shot searching process of a sparse supernet, which
consists of sparsely-mixed paths and nodes without loss
of network power. In particular, we exploit a new continuous architecture representation using Sparse Group Lasso to
achieve the sparse supernet. As a result, the supernet is not
only able to produce diverse mixed-paths between different
pairs of nodes, but also automatically removes some useless
nodes. The more general modeling however makes the optimization much more challenging due to the complex bi-level
optimization with the non-differentiable sparsity constraint,
which cannot be optimized by traditional network optimization algorithms well. To address this challenging issue, we
propose a hierarchical accelerated proximal gradient algorithm that is capable of addressing the mixed sparsity under
the bi-level optimization framework. In summary, this paper
brings several innovations to the domain of NAS as follows:

This paper aims at enlarging the problem of Neural Architecture Search (NAS) from Single-Path and Multi-Path Search
to automated Mixed-Path Search. In particular, we model
the NAS problem as a sparse supernet using a new continuous architecture representation with a mixture of sparsity
constraints. The sparse supernet enables us to automatically
achieve sparsely-mixed paths upon a compact set of nodes. To
optimize the proposed sparse supernet, we exploit a hierarchical accelerated proximal gradient algorithm within a bi-level
optimization framework. Extensive experiments on Convolutional Neural Network and Recurrent Neural Network search
demonstrate that the proposed method is capable of searching
for compact, general and powerful neural architectures.

Introduction
While deep learning has proven its superiority over manual feature engineering, most of the conventional neural network architectures are still handcrafted by experts in a tedious and ad hoc fashion. Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
has been suggested as the path forward for alleviating the
network engineering pain by automatically optimizing architectures. The automatically searched architectures perform competitively in computer vision tasks such as image
classification (Zoph and Le 2018; Liu et al. 2018b; Zoph
et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018; Real et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2019c; Luo et al. 2018; Cai, Zhu, and Han 2019;
Wu et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2019; You et al. 2020), object
detection (Zoph et al. 2018), semantic segmentation (Liu
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019a) and image generation (Gong
et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2020).
As one of the most popular NAS families, one-shot NAS
generally models the architecture search problem as a oneshot training process of an over-parameterized supernet that
comprises candidate architectures (paths). From the supernet, either Single-Path or Multi-Path architecture can be derived. However, both the existing Single-Path and MultiPath Search works typically require a predefined structure
on the searched architectures. For the Single-Path Search,
some works like (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018; Liu et al.
2018a) search for a computation cell as the backbone block

• We suggest the new problem of Mixed-Path Neural Architecture Search where the node and path structure of
the cell are automatically derived.
• We model the problem as a sparse supernet using a new
continuous architecture representation with a mixture of
sparsity constraints.

* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10379

