The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Unlabeled Data via Partial Label Assignment
for Multi-Class Semi-Supervised Learning
Zhen-Ru Zhang1,2,3 , Qian-Wen Zhang3 , Yunbo Cao3 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2,4 *
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Tencent Cloud Xiaowei, Beijing, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
zhangzr@seu.edu.cn, {cowenzhang, yunbocao}@tencent.com, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

initial training iterations (Zhu and Goldberg 2009; van Engelen and Hoos 2020).
Partial label learning is an emerging weakly supervised
learning framework dealing with inaccurate supervision
(Nguyen and Caruana 2008; Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011;
Zhang and Yu 2015; Ren et al. 2016; Zhou 2017; Wang, Li,
and Zhang 2019; Lv et al. 2020; Lyu et al. 2019), where
each training example is associated with a set of candidate
labels among which only one is valid. The task of partial label learning is to induce a multi-class classification model
from partial label training examples, where the ground-truth
label of each training example is assumed to reside in its
candidate label set but not directly accessible to the training
algorithm. In view of supervision spectrum, the weak supervision conveyed by partial label example lies between the
blind supervision of unlabeled example and the full supervision of labeled example. Therefore, it is natural to leverage
partial label example as an intermediate means to facilitate
the exploitation of unlabeled data for semi-supervised learning. Conceptually, other than trying to identify the strong supervision information for unlabeled data with single groundtruth label, it is relatively easier to estimate the weak supervision information for unlabeled data with a set of candidate
labels consisting of the ground-truth label.
In light of the above observations, a novel strategy for unlabeled data exploitation is investigated in this paper. Accordingly, a simple yet effective multi-class semi-supervised
learning approach named E UPAL, i.e. Exploiting Unlabeled
data via PArtial Label assignment, is proposed. Briefly, E U PAL initializes partial label assignment over unlabeled data
by resorting to weighted kNN aggregation. Then, classification models induced from partial label examples and labeled examples are iteratively updated by conducting labeling information communication with random sampling. Experimental results show that the proposed approach serves
as an effective way towards unlabeled data exploitation, especially for the case of lower fraction of labeled examples in
training set.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly, technical details of the proposed E UPAL approach are presented.
Secondly, experimental results of comparative studies are reported. Thirdly, related works on semi-supervised and partial label learning are briefly discussed. Finally, we conclude
this paper.

In semi-supervised learning, one key strategy in exploiting
unlabeled data is trying to estimate its pseudo-label based on
current predictive model, where the unlabeled data assigned
with pseudo-label is further utilized to enlarge labeled data set
for model update. Nonetheless, the supervision information
conveyed by pseudo-label is prone to error especially when
the performance of initial predictive model is mediocre due
to limited amount of labeled data. In this paper, an intermediate unlabeled data exploitation strategy is investigated via
partial label assignment, i.e. a set of candidate labels other
than a single pseudo-label are assigned to the unlabeled data.
We only assume that the ground-truth label of unlabeled data
resides in the assigned candidate label set, which is less errorprone than trying to identify the single ground-truth label via
pseudo-labeling. Specifically, a multi-class classifier is induced from the partial label examples with candidate labels
to facilitate model induction with labeled examples. An iterative procedure is designed to enable labeling information
communication between the classifiers induced from partial
label examples and labeled examples, whose classification
outputs are integrated to yield the final prediction. Comparative studies against state-of-the-art approaches clearly show
the effectiveness of the proposed unlabeled data exploitation
strategy for multi-class semi-supervised learning.

Introduction
In semi-supervised learning, the learning system aims to
exploit unlabeled data to facilitate predictive model induction with limited labeled examples. Most semi-supervised
learning techniques work by trying to estimate the pseudolabel of unlabeled data based on current predictive model,
which is assigned to the unlabeled data as the ground-truth
label and then employed to enrich the labeled data set for
model update, such as co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998;
Zhang and Zhou 2011; Ma et al. 2020), label propagation
(Zhou et al. 2004; Chong et al. 2020), semi-supervised SVM
(Joachims 1999; Chapelle, Sindhwani, and Keerthi 2008; Li,
Kwok, and Zhou 2016), etc. However, one potential issue
lies in that the estimated pseudo-label is prone to error, especially when the predictive model has only mediocre generalization performance with few labeled examples available in
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10973

