The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards a Better Understanding of VR Sickness:
Physical Symptom Prediction for VR Contents
Hak Gu Kim1,2∗ , Sangmin Lee1 , Seongyeop Kim1 , Heoun-taek Lim1 , Yong Man Ro1†
1

Image and Video Systems Lab., KAIST, Korea
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
hakgu.kim@epfl.ch, {sangmin.lee, seongyeop, ingheoun, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract

NFOV

We address the black-box issue of VR sickness assessment
(VRSA) by evaluating the level of physical symptoms of VR
sickness. For the VR contents inducing the similar VR sickness level, the physical symptoms can vary depending on the
characteristics of the contents. Most of existing VRSA methods focused on assessing the overall VR sickness score. To
make better understanding of VR sickness, it is required to
predict and provide the level of major symptoms of VR sickness rather than overall degree of VR sickness. In this paper,
we predict the degrees of main physical symptoms affecting the overall degree of VR sickness, which are disorientation, nausea, and oculomotor. In addition, we introduce a new
large-scale dataset for VRSA including 360 videos with various frame rates, physiological signals, and subjective scores.
On VRSA benchmark and our newly collected dataset, our
approach shows a potential to not only achieve the highest
correlation with subjective scores, but also to better understand which symptoms are the main causes of VR sickness.

110º

Score
for Disorientation
Mismatch
feature

Score
for Nausea
Score
for Oculomotor

Predicted Physical
Symptom Scores

Total VR sickness score
Score for Disorientation
Score for Nausea
Score for Oculomotor

0

20

40

60

Figure 1: The intuition of physical symptom prediction for
better understanding of VR sickness. In general, VR contents lead to different levels of physical symptoms according
to their spatio-temporal characteristics.

To investigate and predict physical symptom responses
of VR sickness, many existing works were proposed that
measured various physiological signals from subjective assessment experiments or collected subjective questionnaires
for physical symptoms of VR sickness through subjective experiments. However, it is time consuming and laborintensive to conduct extensive subjective assessment experiments to obtain physiological signals and subjective questionnaires. Most recently, there were a few approaches for
VR sickness assessment (VRSA) by analyzing the spatiotemporal characteristics of contents (Kim et al. 2017, 2018b)
or both of contents and physiological signals (Lee et al.
2019; Kim et al. 2019). However, they just predicted level
of total VR sickness score or simple mean opinion score
(MOS), instead of physical symptoms responses.
To address that, we firstly propose a novel physical symptom prediction to understand the physical symptoms caused
by VR sickness and make better understanding of VR sickness. Potentially, a reliable physical symptom prediction can
be applicable to a wide range of automation services in
VR content generation and platform services. For example,
in Oculus, users select and experience 360-degree contents
they want to see with reference to its VR sickness level. In
VR content selection, one important problem is that VR contents with similar sickness level may have different causes
of VR sickness. Some users are vulnerable to disorientation
caused by rapid rotation, whereas someone else may be tol-

Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) perception brings an immersive viewing experience to viewers with the development of commercial devices. However, there have been increasing unwanted
side effects on the safety and health of the VR viewing. VR
sickness, which is one of cybersickness in VR environment
(LaViola Jr 2000), often occurs in many users exposed to
VR content (Sharples et al. 2008).
There are various physical symptoms that viewers perceive some levels of VR sickness. The possible physical symptoms of VR sickness have been extensively studied with respect to the viewing safety and health issues (Carnegie and Rhee 2015; Kennedy et al. 1993). In
(Kennedy et al. 1993), through extensive subjective experiments and statistical analysis, three types of statistically
significant symptoms were introduced: 1) disorientation, 2)
nausea, and 3) oculomotor. To better understand and estimate VR sickness, it is required to investigate the levels of
physical symptoms of VR sickness. But it is a non-trivial
task due to a complex combination of various symptoms.
∗

Work done as a part of the research project in KAIST
Corresponding author (ymro@kaist.ac.kr)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

836

