The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-supervised Multi-view Stereo via Effective Co-Segmentation and
Data-Augmentation
Hongbin Xu1,3 * , Zhipeng Zhou1 * , Yu Qiao1,2† , Wenxiong Kang3 , Qiuxia Wu3
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
2
Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
3
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
hongbinxu1013@gmail.com, {zp.zhou, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, {auwxkang, qxwu}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have witnessed that self-supervised methods based on view synthesis obtain clear progress on multiview stereo (MVS). However, existing methods rely on the
assumption that the corresponding points among different
views share the same color, which may not always be true
in practice. This may lead to unreliable self-supervised signal
and harm the final reconstruction performance. To address the
issue, we propose a framework integrated with more reliable
supervision guided by semantic co-segmentation and dataaugmentation. Specially, we excavate mutual semantic from
multi-view images to guide the semantic consistency. And
we devise effective data-augmentation mechanism which ensures the transformation robustness by treating the prediction of regular samples as pseudo ground truth to regularize the prediction of augmented samples. Experimental results on DTU dataset show that our proposed methods achieve
the state-of-the-art performance among unsupervised methods, and even compete on par with supervised methods. Furthermore, extensive experiments on Tanks&Temples dataset
demonstrate the effective generalization ability of the proposed method. The code is released at: https://github.com/
ToughStoneX/Self-Supervised-MVS.

Figure 1: Comparison between SOTA supervised and unsupervised MVS methods.

Thus it drives the community to focus on unsupervised/selfsupervised MVS approaches.
Recently, there has been a surge in the number of selfsupervised MVS methods that transform the depth estimation problem to an image reconstruction problem (Khot et al.
2019; Dai et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020). The predicted
depth map and the input image are used to reconstruct the
image on another view, thus the self-supervision loss is built
to estimate the difference between the reconstructed and realistic image on that view. However, as summarized in Figure 1, despite the impressive efforts in previous unsupervised methods, there still exists a clear gap between supervised and unsupervised results. In this paper, we suggest to
rethink the task of self-supervision itself to improve the accuracy in MVS.
Previous self-supervised MVS methods largely rely on
the same color constancy hypothesis, assuming the corresponding points among different views have the same color.
However, as Figure 2 shows, in realistic scenarios, various factors may disturb the color distribution, such as light
conditions, reflections, noise, etc. Consequently, the ideal
self-supervision loss is susceptible to be confused by these
common disturbances in color, leading to ambiguous supervision in challenging scenarios, namely color constancy
ambiguity. To address the issues, we aim to incorporate
the following extra priors of correspondence with the prior

Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims at recovering 3D scenes from
multi-view images and calibrated cameras, which is an important problem and widely studied in computer vision community (Seitz et al. 2006). Recent success of deep learning
has triggered the interest of extending MVS pipelines to endto-end neural networks. The learning-based methods (Yao
et al. 2018, 2019) adopt CNNs to estimate the feature maps
and build a cost volume upon the reference camera frustum
to predict a per-view depth map for reconstruction. With the
help of large-scale 3D ground truth, they outperform traditional geometry-based approaches and dominate the leaderboard. Whereas the learning-driven approaches strongly depend on the availability of 3D ground truth data for training, which is not easy to acquire (Zhong, Li, and Dai 2018).
* H.Xu and Z.Zhou contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3030

