The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Term Embeddings for Lexical Taxonomies
Jingping Liu1 , Menghui Wang1 , Chao Wang1 , Jiaqing Liang1 , Lihan Chen1 , Haiyun Jiang1 * ,
Yanghua Xiao1† , Yunwen Chen2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
DataGrand Inc., Shanghai, China
{jpliu17, 19212010074, 17110240038, jianghy16, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn
{l.j.q.light, lhc825}@gmail.com, chenyunwen@datagrand.com

Abstract

semantic matching models like HolE (Nickel, Rosasco, and
Poggio 2016) and ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016) are proposed to learn latent representations. They expect the embeddings for each triple to satisfy ~hT Mr ≈ t~T , where Mr is
a matrix associated with the relation r.
In this paper, we focus on the embedding of a special
kind of KGs: lexical taxonomy (LT) built by data-driven approaches. LTs consist of hyponym-hypernym relations between terms. One term is a hypernym of another term if the
meaning of the former covers the latter (Sang 2007). For example, fruit is a hypernym of apple. The opposite of
hypernym is hyponym, so apple is a hyponym of fruit.
In this paper, we use hypo(x, y) to represent a hyponymhypernym relation, where x is a hyponym of y. The reason
we study LTs is that hyponym-hypernym relations are the
key to the proper understanding of natural language texts.
For example, given a text “Kobe Bryant died at age 41, along
with his 13-year-old daughter Gianna and seven others ...”,
Although recent pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT)
have achieved remarkable improvements in a wide range of
NLP tasks, it is difficult to accurately classify the text in a
classification task. The main reason is that the models cannot capture that Kobe Bryant is an NBA star, which is
useful for classifying the text into the class sport. Thus, to
effectively integrate hyponym-hypernym relations into the
numerical models, it is necessary to embed LTs into lowdimensional spaces.
However, the above KG embedding approaches are not
suitable for lexical taxonomy embedding (LTE) due to their
ignorance of the inherent hierarchical structure of LTs. For
example, considering hypo(h, m), hypo(m, t), and hypo(h,
t) in translation-based models, if ~h + ~r ≈ ~
m and ~
m + ~r ≈ t~
hold where r is the hyponym-hypernym relation, it is impossible for ~h + ~r ≈ t~ since ~r 6= 0 (Chen et al. 2018). Semantic
matching models are confronted with the similar problem.
To take into account the hierarchies, some studies such as the
dynamic distance-margin model (DDMM) (Yu et al. 2015),
TransC (Lv et al. 2018), and On2Vec (Chen et al. 2018), employ hierarchical neighborhood information in translationbased models to enforce the close representation between
nodes. Other efforts (Nickel and Kiela 2017) use hyperbolic
space to model hierarchical structure with relatively fewer
dimensions. Although these methods take into account the

Lexical taxonomies, a special kind of knowledge graph, are
essential for natural language understanding. This paper studies the problem of lexical taxonomy embedding. Most existing graph embedding methods are difficult to apply to lexical taxonomies since 1) they ignore implicit but important
information, namely, sibling relations, which are not explicitly mentioned in lexical taxonomies and 2) there are lots of
polysemous terms in lexical taxonomies. In this paper, we
propose a novel method for lexical taxonomy embedding.
This method optimizes an objective function that models both
hyponym-hypernym relations and sibling relations. A termlevel attention mechanism and a random walk based metric
are then proposed to assist the modeling of these two kinds of
relations, respectively. Finally, a novel training method based
on curriculum learning is proposed. We conduct extensive
experiments on two tasks to show that our approach outperforms other embedding methods and we use the learned term
embeddings to enhance the performance of the state-of-theart models that are based on BERT and RoBERTa on text
classification.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs), e.g., WordNet (Miller 1995) and
Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), are an important resource
for many applications, such as question answering (Cui
et al. 2017) and recommendation (Wang et al. 2019). However, KGs adopting symbolic and logical representations are
hard to support tasks with intensive numerical computation.
Thus, many studies have been conducted to embed KGs
into low-dimension spaces. These efforts are referred to as
knowledge graph embedding.
Embedding techniques for KGs, in general, can be
roughly divided into two categories. First, inspired by
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), a series of translation-based
models have been proposed, such as TransE (Bordes et al.
2013) and RotatE (Sun et al. 2019). The basic idea of these
models is to learn the embeddings ~h, ~r, and ~t satisfying
~h + ~r ≈ ~t for a given triple (h, r, t), where r is the relation between the head entity h and the tail entity t. Second,
* Now he works for Tencent AI Lab in Shenzhen, China.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6410

