The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Approximation of Nash Equilibria in Sparse Win-Lose Multi-player Games
Zhengyang Liu, 1 Jiawei Li,2 Xiaotie Deng 2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
CFCS, Peking University
zhengyang@bit.edu.cn, davidlee1999@pku.edu.cn, xiaotie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

itriou introduced the complexity class of PPAD, and proved
that many equilibrium-related problems are contained in
this class. The next major breakthrough (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009) developed Nash equilibrium
in graphical games, simulation of arithmetic, logic operations and Brouwer’s fixed points. This reduction allowed
for a proof of finding an exponentially close approximate
Nash equilibrium in a game over four or more players being
PPAD-complete. Ultimately in the two player case, finding
a polynomially small approximate solution is shown to be
PPAD-complete by Chen et al. (Chen and Deng 2006; Chen,
Deng, and Teng 2009).
This work studies the polynomial precision approximability issue for the problem of approximating a Nash equilibrium in a polymatrix game, focusing on the sparse and
win-lose games. We restrict our discussion to games with a
succinct representations. In particular, we focus on polymatrix games with n players where each player has two strategies. Each pair (i, j) of players play a small (2 × 2) bimatrix
sub-game. The payoff of a player is the sum of the payoffs
she gains in each sub-game, by its given strategy (the same
strategy against all its opponents). We use a 2n × 2n rational matrix P for a polymatrix game. For the PPAD-hardness
result we obtain here, the restriction of the two by two pairwise subgame between every pair of players can easily be
extended to more general m by m bimatrix subgame case
for the same complexity result.
The polymatrix game model is much more important and
interesting for two key points in equilibrium computation.

A polymatrix game is a multi-player game over n players,
where each player chooses a pure strategy from a list of its
own pure strategies. The utility of each player is a sum of payoffs it gains from the two player’s game from all its neighbors,
under its chosen strategy and that of its neighbor. As a natural
extension to two-player games (a.k.a. bimatrix games), polymatrix games are widely used for multi-agent games in real
world scenarios.
In this paper we show that the problem of approximating a
Nash equilibrium in a polymatrix game within the polynomial precision is PPAD-hard, even in sparse and win-lose
ones. This result further challenges the predictability of Nash
equilibria as a solution concept in the multi-agent setting. We
also propose a simple and efficient algorithm, when the game
is further restricted. Together, we establish a new dichotomy
theorem for this class of games. It is also of independent interest for exploring the computational and structural properties
in Nash equilibria.

Introduction
Nash equilibrium models and predicts the strategic behavior of selfish yet rational agents. Essentially, at any Nash
equilibrium, the strategy of each agent is the best response
with respect to the strategies from other agents. The celebrated Nash Theorem (Nash 1951, 1950) establishes the existence of such an equilibrium solution in every finite game,
by leveraging fixed-point theorems. Due to its simplicity and
elegance, Nash equilibrium has been widely applied to economics and political sciences, and to Internet studies in the
fast growth human activities over it.
However, most of the Nash equilibrium results studied under variant settings are non-constructive, which means we
cannot find such a stable state efficiently. Despite much effort made to develop algorithms to tackle this fundamental problem (Kuhn 1961; Lemke and J. T. Howson 1964;
Janovskaya 1968; Wilson 1971; Howson Jr 1972; Garcia,
Lemke, and Luethi 1973; Shapley 1974), the most widely
used algorithm till now still needs an exponential time in the
worst case (Savani and von Stengel 2006).
In his seminal work to characterize the proof structure
of equilibrium problems (Papadimitriou 1994), Papadim-

1. From the viewpoint of economics, bimatrix game is not
the best suitable model in today’s complicated environment, such as over the Internet connected society. The
user profiling approach can allow us to model a wholistic
agent action space. Such a real life observation motivates
the adoption of the polymatrix game model in our study.
2. For the computational complexity issue, polymatrix
games serves as the base from which further PPADhardness results are derived, such as other succinct
games (Chen, Durfee, and Orfanou 2015), market equilibrium (Chen, Paparas, and Yannakakis 2017) and competitive equilibrium (Babichenko, Papadimitriou, and Rubinstein 2016).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5557

