The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Projection-Free Bandit Optimization with Privacy Guarantees
Alina Ene,1 Huy L. Nguyen, 2 Adrian Vladu 3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Boston University
Khoury College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University
3
CNRS & IRIF, Université de Paris
aene@bu.edu, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu, vladu@irif.fr

Abstract

Thakurta 2012; Agarwal and Singh 2017; Bassily, Smith,
and Thakurta 2014; Abadi et al. 2016; Wang, Ye, and Xu
2017; Iyengar et al. 2019). In this paper, we further advance
this line of research by offering differentially private algorithms for a very general task – the bandit convex optimization problem in the case where the space of decisions that the
learning algorithm can make exhibits complex geometry.
Bandit convex optimization is an extremely general
framework for online learning, which is motivated by the
natural setting where, after making a decision, the algorithm
only learns the loss associated with its action, and nothing
about other possible decisions it could have made (as opposed to the weaker full information model where losses
associated to all the possible decisions are revealed). Algorithms for this problem are highly dependent on the geometric properties of the space of decisions – and their performance usually depends on the ability to perform certain projections onto this space (Ben-Tal and Nemirovski
2001; Jaggi 2013). For large scale problems, this requirement may be prohibitive, as decisions may have to satisfy
certain constraints (the set of recommendations must be diverse enough, or the set of ads to be displayed satisfy a
given budget). Projection-free methods overcome this issue by exploiting the fact that some canonical decision sets
often encountered in applications (matroid polytope, submodular base polytope, flow polytope, convex relaxations
of low-rank matrices) have efficient linear optimization oracles. One can therefore use these efficient oracles in conjunction with the projection-free method to obtain algorithms
that can be deployed for real-world applications.
In this work we bridge the requirements of privacy and efficiency for online learning, building on the works of (Garber and Kretzu 2020; Garber and Hazan 2013b), and obtain the first differentially private algorithm for projectionfree bandit optimization. To do so we leverage a generic
framework for online convex optimization in the presence
of noise, which we then adapt to our specific setting in a
modular fashion.

We design differentially private algorithms for the bandit
convex optimization problem in the projection-free setting.
This setting is important whenever the decision set has a
complex geometry, and access to it is done efficiently only
through a linear optimization oracle, hence Euclidean projections are unavailable (e.g. matroid polytope, submodular
base polytope). This is the first differentially-private algorithm for projection-free bandit optimization, and in fact our
bound matches the best known non-private projection-free algorithm and the best known private algorithm, even for the
weaker setting when projections are available.

Introduction
Online learning is a fundamental optimization paradigm
employed in settings where one needs to make decisions
in an uncertain environment. Such methods are essential
for a range of practical applications: ad-serving (McMahan et al. 2013), dynamic pricing (Lobel, Leme, and Vladu
2018; Mao, Leme, and Schneider 2018), or recommender
systems (Abernethy et al. 2007) are only a few examples.
These techniques are highly dependent on access to certain
user data, such as search history, list of contacts, etc. which
may expose sensitive information about a particular person.
As these tools become ubiquitous on the internet, one can
witness a surge in the collection of user data at massive
scales. This is a tremendous problem, since by obtaining
information about the behavior of algorithms run on these
data, adversarial entities may learn potentially sensitive information. This could then be traced to a particular user,
even if the users were anonymized to begin with (Dwork,
Roth et al. 2014).
To mitigate the threat of diminishing user privacy, one
can leverage the power of differential privacy (Dwork et al.
2006), a notion of privacy which ensures that the output of
an algorithm is not sensitive to the presence of a particular
user’s data. Therefore, based on this output, one can not determine whether a user presents one or more given attributes.
Differentially private learning algorithms have been studied in several settings, and a large number of recent works
addressed the challenge of designing general optimization primitives with privacy guarantees (Jain, Kothari, and

Our Contributions. We give the first differentially private algorithm for the bandit convex optimization problem in
the projection-free setting (we defer the definition of (ε, δ)privacy to Definition 2 and the problem statement to the Preliminaries section). We summarize the regret guarantees of
our algorithm in the following theorem and compare it with

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7322

