The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning To Scale Mixed-Integer Programs
Timo Berthold, Gregor Hendel
FICO Xpress Optimization, Fair Isaac Germany GmbH, Takustr. 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany
timoberthold@fico.com, gregorhendel@fico.com

Abstract

tral changes in the model, like changing the order of constraints, might lead to different optimal solutions being reported (Lodi and Tramontani 2013). Since the two standard methods to solve MIPs, namely LP-based branch-andbound and cutting plane algorithms, both rely heavily on the
dual simplex algorithm as a subroutine, they directly inherit
its numerical properties and issues. To make things worse,
tableau-based cuts like Gomory cuts (Gomory 1958) can
amplify numerical issues, unless these cuts are carefully filtered and selected (Balas et al. 1996).
Obviously, cycling, residual errors and other numerical
problems are undesirable and various methods exist to mitigate them, see, e.g., Gleixner, Steffy, and Wolter (2016),
Cheung, Gleixner, and Steffy (2017), or Espinoza (2006).
One of the earliest and to date still most effective way to prevent numerical issues from occuring in LP and MIP solvers
is the use of various scaling algorithms. Scaling methods
for linear programming have first been suggested in the
early 1960’s (Fulkerson and Wolfe 1962). In 1972, Curtis
and Reid introduced a scaling algorithm that solves a leastsquares problem, which effectively minimizes the sum of the
squares of the logarithms of the matrix elements, plus some
correction terms (Curtis and Reid 1972).
Various different scaling algorithms have been suggested,
each of them beneficial for some classes of instances. However, it is not clear a priori which scaling algorithm is bestsuited for a given LP or MIP instance. To this end, we suggest a method to predict which of two of the most common
scaling methods will lead to a numerically more robust solution process.
In this paper, we consider general mixed integer programs
(MIPs) of the form

Many practical applications require the solution of numerically challenging linear programs (LPs) and mixed integer
programs (MIPs). Scaling is a widely used preconditioning
technique that aims at reducing the error propagation of the
involved linear systems, thereby improving the numerical behavior of the dual simplex algorithm and, consequently, LPbased branch-and-bound. A reliable scaling method often
makes the difference whether these problems can be solved
correctly or not. In this paper, we investigate the use of machine learning to choose at the beginning of the solution process between two common scaling methods: Standard scaling and Curtis-Reid scaling. The latter often, but not always,
leads to a more robust solution process, but may suffer from
longer solution times.
Rather than training for overall solution time, we propose to
use the attention level of a MIP solution process as a learning
label. We evaluate the predictive power of a random forest
approach and a linear regressor that learns the (square-root of
the) difference in attention level. It turns out that the resulting classification not only reduces various types of numerical
errors by large margins, but it also improves the performance
of the dual simplex algorithm.
The learned model has been implemented within the FICO
Xpress MIP solver and it is used by default since release 8.9,
May 2020, to determine the scaling algorithm Xpress applies
before solving an LP or a MIP.

Introduction
Numerics play an important role in solving linear and mixed
integer programs (LPs and MIPs) (Miltenberger, Ralphs,
and Steffy 2018). All major solvers for LPs and MIPs rely
on floating-point arithmetic, hence numerical round-off errors and cancellation effects might occur and therefrom, numerical errors might propagate. This affects the solution
process in various critical ways: first of all, the dual simplex algorithm might be more prone to cycling, leading
to a longer runtime or even an unsuccessful termination.
The computed optimal solution vectors might have residual errors larger than acceptable and consequently, the solution might be deemed wrong. In a worst case, instances
might be declared infeasible by mistake or seemingly neu-

min{cT x | Ax ≥ b, ` ≤ x ≤ u, xj ∈ Z ∀j ∈ I},

(1)

with objective coefficient vector c ∈ Qn , constraint coefficient matrix A ∈ Qm×n , constraint right-hand side b ∈ Qm ,
n
and variable bounds `, u ∈ Q , where Q := Q ∪ {±∞}.
Furthermore, the set I ⊆ {1, . . . , n} denotes the indices of
variables that are required to take integer values. If I = ∅,
(1) is called a linear program (LP). By omitting the integrality requirements for a given MIP, we obtain its LP relaxation.
We address the solution of LPs and MIPs by a general
purpose solver, in our case FICO Xpress (FICO). Recently,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3661

