The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Thinking Fast and Slow in AI
G. Booch, 1 F. Fabiano, 2 L. Horesh, 1 K. Kate, 1 J. Lenchner, 1 N. Linck, 1 A. Loreggia,3
K. Murugesan, 1 N. Mattei, 4 , F. Rossi, 1 B. Srivastava 5
1
IBM
University of Udine
3
European University Institute
4
Tulane University
5
Universty of South Carolina
2

Abstract

this is supported by several results that have been obtained
along this line of work. For example, Bengio conjectures
that it is necessary to generalize from raw data to a ”consciousness stream” of few a concepts sparsely related to
each other (Bengio 2017). Also, Marcus argues that explicit
knowledge, symbols, and reasoning should be used to improve the robustness of current AI systems (Marcus 2020).
Other researchers are building hybrid systems that use both
machine learning and symbolic reasoning techniques, employing a so-called neuro-symbolic AI approach (d’Avila
Garcez and Besold 2019).
We argue that a better comprehension of how humans
have, and have evolved to obtain, these advanced capabilities can inspire innovative ways to imbue AI systems with
these competencies. We propose to study and exploit cognitive theories of human reasoning and decision making as a
source of inspiration for the causal source of these capabilities, that help us raise the fundamental research questions
to be considered when trying to provide AI with desired dimensions of human intelligence that are currently lacking.
More precisely, we analyze some of these theories, with
special focus on Kahneman’s theory of thinking fast and
slow, and attempt to connect them into a unified theory with
the aim to identify (some of) the roots of the desired human
capabilities. We then propose to translate these theories of
the human mind into the AI environment, and we conjecture
that this will possibly lead to some of the same kind of capabilities in machines. This paper gives a brief and high-level
overview of this general approach, tries to motivate it, lists
several research questions along the way, and ends with a
call for action to AI researchers to convene an AI research
community that explores this space, assesses the validity of
this approach, and possibly uses it to make significant advances in AI as well as in understanding human intelligence.

This paper proposes a research direction to advance AI which
draws inspiration from cognitive theories of human decision
making. The premise is that if we gain insights about the
causes of some human capabilities that are still lacking in AI
(for instance, adaptability, generalizability, common sense,
and causal reasoning), we may obtain similar capabilities in
an AI system by embedding these causal components. We
hope that the high-level description of our vision included
in this paper, as well as the several research questions that we
propose to consider, can stimulate the AI research community
to define, try and evaluate new methodologies, frameworks,
and evaluation metrics, in the spirit of achieving a better understanding of both human and machine intelligence.

Motivation and Overall Vision
AI systems have seen dramatic advancement in recent years,
bringing many successful applications that are pervading
our everyday life. However, we are still mostly seeing instances of narrow AI: each of these developments are typically focused on a very limited set of competences and goals,
e.g., image interpretation, natural language processing, label
classification, prediction, and many others. Moreover, while
these successes can be accredited to improved algorithms
and techniques, they are also tightly linked to the availability
of huge datasets and computational power (Marcus 2020).
State-of-the-art AI still lacks many capabilities that would
naturally be included in a notion of intelligence, for example, if we compare these AI technologies to what human beings are able to do. Examples of these capabilities are generalizability, robustness, explainability, causal analysis, abstraction, common sense reasoning, ethics reasoning, as well
as a complex and seamless integration of learning and reasoning supported by both implicit and explicit knowledge.
The majority of the AI community is currently making
several attempts to address the current limitations of AI and
create systems that display the ability for more human-like
qualities, using a variety of approaches. One of the main debates is whether end-to-end neural network approaches can
achieve this goal? or whether we need to integrate machine
learning with symbolic and logic-based AI techniques? We
believe that the integration route is the most promising, and

Thinking Fast and Slow, and Other Theories
of Human Decision Making
According to Daniel Kahneman’s theory, described in his
book “Thinking, Fast and Slow” (Kahneman 2011), humans’ decisions are supported and guided by the cooperation of two main kinds of capabilities, that, for sake of
simplicity are called “systems”: system 1 provides tools for
intuitive, imprecise, fast, and often unconscious decisions

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15042

