The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stochastic Graphical Bandits with Adversarial Corruptions
Shiyin Lu, Guanghui Wang, Lijun Zhang∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{lusy, wanggh, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

have been well developed (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012;
Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020).
A natural extension of MAB is the graphical bandits
(GB), initially introduced by Mannor and Shamir (2011). In
GB, there exists a undirected feedback graph G with nodes
corresponding to K arms and edges characterizing the feedback structure. Specifically, an edge (u, v) in graph G indicates that whenever the learner plays arm u or arm v, the
rewards of both u and v are revealed to the learner. Compared to MAB, the main advantage of GB is that it captures the side-information about rewards of unselected arms.
Such side-information widely exist in real-world applications (Alon et al. 2017). For example, in online advertising,
if two ads promote similar products, they can be connected
with an edge in the feedback graph: When a user clicks one
ad, it is likely that the user also takes interest in the other ad.
In social networks, two persons following each other often
share similar preferences, so behaviors of one person also
reveal information on the other. Furthermore, from a theoretical view, GB generalizes and unifies two popular online
learning paradigms: MAB and PEA (Prediction with Expert
Advice, Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006) in the sense that
GB reduces to MAB and PEA when the feedback graph is
empty and complete, respectively.
Since the seminal work of Mannor and Shamir (2011),
there has been a large body of research on GB, which
can be divided into two categories according to the reward
model. One category is the stochastic GB (Caron et al. 2012;
Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz, and Shroff 2014; Cohen, Hazan,
and Koren 2016; Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and Dubhashi 2017;
Liu, Zheng, and Shroff 2018; Liu, Buccapatnam, and Shroff
2018; Hu, Mehta, and Pan 2019; Lykouris, Tardos, and Wali
2020), where the reward of each arm is stochastically generated. The other is the adversarial GB (Mannor and Shamir
2011; Alon et al. 2013; Kocák et al. 2014; Alon et al. 2015;
Neu 2015; Kocák, Neu, and Valko 2016; Lykouris, Sridharan, and Tardos 2018; Feng and Loh 2018; Rangi and
Franceschetti 2019; Arora, Marinov, and Mohri 2019; Lee,
Luo, and Zhang 2020), in which rewards of arms are determined by an adversary and can be hence nearly arbitrary.
While the stochastic GB can achieve a logarithmic regret
bound, it is too optimistic and the stochastic assumption on
reward is too stringent. By contrast, the adversarial GB has
wider applicability, but it is too pessimistic and only enjoys

We study bandits with graph-structured feedback, where a
learner repeatedly selects an arm and then observes rewards
of the chosen arm as well as its neighbors in the feedback
graph. Existing work on graphical bandits assumes either
stochastic rewards or adversarial rewards, both of which are
extremes and appear rarely in real-world scenarios. In this
paper, we study graphical bandits with a reward model that
interpolates between the two extremes, where the rewards are
overall stochastically generated but a small fraction of them
can be adversarially corrupted. For this problem, we propose
an online algorithm that can utilize the stochastic pattern and
also tolerate the adversarial corruptions. The main idea is to
restrict exploration to carefully-designed independent sets of
the feedback graph and perform exploitation by adopting a
soft version of arm elimination. Theoretical analysis shows
that our algorithm attains an O(α ln K ln T + αC) regret,
where α is the independence number of the feedback graph,
K is the number of arms, T is the time horizon, and C quantifies the total corruptions introduced by the adversary. The
effectiveness of our algorithm is demonstrated by numerical
experiments.

Introduction
As a powerful sequential decision-making model, the multiarmed bandits (MAB) have found applications in a variety of
real-world scenarios, such as cell planning (Maghsudi and
Hossain 2016), medical trials (Villar, Bowden, and Wason
2015), and online advertising (Schwartz, Bradlow, and Fader
2017). In MAB, learning proceeds in a sequence of consecutive rounds. At each round, a learner first chooses one of K
arms to play and then receives a reward of the chosen arm.
The learner’s goal is to maximize the total rewards over T
rounds, which requires carefully balancing the trade-off between exploration (trying different arms to avoid missing the
optimal arm) and exploitation (sticking to the empirically
best arm to accumulate more rewards). The standard metric
for MAB is the regret, which is the cumulative rewards obtained by always selecting the optimal arm in hindsight minus the total rewards received by the learner. Over the past
decades, regret theories and effective algorithms for MAB
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8749

