The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Raven’s Progressive Matrices Completion with Latent Gaussian Process Priors
Fan Shi, Bin Li* , Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{fshi19, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Abstract reasoning ability is fundamental to human intelligence. It enables humans to uncover relations among abstract
concepts and further deduce implicit rules from the relations.
As a well-known abstract visual reasoning task, Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) are widely used in human IQ tests.
Although extensive research has been conducted on RPM
solvers with machine intelligence, few studies have considered further advancing the standard answer-selection (classification) problem to a more challenging answer-painting
(generating) problem, which can verify whether the model
has indeed understood the implicit rules. In this paper we aim
to solve the latter one by proposing a deep latent variable
model, in which multiple Gaussian processes are employed
as priors of latent variables to separately learn underlying abstract concepts from RPMs; thus the proposed model is interpretable in terms of concept-specific latent variables. The
latent Gaussian process also provides an effective way of extrapolation for answer painting based on the learned conceptchanging rules. We evaluate the proposed model on RPMlike datasets with multiple continuously-changing visual concepts. Experimental results demonstrate that our model requires only few training samples to paint high-quality answers, generate novel RPM panels, and achieve interpretability through concept-specific latent variables.

Figure 1: An example of the RPM panel from the RAVEN
dataset (Zhang et al. 2019a). The context panel (left) consists
of eight observed cells in blue background and one missing
cell in yellow background; the selection panel (right) consists of eight cells in orange background.

abstract reasoning. From the perspective of visual representation, our vision and nervous system tend to analyze independent visual concepts from an observed object: such as
color, shape, and size. From the perspective of abstract reasoning, when conducting RPM IQ tests, our strong abstract
reasoning ability is based on the comprehension of independent visual concepts and also, concept-changing rules.
In the field of machine learning, enabling computational
models with the abstract reasoning ability is challenging.
Some similarity-based models (Barrett et al. 2018) measure
similarity between every two cell content to carry out the
reasoning process. Recently, as researchers show more interest in deep learning, a considerable amount of literature
has been published on methods utilizing deep neural networks (Barrett et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019b,a). For a particular downstream task, the choice of feature representation has a great impact on performance. If feature representations are well adapted to the current task, the accuracy and robustness of models can be improved (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). The variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013) has emerged as a functional tool in the unsupervised representation learning. To
enhance the interpretability in representations, the notion of
disentanglement is put forward. By decomposing and regularizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO) of VAEs, a
number of disentangled latent variable models have been
proposed (Higgins et al. 2017; Kumar, Sattigeri, and Balakrishnan 2017; Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al. 2018).
These regularization-based models force each dimension (or

Introduction
A major performance of human abstract thinking is the ability to discover relations between abstract concepts and then
summarize underlying rules. Abstract visual reasoning tasks
reflect such abstract thinking capabilities. The Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) problem, a kind of nonverbal abstract visual reasoning task proposed by John C. Raven
(Raven and Court 1938), are usually used to test human fluid
intelligence (Bilker et al. 2012). As an example shown in
Figure 1, participants of the RPM problem should observe
a 3 × 3 context panel with the right-bottom cell invisible.
They are expected to find out underlying concept-changing
rules and choose an answer (Raven and Court 1938) from
a selection panel. The RPM problem predominantly emphasizes two aspects of intelligence: visual representation and
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9612

