The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HetSeq: Distributed GPU Training on Heterogeneous Infrastructure
Yifan Ding, Nicholas Botzer, Tim Weninger
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN, USA
{yding4,nbotzer,tweninge}@nd.edu

Abstract
Modern deep learning systems like PyTorch and Tensorflow
are able to train enormous models with billions (or trillions)
of parameters on a distributed infrastructure. These systems
require that the internal nodes have the same memory capacity and compute performance. Unfortunately, most organizations, especially universities, have a piecemeal approach to
purchasing computer systems resulting in a heterogeneous
infrastructure, which cannot be used to compute large models. The present work describes HetSeq, a software package adapted from the popular PyTorch package that provides the capability to train large neural network models
on heterogeneous infrastructure. Experiments with language
translation, text and image classification shows that HetSeq
scales over heterogeneous systems. Additional information,
support documents, source code are publicly available at
https://github.com/yifding/hetseq.

Introduction
The AI community has witnessed rapid growth in the number of neural network models. Many of these models have
matched or even exceeded human performance in a wide
range of areas including image classification (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018; Peters et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019), go (Silver et al. 2017,
2018) and multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) games
like DOTA2 (Berner et al. 2019), and StarCraft II (Vinyals
et al. 2019).
These increasingly powerful neural network models operate over extremely large training data and require millions (or
even billions) of model parameters (Pudipeddi et al. 2020).
This requires enormous computational resources that are
only available to a handful of large organizations. Alongside the investment in hardware including CPU, GPU and
high performance file systems, economies of scale present in
only the largest organizations allow for the management and
rapid development of new technologies like cloud computing
(e.g., AWS, Azure), tensor processing units (TPUs), halfprecision computation (e.g., Volta or Turing architectures of
NVIDIA GPUs), and network architectures (e.g., infiniband)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15432

for high performance communication between thousands of
these hardware systems.
Smaller organizations like startups and universities, on
the other hand, have relatively limited resources and typically purchase computing systems in an ad hoc manner –
whenever funds allow. University computing resources are
therefore much more heterogeneous in their composition
compared to large technology companies and government
labs. Furthermore, mismatches in memory capacity, network
interface, and GPU/CPU capacity limit the development of
large models. Given the system-homogeneity assumptions of
deep learning software platforms, even the process of training
an existing model on new data is difficult or impossible because the resource limits of a single node in a heterogeneous
system limits the entire pipeline. With these limitations, training even moderately sized models could take weeks or even
months to complete.
If not corrected, universities and other small organizations
risk losing relevance in the race to develop newer and better
machine learning models.
In the present work, we endeavour to level the playing field by adapting existing software platforms to
train large neural network models on heterogeneous systems. We release our software package called HetSeq at
https://github.com/yifding/hetseq, which is built on PyTorch
and includes the common GPU environment and NVIDIA
Collective Communications Library (NCCL) without any extra libraries or packages. In contrast, most existing distributed
GPU training platforms (Sergeev and Del Balso 2018; Paszke
et al. 2019) require extra packages like Docker and Open MPI,
which may not be deployable over shared file system without
administrative privileges.
We evaluate HetSeq using NVIDIA GPU nodes with various number of cores, memory capacity, and CPU architecture,
while running in competition with the myriad of other machine learning projects at the University of Notre Dame. We
perform experiments on translation, language modeling, and
image classification tasks. We show vast improvements in
training scalability using HetSeq without sacrificing model
performance. Finally, the released project code covers detailed steps to install and execute. Examples of language
translation, language modeling, and image classification tasks
are included. Furthermore, developers and researchers can
easily extend HetSeq to many other models with little effort.

