The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DialogXL: All-in-One XLNet for Multi-Party Conversation Emotion Recognition
Weizhou Shen, Junqing Chen, Xiaojun Quan* , Zhixian Xie
Sun Yat-sen University, China
{shenwzh3, chenjq95, xiezhx23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, quanxj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

these works, each utterance is firstly encoded separately into
an utterance representation, which is then modeled sequentially and hierarchically. Although the structures seem to
comply with the organization of utterances, they ignore the
direct dependencies between words in different utterances.
In addition, they are not conducive to the application of pretrained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018)
and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019), which have achieved superior
performance in many dialogue system tasks other than ERC
(Madotto, Wu, and Fung 2018; Bao et al. 2020; Henderson
et al. 2019).
There are two main challenges to directly apply these
pre-trained language models to ERC. First, conversations
in ERC are usually multi-party and there can be intra- and
inter-speaker dependencies (Ghosal et al. 2019). Existing
pre-trained language models are not readily feasible to encode these dependencies. Second, almost all language models are constrained by the input length. When the input sequence exceeds the limit, it has to be truncated, which may
lead to loss of information in distant historical utterances
(Majumder et al. 2019; Ghosal et al. 2019).
To cope with the above challenges, we introduce an allin-one XLNet model, namely DialogXL, for emotion recognition in multi-turn multi-party conversation. DialogXL intends to apply a strong pre-trained language model to ERC
without constructing a complicated, hierarchical model in
processing the conversational data. Specifically, it first replaces XLNet’s segment recurrence by a more flexible
and memory-saving utterance recurrence to utilize historical utterances. Utterance recurrence stores the hidden
states of historical utterances in a memory bank and reuses
them while identifying a query utterance. Next, the selfattention in XLNet’s Transformer layers is substituted for
dialog-aware self-attention, which consists of four different
types of attention, namely local self-attention, global selfattention, speaker self-attention, and listener self-attention.
Dialog-aware self-attention allows DialogXL to model the
inter- and intra-speaker dependencies under different reception fields in the historical context. We conduct extensive
experiments on four ERC benchmarks and the results show
that the proposed model, DialogXL, outperforms all the
baselines on the datasets. Furthermore, several studies are
conducted to verify the modules of DialogXL, and an error
analysis is used to delve into the reasons behind the errors.

This paper presents our pioneering effort for emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) with pre-trained language models. Unlike regular documents, conversational utterances appear alternately from different parties and are usually organized as hierarchical structures in previous work. Such structures are not conducive to the application of pre-trained language models such as XLNet. To address this issue, we propose an all-in-one XLNet model, namely DialogXL, with
enhanced memory to store longer historical context and
dialog-aware self-attention to deal with the multi-party structures. Specifically, we first modify the recurrence mechanism of XLNet from segment-level to utterance-level in order to better model the conversational data. Second, we introduce dialog-aware self-attention in replacement of the vanilla
self-attention in XLNet to capture useful intra- and interspeaker dependencies. Extensive experiments are conducted
on four ERC benchmarks with mainstream models presented
for comparison. The experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms the baselines on all the datasets.
Several other experiments such as ablation study and error
analysis are also conducted and the results confirm the role of
the critical modules of DialogXL.

Introduction
Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) is an emerging
task in natural language processing (NLP) that aims to identify the emotion of each utterance in a conversation. It can
be regarded as an extension of traditional emotion detection
from text, or an arising problem in dialogue systems that
helps generate emotion-aware dialogues (Zhou et al. 2017).
Empirical evidence shows that the conversational context of
an utterance plays an indispensable role in this task (Poria
et al. 2019). Moreover, the emotion also tends to stay unchanged within a short context of the conversation. It is thus
very critical to effectively model the alternate utterances by
different parties.
To solve this problem, many recent works focus on deep
neural networks with hierarchical structures to model the
conversational data (Majumder et al. 2019; Ghosal et al.
2019; Jiao et al. 2019; Zhong, Wang, and Miao 2019). In
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13789

