The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Classification with Few Tests through Self-Selection
Hanrui Zhang,1 Yu Cheng, 2 Vincent Conitzer 1
1

Duke University
University of Illinois at Chicago
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu, yucheng2@uic.edu, conitzer@cs.duke.edu
2

Abstract

and the list of papers one has published strongly affects one’s
future opportunities as a researcher.
An agent’s performance on tests is inevitably random —
on any given day, a capable student may not perform well
due to being tired or sick, due to bad luck in which questions
were selected, or for reasons that we cannot identify. For this
reason, a principal generally is willing to take into consideration multiple test outcomes when making decisions. It then
matters how these tests are offered to agents. Oversimplifying, there are two ways of offering tests: mandatory tests
and optional tests. With mandatory tests, the principal decides which tests each agent should take and/or how many
times they should take them, as well as which (combinations
of) outcomes an agent needs to have in order to be classified
into a certain category. A straightforward example of mandatory tests is students taking exams in school, where typically all students are required to take all exams in a course,
whose outcomes together determine the final grade of the
student. On the other hand, with optional tests, the principal
decides the latter (i.e., which outcomes suffice for classification into a certain category) but not the former (i.e., which
and/or how many tests each agent should take). One example is (an oversimplified version of) the academic job market, where agents’ publication records determine whether
they are invited for an onsite interview, but agents can decide how often to put in the effort to prepare a new paper for
submission to a conference or journal (i.e., to “take” and optional “test”). At first glance, it may appear that mandatory
tests allow the principal tighter control over the classification
process, and therefore would benefit the principal more than
optional tests. As a consequence, the principal should enforce mandatory tests whenever possible (or economically
feasible). However, the above intuitive reasoning does not
appear to be fully backed by evidence from reality: optional
tests continue to be implemented in high-stakes classification tasks such as US college admissions.1 This raises the
following question:

We study test-based binary classification, where a principal
either accepts or rejects agents based on the outcomes they
get in a set of tests. The principal commits to a policy, which
consists of all sets of outcomes that lead to acceptance. Each
agent is modeled by a distribution over the space of possible
outcomes. When an agent takes a test, he pays a cost and receives an independent sample from his distribution as the outcome. Agents can always choose between taking another test
and stopping. They maximize their expected utility, which is
the value of acceptance if the principal’s policy accepts the
set of outcomes they have and 0 otherwise, minus the total
cost of tests taken.
We focus on the case where agents can be either “good”
or “bad” (corresponding to their distribution over test outcomes), and the principal’s goal is to accept good agents and
reject bad ones. We show, roughly speaking, that as long as
the good and bad agents have different distributions (which
can be arbitrarily close to each other), the principal can always achieve perfect accuracy, meaning good agents are accepted with probability 1, and bad ones are rejected with
probability 1. Moreover, there is a policy achieving perfect
accuracy under which the maximum number of tests any
agent needs to take is constant — in sharp contrast to the case
where the principal directly observes samples from agents’
distributions. The key technique is to choose the policy so
that agents self-select into taking tests.

1

Introduction

We often classify based on the outcomes of tests. In a narrow sense, tests can take the form of exams, with numerical scores as outcomes. For example, a course often has
one or more midterm exams and one final exam, and the
intructor uses the outcomes of these exams to decide the final grades of (i.e., to classify) students. More generally, a
test can be any activity that takes a certain amount of effort and produces a verifiable outcome. Examples include
job interviews, research paper submissions, etc. These outcomes, presumably correlated with the true skills of the test
takers (henceforth the agents), are then used by a principal
to classify them — the collective feedback from different interviewers determines whether the interviewee gets the job,

Are there any advantages of optional tests for classification over mandatory ones?
On top of that, in many other scenarios mandatory tests
are simply unrealistic, and the principal has to rely on op1
Applicants may take SAT and/or ACT tests, among others, as
many times as they want.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5805

