The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Innovation Protection: Confronting the Credit Assignment Problem in
Training Heterogeneous Neural Architectures
Sebastian Risi1 and Kenneth O. Stanley2
1

IT University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
2
Uber AI, San Francisco, CA 94103
sebr@itu.dk, kennethostanley@gmail.com

Abstract

of conventional homogeneous networks (see Section 6.1 in
Schmidhuber (2015)), requiring different training setups for
each neural module in combination with evolutionary methods to solve a complex 3D task (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018).
To explore this challenge, we are building on the recently introduced world model architecture introduced by
Ha and Schmidhuber (2018) but employ a novel neuroevolutionary optimization method. This agent model contains
three different components: (1) a visual module, mapping
high-dimensional inputs to a lower-dimensional representative code, (2) an LSTM-based memory component, and
(3) a controller component that takes input from the visual
and memory module to determine the agent’s next action. In
the original approach, each component of the world model
was trained separately and to perform a different and specialised function, such as predicting the future. While Risi
and Stanley (2019) demonstrated that these models can also
be trained end-to-end through a population-based genetic
algorithm (GA) that exclusively optimizes for final performance, the approach was only applied to the simpler 2D car
racing domain and it is an open question how such an approach will scale to the more complex CAP in a 3D VizDoom task that first validated the effectiveness of the world
model approach.
Adding support to the hypothesis that CAP is a problem
in heterogeneous networks, we show that a simple genetic
algorithm fails to find a solution to solving the VizDoom
task and ask the question what are the missing ingredients
necessary to encourage the evolution of better performing
networks. The main insight in this paper is that we can view
the optimization of a heterogeneous neural network (such as
world models) as a co-evolving system of multiple different
sub-systems. The other important CAP insight is that representational innovations discovered in one subsystem (e.g.
the visual system learns to track moving objects) require the
other sub-systems to adapt. In fact, if the other systems are
not given time to adapt, such innovation will likely initially
have an adversarial effect on overall performance.
In order to optimize such co-evolving heterogeneous neural systems, we propose to reduce the selection pressure on
individuals whose visual or memory system was recently
changed, given the controller component time to readapt.
This Deep Innovation Protection (DIP) approach is able to
find a solution to the VizDoom:Take Cover task, which

Deep reinforcement learning approaches have shown impressive results in a variety of different domains, however, more
complex heterogeneous architectures such as world models
require the different neural components to be trained separately instead of end-to-end. While a simple genetic algorithm
recently showed end-to-end training is possible, it failed to
solve a more complex 3D task. This paper presents a method
called Deep Innovation Protection (DIP) that addresses the
credit assignment problem in training complex heterogenous
neural network models end-to-end for such environments.
The main idea behind the approach is to employ multiobjective optimization to temporally reduce the selection pressure
on specific components in multi-component network, allowing other components to adapt. We investigate the emergent
representations of these evolved networks, which learn to predict properties important for the survival of the agent, without
the need for a specific forward-prediction loss.

Introduction
The ability of the brain to model the world arose from the
process of evolution. It evolved because it helped organisms
to survive and strive in their particular environments and not
because such forward prediction was explicitly optimized
for. In contrast to the emergent neural representations in nature, modules of current world model approaches are often
directly rewarded for their ability to predict future states of
the environment (Schmidhuber 1990; Ha and Schmidhuber
2018; Hafner et al. 2018; Wayne et al. 2018). While it is undoubtedly useful to be able to explicitly encourage a model
to predict what will happen next, here we are interested in
the harder problem of agents that should learn to predict
what is important for their survival without being explicitly
rewarded for it.
A challenge in end-to-end training of complex neural
models that does not require each component to be trained
separately (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018), is the well-known
credit assignment problem (CAP) (Minsky 1961). While
deep learning has shown to be in general well suited to solve
the CAP for deep networks (i.e. determining how much each
weight contributes to the network’s error), evidence suggests that more heterogeneous networks lack the “niceness”
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12391

