The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

UNIPoint: Universally Approximating Point Processes Intensities
Alexander Soen, Alexander Mathews, Daniel Grixti-Cheng, Lexing Xie
The Australian National University
alexander.soen@anu.edu.au, alex.mathews@anu.edu.au, a500846@anu.edu.au, lexing.xie@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Point processes are a useful mathematical tool for describing
events over time, and so there are many recent approaches
for representing and learning them. One notable open question is how to precisely describe the flexibility of point process models and whether there exists a general model that
can represent all point processes. Our work bridges this gap.
Focusing on the widely used event intensity function representation of point processes, we provide a proof that a class
of learnable functions can universally approximate any valid
intensity function. The proof connects the well known StoneWeierstrass Theorem for function approximation, the uniform
density of non-negative continuous functions using a transfer
functions, the formulation of the parameters of a piece-wise
continuous functions as a dynamic system, and a recurrent
neural network implementation for capturing the dynamics.
Using these insights, we design and implement UNIPoint,
a novel neural point process model, using recurrent neural
networks to parameterise sums of basis function upon each
event. Evaluations on synthetic and real world datasets show
that this simpler representation performs better than Hawkes
process variants and more complex neural network-based approaches. We expect this result will provide a practical basis
for selecting and tuning models, as well as furthering theoretical work on representational complexity and learnability.

1

Figure 1: Overview of our method of universally approximating point processes. A RNN is used to parameterise a
set of basis functions for each interarrival time τi . Then, the
sum of basis functions is used to approximate a continuous
function, which is composed with a transfer function f+ to
universally approximate all valid intensity functions.

proximate any Borel-measurable function on a compact
domain (Cybenko 1989; Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White
1989). A number of neural architectures have been proposed
for point processes. The Recurrent Marked Temporal Point
Process model (RMTPP) (Du et al. 2016) uses Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) to encode event history, and defines the conditional intensity function by a parametric form.
Common choices of such parametric forms include an exponential function (Du et al. 2016; Upadhyay, De, and Rodriguez 2018) or a constant function (Li et al. 2018; Huang,
Wang, and Mak 2019). Variants of the RNN have been
explored, including NeuralHawkes (Mei and Eisner 2017)
that makes the RNN state a functions over time; as well as
Transformer Hawkes (Zuo et al. 2020) and Self-attention
Hawkes (Zhang et al. 2019) which uses attention mechanisms instead of recurrent units. However, a conceptual gap
on the flexibility of the neural point process representation
still remains. Piece-wise exponential functions (Du et al.
2016; Upadhyay, De, and Rodriguez 2018) only encode intensities that are monotonic between events. The functional
RNN representation (Mei and Eisner 2017) is flexible but
uses many more parameters. Transformers (Zuo et al. 2020;

Introduction

Temporal point processes (Daley and Vere-Jones 2007) are
a preferred tool for describing events happening in irregular
intervals, such as, earthquake modelling (Ogata 1988), social media (Zhao et al. 2015), and finance (Embrechts, Liniger, and Lin 2011). One common variant is the self-exciting
Hawkes process with parametric kernel (Laub, Taimre, and
Pollett 2015), which describes prior events triggering future
events. However, misspecification of the kernel will likely
result in poor performance (Mishra, Rizoiu, and Xie 2016).
One may ask what are the most flexible classes of point
process intensity functions? How can they be implemented
computationally? Does a flexible representation lead to good
performance?
There is a body of literature surrounding these three questions. Multi-layer neural networks are well known for being flexible function approximators. They are able to apCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9685

