The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning with Retrospection
Xiang Deng, Zhongfei Zhang
Computer Science Department, State University of New York at Binghamton
xdeng7@binghamton.edu, zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been successfully deployed in
various domains of artificial intelligence, including computer
vision and natural language processing. We observe that the
current standard procedure for training DNNs discards all
the learned information in the past epochs except the current
learned weights. An interesting question is: is this discarded
information indeed useless? We argue that the discarded information can benefit the subsequent training. In this paper,
we propose learning with retrospection (LWR) which makes
use of the learned information in the past epochs to guide the
subsequent training. LWR is a simple yet effective training
framework to improve accuracies, calibration, and robustness
of DNNs without introducing any additional network parameters or inference cost, but only with a negligible training overhead. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of LWR for training DNNs.

Figure 1: As seen from the coloration patterns of the two
cats, the cat in the first row is more visually similar to a leopard while the cat in the second row is more visually similar
to a tiger. Instead of assigning them the same one-hot label,
it is reasonable to assign them different soft labels with different probabilities for different classes.
served is helpful for mitigating the risk of over-fitting or
over-confidence. Motivated by this observation, we turn to
soft labels. Two intuitive examples about one-hot and soft
labels are shown in Figure 1. For the two cats in Figure 1,
the one-hot labels set the probability for the cat class to 1 and
those for the other classes to 0, which ignores the class similarities. In contrast, soft labels are able to take into account
instance-to-class similarities.
Coinciding with the above idea, many approaches have
benefited from soft labels which assign small probabilities
to non-ground-truth classes. The label smoothing regularizer (LSR) (Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019; Szegedy
et al. 2016) which uses soft labels generated by interpolating one-hot labels and uniform-distribution labels has improved the performances on image classification (Szegedy
et al. 2016; Zoph et al. 2018; Real et al. 2019), speech recognition (Chorowski and Jaitly 2016), and machine translation
(Vaswani et al. 2017), but LSR is unable to capture instanceto-class similarities, e.g., some cats are more visually similar to tigers while some other cats are more similar to leopards as illustrated in Figure 1. Knowledge distillation (KD)
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) takes advantage of the
instance-level soft labels generated by a pretrained teacher
network to train a student network, thus improving the student performance significantly. However, the training cost
of KD is several times of that of the standard training procedure due to two factors: (1) KD first needs to train a teacher

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied to a wide range of applications in artificial intelligence,
such as automated vehicle control (Levinson et al. 2011),
biometric recognition (Lawrence et al. 1997), and medical
diagnosis (Miotto et al. 2016). For these applications, classification is a fundamental and important task. It is appealing to further improve the classification performance, thus
benefiting these applications and extending the application
horizon to more accuracy-critical or safety-critical domains.
The standard procedure for training DNNs on classification is to fit DNN outputs to one-hot labels by using the
cross-entropy loss. In a one-hot label, the probability (confidence score) for the ground-truth class is set to 1 while the
probabilities for the other classes are all 0s, which means
that the labels for different classes are orthogonal. However,
it is observed that the individuals in different classes usually
share visual or semantic similarities, e.g., cats may be visually similar to tigers or leopards. This indicates that one-hot
labels are not necessarily the optimal target to fit as they
ignore the class similarity information. Thus, besides maximizing the probability of the ground-truth class, allowing
for probabilities of the other classes (which may be visually or semantically similar to the ground-truth) to be preCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7201

