The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Enhanced Hierarchical Graph Transformer Network
for Multi-Behavior Recommendation
Lianghao Xia1 , Chao Huang2 * , Yong Xu1,3,4 , Peng Dai2 , Xiyue Zhang1
Hongsheng Yang2 , Jian Pei5 , Liefeng Bo2
1

South China University of Technology, China, 2 JD Finance America Corporation, USA
3
Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 5 Simon Fraser University, Canada
{cslianghao.xia,zhang.xiyue}@mail.scut.edu.cn, chaohuang75@gmail.com, yxu@scut.edu.cn
{peng.dai,hongsheng.yang,liefeng.bo}@jd.com, jpei@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

interactions into latent representations and predicts user’s
preference based on the projected low-dimensional embeddings (Chen et al. 2020).
Many deep neural network techniques have been developed to enhance collaborative ﬁltering architecture for nonlinear feature interactions. Speciﬁcally, early studies, like
NCF (He et al. 2017) and DMF (Xue et al. 2017) utilize the
Multi-layer Perceptron to handle the non-linear interactions.
Furthermore, autoencoder-based methods are designed for
mapping high-dimensional sparse user-item interactions into
low-dimensional dense representations (Sedhain et al. 2015;
Wu, DuBois et al. 2016). Later works investigate the use
of graph neural network to exploit the high-order user-item
relations, and perform neighborhood-based feature aggregations (Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019c).
Although these methods have shown promising results,
a deﬁciency is that they only model singular type of useritem interactions, which makes them insufﬁcient to distill
the complex collaborative signals from the multi-typed behaviors of users (Jin et al. 2020). In particular, there typically
exist multiple relations between user and item that exhibit
various behavior characteristics in many real-world recommendation scenarios, which are particularly helpful in learning users’ preferences on the target type of behavior (Guo
et al. 2019). For example, in online retail platforms, users’
page view and add-to-favorite activities over different items,
can serve as the auxiliary knowledge for assisting the forecasting task of customer purchase (target behavior). Therefore, it is crucial to take such inter-type behavioral inﬂuences
into consideration to more accurately infer user preferences.
There are several key technical challenges that remain
to be solved to realize the multi-behavior recommendation.
First, how to distill the user-speciﬁc collaborative signals
from the multiplex user-item interaction behaviors, is a signiﬁcant challenge to tackle. In practice, type-speciﬁc behavioral patterns interweave with each other in a complex manner (Gao et al. 2019b), like the complementary correlations
between the add-to-cart and purchase behaviors, or users’
negative reviews are mutually exclusive with their positive
feedback over the same item. Without the explicitly encoding of such heterogeneous relationships between user and

Accurate user and item embedding learning is crucial for
modern recommender systems. However, most existing recommendation techniques have thus far focused on modeling users’ preferences over singular type of user-item interactions. Many practical recommendation scenarios involve
multi-typed user interactive behaviors (e.g., page view, addto-favorite and purchase), which presents unique challenges
that cannot be handled by current recommendation solutions.
In particular: i) complex inter-dependencies across different
types of user behaviors; ii) the incorporation of knowledgeaware item relations into the multi-behavior recommendation framework; iii) dynamic characteristics of multityped user-item interactions. To tackle these challenges, this
work proposes a Knowledge-Enhanced Hierarchical Graph
Transformer Network (KHGT), to investigate multi-typed interactive patterns between users and items in recommender
systems. Speciﬁcally, KHGT is built upon a graph-structured
neural architecture to i) capture type-speciﬁc behavior characteristics; ii) explicitly discriminate which types of user-item
interactions are more important in assisting the forecasting
task on the target behavior. Additionally, we further integrate
the graph attention layer with the temporal encoding strategy,
to empower the learned embeddings be reﬂective of both dedicated multiplex user-item and item-item relations, as well as
the underlying interaction dynamics. Extensive experiments
conducted on three real-world datasets show that KHGT consistently outperforms many state-of-the-art recommendation
methods across various evaluation settings. Our implementation code is available in https://github.com/akaxlh/KHGT.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely deployed in many
Internet services (e.g., e-commerce, online review and advertising systems) to alleviate information overload and deliver the most relevant items to users (Liu et al. 2020; Huang
et al. 2019a). In the recommendation scenario with the focus
on implicit feedback, Collaborative Filtering (CF) becomes
one of most popular paradigm which factorizes user-item
* Corresponding author: Chao Huang
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4486

