The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Symmetric Component Caching for Model Counting on Combinatorial Instances
Timothy van Bremen1∗ , Vincent Derkinderen1∗ , Shubham Sharma2∗ ,
Subhajit Roy3 , Kuldeep S. Meel4
1

KU Leuven 2 Nutanix Software India Pvt. Ltd.
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 4 National University of Singapore
{timothy.vanbremen,vincent.derkinderen}@cs.kuleuven.be, sharma.shubham736@gmail.com, subhajit@iitk.ac.in,
meel@comp.nus.edu.sg
3

Abstract

Pehoushek 2000; Sang et al. 2004; Thurley 2006; Aziz et al.
2015; Oztok and Darwiche 2015; Lagniez and Marquis 2017).
Many solvers use variants of the classic DPLL algorithm for
SAT solving (Davis, Logemann, and Loveland 1962), with
optimizations geared towards model counting (Birnbaum
and Lozinskii 1999). One prominent optimization used in
such algorithms is component caching: during the search
process subsets of clauses that can be solved independently
(referred to as components) are identified, solved, and cached.
When the same component appears again along a different
search path, the model count of the component can simply be
returned from the cache, alleviating the need to recompute
it (Bacchus, Dalmao, and Pitassi 2003).
The exact representation scheme used for storing components in the cache differs between solvers: C ACHET (Sang
et al. 2004; Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005) uses a simple
encoding where the literals in each clause are represented
as integers with clauses separated by a sentinel. SHARP SAT
(Thurley 2006) uses a hybrid encoding that achieves a more
compact representation. G ANAK (Sharma et al. 2019) introduced the notion of a probabilistic cache: the component
encodings are hashed into a yet smaller representation to enable better cache utilization but, in the process, paying a price
with a (small) probability of incorrect counts due to hash collisions. The algorithm is parametrized by the probability of
collision, which can be set as small as the user desires, at
the expense of poorer cache utilization due to longer hash
lengths. In addition, G ANAK adds several other optimizations
that allow it to significantly outperform other state-of-the-art
model counters.
However, all existing cache indexing schemes (including
that of G ANAK) declare a cache hit only on exact matches on
components. We make an important observation that there
are often components that are structurally identical but differ only in the variables appearing in the formula. Due to
the fact that components employ variables disjoint from the
rest of the formula, the model counts can also be transferred
across such structurally identical components. Such symmetric components occur naturally in many instances, particularly those arising from combinatorial problems. It is worth
remarking here that counting variants of many combinatorial problems, such as n-queens, quasigroup (Latin square)
completion, and graph k-colouring, enjoy straightforward
reductions to #SAT (Wang et al. 2020; Lauria et al. 2017;

Given a propositional formula ψ, the model counting problem,
also referred to as #SAT, seeks to compute the number of
satisfying assignments (or models) of ψ. Modern search-based
model counting algorithms are built on conflict-driven clause
learning, combined with the caching of certain subformulas
(called components) encountered during the search process.
Despite significant progress in these algorithms over the years,
state-of-the-art model counters often struggle to handle large
but structured instances that typically arise in combinatorial
settings. Motivated by the observation that these counters do
not exploit the inherent symmetries exhibited in such instances,
we revisit the component caching architecture employed in
current counters and introduce a novel caching scheme that focuses on identifying symmetric components. We first prove the
soundness of our approach, and then integrate it into the stateof-the-art model counter G ANAK. Our extensive experiments
on hard combinatorial instances demonstrate that the resulting
counter, S YM G ANAK, leads to improvements over G ANAK
both in terms of PAR-2 score and the number of instances
solved.

1

Introduction

Given a propositional formula ψ, the model counting problem,
also referred to as #SAT, seeks to compute the number of
satisfying assignments (or models) of ψ. Model counting is a
fundamental problem in artificial intelligence with a wide variety of applications such as probabilistic inference (Chavira
and Darwiche 2008), neural network verification (Baluta et al.
2019), computational biology (Sashittal and El-Kebir 2020),
and the like. Consequently, the problem of model counting
has been subject to intense theoretical and practical investigations over the past four decades. The seminal work of
Valiant (1979) showed that model counting is #P-complete.
Subsequently, Toda (1991) proved that every problem in the
polynomial hierarchy can be efficiently solved using only a
single call to a #P oracle; more formally, PH ⊆ P#P .
Practical strategies for model counting span a variety of
approaches, from approximate techniques (Stockmeyer 1983;
Soos and Meel 2019) with probabilistic error bounds, to exact
counting (Birnbaum and Lozinskii 1999; Bayardo Jr and
∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3922

