The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Object Relation Attention for Image Paragraph Captioning
Li-Chuan Yang,1 Chih-Yuan Yang,1,2 and Jane Yung-jen Hsu1,2
1

Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
NTU IoX Center, National Taiwan University
{r07922100,yangchihyuan,yjhsu}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

often generate similar sentences, which are highly different from human-written diverse sentences in a paragraph.
To address this problem, Krause et al. propose a hierarchical recurrent network (Krause et al. 2017). Liang et
al. introduce adversarial training for paragraph generation (Liang et al. 2017). Chatterjee et al. propose coherence
vectors and global topic vectors to augment the hierarchical
structure (Chatterjee and Schwing 2018). Melas-Kyriazi et
al (Melas-Kyriazi, Rush, and Han 2018). propose repetition penalty and apply it to two existing image captioning
methods, bottom-up and top-down attention (Anderson et al.
2018) and SCST (Self-Critical Sequence Training) (Rennie
et al. 2017), and achieve state-of-the-art performance.
However, since image paragraph captioning is a new research problem, there are many unsolved challenges such
as generating coherent and diverse sentences with details.
All existing methods use Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015)
to extract individual object features and use the remaining
language module to learn the relations among those objects
from the training paragraphs. It is questionable how effective
this approach will be because most training sentences consist of object and relation terms. And generating paragraphs
requires more detailed relation information. Thus without
strong relation information at the object feature level, the
language module may learn to generate sentences incorrectly describing the input image as shown in Figure 5.
Based on this observation, we propose a set of two networks to encode relations into object features. One network
learns to calculate the importance of object pairs with respect to the corresponding words occurring in training sentences. The other network learns to modify raw object features to encode the learned pair importance. We design a
model to train the two networks together. We use spatial coherence as our object relations because this information is
easy to obtain by simply checking whether objects’ bounding boxes overlap. Existing object detector algorithms have
shown promising performance in finding objects in images.
We do not use object relations in other types such as object categories or semantic connections because we aim to
evaluate how well our model can encode relation features
by giving pairs of subjects in terms of their visual features.
To encode relation features, we are inspired by the concept
of graph convolution networks (Bruna et al. 2013; Niepert,
Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016) which generate a node’s con-

Image paragraph captioning aims to automatically generate
a paragraph from a given image. It is an extension of image
captioning in terms of generating multiple sentences instead
of a single one, and it is more challenging because paragraphs
are longer, more informative, and more linguistically complicated. Because a paragraph consists of several sentences, an
effective image paragraph captioning method should generate
consistent sentences rather than contradictory ones. It is still
an open question how to achieve this goal, and for it we propose a method to incorporate objects’ spatial coherence into
a language-generating model. For every two overlapping objects, the proposed method concatenates their raw visual features to create two directional pair features and learns weights
optimizing those pair features as relation-aware object features for a language-generating model. Experimental results
show that the proposed network extracts effective object features for image paragraph captioning and achieves promising
performance against existing methods.

Introduction
With computer vision and natural language processing advancements, describing visual content using natural languages has achieved impressive results in recent years (Chen
and Zitnick 2014; Donahue et al. 2015; Karpathy and FeiFei 2015; Mao et al. 2014; Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2015; Luo et al. 2018; Anderson et al. 2018). Among studies integrating computer vision and natural language processing, image captioning aims to generate a single sentence
from a given image. Due to the limited length of a single
sentence expressed in a natural way, it is hard to describe
rich details depicted by an image. To address this problem,
Krause et al (Krause et al. 2017) compile a dataset containing thousands of images and their corresponding paragraphs
in 5 to 8 descriptive sentences. This is the only dataset designed for image paragraph captioning to the best of our
knowledge, which aims to generate multiple sentences as an
integrated description of an image.
Since image paragraph captioning is extended from image captioning, a straight-forward extension for image paragraph captioning is to generate sentences after sentences to
form a paragraph. However, image captioning approaches
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3136

