The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Embracing Domain Differences in Fake News: Cross-domain Fake News Detection
using Multi-modal Data
Amila Silva, Ling Luo, Shanika Karunasekera, Christopher Leckie
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Victoria, Australia
{amila.silva@student., ling.luo@, karus@, caleckie@}unimelb.edu.au
Abstract

it is not practical to identify fake news using manual fact
checking. Therefore, automatic detection of fake news has
recently become a significant problem attracting immense
research effort.

With the rapid evolution of social media, fake news has become a significant social problem, which cannot be addressed
in a timely manner using manual investigation. This has motivated numerous studies on automating fake news detection.
Most studies explore supervised training models with different modalities (e.g., text, images, and propagation networks)
of news records to identify fake news. However, the performance of such techniques generally drops if news records
are coming from different domains (e.g., politics, entertainment), especially for domains that are unseen or rarely-seen
during training. As motivation, we empirically show that
news records from different domains have significantly different word usage and propagation patterns. Furthermore, due
to the sheer volume of unlabelled news records, it is challenging to select news records for manual labelling so that
the domain-coverage of the labelled dataset is maximized.
Hence, this work: (1) proposes a novel framework that jointly
preserves domain-specific and cross-domain knowledge in
news records to detect fake news from different domains;
and (2) introduces an unsupervised technique to select a set
of unlabelled informative news records for manual labelling,
which can be ultimately used to train a fake news detection
model that performs well for many domains while minimizing the labelling cost. Our experiments show that the integration of the proposed fake news model and the selective annotation approach achieves state-of-the-art performance for
cross-domain news datasets, while yielding notable improvements for rarely-appearing domains in news datasets.

Challenges. Nevertheless, most existing fake news detection techniques fail to identify fake news in a real-world
news stream for the following reasons. First, most existing
techniques (Silva et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Shu et al.
2019, 2020b; Ruchansky et al. 2017) are trained and evaluated using datasets (Shu et al. 2020a; Cui et al. 2020) that
are limited to a single domain such as politics, entertainment, healthcare. However, a real news stream typically covers a wide variety of domains. We have empirically found
that existing fake news detection techniques perform poorly
for such a cross-domain news dataset despite yielding good
results for domain-specific news datasets. This observation
may be due to two reasons: (1) domain-specific word usage;
and (2) domain-specific propagation patterns. For example,
Figure 1 adopts two datasets from different domains, PolitiFact for politics and GossipCop for entertainment, which
are two widely used labelled datasets to train fake news
detection models. Fig. 1 shows that there are significant
differences in the frequently used words and propagation
patterns of these two datasets. To address this challenge,
some previous works (Wang et al. 2018; Castelo et al. 2019)
learned models to overlook such domain-specific information and only rely on cross-domain information (e.g., webmarkup and readability features) for fake news detection.
However, domain-specific knowledge could be useful for accurate identification of fake news. As a solution, this work
aims to address how to preserve domain-specific and crossdomain knowledge in news records to detect fake news in
cross-domain news datasets. Second, the studies in (Han
et al. 2020; Janicka et al. 2019) show that most fake news
detection techniques are not good at identifying fake news
records from unseen or rarely-seen domains during training.
As a solution, fake news detection models can be learned using a dataset that covers as many domains as possible. Here
we assume that the fake news detection model requires supervision as supervised techniques are known to be substantially better at identifying fake news compared to the unsupervised methods (Yang et al. 2019a). In such a supervised
learning setting, each training (i.e., labelled) data point has
an associated labelling cost. Thus, the total labelling budget

Introduction
Motivation. Today, social media is considered as one of
the leading and fastest media to seek news information online.Thus, social media platforms provide an ideal environment to spread fake news (i.e., disinformation). Many times
the cost and damage due to fake news are high and early detection to stop spreading such information is of importance.
For example, it has been estimated that at least 800 people
died and 5800 were admitted to hospital as a result of false
information related to the COVID-19 pandemic, e.g., believing alcohol-based cleaning products are a cure for the virus1 .
Due to the high volumes of news generated on a daily basis,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-53755067

557

