The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Designing a Hybrid AI Residency
Felipe Leno Da Silva1 , Silvio Stanzani1 , Jefferson Fialho1 , Jorge Mondadori2 ,
Muriel Mazzetto2 , Felipe Sanches Couto 2 , Raphael Cobe1
1

Advanced Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2), São Paulo, SP, Brazil
2
Senai AI Hub, Londrina, PR, Brazil
{felipe.leno, silvio.stanzani, jefferson.fialho, raphael.cobe}@advancedinstitute.ai
{jorge.mondadori, muriel.mazzetto, felipe.couto}@sistemafiep.org.br
Abstract

often require a practitioner mindset in addition to creativity and scientific knowledge. These soft skills are hard to
acquire other than from experience in practical projects. In
that scenario, a residency program provides both the opportunity to train and to identify talented candidates that can be
hired later if they perform well during the residency.
The current implementation of those programs works well
when the company has a vast pool of candidates with specific STEM background. Furthermore, a well-established
and active AI department is required so that those professionals can assign projects and provide mentorship. Unfortunately, those candidates and professionals are not available for many companies and for many locations with low
STEM-ready talent pool. We argue that the one-on-one mentoring method focused exclusively in projects of interest of a
single company cannot scale and is ineffective for leveraging
all the potential of an AI Residency.
As an educational institution, we believe that an AI Residency is a very effective tool not only to help with the scarceness of AI talent, but also to provide a vocational practitioner
career path for those interested in working with applied AI.
Moreover, we also believe that this program has the ability
to increase the confidence from companies in AI. In some
cases, leading them to invest in in-house R&D AI teams,
fostering the development of the AI ecosystem where the
residency is implemented.
Therefore, we designed a hybrid AI Residency, where a
class of residents without any initial AI expertise is introduced to a set of real local industry demands. Residents
have AI classes, focusing on practical methods, tools, and
methodologies, while simultaneously working on developing proof of concepts tackling industry demands. We named
this program hybrid AI residency because it integrates regular classes with project-based learning driven by industry
needs. We have designed the classes from scratch, recruited
residents, and carried out the program in the cities of Londrina and Curitiba, Brazil, where the first class of 20 residents
graduated in 2020.
In this paper, we describe our residency program, the educational challenges we faced, and the lessons learned after
our first graduated class. We hope that our paper will encourage new groups to replicate our program in new locations,
disseminating AI tools in different communities. We also

The industry demand for AI experts raised to unprecedented
levels in the last years. However, the increasing demand was
not met by the number of skilled professionals in this area.
As an effort to mitigate this problem, many companies create
AI residency programs to provide in-house practical training.
However, we argue that the usual dynamics based on one-onone mentorship in those programs is very hard to scale and insufficient to meet the demand for AI professionals. In this paper, we describe a hybrid AI residency program that connects
educational institutions, partner companies, and prospective
residents. This program is designed to be funded by partner
companies. Residents are exposed to practical projects of industry interest and are instructed on AI techniques and tools.
We describe how we implemented our program, the challenges involved, and the lessons learned after the conclusion
of the first residency class. Our program was developed to
be inclusive and scalable, and resulted in a high employment
rate for our alumni. Furthermore, several partner companies
invested in in-house AI teams after the residency, resulting in
direct benefits for our local AI community.

Introduction
An “AI residency” is a research training program that
teaches promising students (residents) the tools to work on
innovative and challenging AI practical projects.
AI Residencies with internal selection and training
processes have been implemented by several companies
(Google1 , Facebook2 , Microsoft3 , IBM4 , OpenAI5 , etc.) in
order to prepare experts to work on their AI projects.
Companies developed those programs for two main reasons: (1) AI experts are a scarce resource, giving rise to a
fierce competition for hiring top AI talent, and the consequent rise on their compensation; (2) Industry AI projects
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://research.google/careers/ai-residency/
2
https://research.fb.com/programs/facebook-ai-residencyprogram/
3
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/academicprogram/microsoft-ai-residency-program/
4
https://www.research.ibm.com/artificial-intelligence/careers/
ai-residency/
5
https://openai.com/blog/openai-scholars-spring-2020/

15640

