The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Large Motion Video Super-Resolution with Dual Subnet and Multi-Stage
Communicated Upsampling
Hongying Liu1 , Peng Zhao1 , Zhubo Ruan1 , Fanhua Shang1,2 * , Yuanyuan Liu1
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial
Intelligence, Xidian University; 2 Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen.
{hyliu, fhshang, yyliu}@xidian.edu.cn, pzhao 0@stu.xidian.edu.cn, zboruan@163.com

Abstract

The first deep-learning-based single image super-resolution
(SISR) algorithm is SRCNN (Dong et al. 2015), while the
first deep-learning-based VSR algorithm is Deep-DE (Liao
et al. 2015). Since then, many deep-learning-based VSR algorithms have been proposed, such as VSRnet (Kappeler
et al. 2016), 3DSRNet (Kim et al. 2018), RBPN (Haris,
Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2019) and TDAN (Tian et al.
2020). It may be considered that VSR can be achieved by
using SISR algorithms frame by frame. However, SISR algorithms ignore temporal consistency between frames and
easily brings artifact and jam, leading to worse visual experience. In contrast, VSR methods are usually able to process
such consecutive frames and generate HR video with more
natural details and less artifact.
There are many VSR methods based on motion estimation and motion compensation (MEMC). They rely heavily
on optical flow estimation for consecutive frames, and thus
execute compensation to import temporal information to the
center frame. For example, SOF-VSR (Wang et al. 2018a)
proposed a coarse-to-fine CNN to gradually estimate HR optical flow in three stages. And RBPN (Haris, Shakhnarovich,
and Ukita 2019) presented a back projection module which
is composed of a sequence of consecutive alternate encoders
and decoders after implicit alignment. They work well for
videos consisting of scenes with small motion in a short
time, as the optical flow estimation is accurate under such
ideal scenes. However, in actual multimedia scenes, the motion are always diverse in different amplitudes. Especially
when real-time shooting scenes like extreme sports have
been popular, wearable shooting equipments can be widely
used and often bring about video jitter. The jitter can easily
bring about large motions. In visual tasks, large motion is
always based on the consistency assumption of optical flow
calculation (Gibson 1957). If the target motion changes too
fast relative to the frame rate, this motion can be called large
motion in videos.
Moreover, some VSR methods do not perform explicit
MEMC. They directly input multiple frames for spatiotemporal feature extraction, fusion and super-resolution,
thus achieve implicit MEMC. For example, 3DSRNet (Kim
et al. 2018) and FSTRN (Li et al. 2019) utilize 3D convolution (C3D) (Ji et al. 2012) to extract spatio-temporal
correlation on the spatio-temporal domain. However, high
computational complexity of C3D limits them to develop

Video super-resolution (VSR) aims at restoring a video in
low-resolution (LR) and improving it to higher-resolution
(HR). Due to the characteristics of video tasks, it is very
important that motion information among frames should be
well concerned, summarized and utilized for guidance in a
VSR algorithm. Especially, when a video contains large motion, conventional methods easily bring incoherent results or
artifacts. In this paper, we propose a novel deep neural network with Dual Subnet and Multi-stage Communicated Upsampling (DSMC) for super-resolution of videos with large
motion. We design a new module named U-shaped residual
dense network with 3D convolution (U3D-RDN) for fine implicit motion estimation and motion compensation (MEMC)
as well as coarse spatial feature extraction. And we present a
new Multi-Stage Communicated Upsampling (MSCU) module to make full use of the intermediate results of upsampling
for guiding the VSR. Moreover, a novel dual subnet is devised to aid the training of our DSMC, whose dual loss helps
to reduce the solution space as well as enhance the generalization ability. Our experimental results confirm that our method
achieves superior performance on videos with large motion
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims at recovering the corresponding high-resolution (HR) counterpart from a given
low-resolution (LR) video (Liu et al. 2020b). As an important computer vision task, it is a classic ill-posed problem. In
recent years, due to the emergence of 5G technology and the
popularity of high-definition (HD) and ultra high-definition
(UHD) devices (Liu et al. 2020a), the VSR technology has
attracted more attention from researchers and has become
one of the research spotlights. Traditional super-resolution
(SR) methods mainly include interpolation, statistical methods and sparse representation methods.
In recent years, with the rapid development of deep neural networks, deep-learning-based VSR has attracted more
attention among researchers. Due to the powerful data fitting and feature extraction ability, such algorithms are generally superior to traditional super-resolution techniques.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2127

