The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HateXplain: A Benchmark Dataset for Explainable Hate Speech Detection
Binny Mathew1 * , Punyajoy Saha1 * , Seid Muhie Yimam2
Chris Biemann2 , Pawan Goyal1 , Animesh Mukherjee1
1

Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
2
Universität Hamburg, Germany
binnymathew@iitkgp.ac.in, punyajoys@iitkgp.ac.in, yimam@informatik.uni-hamburg.de
biemann@informatik.uni-hamburg.de, pawang@cse.iitkgp.ac.in, animeshm@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
Abstract

2018). The models may classify comments that refer to certain commonly-attacked identities (e.g., gay, black, muslim)
as toxic without the comment having any intention of being toxic (Dixon et al. 2018; Borkan et al. 2019). A large
prior on certain trigger vocabulary leads to biased predictions that may discriminate against particular groups who
are already the target of such abuse (Sap et al. 2019; Davidson, Bhattacharya, and Weber 2019). Another issue with the
current methods is the lack of explanation about the decisions made. With hate speech detection models becoming
increasingly complex, it is getting difficult to explain their
decisions (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). Laws
such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR (Council 2016)) in Europe have recently established a “right to explanation”. This calls for a shift in perspective from performance based models to interpretable models. In our work,
we approach model explainability by learning the target
classification and the reasons for the human decision jointly,
and also to their mutual improvement.
We therefore have compiled a dataset that covers multiple aspects of hate speech. We collect posts from Twitter3 and Gab4 , and ask Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
workers to annotate these posts to cover three facets. In addition to classifying each post into hate, offensive, or normal speech, annotators are asked to select the target communities mentioned in the post. Subsequently, the annotators are asked to highlight parts of the text that could justify their classification decision5 . The notion of justification,
here modeled as ‘human attention’, is very broad with many
possible realizations (Lipton 2018; Doshi-Velez 2017). In
this paper, we specifically focus on using rationales, i.e.,
snippets of text from a source text that support a particular
categorization. Such rationales have been used in commonsense explanations (Rajani et al. 2019), e-SNLI (Camburu
et al. 2018) and several other tasks (DeYoung et al. 2020). If
these rationales are good reasons for decisions, then models guided towards these in training could be made more
human-decision-taking-like.
Consider the examples in Table 1. The first row shows

Hate speech is a challenging issue plaguing the online social media. While better models for hate speech detection are
continuously being developed, there is little research on the
bias and interpretability aspects of hate speech. In this paper,
we introduce HateXplain, the first benchmark hate speech
dataset covering multiple aspects of the issue. Each post in
our dataset is annotated from three different perspectives: the
basic, commonly used 3-class classification (i.e., hate, offensive or normal), the target community (i.e., the community
that has been the victim of hate speech/offensive speech in
the post), and the rationales, i.e., the portions of the post on
which their labelling decision (as hate, offensive or normal)
is based. We utilize existing state-of-the-art models and observe that even models that perform very well in classification
do not score high on explainability metrics like model plausibility and faithfulness. We also observe that models, which
utilize the human rationales for training, perform better in reducing unintended bias towards target communities. We have
made our code and dataset public1 for other researchers2 .

Introduction
The increase in online hate speech is a major cultural
threat, as it already resulted in crime against minorities, see
e.g. (Williams et al. 2020). To tackle this issue, there has
been a rising interest in hate speech detection to expose
and regulate this phenomenon. Several hate speech datasets
(Ousidhoum et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2019b; de Gibert et al.
2018; Sanguinetti et al. 2018), models (Zhang, Robinson,
and Tepper 2018; Mishra et al. 2018; Qian et al. 2018b,a),
and shared tasks (Basile et al. 2019; Bosco et al. 2018) have
been made available in the recent years by the community,
towards the development of automatic hate speech detection.
While many models have claimed to achieve state-ofthe-art performance on some datasets, they fail to generalize (Arango, Pérez, and Poblete 2019; Gröndahl et al.
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/punyajoy/HateXplain
2
Disclaimer: The article contains material that many will find
offensive or hateful; however this cannot be avoided owing to the
nature of the work.

3

https://twitter.com/
https://gab.com/
5
In case the post is classified as normal, the annotators does not
need to highlight any span.
4

14867

