The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

StatEcoNet: Statistical Ecology Neural Networks
for Species Distribution Modeling
Eugene Seo, 1 Rebecca A. Hutchinson, 1,2 Xiao Fu, 1 Chelsea Li, 1
Tyler A. Hallman, 4 John Kilbride, 3 W. Douglas Robinson 2
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
2
Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
3
College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
4
Monitoring Department, Swiss Ornithological Institute, Sempach, Switzerland
{seoe,rah,xiao.fu,lichel}@oregonstate.edu, tyler.hallman@vogelwarte.ch, {kilbridj,douglas.robinson}@oregonstate.edu
Abstract

are employed to investigate how environmental features define species habitat and predict where species can persist
successfully (Araújo and Peterson 2012).
At first glance, species distribution modeling may appear
to be a straightforward machine learning (ML) problem, but
the complex nature of ecological systems and the noiseprone data acquisition process entail unique challenges that
are not addressed in conventional ML frameworks. First,
data on species distributions are persistently plagued by imperfect detection, in which some individuals of the species
are missing from the data because of poor observation conditions, species behavioral traits, and/or limited survey efforts. Second, species respond to their environment in complex ways, so models of this process must handle many input
variables and represent nonlinear relationships. Third, models must be as interpretable as possible in order to translate
their conclusions to meaningful scientific insights and effective management policies. Finally, SDMs are often built
from smaller datasets than some other ML domains, with
hundreds rather than thousands or millions of examples.
Classic approaches like regression models fail to capture systematic imperfect detection (Guillera-Arroita et al.
2014; Lahoz-Monfort, Guillera-Arroita, and Wintle 2014).
Instead, a family of latent variable models has been developed in statistical ecology to account for error in the observation process (Royle and Dorazio 2008; MacKenzie et al.
2018). This family originated with occupancy models, in
which the species occupancy (occurrence) at a set of sites
is represented with binary latent variables, and the species
observations depend on occupancy status as well as a detection probability (MacKenzie et al. 2002). In these models,
the latent variables are of great scientific interest. Understanding how the environment determines occupancy may
not only advance ecological research, but also assist policy
decisions—e.g., making conservation policies for threatened
species. Various extensions to this latent variable modeling
framework have been introduced (e.g., with count-valued latent variables (Royle 2004)), but this paper focuses on the
occupancy model as a representative example. These models are often used within a classic statistical paradigm, where
the probabilities of occupancy and detection are linked to
features with regression functions, and models are selected

This paper focuses on a core task in computational sustainability and statistical ecology: species distribution modeling
(SDM). In SDM, the occurrence pattern of a species on a
landscape is predicted by environmental features based on
observations at a set of locations. At first, SDM may appear to be a binary classification problem, and one might
be inclined to employ classic tools (e.g., logistic regression,
support vector machines, neural networks) to tackle it. However, wildlife surveys introduce structured noise (especially
under-counting) in the species observations. If unaccounted
for, these observation errors systematically bias SDMs. To
address the unique challenges of SDM, this paper proposes
a framework called StatEcoNet. Specifically, this work
employs a graphical generative model in statistical ecology to serve as the skeleton of the proposed computational
framework and carefully integrates neural networks under the
framework. The advantages of StatEcoNet over related
approaches are demonstrated on simulated datasets as well as
bird species data. Since SDMs are critical tools for ecological science and natural resource management, StatEcoNet
may offer boosted computational and analytical powers to a
wide range of applications that have significant social impacts, e.g., the study and conservation of threatened species.

Introduction
Estimating species distributions across a landscape is a fundamental problem in ecology. Species distribution models
(SDMs) learn the relationship between the species of interest and a set of environmental features (e.g., elevation,
land cover) from data collected at points on the landscape
(Elith and Leathwick 2009; Franklin and Miller 2010). The
species data may come from historical records (Elith et al.
2006), professional surveys (Betts et al. 2008), or volunteers in community science projects 1 (Fink et al. 2010).
The environmental data may be collected in situ or linked
to the observation points post hoc (e.g., via remote sensing (Shirley et al. 2013)). SDMs are critical tools for both
scientific inquiry and natural resource management, as they
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Also referred to as “citizen science” projects/data.

513

