The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Hybrid Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Method
Chao Zhang,1 Zhijian Li,1 Zebang Shen,2 Jiahao Xie,1 Hui Qian1 *
1

Zhejiang University
University of Pennsylvania
{zczju,lizhijian}@zju.edu.cn, zebang@seas.upenn.edu, {xiejh,qianhui}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

correction step (Hastings 1970) is eschewed. It has been
proved that by utilizing the full gradient of the potential
function f (x), the distributions of the iterates are driven towards the target distribution p∗x efficiently (Roberts, Tweedie
et al. 1996; Durmus and Moulines 2016a,b; Cheng et al.
2017). Nowadays, the stochastic gradient technique, i.e. constructing a stochastic approximation from a mini-batch of
samples to replace the full gradient, has been widely adopted
to reduce the per-iteration computational cost, especially in
large-scale and complex Bayesian learning tasks (Welling
and Teh 2011; Ma, Chen, and Fox 2015; Chen, Fox, and
Guestrin 2014; Ahn, Shahbaba, and Welling 2014; Baker
et al. 2017; Brosse, Durmus, and Moulines 2018). In this
paper, we refer to MCMC methods with stochastic gradients
as SG-MCMC methods.
However, the mean square error of the stochastic gradient approximation has to be controlled at a desirable level to
ensure non-asymptotic convergence to the target distribution
(Chen, Ding, and Carin 2015). To achieve this goal, a common approach is to enlarge the per-iteration mini-batch size.
Recent analyses reveal that for tasks with nonconvex potential functions (e.g., Bayesian Neural Networks and Gaussian
Mixture Models), the required mini-batch size is on the order of Õ(−4 exp(O(d))), where  denotes the target accuracy and d is the dimensionality (Raginsky, Rakhlin, and
Telgarsky 2017; Gao, Gurbuzbalaban, and Zhu 2018; Zou,
Xu, and Gu 2019b). This sample size may be gigantic even
for a moderate target accuracy and dimensionality, which
would result in a high overall sample complexity.
Inspired by the recent advances in the stochastic gradient descent methods, another class of SG-MCMC methods
instead resort to the variance reduction techniques to control the mean square error (Zou, Xu, and Gu 2018a; Li et al.
2019; Zou, Xu, and Gu 2019b; Zhang et al. 2020). In these
methods, historical gradient information is reused to reduce
the per-iteration mini-batch size. Among them, the SRVRHMC method (Zou, Xu, and Gu 2019b) employs a recursively updated biased semi-stochastic gradient estimator and
achieves the best overall stochastic sample complexity for
nonconvex potentials. Though the amortized mini-batch size
can be small, SRVR-HMC still needs to periodically draw a
large mini-batch of samples (Õ(−4 exp(O(d))) to trade off
between bias and variance in the mean square error. This
renders a nested-loop algorithm with four hyperparameters

Recent theoretical analyses reveal that existing Stochastic
Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) methods
need large mini-batches of samples (exponentially dependent
on the dimension) to reduce the mean square error of gradient
estimates and ensure non-asymptotic convergence guarantees
when the target distribution has a nonconvex potential function. In this paper, we propose a novel SG-MCMC algorithm,
called Hybrid Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HSG-HMC) method, which needs merely one sample per
iteration and possesses a simple structure with only one hyperparameter. Such improvement leverages a hybrid stochastic gradient estimator that exploits historical stochastic gradient information to control the mean square error. Theoretical
analyses show that our method obtains the best-known overall sample complexity to achieve epsilon-accuracy in terms
of the 2-Wasserstein distance for sampling from distributions with nonconvex potential functions. Empirical studies
on both simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate the
advantage of our method.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of sampling from a
probability measure on Rd , which admits a density p∗x with
respect to the Lebesgue measure on all x ∈ Rd by
p∗x ∝ exp(−f (x)).

(1)

d

Here, f (x) : R → R is a smooth potential function. This
problem lies at the core of many Bayesian learning tasks
in the artificial intelligence literature (Gelman et al. 2014;
Andrieu et al. 2003; Ahn et al. 2015; Blundell et al. 2015;
Jaakkola and Jordan 1997). Dynamics based Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, such as Langevin Monte
Carlo (LMC) method (Roberts and Stramer 2002), Underdamped Langevin MCMC (UL-MCMC) method (Kloeden
and Platen 1992), and modified UL-MCMC method (Cheng
et al. 2017), have been widely adopted to solve this problem,
due to their simplicity and effectiveness. Generally, these
methods generate iterates by discretizing continuous dynamics whose stationary distribution (or its marginal) is the target distribution p∗x , and the expensive Metropolis Hastings
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10842

