The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dependency Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability:
A Logical Formalism for NEXPTIME Decision Problems with Uncertainty
Nian-Ze Lee,1 Jie-Hong R. Jiang1, 2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd., Taipei 10617, Taiwan
{d04943019, jhjiang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

to their simplicity and generality, various satisfiability formulations are under active investigation.
Among the quantified decision procedures, QBF and
SSAT are closely related. While SSAT extends QBF to
allow random quantifiers to model uncertainty, they are
both PSPACE-complete (Stockmeyer and Meyer 1973). A
number of SSAT solvers have been developed and applied
in probabilistic planning, formal verification of probabilistic design, partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP), and analysis of software security. For example,
solver MAXPLAN (Majercik and Littman 1998) encodes a
conformant planning problem as an exist-random quantified SSAT formula; solver ZANDER (Majercik and Littman
2003) deals with partially observable probabilistic planning
by formulating the problem as a general SSAT formula;
solver DC-SSAT (Majercik and Boots 2005) relies on a
divide-and-conquer approach to speedup the solving of a
general SSAT formula. Solvers ressat and erssat (Lee,
Wang, and Jiang 2017, 2018) are developed for randomexist and exist-random quantified SSAT formulas respectively, and applied to the formal verification of probabilistic
design (Lee and Jiang 2018). POMDP has also been studied under the formalism of SSAT (Majercik and Littman
2003; Salmon and Poupart 2019). Recently, bi-directional
polynomial-time reductions between SSAT and POMDP are
established (Salmon and Poupart 2019). The quantitative information flow analysis for software security is also investigated as an exist-random quantified SSAT formula (Fremont, Rabe, and Seshia 2017).
In view of the close relation between QBF and SSAT,
we raise the question what would be the formalism that
extends DQBF to the stochastic domain. We formalize the
dependency SSAT (DSSAT) as the answer to the question.
We prove that DSSAT has the same NEXPTIME-complete
complexity as DQBF (Peterson, Reif, and Azhar 2001), and
therefore it can succinctly encode decision problems with
uncertainty in the NEXPTIME complexity class.
To highlight the benefits of DSSAT over DQBF, we note
that DSSAT intrinsically represents an optimization problem
(the answer is the maximum satisfying probability) while
DQBF is a decision problem (the answer is either true or
false). The optimization nature of DSSAT potentially allows
broader applications of the formalism. Moreover, DSSAT is
often preferable to DQBF in expressing problems involving

Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability (SSAT) is a logical formalism to model decision problems with uncertainty, such as
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) for
verification of probabilistic systems. SSAT, however, is limited by its descriptive power within the PSPACE complexity class. More complex problems, such as the NEXPTIMEcomplete Decentralized POMDP (Dec-POMDP), cannot be
succinctly encoded with SSAT. To provide a logical formalism of such problems, we extend the Dependency Quantified
Boolean Formula (DQBF), a representative problem in the
NEXPTIME-complete class, to its stochastic variant, named
Dependency SSAT (DSSAT), and show that DSSAT is also
NEXPTIME-complete. We demonstrate the potential applications of DSSAT to circuit synthesis of probabilistic and
approximate design. Furthermore, to study the descriptive
power of DSSAT, we establish a polynomial-time reduction
from Dec-POMDP to DSSAT. With the theoretical foundations paved in this work, we hope to encourage the development of DSSAT solvers for potential broad applications.

1

Introduction

Satisfiability (SAT) solvers (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren
2009) have been successfully applied to numerous research
fields including artificial intelligence (Nilsson 2014; Russell
and Norvig 2016), electronic design automation (MarquesSilva and Sakallah 2000; Wang, Chang, and Cheng 2009),
software verification (Bérard et al. 2013; Jhala and Majumdar 2009), etc. The tremendous benefits have encouraged the
development of more advanced decision procedures for satisfiability with respect to more complex logics beyond pure
propositional. For example, solvers of the satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) (De Moura and Bjørner 2011; Barrett
and Tinelli 2018) accommodate first order logic fragments;
quantified Boolean formula (QBF) (Narizzano, Pulina, and
Tacchella 2006; Büning and Bubeck 2009) allows both existential and universal quantifiers; stochastic Boolean satisfiabilty (SSAT) (Littman, Majercik, and Pitassi 2001; Majercik
2009) models uncertainty with random quantification; and
dependency QBF (DQBF) (Balabanov, Chiang, and Jiang
2014; Scholl and Wimmer 2018) equips Henkin quantifiers
to describe multi-player games with partial information. Due
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3877

