The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parameterized Complexity of Logic-Based Argumentation in Schaefer’s
Framework
Yasir Mahmood,1 Arne Meier,1 Johannes Schmidt 2
2

1
Leibniz Universität Hannover, Institut für Theoretische Informatik, Germany
Jönköping University, Department of Computer Science and Informatics, School of Engineering, Sweden
{mahmood,meier}@thi.uni-hannover.de, johannes.schmidt@ju.se

inclusion-minimal consistent sets of formulas Φ (the support) that entail a claim α, modelled through a formula (in
the positive case one calls (Φ, α) an argument). In this paper, we focus on the latter formalism and, specifically, study
three decision problems. The first, ARG, asks, given a set of
formulas ∆ (the knowledge-base) and a formula α, whether
there exists a subset Φ ⊆ ∆ such that (Φ, α) is an argument
in ∆. The two further problems of interest are ARG-Check
(is a given set a support for a given claim), and ARG-Rel
(ARG plus requiring an additionally given formula to be
contained in the support, too).

Abstract
Logic-based argumentation is a well-established formalism
modeling nonmonotonic reasoning. It has been playing a major role in AI for decades, now. Informally, a set of formulas is the support for a given claim if it is consistent, subsetminimal, and implies the claim. In such a case, the pair of
the support and the claim together is called an argument. In
this paper, we study the propositional variants of the following three computational tasks studied in argumentation: ARG
(exists a support for a given claim with respect to a given
set of formulas), ARG-Check (is a given set a support for a
given claim), and ARG-Rel (similarly as ARG plus requiring
an additionally given formula to be contained in the support).
ARG-Check is complete for the complexity class DP, and the
other two problems are known to be complete for the second
level of the polynomial hierarchy and, accordingly, are highly
intractable. Analyzing the reason for this intractability, we
perform a two-dimensional classification: first, we consider
all possible propositional fragments of the problem within
Schaefer’s framework, and then study different parameterizations for each of the fragment. We identify a list of reasonable
structural parameters (size of the claim, support, knowledgebase) that are connected to the aforementioned decision problems. Eventually, we thoroughly draw a fine border of parameterized intractability for each of the problems showing
where the problems are fixed-parameter tractable and when
this exactly stops. Surprisingly, several cases are of very high
intractability (paraNP and beyond).

Example 1 (Besnard and Hunter (2001)). Consider the following two arguments. (A1) Support: Donald is a public person, so we can publicize details about his private life. Claim:
We can publicize that Donald plays golf. (A2) Support: Donald just resigned from politics; as a result, he is no longer a
public person. Claim: Donald is no longer a public person.
Formalizing these arguments would yield A1 : Φ1 =
{xpd → xdg , xpd }, α1 = {xdg }, A2 : Φ2 = {xrd →
¬xpd , xrd }, α2 = {¬xpd }, where xpd , “Donald is a public person”, xdg ,“Donald plays golf”, xrd ,“Donald
resigned from politics”. Each argument is supporting its
claim, yet together they are conflicting, as A2 attacks A1 .
It is rather computationally involved to compute the support of an argument, as ARG was shown to be ΣP
2 -complete
by Parsons et al. (2003). Yet, there have been made efforts to improve the understanding of this high intractability by Creignou et al. (2014; 2011) in two settings: Schaefer’s (1978) as well as Post’s (1941) framework. Clearly,
such research aims for drawing the fine intractability frontier of computationally involved problems to show for what
restrictions there still is hope to reach algorithms running for
practical applications. Both approaches mainly focus on restrictions on the logical part of the problem language, that is,
restricting the allowed connectives or available constraints.
In this paper, Schaefer’s approach is our focus, that is, the
formulas we study are propositional formulas in conjunctive
normalform (CNF) whose clauses are formed depending on
a fixed set of relations Γ (the so-called constraint language,
short CL). In this setting, Schaefer’s framework (1978) captures well-known classes of CNF-formulas (e.g., Horn, dualHorn, or Krom). Accordingly, one can see classifications in
such a setting as a one-dimensional approach (the dimension

Introduction
Argumentation is a nonmonotonic formalism in artificial intelligence around which an active research community has
evolved (Atkinson et al. 2017; Amgoud and Prade 2009;
Rago, Cocarascu, and Toni 2018; Baroni et al. 2018). Essentially, there exist two branches of argumentation: the
abstract (Dung 1995) and the logic-based (Besnard and
Hunter 2001, 2008; Chesñevar, Maguitman, and Loui 2000;
Prakken and Vreeswijk 2002) approach. The abstract setting
mainly focusses on formalizing the argumentative structure
in a graph-theoretic way. Arguments are nodes in a directed
graph and the ‘attack-relation’ draws which argument eliminates which other. In the logic-based method, one looks for
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6426

