The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combinatorial Pure Exploration with Full-Bandit or
Partial Linear Feedback
Yihan Du,1∗ Yuko Kuroki,2∗ Wei Chen3
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, 2 The University of Tokyo, RIKEN, 3 Microsoft Research
duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ykuroki@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, weic@microsoft.com

Abstract

2006; Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos 2010; Chen and Li 2015;
Kaufmann, Cappé, and Garivier 2016).
In many application domains, possible actions have a certain combinatorial structure. For example, each action may
be a size-k subset of keywords in online advertisements (Rusmevichientong and Williamson 2006), or an assignment between workers and tasks in crowdsourcing (Lin et al. 2014),
or a spanning tree in communication networks (Huang, Liu,
and Ding 2008). To deal with such a combinaotrial action
space, the model of combinatorial pure exploration of multiarmed bandits (CPE-MB) was first proposed by Chen et
al. (2014). In this model, there are d base arms, each of
which is associated with an unknown reward distribution, and
a collection of super arms, each of which is a subset of base
arms. A learner plays a base arm at each step and observes
its random reward, with the goal of identifying the best super arm that maximizes the sum of expected rewards at the
end of exploration. CPE-MB generalizes the classical BAI
problem (Kalyanakrishnan and Stone 2010; Kalyanakrishnan
et al. 2012; Bubeck, Wang, and Viswanathan 2013).
However, many real-world scenarios may not fit into CPEMB. In particular, CPE-MB assumes that the learner can
directly play each base arm and observe its outcome, but this
might not be allowed due to system constraints or privacy
issues. Only a few studies avoid such an assumption. Kuroki
et al. (2020b) studied the combinatorial pure exploration with
full-bandit linear feedback (CPE-BL), in which the learner
pulls a super arm (rather than base arm) and only observes
the sum of rewards from the involved base arms. They designed an efficient algorithm for CPE-BL, but the algorithm
is nonadaptive and its sample complexity heavily depends
on the smallest gap between the best and the other super
arms (denoted by ∆min ). Rejwan and Mansour (2020) also
designed an efficient algorithm with an adaptive SuccessiveAccept-Reject algorithm, but the algorithm only works for
the top-k case of CPE-BL, which we show can be simply
reduced to previous CPE-MB (see Appendix D in the full
version).
Note that CPE-BL can be regarded as an instance of the
best arm identification in linear bandits (BAI-LB), which has
received increasing attention recently (Soare, Lazaric, and
Munos 2014; Tao, Blanco, and Zhou 2018; Fiez et al. 2019).
However, none of the existing algorithms for BAI-LB can
efficiently solve CPE-BL, because their running times have

In this paper, we first study the problem of combinatorial
pure exploration with full-bandit feedback (CPE-BL), where
a learner is given a combinatorial action space X ⊆ {0, 1}d ,
and in each round the learner pulls an action x ∈ X and receives a random reward with expectation x⊤ θ, with θ ∈ Rd
a latent and unknown environment vector. The objective is to
identify the optimal action with the highest expected reward,
using as few samples as possible. For CPE-BL, we design the
first polynomial-time adaptive algorithm, whose sample complexity matches the lower bound (within a logarithmic factor)
for a family of instances and has a light dependence of ∆min
(the smallest gap between the optimal action and sub-optimal
actions). Furthermore, we propose a novel generalization of
CPE-BL with flexible feedback structures, called combinatorial pure exploration with partial linear feedback (CPE-PL),
which encompasses several families of sub-problems including
full-bandit feedback, semi-bandit feedback, partial feedback
and nonlinear reward functions. In CPE-PL, each pull of action x reports a random feedback vector with expectation of
Mx θ, where Mx ∈ Rmx ×d is a transformation matrix for x,
and gains a random (possibly nonlinear) reward related to x.
For CPE-PL, we develop the first polynomial-time algorithm,
which simultaneously addresses limited feedback, general reward function and combinatorial action space (e.g., matroids,
matchings and s-t paths), and provide its sample complexity
analysis. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that our algorithms run orders of magnitude faster than the existing ones,
and our CPE-BL algorithm is robust across different ∆min
settings while our CPE-PL algorithm is the first one returning
correct answers for nonlinear reward functions.

1

Introduction

The problem of best arm identification (BAI) is the pureexploration framework in stochastic multi-armed bandits. In
BAI, at each step a learner chooses an arm and observes its
reward sampled from an unknown distribution, with the goal
of returning the best arm with the highest expected reward
using as few exploration steps as possible. This problem
abstracts a decision making model in the face of uncertainty
with a wide range of applications, and has received much
attentions in the literature (Even-Dar, Mannor, and Mansour
∗

The first two authors have equal contributions.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7262

