The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Extracting Learned Discard and Knocking Strategies from a Gin Rummy
Bot
Benjamin Goldstein, Jean-Pierre Astudillo Guerra, Emily Haigh, Bryan Cruz Ulloa, Jeremy Blum
The Pennsylvania State University
{bjg5493, jpa5180, evh5311, bbc5256, jjb24}@psu.edu
Abstract

on its potential to improve the agent’s score and its potential
to improve the opponent’s score. The agent used the Monte
Carlo Counterfactual Regret (MCCFR) minimization algorithm to approximate equilibrium end-of-game strategies.
There is conflicting and ambiguous advice for discard and
knocking strategies. When determining whether an opponent may be able to use a potential discard, suggested factors
to consider include the card’s rank, discarded cards of the
same rank, and discarded cards in the same suit with nearby
ranks (Brown 2019, Kotsckowski 2020B). However, the relative importance of these factors differs between sources.
Similarly, some sources claim that the player should usually
attempt to end the game as soon as possible (Kotsckowski
2020A). Others stress knocking early in the game and avoiding “weak” knocks later (Brown 2019).
The discard and knocking strategies, learned by the agent,
provide insight into resolving these conflicting strategy tips.
The agent’s learned discard strategy provides the relative
importance of a discard’s rank and the state of cards that
could meld with the discard. MCCFR minimization was
used to approximate equilibrium knocking strategies under
common variations in Gin Rummy rulesets. These knocking
strategies varied significantly between rulesets. This result
suggests that the rule configurations are important to consider when formulating an end-of-game strategy.

Various Gin Rummy strategy guides provide heuristics for
human players to improve their gameplay. Often these heuristics are either conflicting or contain ambiguity that limits
their applicability, especially for discard and end-of-game decisions. This paper describes an approach to analyzing the
machine learning capabilities of a Gin Rummy agent to help
resolve these conflicts and ambiguities. There are three main
decision points in the game: when to draw from the discard
pile, which card to discard from the player's hand, and when
to knock. The agent uses a learning approach to estimate the
expected utility for discards. An analysis of these utility values provides insight into resolving ambiguities in tips for discard decisions in human play. The agent’s end-of-game, or
knocking, strategy was derived using Monte Carlo Counterfactual regret minimization (MCCFR). This approach was
applied to estimate Nash equilibrium knocking strategies under different rules of the game. The analysis suggests that
conflicts in the end-of-game playing tips are due in part to
different rules used in common Gin Rummy variants.

Introduction
In the past several years, algorithms to find Nash Equilibria
in zero-sum, extensive-form games have been the subject of
extensive research; however, the game of Gin Rummy has
received little attention. Moreover, strategy guides for Gin
Rummy, targeting human players, often contain conflicting
or ambiguous suggestions for gameplay. The process of developing an agent for the EAAI Gin Rummy Competition
(Neller 2019) provides an opportunity to study these strategy tips, and their alignment with equilibrium strategies.
There are three main decision points for a player in the
game of Gin Rummy. In the first decision point, a player
decides whether to draw the face-up card. The strategy used
by our agent is a simple heuristic-based one, similar to a
conservative player, where a face-up card is picked up under
a limited set of favorable circumstances. The discard decision is driven by an approach that classifies each card based

Background
The Game of Gin Rummy
Gin Rummy is part of the Rummy game family, which consists of hundreds of distinct games. Gin Rummy is believed
to have been played publicly for the first time in 1910, when
it was introduced by Elwood Baker (Jacoby 1959).
Gin Rummy is a two-player game, played with a standard
deck of 52 cards; the goal is to be the first player to reach a

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15518

