The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Split then Refine: Stacked Attention-guided ResUNets for
Blind Single Image Visible Watermark Removal
Xiaodong Cun and Chi-Man Pun∗
University of Macau, Macau, China
yb87432@umac.mo, cmpun@umac.mo

Abstract
Digital watermark is a commonly used technique to protect
the copyright of medias. Simultaneously, to increase the robustness of watermark, attacking technique, such as watermark removal, also gets the attention from the community.
Previous watermark removal methods require to gain the watermark location from users or train a multi-task network
to recover the background indiscriminately. However, when
jointly learning, the network performs better on watermark
detection than recovering the texture. Inspired by this observation and to erase the visible watermarks blindly, we propose
a novel two-stage framework with a stacked attention-guided
ResUNets to simulate the process of detection, removal and
refinement. In the first stage, we design a multi-task network
called SplitNet. It learns the basis features for three sub-tasks
altogether while the task-specific features separately use multiple channel attentions. Then, with the predicted mask and
coarser restored image, we design RefineNet to smooth the
watermarked region with a mask-guided spatial attention. Besides network structure, the proposed algorithm also combines multiple perceptual losses for better quality both visually and numerically. We extensively evaluate our algorithm
over four different datasets under various settings and the experiments show that our approach outperforms other state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin.

Figure 1: We propose an end-to-end, two-stage method to
remove the visible watermark from a single image without
any prior knowledge or user input. In the first stage, we use
a multi-task attention-guided network to predict the coarser
background (b), the location of watermark (e), and the recovered watermark (g). Then, the second-stage network uses
(b) and (e) as input and learns the final results (c).

Since the invention of the watermark, removal techniques (Huang and Wu 2004; Park, Tai, and Kweon 2012;
Pei and Zeng 2006) have been developed to attack them synchronously. In some previous work, detecting the location is
a precondition for removing because it is relatively easier
to match the features with the known mask. After getting
the location, the watermark can be removed by image inpainting (Huang and Wu 2004) or features matching (Park,
Tai, and Kweon 2012; Pei and Zeng 2006). On the other
hand, since the single image-based watermark removal is
difficult, multiple images with the same watermarks (Dekel
et al. 2017; Gandelsman, Shocher, and Irani 2019) supply a
strong prior knowledge for removing. However, erasing the
watermark interactively and using multiple images restrict
the application range of previous methods. Recently, Hertz
et al. (2019) use a multi-task network to remove the watermark with a single image blindly for the first time. Nevertheless, as discussed in the previous work (Liu et al. 2018;
Cun and Pun 2020; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018),
the watermarked regions should be learnt explicitly using the
carefully designed blocks. Thus, we propose a novel method

Introduction
Sharing rich contents such as images, audios or videos on
social media has become a significant trend recently. Thus,
digital watermarks, especially the visible ones, are used to
credit the affiliation of the digital media. In general, the media vendor or the users assume the embedded watermarks
are robust to various attacks, such as JPEG compression and
the removal techniques. Also, the watermarks should have
minimal visual influences on recognizing the original media contents. The robustness of the watermarking systems
is a very important multimedia security issue for protecting
the copyright or ownership of the digital media. Therefore,
many research work have been studying the watermark removal methods to verify and improve the resilience of digital
watermarks.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1184

