The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Nearly Linear-Time, Parallelizable Algorithms for Non-Monotone Submodular
Maximization
Alan Kuhnle
Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida
kuhnle@cs.fsu.edu

Abstract

One aspect of algorithmic efficiency is the query complexity,
the total number of queries to the oracle for f ; since evaluation of f is often expensive, the queries to f often dominate
the runtime of an algorithm. In addition to low query complexity, it is necessary to design algorithms that parallelize
well to take advantage of modern computer architectures. To
quantify parallelization, the adaptivity or adaptive complexity
of an algorithm is the minimum number of rounds such that
in each round the algorithm makes O(poly(n)) independent
queries to the evaluation oracle. The lower the adaptive complexity of an algorithm, the more suited the algorithm is to
parallelization, as within each adaptive round, the queries to
f are independent and may be easily parallelized.
The design of algorithms with nontrivial adaptivity for
SMCC when f is monotone has been recently initiated by
Balkanski and Singer (2018), who also prove a lower bound
of Ω(log n/ log log n) adaptive rounds to achieve a constant
ratio. Recently, much work has focused on the design of adaptive algorithms for SMCC with (not necessarily monotone)
submodular functions, as summarized in Table 1. However,
although many algorithms with low adaptivity have been proposed, most of these algorithms exhibit at least a quadratic
dependence of the query complexity on the size n of the
ground set, for k = Ω(n). For many applications, instances
have grown too large for quadratic query complexity to be
practical. Therefore, it is necessary to design adaptive algorithms that also have nearly linear query complexity. The
only algorithm in prior literature that meets this requirement
is the (0.039 − ε)-approximation algorithm developed by
Fahrbach, Mirrokni, and Zadimoghaddam (2019a), which
has O(n log k) query complexity and O(log n) adaptivity.

We study combinatorial, parallelizable algorithms for maximization of a submodular function, not necessarily monotone,
with respect to a cardinality constraint k. We improve the
best approximation factor achieved by an algorithm that has
optimal adaptivity and query complexity, up to logarithmic
factors in the size of the ground set, from 0.039 to nearly 0.193.
Heuristic versions of our algorithms are empirically validated
to use a low number of adaptive rounds and total queries while
obtaining solutions with high objective value in comparison
with state-of-the-art approximation algorithms, including continuous algorithms that use the multilinear extension.

1

Introduction

A nonnegative set function f : 2N → R+ , defined on all
subsets of a ground set N of size n, is submodular if for all
A, B ⊆ N , f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) + f (A ∩ B). Submodular set functions naturally arise in many learning applications, including data summarization (Simon, Snavely, and
Seitz 2007; Sipos et al. 2012; Tschiatschek et al. 2014; Libbrecht, Bilmes, and Stafford 2017), viral marketing (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Hartline, Mirrokni, and Sundararajan 2008), and recommendation systems (El-Arini and
Guestrin 2011). Some applications yield submodular functions that are not monotone (a set function is monotone if
A ⊆ B implies f (A) ≤ f (B)): for example, image summarization with diversity (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and
Karbasi 2016) or revenue maximization on a social network (Hartline, Mirrokni, and Sundararajan 2008). In this
work, we study the maximization of a (not necessarily monotone) submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint;
that is, given submodular function f and integer k, determine arg max|S|≤k f (S) (SMCC). Access to f is provided
through a value query oracle, which when queried with the
set S returns the value f (S).
As the amount of data in applications has exhibited exponential growth in recent years (e.g. the growth of social networks (Mislove et al. 2008) or genomic data (Libbrecht, Bilmes, and Stafford 2017)), it is necessary to design
algorithms for submodular optimization that can scale to
these large datasets (Badanidiyuru and Vondrák 2014; Mirzasoleiman et al. 2015; Kuhnle 2019; Crawford 2019, 2020).

Contributions In this work, we improve the best approximation factor for nearly linear-time algorithms that are
highly parallelizable to 0.193 − ε. Specifically, we propose two algorithms: the (1/6 − ε)-approximation algorithm A DAPTIVE S IMPLE T HRESHOLD (AST) with adaptivity O(log n) and query complexity O(n log k); and the
(0.193 − ε)-approximation algorithm A DAPTIVE T HRESH 2
OLD G REEDY (ATG) with adaptivity O(log n) and query
complexity O(n log k).
Our algorithm AST uses a novel double-thresholding procedure to obtain its ratio of 1/6 − ε. Our second algorithm
ATG is a low-adaptivity modification of the algorithm of

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8200

