The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Objective Submodular Maximization
by Regret Ratio Minimization with Theoretical Guarantee
Chao Feng,1,2 Chao Qian1
1

2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
chaofeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qianc@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Previous works mainly considered one single submodular objective function, while there can be multiple ones
in several applications. For example, the variable selection
problem under parameter uncertainty (Krause et al. 2008)
tries to find a subset of observed variables which simultaneously maximizes information gains (which are submodular)
for all possible parameter values; the document summarization task (Lin and Bilmes 2011) is modeled by maximizing
two submodular objective functions, i.e., coverage and diversity; multi-objective weighted Max-Cut (Angel, Bampis,
and Gourvs 2006; Bhangale et al. 2018) is to find a subset of vertices from a graph (where each edge has a weight
vector instead of only a single weight), maximizing the total weight vector of the edges between the selected subset
and its complement, each dimension of which corresponds
to one submodular objective function.
Multi-objective submodular maximization can be formulated as

Submodular maximization has attracted much attention due
to its wide application and attractive property. Previous works
mainly considered one single objective function, while there
can be multiple ones in practice. As the objectives are usually conflicting, there exists a set of Pareto optimal solutions,
attaining different optimal trade-offs among multiple objectives. In this paper, we consider the problem of minimizing the regret ratio in multi-objective submodular maximization, which is to find at most k solutions to approximate the
whole Pareto set as well as possible. We propose a new algorithm RRMS by sampling representative weight vectors
and solving the corresponding weighted sums of objective
functions using some given α-approximation algorithm for
single-objective submodular maximization. We prove that the
regret ratio of the output of RRMS is upper bounded by
√
1
d
1−α+O( d − 1·( k−d
) d−1 ), where d is the number of objectives. This is the first theoretical guarantee for the situation
with more than two objectives. When d = 2, it reaches the
(1 − α + O(1/k))-guarantee of the only existing algorithm
P OLYTOPE. Empirical results on the applications of multiobjective weighted maximum coverage and Max-Cut show
the superior performance of RRMS over P OLYTOPE.

max (f1 (X), f2 (X), . . . , fd (X)) s.t. X ∈ C,

(1)

where C is the feasible solution set, and ∀i : fi (X) is the i-th
submodular objective function to be maximized. As the objective functions can be conflicting, it is impossible to have
one solution (i.e., subset) which is optimal for all objectives,
while there is a set of Pareto optimal solutions, attaining different optimal trade-offs among multiple objectives.
However, it is often impractical to find the whole Pareto
set, whose size can be even exponentially large. A simplified alternative approach is to consider the robust formulation (Krause et al. 2008; Udwani 2018; Anari et al. 2019):

Introduction
Submodular maximization tries to find a subset maximizing a submodular objective function (i.e., an objective function satisfying the natural diminishing returns property) under some constraints. It arises in various real-world applications, such as influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos 2003) and sensor placement (Krause, Singh,
and Guestrin 2008). The problems of maximizing submodular functions are usually NP-hard, and many polynomialtime algorithms with bounded approximation guarantees
have been proposed. For example, for maximizing a monotone submodular function with a cardinality constraint, the
greedy algorithm achieves the optimal polynomial-time approximation guarantee of (1 − 1/e) (Nemhauser, Wolsey,
and Fisher 1978; Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978); for maximizing a non-monotone submodular function, the double greedy algorithm achieves the optimal guarantee of
(1/2) (Buchbinder et al. 2015).

arg max

min

X∈C

i∈{1,2,...,d}

fi (X),

(2)

that is to find a solution maximizing the minimum of all
submodular objectives. Recently, Soma and Yoshida (2017)
considered the formulation of minimizing regret ratio:
arg min max

d
S⊆C,|S|≤k w∈R+

maxX∈C f w (X)−maxX∈S f w (X)
, (3)
maxX∈C f w (X)

where R+ denotes the set of non-negative reals, and
Pd
f w (X) = i=1 wi fi (X) is the linear combination of objective functions w.r.t. the weight vector w. That is, the goal
is to select at most k solutions to approximate the whole
Pareto set as well as possible. In fact, robust submodular

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12302

