The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Augment for Data-Scarce Domain BERT Knowledge Distillation
∗

∗

†

Lingyun Feng1, , Minghui Qiu2, , Yaliang Li2 , Hai-Tao Zheng1, , Ying Shen3,

†

1

Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
3
Sun-Yat Sen University
fly19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {minghui.qmh,yaliang.li}@alibaba-inc.com,
zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

to a small student model while preserving the knowledge
of teacher model. However, for a target domain with scarce
training data, the teacher can hardly pass useful knowledge
to the student, which yields performance degradation for the
student models.
Data augmentation (DA) is a common strategy to deal with
the data scarcity problem, which augments the target data
by generating new data based on the labeled training sets.
Nevertheless, designing an effective DA method for BERT
knowledge distillation has been less explored. Existing augmentation methods for distillation are usually manually designed, such as thesaurus based synonym replacement (Wang
and Yang 2015; Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015), words replacement with paradigmatic relations (Kobayashi 2019) or
predictions of large language model (Jiao et al. 2019; Wu
et al. 2019). Pre-defining such augmentation rules is timeconsuming and hardly can find an optimal way to help knowledge distillation. It remains to be a challenging task to design
an effective strategy to automatically augment useful data for
the data-scarce domain.
In the light of this challenge, we propose a method to
learn to augment data (L2A) for data-scarce domain BERT
knowledge distillation that automates the process of data augmentation. Unlike prevailing data augmentation methods that
pre-define heuristic rules, we automatically augment data
and dynamically refine the augmentation strategy based on
the feedback from the student model. The proposed method
also leverages information from resource-rich domain data to
help augment target data. Specifically, we adopt a reinforced
selector to automate cross-domain data manipulation. The
reinforced selector is a reinforcement learning policy network
that controls the generation of cross-domain data based on
the feedback from the student model. The student learns to
mimic the behavior of the teacher with respect to teacher’s
dark knowledge (i.e., prediction logits) and intermediate hints
based on the augmented data. Inspired by the reward augmented maximum likelihood (Norouzi et al. 2016; Ke et al.
2019), our generator is updated on the samples acquired from
a stationary distribution weighted by the reinforced selector. Such stationary distribution is designed to guarantee that
training samples are surrounding the real data, thus the exploration space of our generator is indeed restricted, leading
to stable training.
Experiments show that our model significantly outper-

Despite pre-trained language models such as BERT have
achieved appealing performance in a wide range of natural
language processing tasks, they are computationally expensive
to be deployed in real-time applications. A typical method
is to adopt knowledge distillation to compress these large
pre-trained models (teacher models) to small student models. However, for a target domain with scarce training data,
the teacher can hardly pass useful knowledge to the student,
which yields performance degradation for the student models. To tackle this problem, we propose a method to learn to
augment for data-scarce domain BERT knowledge distillation,
by learning a cross-domain manipulation scheme that automatically augments the target with the help of resource-rich
source domains. Specifically, the proposed method generates
samples acquired from a stationary distribution near the target
data and adopts a reinforced selector to automatically refine
the augmentation strategy according to the performance of the
student. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines
on four different tasks, and for the data-scarce domains, the
compressed student models even perform better than the original large teacher model, with much fewer parameters (only
∼13.3%) when only a few labeled examples available.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019), XLNet (Yang et al. 2019), and RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019) have demonstrated their extraordinary performance
via fine-tuning on down-streaming natural language processing tasks (Wang et al. 2018; Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018; Xu et al. 2019). However, the large number of
parameters in these models leads to high storage and computational costs, which makes them a burden to be deployed in
resource-constrained application scenarios such as real-time
inference on mobile or edge devices. A typical solution is
to adopt knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015) to reduce their storage and computation cost,
and accelerate the inference time (Sanh et al. 2019; Sun et al.
2019; Jiao et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020). The basic idea of
knowledge distillation is to compress the large BERT model
∗

Equal contributions.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7422

