The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Merging Statistical Feature via Adaptive Gate for Improved Text Classification
Xianming Li, 1† Zongxi Li, 2† * Haoran Xie, 3 Qing Li 4
1

Ant Group, Shanghai, China
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
3
Department of Computing and Decision Sciences, Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
niming.lxm@antgroup.com, zongxili2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, hrxie@ln.edu.hk, csqli@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract

deep learning paradigm has overlooked such primitive features as word frequency and distribution, which are fixed,
intrinsic, and easy-to-retrieve features of a corpus (Yang
and Pedersen 1997; Aizawa 2003). The most representative algorithm utilizing statistical features is still the term
frequency-inverse document frequency (TFIDF), a straightforward information retrieval technique for document modelling. However, because of the bag-of-word nature, TFIDF
is unable to utilize positional information and capture the
fine-grained semantics (Ramos et al. 2003), which makes
it less favourable compared with other representation learning methods in the deep architecture. From our pilot study,
we find that using statistical features (such as term-countof-label to be defined in Section 3.1) as an additional feature
brings forth substantial improvements to various baselines,
in which the word frequency adapts weights of terms via an
attention layer. Unfortunately, earlier research may have underestimated the real power of corpus-level statistic features
in deep learning, and new fusion mechanism is necessary
to incorporate such information. In particular, when designing the fusion mechanism, we must consider two major concerns:

Currently, text classification studies mainly focus on training
classifiers by using textual input only, or enhancing semantic
features by introducing external knowledge (e.g., hand-craft
lexicons and domain knowledge). In contrast, some intrinsic
statistical features of the corpus, like word frequency and distribution over labels, are not well exploited. Compared with
external knowledge, the statistical features are deterministic
and naturally compatible with corresponding tasks. In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Gate Network (AGN) to consolidate semantic representation with statistical features selectively. In particular, AGN encodes statistical features through
a variational component and merges information via a welldesigned valve mechanism. The valve adapts the information
flow into the classifier according to the confidence of semantic features in decision making, which can facilitate training
a robust classifier and can address the overfitting caused by
using statistical features. Extensive experiments on datasets
of various scales show that, by incorporating statistical information, AGN can improve the classification performance of
CNN, RNN, Transformer, and Bert based models effectively.
The experiments also indicate the robustness of AGN against
adversarial attacks of manipulating statistical information.

1

1. The semantic feature and statistical feature are not compatible in scale and dimension;

Introduction

Text classification is playing an essential role in Natural Language Processing (NLP) as one of the fundamental tasks with broad applications. In recent years, CNNbased (Kim 2014; Lai et al. 2015; Conneau et al. 2017;
Johnson and Zhang 2017), RNN-based (Socher et al. 2013;
Graves, Jaitly, and Mohamed 2013; Tang, Qin, and Liu
2015), Transformer-based (Vaswani et al. 2017), and Bertbased (Devlin et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020) deep learning
models have become mainstream approaches which outperform traditional classification methods. To enrich semantic
features, researchers turn to some external knowledge, such
as character, sentiment lexicon, and entity knowledge base,
as complementary information (Post and Bergsma 2013;
Teng, Vo, and Zhang 2016; Chen et al. 2019). These studies
show that introducing proper external knowledge is helpful
to the classification task. However, we notice that the current

2. The new information may not be necessary for all semantic features.
In this paper, we advocate a new framework, Adaptive
Gate Network (AGN)1 , to enhance neural classification by
fusing statistical features elegantly via a gate mechanism.
More concretely, the AGN consists of three components,
a variational encoding network referred to as the V-Net, a
semantic representation projection network referred to as
the S-Net, and an adaptive gate mechanism denoted as the
valve. The V-Net exploits unsupervised autoencoder to learn
a global representation for each statistical feature vector,
where we notice that employing a variational inference can
further improve the model performance compared with a
vanilla autoencoder. The S-Net extracts latent semantic representation from textual input by using one of the most commonly used extractors, i.e., CNN, RNN, Transformer, or
Bert. Furthermore, the S-Net projects semantic features into

* Corresponding author; † Equal contribution.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13288

Code available at https://github.com/4AI/AGN

