The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fitting the Search Space of Weight-sharing NAS
with Graph Convolutional Networks
Xin Chen1 , Lingxi Xie1 , Jun Wu2 , Longhui Wei1 , Yuhui Xu3 , Qi Tian 1
1

Huawei Cloud & AI
Fudan University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chenxin061@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, wujun@fudan.edu.cn,
weilonghui1@huawei.com, yuhuixu@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
2

Abstract

contains the parameters of all architectures (often referred to
as sub-networks) that can appear. With the super-network
being pre-trained, each sampled sub-network can be estimated with reduced costs, so that the overall search process
is largely accelerated, e.g., by 4–5 orders of magnitudes if differentiable search is used (Chen et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020).
One of the most important concerns of weight-sharing
NAS lies in the accuracy of sub-network sampling. In other
words, there is no guarantee if the estimated accuracy of the
sub-networks can reflect the real performance of the corresponding architectures. In particular, given a search space, S,
and two architectures, M1 and M2 , we can either evaluate
them by training them from scratch or train a super-network
and then sample them from it. Then, how often will the relative performance (i.e., whether M1 is better than M2 ) be
consistent under the two evaluation methods? We perform experiments by sampling 8 architectures with similar hardware
complexity from a search space containing 19 cells, each
of which has 6 possibilities. The result is disappointing: the
Kendall-τ coefficient between two rankings is merely 0.2143
(0 being random permutation). With such a low correlation,
it is hard to guarantee that weight-sharing NAS can find a
high-quality architecture in the search space.
To solve this problem, we make an assumption that the
inaccuracy mostly comes from the randomness during training the super-network. We take a single-path training process (Guo et al. 2019; Chu et al. 2019b) as an example: in
each training iteration, only one operator in each cell gets
updated while others remain unchanged. For a candidate architecture being evaluated, its performance will potentially
be high if it is closely related to one of the recently trained
sub-networks. Therefore, for an arbitrary architecture, M,
we formulate the relationship between the real performance,
?
zM
, and the estimated one, zM , into a linear formula1 of
?
zM = a × zM
+ M + b, where a and b are constants and M
is a zero-mean random variable associated to M. The goal is
to alleviate the impact of M , since the remaining part will

Neural architecture search has attracted wide attentions in both
academia and industry. To accelerate it, researchers proposed
weight-sharing methods which first train a super-network to
reuse computation among different operators, from which exponentially many sub-networks can be sampled and efficiently
evaluated. These methods enjoy great advantages in terms of
computational costs, but the sampled sub-networks are not
guaranteed to be estimated precisely unless an individual training process is taken. This paper attributes such inaccuracy to
the inevitable mismatch between assembled network layers,
so that there is a random error term added to each estimation. We alleviate this issue by training a graph convolutional
network to fit the performance of sampled sub-networks so
that the impact of random errors becomes minimal. With this
strategy, we achieve a higher rank correlation coefficient in
the selected set of candidates, which consequently leads to
better performance of the final architecture. In addition, our approach also enjoys the flexibility of being used under different
hardware constraints, since the graph convolutional network
has provided an efficient lookup table of the performance of
architectures in the entire search space.

Neural architecture search (NAS) is an emerging research
field of automated machine learning (AutoML), with the
goal being exploring deep networks that have not been investigated by manual designs. Early NAS approaches (Zoph
and Le 2017; Real et al. 2017) mostly sampled architectures
from a large search space and evaluated them using an individual training-from-scratch process. Despite their ability
in finding powerful architectures, the search process is often
computationally expensive, e.g., hundreds or even thousands
of GPU-days are required even if efficient sampling strategies
were used (Liu et al. 2018; Real et al. 2018).
To alleviate the computational burden, researchers started
to consider reusing computation among differently sampled
architectures (Cai et al. 2018). Going one step forward, an
efficient framework named weight-sharing NAS (Pham et al.
2018; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018; Xie et al. 2020) was
proposed in which the search space is formulated into a
super-network, an over-parameterized architecture which

1

A higher-order function may better fit the data distribution, but
it also increases the risk of over-fitting. More importantly, we found
no cues in NAS that suggests a higher-order relationship between
the true and sampled accuracy, so using a linear assumption is a
relatively safe choice.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7064

