The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpretable Self-Supervised Facial Micro-Expression Learning to
Predict Cognitive State and Neurological Disorders
Arun Das, 1 Jeffrey Mock, 2 Yufei Huang, 1 Edward Golob, 2 Peyman Najafirad 1∗
1

Secure AI and Autonomy Laboratory, University of Texas at San Antonio
Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, University of Texas at San Antonio
{arun.das, jeffrey.mock, yufei.huang, edward.golob, paul.rad}@utsa.edu

2

Abstract
Human behavior is the confluence of output from voluntary and involuntary motor systems. The neural activities that mediate behavior, from individual cells to
distributed networks, are in a state of constant flux. Artificial intelligence (AI) research over the past decade
shows that behavior, in the form of facial muscle activity, can reveal information about fleeting voluntary
and involuntary motor system activity related to emotion, pain, and deception. However, the AI algorithms
often lack an explanation for their decisions, and learning meaningful representations requires large datasets
labeled by a subject-matter expert. Motivated by the
success of using facial muscle movements to classify brain states and the importance of learning from
small amounts of data, we propose an explainable selfsupervised representation-learning paradigm that learns
meaningful temporal facial muscle movement patterns
from limited samples. We validate our methodology by
carrying out comprehensive empirical study to predict
future speech behavior in a real-world dataset of adults
who stutter (AWS). Our explainability study found facial muscle movements around the eyes (p <0.x001)
and lips (p <0.001) differ significantly before producing fluent vs. disfluent speech. Evaluations using
the AWS dataset demonstrates that the proposed selfsupervised approach achieves a minimum of 2.51% accuracy improvement over fully-supervised approaches.

Figure 1: Facial muscle movement dynamics of individuals with speech disorders indicates large variations in upper
and lower muscle groups during speech disfluency. We learn
to distinguish these subtle micro-expressions using our proposed self-supervised explainable algorithm.

The face is a known body region to be rich with both voluntary and involuntary movements. It is evident that specific
combinations of voluntary facial muscle activations could
even induce real emotions (Ekman, Levenson, and Friesen
1983) varying slightly between cultures (Ekman 1992). Facial activity is a treasure-chest of information which aids
psychologists and neuropsychologists to examine and diagnose various diseases (Wu et al. 2014; Bandini et al. 2016).
These facial activities are usually micro-expressions (Oh
et al. 2018) which are subtle involuntary facial expressions
happening briefly (Ekman 2009; Verma et al. 2019) in the
upper and lower facial regions.
The successes in encoding facial muscle patterns as facial
Action Units (AUs) (Ekman and Rosenberg 2005; Friesen
and Ekman 1978) and using AUs to study attention, affect
(Sayette et al. 2002; Hamm et al. 2011; Lints-Martindale
et al. 2007), and pain (Kunz, Meixner, and Lautenbacher

Introduction
Every action is preceded by information flow between specific sensory and motor networks responsible for producing
the desired movement. This information flow resides in distributed neuronal networks that are in a constant state of flux.
Research has shown micro involuntary movements also accompany many desired voluntary movements. To date, most
research on human behavior focuses on the easy to quantify
factors of voluntary movements like reaction times and accuracy while ignoring the information present in the involuntary movements. Involuntary movements have been historically ignored due to the difficulty in identifying, quantifying and interrupting the information present in them.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

818

