The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Split-and-Bridge: Adaptable Class Incremental Learning within a Single Neural
Network
Jong-Yeong Kim, Dong-Wan Choi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Inha University, South Korea
kjy93217@naver.com, dchoi@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

Cross-task
knowledge

Continual learning has been a major problem in the deep
learning community, where the main challenge is how to effectively learn a series of newly arriving tasks without forgetting
the knowledge of previous tasks. Initiated by Learning without Forgetting (LwF), many of the existing works report that
knowledge distillation is effective to preserve the previous
knowledge, and hence they commonly use a soft label for the
old task, namely a knowledge distillation (KD) loss, together
with a class label for the new task, namely a cross entropy
(CE) loss, to form a composite loss for a single neural network.
However, this approach suffers from learning the knowledge
by a CE loss as a KD loss often more strongly influences the
objective function when they are in a competitive situation
within a single network. This could be a critical problem particularly in a class incremental scenario, where the knowledge
across tasks as well as within the new task, both of which can
only be acquired by a CE loss, is essentially learned due to
the existence of a unified classifier. In this paper, we propose
a novel continual learning method, called Split-and-Bridge,
which can successfully address the above problem by partially
splitting a neural network into two partitions for training the
new task separated from the old task and re-connecting them
for learning the knowledge across tasks. In our thorough experimental analysis, our Split-and-Bridge method outperforms the
state-of-the-art competitors in KD-based continual learning.

Intra-old
knowledge

Intra-new
knowledge

Figure 1: Three types of knowledge in CIL

severely be lost during the training process of new classes,
often referred to as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and
Cohen 1989; McClelland, McNaughton, and O’Reilly 1995).
In addition, such a loss of previous knowledge can be even
more aggravated in class incremental learning (CIL) where
a single classifier should be incrementally unified. This is
unlike task incremental learning (TIL) where an inference is
usually made with a task identity, i.e., the prior knowledge of
which task each sample belongs to, for as many classifiers as
tasks that have been trained.
In general, we can think of CIL as the problem of learning three types of knowledge, namely intra-old, intra-new,
and cross-task, as shown in Figure 1. Either of the intra-old
and the intra-new knowledge indicates how to discriminate
classes only within the old task or the new task. On the other
hand, the cross-task knowledge is about distinguishing every class in a particular task from the ones in the other task.
Thus, we need all of the intra-old, intra-new, and cross-task
knowledge for a unified classifier in CIL, but the cross-task
knowledge is not necessary in TIL with a task identity provided at inference time. In this context, the goal of CIL is
(i) to newly learn the intra-new knowledge as well as (ii) to
incrementally update the cross-task knowledge (iii) without
forgetting the previous intra-old knowledge.
As firstly introduced by Learning without Forgetting (LwF)
(Li and Hoiem 2016, 2018), it has been reported that knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) is an
effective strategy to preserve the intra-old knowledge. Also,
the rehearsal technique (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017) is often supplementary used to acquire the
cross-task knowledge as well as to give an additional opportunity for learning the intra-old knowledge. The intra-new

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have performed remarkably well in many practical applications like
image or voice recognition (He et al. 2016),(Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), object detection (He et al. 2020),
and language translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
A typical DNN learns the entire data for a fixed number of
target tasks at once. However, in real-life applications encountering a dynamic stream of samples such as autonomous
robots and unmanned vehicles, it is necessary to continuously
incorporate a series of new tasks into the model being trained.
This problem is known as continual learning (Parisi et al.
2019), which aims to incrementally train a model so that it
can perform well on both previous tasks and new tasks. A
major difficulty of continual learning in DNNs lies in the
fact that the knowledge previously learned for old classes can
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8137

