The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual-Octave Convolution for Accelerated Parallel MR Image Reconstruction
Chun-Mei Feng1 , Zhanyuan Yang3 , Geng Chen4 , Yong Xu12 * , Ling Shao4
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
strawberry.feng0304@gmail.com
yongxu@ymail.com
Abstract

Magnetic resonance (MR) image acquisition is an inherently
prolonged process, whose acceleration by obtaining multiple
undersampled images simultaneously through parallel
imaging has always been the subject of research. In this
paper, we propose the Dual-Octave Convolution
(Dual-OctConv), which is capable of learning multi-scale
spatial-frequency features from both real and imaginary
components, for fast parallel MR image reconstruction. By
reformulating the complex operations using octave
convolutions, our model shows a strong ability to capture
richer representations of MR images, while at the same time
greatly reducing the spatial redundancy. More specifically,
the input feature maps and convolutional kernels are first
split into two components (i.e., real and imaginary), which
are then divided into four groups according to their spatial
frequencies. Then, our Dual-OctConv conducts intra-group
information updating and inter-group information exchange
to aggregate the contextual information across different
groups. Our framework provides two appealing benefits: (i)
it encourages interactions between real and imaginary
components at various spatial frequencies to achieve richer
representational capacity, and (ii) it enlarges the receptive
field by learning multiple spatial-frequency features of both
the real and imaginary components. We evaluate the
performance of the proposed model on the acceleration of
multi-coil MR image reconstruction. Extensive experiments
are conducted on an in vivo knee dataset under different
undersampling patterns and acceleration factors. The
experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our
model in accelerated parallel MR image reconstruction. Our
code is available at: github.com/chunmeifeng/Dual-OctConv.

Figure 1: Previous methods utilize vanilla convolutions (a)
to process the real- and imaginary-valued parts of an MR
image independently or complex convolutions (b) to jointly
deal with the two parts. In contrast, we propose DualOctConv, which is a generalization of complex convolutions,
to process complex-valued inputs in a multi-frequency space
for more effective feature representations.

image reconstruction, which is typically achieved by reconstructing the desired full images from undersampled measured data (Aggarwal, Mani, and Jacob 2018).
Parallel MR imaging is considered as one of the
most important achievements in accelerated MR imaging (Knoll et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017). Most studies (e.g.,
SENSE (Pruessmann et al. 1999), GRAPPA (Griswold et al.
2002), SPIRiT (Lustig and Pauly 2010)) take advantage of
spatial sensitivity and gradient coding to reduce the amount
of data required for reconstruction, thereby shortening the
imaging time. Moreover, compressed sensing (CS) is an important technique for fast MR image reconstruction (Feng
et al. 2019), which recovers the desired signal from k-space
data sampled below the Nyquist rate. Typical CS-based approaches adopt a sparsity prior (Liu et al. 2019), low-rank
sparse sampling (He et al. 2016; Haldar and Zhuo 2016), or
manifold learning (Nakarmi et al. 2017) for reconstruction.
More recently, with the renaissance of deep neural
networks, deep learning techniques (Zhou et al. 2021;
Feng et al. 2021), especially convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), have been widely used for parallel MR imaging (Ramani and Fessler 2010; Haldar and Zhuo 2016).

Introduction
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging has become increasingly
popular in radiology and medicine over the past decade,
thanks to its advantages of being non-radiative, having a
high spatial-resolution, and providing superior soft tissue
contrast (Sun et al. 2018). However, a major limitation of
MR imaging is that it requires a much longer acquisition
time than other imaging techniques, e.g., computed tomography (CT), X-Ray, and ultrasound (Wang et al. 2020). Recently, great efforts have been devoted to accelerated MR
* Corresponding Author: Yong Xu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

116

