The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Reusable Network Components by Learning Compatible Representations
Michael Gygli, Jasper Uijlings, Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research
gyglim@google.com, jrru@google.com, vittoferrari@google.com

Abstract

classify animals, localize cars, segment roads, or estimate human body poses. The compatibility of the components would
make it easy to mix and match them into a highly performing
model for the task at hand. Besides domain adaptation and
transfer learning, this would also enable training a single classifier which can be deployed on various devices, each with
its own hardware-specific backbone network. We make a first
step in the direction of reusable components by devising a
training procedure to make the feature representations learnt
on different tasks become compatible, without any post-hoc
fine-tuning. On the long term, we envisage a future where
the practice of building computer vision models will mature
into a state similar to the car manufacturing or building construction industries: with a large pool of high-quality and
functionally well-defined compatible parts that a designer
can conveniently recombine into more complex models tailored to new tasks. The compatibility of components saves
the designer the effort to make them work together in a new
combination, so they are free to focus on designing ever more
complex models.

This paper proposes to make a first step towards compatible
and hence reusable network components. Rather than training networks for different tasks independently, we adapt the
training process to produce network components that are compatible across tasks. In particular, we split a network into
two components, a features extractor and a target task head,
and propose various approaches to accomplish compatibility
between them. We systematically analyse these approaches
on the task of image classification on standard datasets. We
demonstrate that we can produce components which are directly compatible without any fine-tuning or compromising
accuracy on the original tasks. Afterwards, we demonstrate
the use of compatible components on three applications: Unsupervised domain adaptation, transferring classifiers across
feature extractors with different architectures, and increasing
the computational efficiency of transfer learning.

1

Introduction

In computer vision we often train a different neural network
for each task, where reuse of previously learnt knowledge typically remains limited to pre-training on ImageNet (ILSVRC12) (Russakovsky et al. 2015). However, human knowledge is
composable and reusable (Tenenbaum et al. 2011). Therefore
it seems prudent to give neural networks these properties too.
Similar to what humans do, computer vision methods should
reuse and transfer from previously acquired knowledge in
the form of previously trained models (Zamir et al. 2018;
Ngiam et al. 2018; Dwivedi and Roig 2019; Achille et al.
2019; Kontogianni et al. 2020). For example, when a model
can recognize cars in daylight, this knowledge should help
recognizing cars by night through domain adaptation (BenDavid et al. 2010; Shu et al. 2018). In addition, when a model
expands its knowledge, e.g. through more training examples
or by learning a new concept, these improvements should be
easily transferable to related tasks.
We believe that a general way to achieve network reusability is to build a large library of compatible components which
are specialized for different tasks. For example, some would
extract features from RGB images, depth images, or optical
flow fields. Other components could use these features to

Our quest for reusable components is related to the question of how similar the representations of independently
trained networks are, when they are trained on similar
data (Kornblith et al. 2019; Lenc and Vedaldi 2019; Li et al.
2016b; Lu et al. 2018; Mehrer, Kriegeskorte, and Kietzmann
2018; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio 2018; Wang et al. 2018).
Instead of such a post-hoc analysis, we make a first step
towards training neural network that are directly compatible, rather than only similar (e.g. in terms of feature correlation (Li et al. 2016b; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio 2018)).
For the purpose of this paper, we define components by splitting a neural network into two parts: a feature extractor and
a target task head. We say two networks are compatible if
we can recombine the feature extractor of one network with
the task head of the other while still producing good predictions, directly without any fine-tuning after recombination
(Fig. 1). When network components become perfectly compatible, they can be interchanged at no loss of accuracy. It is
important to note that compatibility does not require learning
identical mappings, as in feature distillation (Romero et al.
2015). As an extreme case, we could not distill the features
from a network for street view images to a network for underwater images. Instead, by only requiring compatibility as
defined above, each network can learn a feature extractor that

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7620

