The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Meta Learning for Causal Direction
Jean-François Ton,1 Dino Sejdinovic, 1 Kenji Fukumizu 2
1

University of Oxford
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
ton@stats.ox.ac.uk, dino.sejdinovic@stats.ox.ac.uk, fukumizu@ism.ac.jp
2

Abstract

to such a score as BIC (Chickering 2002). These methods
are, however, often unable to determine the correct structure
and can be computationally very expensive. There are also
hybrid methods which mitigate such difficulty (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006).
A new line of research has taken specific interest in the
bivariate case, i.e., the cause-effect inference, where one decides between causal hypotheses “X → Y ” and “Y →
X” (Hoyer et al. 2009; Goudet et al. 2017; Mitrovic, Sejdinovic, and Teh 2018; Wu and Fukumizu 2020). In this
setting, methods that exploit the inherent asymmetries between cause and effect are the most prominent. The data is
analysed under the Functional Causal Model (FCM, (Pearl
2009)) formalism, following respective model assumptions.
Due to the intrinsic asymmetry of the problem, several statistics have been proposed to infer the direction of the causeeffect pairs (Shimizu et al. 2006; Hoyer et al. 2009; Mooij
et al. 2016; Mitrovic, Sejdinovic, and Teh 2018).
Most relevant prior work to this paper is the framework
of Causal Generative Neural Networks (CGNN, (Goudet
et al. 2017)). When applied to cause-effect inference, CGNN
learns a generative model using a neural network for each
direction and compares their fitting to determine the causal
directionality. Many advanced methods including CGNN,
however, assume an access to a large dataset to make use
of strong learning models such as neural networks. This in
turn may lead significantly degraded performances in small
data settings encountered in practical problems (Look and
Riedelbauch 2018). We demonstrate this phenomenon in our
experimental section. In addition, training a model for every
dataset may cause significantly slow inference time by the
computational burden of neural networks.
In this paper, we revisit the problem of cause-effect inference from the viewpoint of empirical learning. Specifically, we are interested in learning from many examples
of cause-effect datasets together with their true causal directions. Our purpose is to develop a method for using this
empirical knowledge on causal directions effectively, when
making cause-effect inference on a new unseen and purely
observational dataset.
Learning-based cause-effect inference has been already
explored in the literature. For instance, Randomized Causation Coefficient (RCC) (Lopez-Paz, Muandet, and Recht
2015) and Neural Causation Coefficient (NCC) (Lopez-

The inaccessibility of controlled randomized trials due to inherent constraints in many fields of science has been a fundamental issue in causal inference. In this paper, we focus
on distinguishing the cause from effect in the bivariate setting under limited observational data. Based on recent developments in meta learning as well as in causal inference, we
introduce a novel generative model that allows distinguishing cause and effect in the small data setting. Using a learnt
task variable that contains distributional information of each
dataset (task), we propose an end-to-end algorithm that makes
use of similar training datasets at test time. We demonstrate
our method on various synthetic as well as real-world data
and show that it is able to maintain high accuracy in detecting
directions across varying dataset sizes.

Introduction
Discovering causal links between variables has been a long
standing problem in many areas of science. Ideally all experiments are in a randomized controlled environment where
each variable can be accounted for separately. However in
most cases, this is impossible due to physical, financial or
ethical reasons. The problem of determining causal direction
becomes even more apparent, when trying to understand the
true generating process of data. Although modern machine
learning models are able to achieve impressive performances
in capturing complex nonlinear relationships among variables, many of them do not take into account causal structure, which might lead to generalization errors when faced
with different data than seen during training.
Hence, in recent years, researchers have focused on inferring causal relations from observational data and have developed many different algorithms. One of the major approaches is constraint-based methods, which analyze the
conditional independence among variables to determine the
causal graph up to a Markov equivalence class under certain
assumptions (Neuberg 2003); in addition to early example
of the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al. 2000), there are also nonlinear methods for capturing independence (Sun et al. 2007;
Sun, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2007; Zhang et al. 2011).
Another category is score-based methods which use
search algorithms to find the best causal graph with respect
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9897

