The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SD-Pose: Semantic Decomposition for Cross-Domain 6D Object Pose Estimation
Zhigang Li,1 Yinlin Hu,2 Mathieu Salzmann,2,3 and Xiangyang Ji 1 *
1

Tsinghua University
2
EPFL
3
ClearSpace SA
lzg15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yinlin.hu@epfl.ch, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

a)

Abstract

most
distilled

The current leading 6D object pose estimation methods rely
heavily on annotated real data, which is highly costly to acquire. To overcome this, many works have proposed to introduce computer-generated synthetic data. However, bridging the gap between the synthetic and real data remains a
severe problem. Images depicting different levels of realism/semantics usually have different transferability between
the synthetic and real domains. Inspired by this observation,
we introduce an approach, SD-Pose, that explicitly decomposes the input image into multi-level semantic representations and then combines the merits of each representation to
bridge the domain gap. Our comprehensive analyses and experiments show that our semantic decomposition strategy can
fully utilize the different domain similarities of different representations, thus allowing us to outperform the state of the
art on modern 6D object pose datasets without accessing any
real data during training.

b) Traditional approach
𝜙!"#
𝜃!"#
ℱ!"#
RGB
Pose
c) Our approach
𝜙$%"$
ℱ$%"$
Edge
𝜙"!&'
𝜙!"#

…

RGB

…

…

least
distilled

Gray

ℱ"!&'

𝜃

Pose

ℱ!"#

Figure 1: a) A single input image can be decomposed into diverse representations, thus constructing a hierarchical representation with different semantic levels. b) Traditional RGBbased pose estimation only uses the raw RGB representation. Here, φ and θ are functions represented by some neural
networks. c) By contrast, we leverage the different properties of the diverse semantic representations so as to bridge
the domain gap between the synthetic and real data and produce high-quality 6D object pose estimates when only synthetic data is available during training.

Introduction
Accurately estimating the rotation and translation of a 3D
object from a single RGB image is a fundamental problem in
computer vision. It has broad applications in the real world,
such as augmented reality, mobile robotics, and autonomous
navigation. As such, this task has attracted continuous attention in the research community.
While much progress has been made (Kehl et al. 2017;
Sundermeyer et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2019; Li, Wang, and Ji
2019), the current leading approaches are data-hungry and
rely heavily on annotated real-world data, which are costly
to obtain, because 6D object pose annotations have to be
done in the 3D space. A straightforward solution to this
problem consists of exploiting virtual environments. In principle, given the 3D object model, one can generate large
amounts of synthetic data with perfect pose annotations.
However, this typically results in a significant domain gap
between the synthetic and real images, limiting the performance of methods trained on such synthetic data.
To this date, this problem is mainly alleviated by either
employing a physically-based renderer (Hodan et al. 2019)
or resorting to domain randomization techniques (Kehl et al.

2017; Sundermeyer et al. 2018) . Nevertheless, to achieve
reasonable accuracy, these methods still require having access to some annotated real images. In short, accurate pose
estimation without any annotated real-world data remains an
open problem, for which a solution is urgently needed.
In this paper, we address this by observing that different
semantic representations of an image have different levels of
transferability between the synthetic and real domains. Inspired by this, we propose to explicitly decompose the input
image to multi-level semantic representations, as shown in
Fig. 1. We then propose to fuse the features extracted from
these individual semantic representations so as to jointly
leverage their complementary transferability power.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel pose estimation approach, SD-Pose,
which effectively leverages the domain transferability
benefits of diverse representations for cross-domain 6D
object pose estimation.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Our SD-Pose relies on the following novel components:
2020

