The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

G EN S YNTH: Synthesizing Datalog Programs without Language Bias
Jonathan Mendelson1∗ , Aaditya Naik1 * , Mukund Raghothaman2 , Mayur Naik1
1

University of Pennsylvania
University of Southern California
{jonom,asnaik}@seas.upenn.edu,raghotha@usc.edu,mhnaik@seas.upenn.edu
2

Abstract

8

Techniques for learning logic programs from data typically
rely on language bias mechanisms to restrict the hypothesis
space. These methods are therefore limited by the user’s ability
to tune them such that the hypothesis space is simultaneously
large enough to include the target program but small enough to
admit a tractable search. We propose a technique to learn Datalog programs from input-output examples without requiring
the user to specify any language bias. It employs an evolutionary search strategy that mutates candidate programs and
evaluates their fitness on the examples using an off-the-shelf
Datalog interpreter. We have implemented our approach in
a tool called G EN S YNTH and evaluate it on diverse tasks from
knowledge discovery, program analysis, and relational queries.
Our experiments show that G EN S YNTH can learn correct
programs from few examples, including for tasks that require
recursion and invented predicates, and is robust to noise.

1

4

7

2

5

6

1

Input tuples (EDB)

Output tuples (IDB)

9

edge (3, 4)
edge (4, 5)
edge (5, 3)
···

scc (3, 3) scc (4, 3)
scc (3, 4) scc (4, 5)
scc (3, 5) · · ·
scc (4, 4)

(a)

(b)

3

(c)

Figure 1: Example of a directed graph (a) and its representation as a set of tuples (b). An edge from x to y is represented
as tuple edge(x, y). The goal is to realize relation scc(x, y),
indicating that x and y belong to the same SCC in graph (a).
stating that any edge from x to y implies a path from x to y.
The second rule defines the inductive step for path: an edge
from x to z and a path from z to y implies a path from x to
y. Finally, the third rule states that a path from x to y and a
path from y to x implies that x and y are in the same scc.
Note that this solution is non-trivial, as it is a recursive
program requiring complex joins and an invented predicate
path. An invented predicate is a hidden intermediate concept
often necessary for synthesis but not specified in the schema
or input-output example.
Existing approaches to this problem are broadly classified
into Inductive Logic Programming (ILP), e.g. Metagol (Muggleton 1991); Answer Set Programming (ASP), e.g. ILASP3
(Law 2018); program synthesis, e.g. ProSynth (Raghothaman
et al. 2020); and neural learning, e.g. NTP (Rocktäschel and
Riedel 2017). Despite using notably different search techniques, however, all of these approaches rely on various language bias mechanisms or restrictions on expressiveness to
limit the hypothesis space. We draw comparisons between
various contemporary tools in Table 1.
Approaches with significant language bias mechanisms,
such as metarules (Metagol), candidate rules (ProSynth), or
templates (NTP) run quickly only under a carefully crafted
small set of these entities, hereafter called templates. This belies the considerable user burden of authoring the templates
which then fundamentally biases the tool toward a specific
subset of programs that the author has in mind. Since the
runtime of these template-based tools become impractical
far before they can consider a large sample space, these approaches are critically limited by the user’s ability to strike
a balance when providing templates: too many and the tool
times out, too few and it fails to synthesize a solution.

Introduction

The problem of learning logic programs from input-output
data has been widely studied in artificial intelligence, formal
methods, and machine learning. Such programs offer a variety of benefits by virtue of being explainable, interpretable,
generalizable, verifiable, and composable.
Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1994), a logic programming language, is commonly targeted due to its rich
expressivity, declarative rule-based semantics, and efficient
implementations. In this setting, the input-output data are
specified in the form of tuples over finite relations; the goal
is to synthesize a Datalog program that, when executed on
the given input tuples, produces the given output tuples.
Figure 1 shows an example task in which the input data
is a binary relation edge encoding edges in a directed graph,
and the output data is a binary relation scc representing pairs
of nodes in the input graph that belong to the same strongly
connected component (SCC). A correct and concise solution
is the following recursive program:
path(x,y) :- edge(x,y).
path(x,y) :- edge(x,z), path(z,y).
scc(x,y) :- path(x,y), path(y,x).

The first rule defines the base case for the predicate path,
* Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6444

