The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TDAF: Top-Down Attention Framework for Vision Tasks
Bo Pang1 , Yizhuo Li1 , Jiefeng Li1 , Muchen Li2 ,
Hanwen Cao1 , Cewu Lu 1∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{pangbo, liyizhuo, ljf likit, mbd chw, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, muchenli1997@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Human attention mechanisms often work in a top-down manner, yet it is not well explored in vision research. Here, we
propose the Top-Down Attention Framework (TDAF) to capture top-down attentions, which can be easily adopted in most
existing models. The designed Recursive Dual-Directional
Nested Structure in it forms two sets of orthogonal paths, recursive and structural ones, where bottom-up spatial features
and top-down attention features are extracted respectively.
Such spatial and attention features are nested deeply, therefore, the proposed framework works in a mixed top-down
and bottom-up manner. Empirical evidence shows that our
TDAF can capture effective stratified attention information
and boost performance. ResNet with TDAF achieves 2.0%
improvements on ImageNet. For object detection, the performance is improved by 2.7% AP over FCOS. For pose estimation, TDAF improves the baseline by 1.6%. And for action recognition, the 3D-ResNet adopting TDAF achieves improvements of 1.7% accuracy.

“Top” Attention

“Middle” Attention

“Down” Attention

Figure 1: Top-Down Attentions. The model introduces
global information at “top” attention stage to focus on coarse
areas and then gradually adjusts the attention to elaborate areas that contain the most important features. Such a manner
can generate fine-grained attention maps with high-level semantics and reduce the loss of information.
block (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018; Woo et al. 2018), where
hierarchical attention features are extracted along with basic
bottom-up spatial features. Thus, this kind of attention has
to focus on local details first then on the global information.
Since these bottom-up mechanisms only access to local features at early stages, they will first generate trivial attention
features, failing to focus models on the part of interest.
In this paper, to extract the top-down attention features
(see Fig. 1), we cannot simply extract the attention along
with the basic features, instead, we utilize a recursive structure. By adding the recursive dimension, the proposed model
can establish the top-down features step by step. It consists of two principal techniques, namely Recursive DualDirectional Nested Structure (R2DNS) and Attention Network across Recurrence (ANAR). As its name, R2DNS is a
recursive structure and information flows in two nested directions: recursive and structural directions. At each recursive step, it takes as input the images with different scales,
from small to large. The small scale inputs contain global
but coarse information while the large ones contain local
but detailed information. Thus, in the recursive direction,
information flows from “global” to “local”, forming the topdown path. While in the structural direction, the multi-layer
deep model still works in the bottom-up scheme. Therefore,
R2DNS works in a mixed top-down and bottom-up manner.
Attention Network across Recurrence (ANAR) serves as
a recursive bridge and takes charge of propagating attention features along the recursive paths of R2DNS. It is an

Introduction
When observing an unfamiliar scene, its natural for humans
to first take a glimpse to grasp the part of interest and then
look closer to its details. Such a top-down attention mechanism allows global context information to be considered by
humans at an early stage so that they can quickly and precisely understand the surroundings (Corbetta and Shulman
2002; Buschman and Miller 2007). In contrast to humans
vision system, deep neural networks(DNN), the most powerful vision tools, work in a bottom-up manner. They extract
local features first then integrate them into global features.
Thus, in DNN, local features are aggregated step by step
to help networks interpret global context. Observing from
above we intend to build a model that works in a mixed topdown and bottom-up manner, incorporating the strong traits
of deep model and mimicking the human attention.
Despite that the design of attention mechanism has been
intensively studied in previous literature, little research has
been conducted to introduce the human-like top-down attention into mainstream deep models. Some works formulate attention mask as a residual module (Li, Zhu, and Gong
2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2017) or built-in
∗

Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2384

