The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Communication-Aware Collaborative Learning
Avrim Blum,1 Shelby Heinecke,2 Lev Reyzin3
1

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
2
Salesforce Research
3
University of Illinois at Chicago
avrim@ttic.edu, shelby.heinecke@salesforce.com, lreyzin@uic.edu

Abstract

sample efficient than individual PAC learning. Collaborative
PAC learning algorithms have been optimized in subsequent
works with respect to overhead, and hence sample complexity (Blum et al. 2017; Chen, Zhang, and Zhou 2018; Nguyen
and Zakynthinou 2018; Qiao 2018).
Certain difficulties may arise in real-world applications of
collaborative PAC learning. First, communicating data between players and the center can be costly. Second, the data
from players may be noisy. Consider the example described
in (Blum et al. 2017) where k players represent hospitals
serving different demographics of the population. In this network of hospitals, each of which generates an abundance of
data, transmitting data to the center is costly and thus hospitals want to minimize the amount of data transmitted. Additionally, mistakes may be present in the labels of the data at
the hospitals, due to clerical errors and misdiagnoses, among
other reasons. Given access to only the noisy data from the
hospitals, we wish to learn classifiers that generalize well
with respect to each hospital’s underlying noiseless distribution. We tackle both difficulties in this paper. First, we
develop communication-aware collaborative learning algorithms in the noiseless setting that enjoy reduced communication costs at no penalty to the sample complexity. Then,
we develop communication-aware collaborative learning algorithms in the presence of classification noise, where each
player has label noise rate ηi < 12 .
The algorithms and analysis in this work focus on personalized learning. We discuss the applications of our insights
and analyses to the centralized learning setting in the Appendix. Omitted proofs are also included in the Appendix.

Algorithms for noiseless collaborative PAC learning have
been analyzed and optimized in recent years with respect
to sample complexity. In this paper, we study collaborative
PAC learning with the goal of reducing communication cost
at essentially no penalty to the sample complexity. We develop communication efficient collaborative PAC learning algorithms using distributed boosting. We then consider the
communication cost of collaborative learning in the presence
of classification noise. As an intermediate step, we show how
collaborative PAC learning algorithms can be adapted to handle classification noise. With this insight, we develop communication efficient algorithms for collaborative PAC learning
robust to classification noise.

Introduction
Collaborative learning was recently formalized by Blum et
al. (2017) as a PAC learning model. In this collaborative
PAC setting, there is a domain X, over which are k distributions, referred to as players. There is also a center node that
orchestrates the learning process. The goal of collaborative
PAC learning is to learn classifiers from data provided by the
players that generalize well on each of players’ distributions
simultaneously. Note that this is distinct from the related distributed learning setting, where the goal is to learn classifiers
that generalize well on the mixture of players’ distributions
(Balcan et al. 2012).
There are generally a few styles of collaborative PAC
learning. In the personalized learning setting, which is the
main focus of our paper, the goal is to learn a classifier for
each player with generalization error less than , with probability 1 − δ. Another setting is the centralized learning setting, where the goal is learn a single classifier with generalization error less than  on each players’ distribution with
probability 1 − δ. The efficiency of a collaborative learning algorithm is assessed by its overhead, defined as the ratio of the sample complexity of learning in the collaborative setting to the sample complexity of learning in the single player setting. An overhead of at least k indicates that
the collaborative learning algorithm offers no sample complexity benefit over individual PAC learning. An overhead
less than k indicates that the collaborative algorithm is more

Previous Work
Algorithms for collaborative PAC learning have been analyzed and optimized in (Blum et al. 2017; Chen, Zhang,
and Zhou 2018; Nguyen and Zakynthinou 2018; Qiao 2018)
with respect to sample complexity. The collaborative PAC
framework was formalized in (Blum et al. 2017), where they
also develop an optimal algorithm in the personalized setting
with O(ln(k)) overhead and a suboptimal algorithm in the
centralized setting with O(ln2 (k)) overhead. We recall their
algorithm, which we refer to as Personalized Learning (Algorithm 1), and the corresponding sample complexity result
below.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6786

