The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GSNet: Learning Spatial-Temporal Correlations from Geographical and Semantic
Aspects for Traffic Accident Risk Forecasting
Beibei Wang,1,2 Youfang Lin,1,2,3,4 Shengnan Guo,1,2,4 Huaiyu Wan1,2,3 *
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
CAAC Key Laboratory of Intelligent Passenger Service of Civil Aviation, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Transport Industry of Big Data Appalication Technologies for Comprehensive Transport, Beijing, China
{wangbb, yflin, guoshn, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

first class mainly employs recurrent neural networks (RNN)
to model traffic accidents’ underlying temporal correlations,
such as TARPML (Ren et al. 2018), or convolutional neural
networks (CNN) to capture adjacent regions’ spatial correlations, such as SDCAE (Chen et al. 2018). The other class
combines RNN and CNN to model both the temporal periodicity and spatial correlations of traffic accidents, such as
Hetero-ConvLSTM (Yuan, Zhou, and Yang 2018).
However, these existing traffic accident forecasting methods cannot effectively solve the following three problems:
1) The causes of traffic accidents are complex. In reality,
lots of factors such as weather, time, traffic flow, etc., can
affect the occurrence of traffic accidents. How to take all
these factors into account when forecasting traffic accident
risk is challenging.
2) Traffic accidents usually exhibit multi-scale dependencies in both the spatial and temporal dimensions, which can
be called geographical spatial-temporal correlations and semantic spatial-temporal correlations. Firstly, taking the geographical spatial-temporal correlations shown in Figure 1
as an example, in the spatial dimension, traffic accidents of
neighboring regions (e.g., region ¬ and ­) are usually affected by each other due to the road connections and traffic
flows. In the temporal dimension, traffic accidents often have
short-term proximity and long-term periodicity. Besides,
there are semantic spatial-temporal correlations among regions. For example, region ¬ and ® in Figure 1 share similar
features, i.e., road structure, POI (point of interest) distribution and traffic accident pattern. Therefore, they might have
a similar trend in traffic accident risk. In a word, it is essential to model the multi-scale correlations of regions for
accurate traffic accident risk forecasting.
3) The zero-inflated issue. Generally, traffic accidents are
rare events, which means too excessive number of zeros
exist in traffic accident risk values. In the model training
phase, if the zeros are not properly handled, they will further
cause the prediction toward zero. We call this phenomenon
the zero-inflated issue. (Bao, Liu, and Ukkusuri 2019) mentioned that when the spatial-temporal resolution of the prediction tasks increases, the zero-inflated issue will occur.
To address the above problems, we propose a Geographical and Semantic spatial-temporal Network (GSNet) for

Traffic accident forecasting is of great importance to urban
public safety, emergency treatment, and construction planning. However, it is very challenging since traffic accidents
are affected by multiple factors, and have multi-scale dependencies on both spatial and temporal dimensional features.
Meanwhile, traffic accidents are rare events, which leads to
the zero-inflated issue. Existing traffic accident forecasting
methods cannot deal with all above problems simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose a novel model, named GSNet,
to learn the spatial-temporal correlations from geographical
and semantic aspects for traffic accident risk forecasting. In
the model, a Spatial-Temporal Geographical Module is designed to capture the geographical spatial-temporal correlations among regions, while a Spatial-Temporal Semantic
Module is proposed to model the semantic spatial-temporal
correlations among regions. In addition, a weighted loss function is designed to solve the zero-inflated issue. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of GSNet against the state-of-the-art baseline methods.

Introduction
Traffic accidents have caused heavy loss of life and property every year. According to the WHO1 , the number of annual road traffic deaths on the earth reaches 1.35 million in
2018. Hence, traffic accident forecasting is very significant
for public safety and city construction. If the traffic accident
risk can be predicted accurately in advance, governments
can make better traffic planning to reduce traffic accidents,
administrators can issue traffic accident risk warnings and
drivers can choose safer routes to avoid traffic hazards.
Traffic accidents occur in certain spatial and temporal scenarios, so they are affected by both spatial and temporal dimensional factors. In recent years, researchers have already
proposed many deep learning-based models to forecast traffic accidents. Existing deep learning-based models can be
broadly categorized into two classes. One class only captures spatial or temporal features and the other class captures
both spatial and temporal features. More specifically, the
* Corresponding author: hywan@bjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.who.int/

4402

