The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Person Re-identification via Heterogeneous
Graph Alignment
Minying Zhang,1∗ Kai Liu,1,2∗ Yidong Li,2 † Shihui Guo,3 Hongtao Duan,1 Yimin Long,1 Yi Jin2
1

Alibaba Group 2 Beijing Jiaotong University 3 Xiamen University
minying.zmy@alibaba-inc.com, {liukai18, ydli}@bjtu.edu.cn, guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn,
{hongtao.dht, yimin.lym}@alibaba-inc.com, yjin@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised person re-identification (re-ID) is becoming increasingly popular due to its power in real-world systems
such as public security and intelligent transportation systems.
However, the person re-ID task is challenged by the problems of data distribution discrepancy across cameras and lack
of label information. In this paper, we propose a coarse-tofine heterogeneous graph alignment (HGA) method to find
cross-camera person matches by characterizing the unlabeled
data as a heterogeneous graph for each camera. In the coarsealignment stage, we assign a projection for each camera and
utilize an adversarial learning based method to align coarsegrained node groups from different cameras into a shared
space, which consequently alleviates the distribution discrepancy between cameras. In the fine-alignment stage, we exploit potential fine-grained node groups in the shared space
and introduce conservative alignment loss functions to constrain the graph aligning process, resulting in reliable pseudo
labels as learning guidance. The proposed domain adaptation
framework not only improves model generalization on target
domain, but also facilitates mining and integrating the potential discriminative information across different cameras. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: Illustration of the heterogeneous graph for a single
camera. Person images are distributed with latent structures.
We construct heterogeneous graphs in each camera-specific
sub-domain to exploit the potential distribution structure.
There are two types of node (coarse-grained appearance
node A and fine-grained person node P ) and one type of
edge (distance E) in one graph for each camera. As shown
in this figure, images in a coarse-grained appearance node A
mostly look similar in color, while images of a fine-grained
person node P come from the same person ID.

Introduction
Person re-identification(Re-ID) aims to identify the same
people across non-overlapping camera views. Most of these
studies focus on supervised learning (Zheng, Gong, and Xiang 2012; Liao et al. 2015; Li et al. 2014; Ahmed, Jones,
and Marks 2015; Sun et al. 2017). In real-world applications,
the performance of the supervised learning method quite depends on the quality of labeled data. Therefore, some works
attempt to take advantage of abundant unlabelled data and
apply unsupervised learning (Peng et al. 2016; Kodirov et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2018;
Deng et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2018a). However, the existing
unsupervised methods tend to be less effective and unstable

due to the lack of supervised information. The main issues
are: 1) the data distribution of different camera views varies
significantly due to the variation of viewpoint, illumination,
image resolution, and background noise; and 2) existing loss
functions of person Re-ID are mostly designed for supervised learning, which cannot be applied directly due to the
lack of labeled data.
The studies in (Wei et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2018; Liu
et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020) make effort on addressing
the first issue by treating person Re-ID as an unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) problem However, these methods

∗
Equal contribution. This work was done when Kai Liu was an
intern at Alibaba Group.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3360

