The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Primal-Dual Online Algorithm
for Online Matching Problem in Dynamic Environments
Yu-Hang Zhou, Peng Hu, Chen Liang, Huan Xu, Guangda Huzhang,
Yinfu Feng, Qing Da, Xinshang Wang, An-Xiang Zeng
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{zyh174606,sylar.hp,liangchen.lc,huan.xu,guangda.hzgd,yinfu.fyf,daqing.dq,xinshang.w}@alibaba-inc.com,
renzhong@taobao.com
learner chooses an item it according to the historical information {(r τ , C τ )}tτ =1 , obtaining the corresponding reward
and consuming the corresponding resources. Given the total number T of arrival users, our goal is to maximize the
cumulative reward while satisfying the budget constraints.
When all parameters of T users, i.e., {(r t , C t )}Tt=1 are
available in advance, the matching problem can be formulated as an offline linear program (LP). It is easy to see that
the solution of offline LP is an upper bound of its online version since the online learner has to make irrevocable decisions without complete information about subsequent users.
Moreover, the ratio of the cumulative reward obtained by an
online method to that obtained by offline LP is called Competitive Ratio (C.R.). To make the online problem more feasible, researchers introduce several assumptions regarding
user arrival fashion. In general, there are two common user
arrival models, i.e., the adversarial model and the stochastic
model. The adversarial model assumes that there is an adversary who knows the strategy of the algorithm and generates
the worst user sequence accordingly, which is usually pessimistic in practice. The stochastic model, on the contrary,
assumes that the users are drawn from a stationary distribution, which is often in accordance with the real data.
Adopting the stochastic user arrival model, most existing methods are based on the primal-dual framework, where
dual optimal prices are learned by solving a fractional
matching problem on the revealed users and are used for
subsequent assignments. In stationary environments, these
methods achieved a near-optimal solution. Recently, (Li,
Sun, and Ye 2020) proposed online algorithms by establishing the dual convergence result. Rather than learning dual
prices on fractional data, they run an OGD algorithm on the
dual problem to update the dual prices online. Since the dual
optimal prices are stable in stationary environments, their
proposed online methods converge at a fast rate.
However, the stochastic model may derive optimistic
methods that suffer from poor performance when the environment is changing. In particular, the dual optimal prices
can be non-stable, which leads to the failure of the dual convergence result. Alternatively, minimizing the dynamic regret with respect to any feasible sequence of dual prices is a
better choice in a dynamic environment. Similar works have
been established in OCO problems (Zhang, Lu, and Zhou
2018; Zhao et al. 2020a).

Abstract
Recently, the online matching problem has attracted much attention due to its wide application on real-world decisionmaking scenarios. In stationary environments, by adopting
the stochastic user arrival model, existing methods are proposed to learn dual optimal prices and are shown to achieve a
fast regret bound. However, the stochastic model is no longer
a proper assumption when the environment is changing, leading to an optimistic method that may suffer poor performance.
In this paper, we study the online matching problem in dynamic environments in which the dual optimal prices are allowed to vary over time. We bound the dynamic regret of online matching problem by the sum of two quantities, including a regret of online max-min problem and a dynamic regret of online convex optimization (OCO) problem. Then we
propose a novel online approach named Primal-Dual Online
Algorithm (PDOA) to minimize both quantities. In particular,
PDOA adopts the primal-dual framework by optimizing dual
prices with the online gradient descent (OGD) algorithm to
eliminate the online max-min problem’s regret. Moreover, it
maintains a set of OGD experts and combines them via an
expert-tracking algorithm, which gives a sublinear dynamic
regret bound for p
the OCO problem. We show that PDOA
achieves an O(K T (1 + PT )) dynamic regret where K is
the number of resources, T is the number of iterations and PT
is the path-length of any potential dual price sequence that reflects the dynamic environment. Finally, experiments on real
applications exhibit the superiority of our approach.

Introduction
The online matching problem has been widely applied in
many real-world tasks, e.g., internet advertising, resource allocation, and dynamic pricing. There are M potential items
and K resources. The k-th resource possesses a budget Bk
representing the maximum amount that can be consumed.
The protocol is as follows: in each round, the t-th user is
revealed with a reward vector r t ∈ RM and a resource
consumption matrix C t ∈ RM ×K . Denote rti as the i-th
component of r t , Ctik as the i-th row and the k-th column component of C t . When assigning the i-th item to the
t-th user, the reward and the consumption of the k-th resource can be represented by rti and Ctik , respectively. The
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11160

