The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hindsight and Sequential Rationality of Correlated Play
Dustin Morrill1 , Ryan D’Orazio2 , Reca Sarfati3 , Marc Lanctot4 ,
James R. Wright1 , Amy R. Greenwald5 , Michael Bowling1, 4
1

University of Alberta; Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Canada
2
Université de Montréal; Mila, Canada
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
4
DeepMind
5
Brown University, United States
morrill@ualberta.ca, ryan.dorazio@mila.quebec, sarfati@mit.edu, lanctot@google.com,
james.wright@ualberta.ca, amy greenwald@brown.edu, mbowling@ualberta.ca
Abstract
either should be fielded against unknown strategies in these
situations. The maximin concept assumes all other players
Driven by recent successes in two-player, zero-sum game
collude against you, which can produce overly pessimistic
solving and playing, artificial intelligence work on games has
strategies. Nash equilibria make the less pessimistic assumpincreasingly focused on algorithms that produce equilibriumtion that each player is rational and independent, but stratebased strategies. However, this approach has been less effecgies from such equilibria have no performance guarantees
tive at producing competent players in general-sum games or
against arbitrary strategies and are hard to compute. Perhaps
those with more than two players than in two-player, zeroone reason that AI has struggled to find the same success in
sum games. An appealing alternative is to consider adaptive
algorithms that ensure strong performance in hindsight relamulti-agent, general sum games is the lack of a strong thetive to what could have been achieved with modified behavior.
oretical base like that provided by the maximin objective in
This approach also leads to a game-theoretic analysis, but in
zero-sum games.
the correlated play that arises from joint learning dynamics
An appealing alternative is to consider adaptive algorather than factored agent behavior at equilibrium. We derithms
that ensure strong performance in hindsight relative
velop and advocate for this hindsight rationality framing of
to what could have been achieved with modified behavlearning in general sequential decision-making settings. To
ior (e.g., Hannan (1957)). We advocate for a hindsight rathis end, we re-examine mediated equilibrium and deviation
types in extensive-form games, thereby gaining a more comtionality framing of learning in sequential decision-making
plete understanding and resolving past misconceptions. We
settings where rational correlated play, rather than factored
present a set of examples illustrating the distinct strengths and
equilibrium behavior, arises naturally through repeated play.
weaknesses of each type of equilibrium in the literature, and
Hindsight rationality is the dynamic interpretation of static
prove that no tractable concept subsumes all others. This line
mediated equilibrium (Aumann 1974) concepts that have
of inquiry culminates in the definition of the deviation and
led to elegant decentralized learning algorithms like regret
equilibrium classes that correspond to algorithms in the counmatching (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000) and connections beterfactual regret minimization (CFR) family, relating them to
tween learning and statistical calibration (Foster and Vohra
all others in the literature. Examining CFR in greater detail
1997).
further leads to a new recursive definition of rationality in
correlated play that extends sequential rationality in a way
Mediated equilibria in EFGs have gained increasing
that naturally applies to hindsight evaluation.
interest recently with the introduction of extensive-form
(coarse-)correlated equilibrium (EF(C)CE) (Forges and
von Stengel 2002; von Stengel and Forges 2008; Farina,
Introduction
Bianchi, and Sandholm 2020) and agent-form (Selten 1974)
Algorithms to approximate maximin or Nash equilibrium
(coarse-)correlated equilibrium (AF(C)CE) (von Stengel
strategies have fueled major successes in the autonomous
and Forges 2008), along with related algorithms (Celli et al.
play of human-scale games like Go (Silver et al. 2016,
2019, 2020). However, there has yet to be a clear description
2017b, 2018), chess and shogi (Silver et al. 2017a, 2018),
of the general mediated equilibrium landscape in EFGs bepoker (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2018,
yond causal and action deviations (von Stengel and Forges
2019) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2019). With the excep2008; Dudı́k and Gordon 2009). There has also yet to be a
tion of multi-player poker addressed by Brown and Sandclear proposal about how this line of inquiry can be used
holm (2019), all of these are two-player, zero-sum games.
to design more competent game playing algorithms. We
Less success has been achieved in games outside this space.
show how hindsight rationality operationalizes these conWhile both maximin and Nash equilibrium concepts apcepts in concrete regret minimization objectives while preply in general-sum, multi-player games, it is not clear that
serving equilibria as descriptions of jointly rational learning.
We present a more complete picture of the relationships
c
Copyright
2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
between the deviation types and equilibrium classes dis5584

