The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Why Do Attributes Propagate in Graph Convolutional Neural Networks?
Liang Yang1,2,3 , Chuan Wang2∗ , Junhua Gu1,3 , Xiaochun Cao2 , Bingxin Niu1,3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, {wangchuan, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, {jhgu hebut, niubingxin666}@163.com
2

Abstract

Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2017), which is a simple, well-behaved and insightful GNN,
bridges above two perspectives by proving that the propagation can be motivated from a first-order approximation of
spectral graph convolutions. Recently progress also demonstrates the equivalent of spatial and spectral ones (Balcilar
et al. 2020). Many efforts have been paid to enhance GCN
from the perspective of propagation (Gilmer et al. 2017),
such as learnable propagation weights in Graph Attention
Network (GAT) (Velickovic et al. 2018), Gated Attention
Network (GaAN) (Zhang et al. 2018) and Probabilistic GCN
(Yang et al. 2020), structural neighbourhood in Geom-GCN
(Pei et al. 2020) and multi-scale (multi-hop) combination in
N-GCN (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2019a), MixHop (Abu-El-Haija
et al. 2019b), LanczosNet (Liao et al. 2019) and Krylov
GCN (Luan et al. 2019). The common philosophy of them
is: “Propagation is the essence of the GCNNs”. And, the
success of GCNs attributes to the Laplacian smoothing induced by the propagation (Li, Han, and Wu 2018).

Many efforts have been paid to enhance Graph Convolutional
Network from the perspective of propagation under the philosophy that “Propagation is the essence of the GCNNs”.
Unfortunately, its adverse effect is over-smoothing, which
makes the performance dramatically drop. To prevent the
over-smoothing, many variants are presented. However, the
perspective of propagation can’t provide an intuitive and unified interpretation to their effect on prevent over-smoothing.
In this paper, we aim at providing a novel explanation to the
question of “Why do attributes propagate in GCNNs?”. which
not only gives the essence of the oversmoothing, but also
illustrates why the GCN extensions, including multi-scale
GCN and GCN with initial residual, can improve the performance. To this end, an intuitive Graph Representation Learning (GRL) framework is presented. GRL simply constrains
the node representation similar with the original attribute,
and encourages the connected nodes possess similar representations (pairwise constraint). Based on the proposed GRL,
exiting GCN and its extensions can be proved as different
numerical optimization algorithms, such as gradient descent,
of our proposed GRL framework. Inspired by the superiority
of conjugate gradient descent compared to common gradient
descent, a novel Graph Conjugate Convolutional (GCC) network is presented to approximate the solution to GRL with
fast convergence. Specifically, GCC adopts the obtained information of the last layer, which can be represented as the
difference between the input and output of the last layer, as
the input to the next layer. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of GCC.

Unfortunately, the most serious issue of GNNs is the
over-smoothing, which makes the performance dramatically
drop, caused by the multiple propagations via stacking multiple graph convolution layers. Recently, (Oono and Suzuki
2020) shows the the exponential loss of expressive power of
GNNs by generalizing the forward propagation of a GCN
as a specific dynamical system. To prevent over-smoothing,
two kinds of methods are proposed. On one hand, methods in the first category constrain the propagation. Disentangled GCN (Ma et al. 2019) makes each attribute only
be propagated on part of the edges. DropEdge (Rong et al.
2020) randomly removes a certain number of edges from
the input graph at each training epoch to reduce the adverse effect of message passing. On the other hand, methods in the second category constrain the propagation result with the original attributes. PageRank-GCN (Klicpera,
Bojchevski, and Günnemann 2019) integrates personalized
PageRank to GCN to combine the original attribute. JKNet
(Xu et al. 2018) employs dense connections for multi-hop
message passing, while DeepGCN (Li et al. 2019) and (GCNII) (Chen et al. 2020) incorporates residual layers into
GCNs to facilitate the development of deep architectures.
However, the perspective of propagation can’t provide an intuitive and unified interpretation to their effect on preventing
over-smoothing.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2019) have become a hot topic in deep learning for their potentials in modeling irregular data. GNNs have been widely
used and achieved state-of-the-art performance in many
fields, such as computer vision, natural language processing
(Yang et al. 2020), traffic forecasting, chemistry and medical analysis, etc. Existing GNNs fall into two categories,
spectral methods (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) and spatial ones (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Gilmer et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019b,a; Jin et al. 2019, 2020,
2021).
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4590

