The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Empirical Best Practices On Using Product-Specific Schema.org
Mayank Kejriwal,1 Ravi Kiran Selvam, 1 Chien-Chun Ni, 2 Nicolas Torzec 2
1

University of Southern California
2
Verizon Media
kejriwal@isi.edu, rselvam@isi.edu, chien-chun.ni@verizonmedia.com, torzecn@verizonmedia.com

Abstract

webpages. Launched in the early 2010s by major search engines such as Google and Bing, schema.org was designed
to facilitate structured (and even knowledge graph) search
applications on the Web. The Web Data Commons (WDC)
project has crawled increasing amounts of schema.org data
in recent years (Mühleisen and Bizer 2012), including in the
e-commerce and products domain. WDC schema.org data
has broad coverage at the level of ‘pay-level domains’ (such
as rakuten.com), languages and product categories, providing a golden opportunity for researchers to use this data in
downstream applications and analyses.
Yet, there are also considerable challenges in using this
data. Not including noise due to variations and misspellings,
language tags on text literals may be inaccurate, and there
may be skew both in the distribution of languages and paylevel domains. Some of the properties may have less semantic validity than others. All of this is further made difficult
by the fact that WDC product-specific schema.org datasets
are non-trivial in size (with each year’s data comprising hundreds of gigabytes even in compressed format), which precludes significant manual processing and labeling (or ‘eyeballing’). What is needed and is currently lacking is a set of
empirically grounded best practices for consuming productspecific schema.org data released by the WDC. These best
practices, once determined, could then be implemented in
practice by any engineer looking to consume these datasets
in applications and processes of their own.
In this paper, we conduct a series of empirical studies to
describe and justify such a set of practices. We use 2018
product-specific schema.org WDC for this purpose. In total, we conduct three broad studies investigating issues ranging from skewness in language distributions to data localization. From our experiments, we distill five best practices for
both researchers and practitioners. We show that, while extremely promising, schema.org data from WDC should be
used while keeping these best practices in mind to avoid issues of quality, scale and bias. Future work may further refine these practices and supplement them significantly.

Schema.org has experienced high growth in recent years.
Structured descriptions of products embedded in HTML
pages are now not uncommon, especially on e-commerce
websites. The Web Data Commons (WDC) project has extracted schema.org data at scale from webpages in the Common Crawl and made it available as an RDF ‘knowledge
graph’ at scale. The portion of this data that specifically describes products offers a golden opportunity for researchers
and small companies to leverage it for analytics and downstream applications. Yet, because of the broad and expansive
scope of this data, it is not evident whether the data is usable in its raw form. In this paper, we do a detailed empirical
study on the product-specific schema.org data made available
by WDC. Rather than simple analysis, the goal of our study is
to devise an empirically grounded set of best practices for using and consuming WDC product-specific schema.org data.
Our studies reveal five best practices, each of which is justified by experimental data and analysis.

Introduction
Structured data has continued to play an increasingly important role for Web search and applications. In fact, according to (Cafarella, Halevy, and Madhavan 2011), the expanding quantity and heterogeneity of Web structured data has
enabled new solutions to problems, especially concerning
search engine optimization (SEO) and data integration spanning multiple web sources. Two application areas that have
benefited greatly from structured data are e-commerce and
advertisements. Because of structured data and markup, it
is now easier than ever both to advertise and find products
on the Web, in no small part due to the ability of search engines to make good use of this data. There is also limited
evidence that structured data plays a key role in populating
Web-scale knowledge graphs such as the Google Knowledge
Graph that are essential to modern semantic search (Singhal
2012).
However, even though most e-commerce platforms have
their own proprietary datasets, some resources do exist for
smaller companies, researchers and organizations. A particularly important source of data is schema.org markup in

Related Work
The research presented in this paper is related to several
of the existing lines of work that we briefly describe below. There has been a considerable amount of work on
schema.org already, both in describing its principles and

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15452

