The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consistent Right-Invariant Fixed-Lag Smoother
with Application to Visual Inertial SLAM
Jianzhu Huai 1 , Yukai Lin 2 , Yuan Zhuang ∗, 1 , Min Shi3
1

Wuhan University
2
ETH Zurich
3
Washington University, St. Louis
{jianzhu.huai,yuan.zhuang}@whu.edu.cn, linyuk@ethz.ch, mshi2018@fau.edu
Abstract

As reported in the literature, traditional real-time estimators, e.g., filters, fixed-lag smoothers (FLSs), tend to gain
fictitious information on unobservable directions (Huang,
Mourikis, and Roumeliotis 2010; Dong-Si and Mourikis
2011), and to output falsely optimistic covariance inconsistent to the actual state error. This inconsistency is caused by
the marginalization step of real-time estimators which removes old state variables and measurements (i.e., factors)
from an estimator and approximates those measurements by
a linear prior factor. A deeper cause is that for a variable
in the prior factor, its linearization point used by the prior
factor differs from that used by the remaining factors. Obviously, the batch estimator and its incremental variants, e.g.,
iSAM2 (Kaess et al. 2012), do not have this issue as they do
not marginalize variables.
To fix the estimator inconsistency, techniques that modify
the measurement Jacobians to fit certain criteria have been
proposed. For instance, the “first estimate Jacobian (FEJ)”
technique (Huang, Mourikis, and Roumeliotis 2010) evaluates Jacobians relative to variables in the linear prior factor at
their estimates upon marginalization. Because the Jacobian
computation depends on specifics, such as an earlier estimate of a variable, it is usually difficult to apply such techniques to an existing estimator framework. A new trend is to
use right invariant error formulation (Barrau and Bonnabel
2016a) where a navigation state variable (consisting of orientation, position, and velocity) is associated to a Lie group
SE2 (3) and the error vector is invariant to transforming the
trajectory by a right multiplication. Besides mathematically
elegant, it is easy to implement as it fits the conventional filtering framework. However, this formulation has not been
used in FLSs, mainly because of the challenge to analyze
their consistency property.
Previous work has shown that the estimator inconsistency
comes along with the observability issue where the unobservable directions become spuriously observable (Hesch
et al. 2014a). Thus, consistency has been predominantly
studied by examining rank deficiency of the linearized observability matrix, e.g., (Huang, Mourikis, and Roumeliotis
2010; Dong-Si and Mourikis 2012; Brossard, Barrau, and
Bonnabel 2018). The local observability matrix is acceptable in complexity for analyzing filters, but becomes very
involved for dealing with FLSs, e.g., (Dong-Si and Mourikis
2012). Because the observability matrix is a derivative of the

State estimation problems without absolute position measurements routinely arise in navigation of unmanned aerial vehicles, autonomous ground vehicles, etc. whose proper operation relies on accurate state estimates and reliable covariances. Unaware of absolute positions, these problems have
immanent unobservable directions. Traditional causal estimators, however, usually gain spurious information on the unobservable directions, leading to over-confident covariance inconsistent with actual estimator errors. The consistency problem of fixed-lag smoothers (FLSs) has only been attacked
by the first estimate Jacobian (FEJ) technique because of the
complexity to analyze their observability property. But the
FEJ has several drawbacks hampering its wide adoption. To
ensure the consistency of a FLS, this paper introduces the
right invariant error formulation into the FLS framework. To
our knowledge, we are the first to analyze the observability
of a FLS with the right invariant error. Our main contributions are twofold. As the first novelty, to bypass the complexity of analysis with the classic observability matrix, we
show that observability analysis of FLSs can be done equivalently on the linearized system. Second, we prove that the
inconsistency issue in the traditional FLS can be elegantly
solved by the right invariant error formulation without artificially correcting Jacobians. By applying the proposed FLS
to the monocular visual inertial simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) problem, we confirm that the method consistently estimates covariance similarly to a batch smoother
in simulation and that our method achieved comparable accuracy as traditional FLSs on real data.

Introduction
Positioning and navigation of a variety of vehicles, e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), autonomous ground vehicles (AGVs), depends on real-time state estimation. Accurate system state and reasonable covariance output by state
estimators in real time are necessary for the proper operation of these systems. For state estimation, these systems
usually fuse measurements captured by sensors that do not
provide absolute positions, like cameras, lidars, inertial measurement units (IMUs), etc. It is well known that estimators
which fuse such measurements have unobservable directions
(Jones and Soatto 2011).
∗

Corresponding author, yuan.zhuang@whu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6084

