The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Directed Graph Embedding
Shijie Zhu1,2 , Jianxin Li1,2 , Hao Peng1,2 , Senzhang Wang3 , Lifang He4
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
{zhusj,lijx,penghao}@act.buaa.edu.cn, szwang@nuaa.edu.cn, lih319@lehigh.edu
Abstract

Twitter
6.1%
16.4%

Node representation learning for directed graphs is critically
important to facilitate many graph mining tasks. To capture
the directed edges between nodes, existing methods mostly
learn two embedding vectors for each node, source vector and
target vector. However, these methods learn the source and
target vectors separately. For the node with very low indegree or outdegree, the corresponding target vector or source
vector cannot be effectively learned. In this paper, we propose a novel Directed Graph embedding framework based on
Generative Adversarial Network, called DGGAN. The main
idea is to use adversarial mechanisms to deploy a discriminator and two generators that jointly learn each node’s source
and target vectors. For a given node, the two generators are
trained to generate its fake target and source neighbor nodes
from the same underlying distribution, and the discriminator
aims to distinguish whether a neighbor node is real or fake.
The two generators are formulated into a unified framework
and could mutually reinforce each other to learn more robust
source and target vectors. Extensive experiments show that
DGGAN consistently and significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods across multiple graph mining tasks
on directed graphs.

77.5%

A
C

0 indegree
0 outdegree
others

B
CiteSeer
49.0%
12.3%
38.7%

0 indegree
0 outdegree
others

Figure 1: The left figure is a toy example of directed graph.
Considering the edge from A to B, B is the target neighbor of A and A is the source neighbor of B. The right two
figures are statistics from the social network of Twitter (Cha
et al. 2010) and the citation network of CiteSeer (Bollacker,
Lawrence, and Giles 1998), respectively.

Introduction

nodes, one corresponding to the outgoing direction and one
for the incoming direction.
We argue that there are two major limitations for existing directed graph embedding methods: (1) Methods like
HOPE (Ou et al. 2016) rely on strict proximity measures
like Katz (Katz 1953) and low rank assumption of the graph.
Thus, they are difficult to be generalized to different types
of graphs and tasks (Khosla et al. 2019). Moreover, HOPE
is not scalable to large graphs as it requires the entire graph
matrix as input and then adopts matrix factorization (Tsitsulin et al. 2018). (2) Existing shallow methods focus on
preserving the structure proximities but ignore the underlying distribution of the nodes. Methods like APP (Zhou
et al. 2017) adopt directed random walk sampling technique which follows the outgoing direction to sample node
pairs. These methods utilize negative sampling technique
to randomly select existing nodes from the graph as negative samples. However, for nodes with only outgoing edges
or only incoming edges, the target or source vectors cannot be effectively trained. Figure 1 presents a toy example.

Graph embedding aims to learn a low-dimensional vector
representation of each node in a graph, and has gained increasing research attention recently due to its wide and practical applications, such as link prediction (Liben-Nowell
and Kleinberg 2007), graph reconstruction (Tsitsulin et al.
2018), node recommendation (Ying et al. 2018), and node
classification (Bhagat, Cormode, and Muthukrishnan 2011).
Most existing methods, such as DeepWalk (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014), node2vec (Grover and Leskovec
2016), LINE (Tang et al. 2015), and GraphGAN (Wang
et al. 2018), are designed to handle undirected graphs, but
ignore the directions of the edges. While the directionality
often contains important asymmetric semantic information
in directed graphs such as social networks, citation networks
and webpage networks. To preserve the directionality of the
edges, some recent works try to use two node embedding
spaces to represent the source role and the target role of the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4741

