The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Quantification of Resource Production Incompleteness
Yakoub Salhi
CRIL, U. Artois & CNRS, Lens, France
salhi@cril.fr

Abstract

in classical logic, we concentrate in this work on the use
of formulas as resources by dealing with resource availability, consummation, and production. To give an illustration of
this point, consider the implication φ = have-one-dollar →
have-a-metro-ticket. Clearly, we obtain in classical logic
have-one-dollar, φ ` have-one-dollar∧have-a-metro-ticket.
This means that we can have a metro ticket without consuming the available dollar, which is not appropriate if the
formulas are used to represent resources.
Linear logic is a substructural logic that can be used for
reasoning about resource-sensitive problems (Girard 1987).
The main idea behind the resource-oriented interpretation
is to consider formulas in a proof as resources that can be
consumed or produced. In particular, this logic takes into
account the number of occurrences of formulas (two occurrences of a given formula have a different meaning from
a single occurrence of the same formula). The intuitionistic variant of linear logic was defined through the sequent
calculus of linear logic by restricting sequents to have exactly one formula on the right-hand side (Girard and Lafont 1987; Troelstra 1992). This variant allows reasoning
about resources in a more natural way than linear logic and
avoiding some logical connectives that are difficult to explain in terms of resources (there is particularly no negation operator). This point can be illustrated by encodings
of problems such as Petri net reachability (Engberg and
Winskel 1990, 1993) and classical AI planning (Kanovich
and Vauzeilles 2001). We consider in this work intuitionistic affine logic, which is obtained from intuitionistic linear
logic by adding the structural rule of weakening. This structural rule is needed because we are interested in having the
monotonicity property, that is, if resources Γ allow producing a resource φ, then it is also possible to produce φ by
adding new elements to Γ. It appears in the literature that
intuitionistic affine logic is appropriate for reasoning about
resources in several contexts (e.g. see (Kamide 2006; Porello
and Endriss 2010; Kanovich and Vauzeilles 2011; Bugliesi
et al. 2013; Fermüller and Lang 2017)).
In this paper, we first discuss resource managementrelated situations to motivate our proposal and show how incompleteness measures can be applied for reasoning about
resource consummation and production. Then, we present
our framework for quantifying resource production incompleteness. An incompleteness measure is defined as a func-

In a situation where an agent has to produce specific resources using the available ones, it may not be possible to
achieve the complete goal, but only obtaining some of its
parts. This incompleteness problem calls for reasoning models to make rational decisions. In this paper, we introduce a
logic-based framework for measuring resource production incompleteness: the greater the value returned by a measure,
the greater is the intensity of incompleteness. After motivating our work by describing situations where the incompleteness measures can be applied, we introduce our framework
by using a postulate-based approach. To some extent, the incompleteness measures can be seen as a counterpart of inconsistency measures in resource logics. Here, intuitionistic
affine logic is used for representing and reasoning about resource consummation and production. Besides, we propose
different notions that are useful for defining different types of
incompleteness measures. We also present several measures
to illustrate the introduced concepts and notions.

Introduction
Resource management is an essential task in several areas,
including economics, social policy, and computer science.
In this work, we focus on the general situation where an
agent has to use available resources to attain a given goal.
One of the main problems that an agent may face in this
context is when the available resources do not allow reaching the entire goal but only some of its parts. Indeed, under
this incompleteness problem, an agent may need to represent and reason about the difficulty to produce the desired
resources. This explains the interest in defining reasoning
tools for making particularly rational decisions.
The purpose of this paper is to introduce a logic-based
framework for defining measures that can be used for reasoning and analyzing the intensity of resource production
incompleteness. Up to a point, these measures can be seen
as a counterpart of inconsistency measures in resource logics. Inconsistency measures are functions that associate
non-negative values with knowledge bases to quantify the
amount of conflicts (e.g. see (Hunter and Konieczny 2010;
Thimm 2016; Bona et al. 2018; Thimm 2018a)). By contrast,
rather than focusing on truth as in the case of inconsistency
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6480

