The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning the Parameters of Bayesian Networks from Uncertain Data
Segev Wasserkrug1 , Radu Marinescu2 , Sergey Zeltyn1 , Evgeny Shindin1 , Yishai A. Feldman1
1

IBM Research – Haifa
IBM Research Europe
segevw@il.ibm.com, radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com, sergeyz@il.ibm.com, evgensh@il.ibm.com, yishai@il.ibm.com
2

Abstract

this data to train the BN, natural language processing (NLP)
tools were used to transform the unstructured data into a
structured format necessary for learning BN parameters. Of
course, such NLP models are not completely accurate, and
have both false positives and false negatives. In addition,
most such tools provide confidence measures indicating their
level of certainty about the outcome. It is of course desirable
to use such confidence levels when learning the parameters
of the BN.
While there are standard ways to incorporate uncertainty
during inference in BNs (Mrad et al. 2015), to the best of
our knowledge, incorporating uncertainty of any sort during
parameter learning has not been addressed.
In this paper, we address this gap. Our primary contribution is an algorithm that enables the use of uncertain data as
inputs for learning the parameters of BNs. More specifically,
we extend the standard EM algorithm for BNs (Koller and
Friedman 2009) to incorporate historical examples with likelihood evidence–based uncertainty. In addition, we prove that
our proposed algorithm maintains the correctness and convergence properties of the original EM algorithm. Finally, we
present an empirical validation that demonstrates the value
of our approach.

The creation of Bayesian networks often requires the specification of a large number of parameters, making it highly
desirable to be able to learn these parameters from historical
data. In many cases, such data has uncertainty associated with
it, including cases in which this data comes from unstructured
analysis or from sensors. When creating diagnosis networks,
for example, unstructured analysis algorithms can be run on
the historical text descriptions or images of previous cases so
as to extract data for learning Bayesian network parameters,
but such derived data has inherent uncertainty associated with
it due to the nature of such algorithms. Because of the inability
of current Bayesian network parameter learning algorithms
to incorporate such uncertainty, common approaches either
ignore this uncertainty, thus reducing the resulting accuracy,
or completely disregard such data. We present an approach for
learning Bayesian network parameters that explicitly incorporates such uncertainty, and which is a natural extension of the
Bayesian network formalism. We present a generalization of
the Expectation Maximization parameter learning algorithm
that enables it to handle any historical data with likelihoodevidence-based uncertainty, as well as an empirical validation demonstrating the improved accuracy and convergence
enabled by our approach. We also prove that our extended algorithm maintains the convergence and correctness properties
of the original EM algorithm, while explicitly incorporating
data uncertainty in the learning process.

Preliminaries

Introduction
Bayesian networks (BNs) (Pearl 1988) provide a powerful
framework for probabilistic reasoning. In practice, however,
the creation of BNs often requires the specification of a large
number of parameters, making it highly desirable to be able
to learn these parameters from historical data.
In real-world applications, such historical data often has
uncertainty associated with it. A prominent example is when
such data is available only in unstructured formats. For example, Wasserkrug et al. (2019) report on work on creating
a model for electrical equipment diagnosis, in which much
of the data available to train the BN was in textual descriptions written by technicians. In order to be able to utilize
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12190

A Bayesian network (Pearl 1988) is defined as B =
hX, D, G, Pi, where X = {X1 , . . . , Xn } is a set of random variables, D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } is the set of the corresponding domains, G = (V, E) is a directed acyclic graph
over X (that is, V = X), and P = {P1 , . . . , Pn }, where
Pi = Pr(Xi | Pai ) is the conditional probability table (CPT)
that provides the conditional probability of each value of Xi
given the values of its parents Pai .
Bayesian networks are often used for diagnosis, in both
medical (Kahn et al. 1997) and engineering domains (Cai,
Huang, and Xie 2017). Figure 1(a) depicts a well-known example of a diagnosis network in the medical domain, which
we will use to illustrate the key concepts of our work (and
which was also empirically analyzed). The network is often called the “Asia” or “Lung cancer” network (Lauritzen
and Spiegelhalter 1988). Figure 1(b) shows the CPT of the
node “Dyspnoea?”. Once its parameters have been deter-

