The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Complex 3D Human Self-Contact
Mihai Fieraru1 Mihai Zanfir1 Elisabeta Oneata1
Alin-Ionut Popa1 Vlad Olaru1 Cristian Sminchisescu2,1
1
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, 2 Lund University
{mihai.fieraru, mihai.zanfir, elisabeta.oneata, alin.popa, vlad.olaru}@imar.ro, cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract
Monocular estimation of three dimensional human selfcontact is fundamental for detailed scene analysis including body language understanding and behaviour modeling.
Existing 3d reconstruction methods do not focus on body
regions in self-contact and consequently recover configurations that are either far from each other or self-intersecting,
when they should just touch. This leads to perceptually incorrect estimates and limits impact in those very fine-grained
analysis domains where detailed 3d models are expected to
play an important role. To address such challenges we detect self-contact and design 3d losses to explicitly enforce it.
Specifically, we develop a model for Self-Contact Prediction
(SCP), that estimates the body surface signature of selfcontact, leveraging the localization of self-contact in the image, during both training and inference. We collect two large
datasets to support learning and evaluation: (1) HumanSC3D,
an accurate 3d motion capture repository containing 1, 032
sequences with 5, 058 contact events and 1, 246, 487 ground
truth 3d poses synchronized with images collected from multiple views, and (2) FlickrSC3D, a repository of 3, 969 images, containing 25, 297 surface-to-surface correspondences
with annotated image spatial support. We also illustrate how
more expressive 3d reconstructions can be recovered under
self-contact signature constraints and present monocular detection of face-touch as one of the multiple applications made
possible by more accurate self-contact models.

Figure 1: Our self-contact prediction network (SCP) estimates the body regions in contact, their correspondences and
the self-contact positioning in image space.

sis but in assessing hygiene and possible health implications
during a pandemic.
To overcome some of the shortcomings of existing, selfcontact agnostic, 3d reconstruction methods, we propose to
represent self-contact explicitly and show how the resulting models can assist behavioural understanding in applications assessing face touching. Our models learn to predict the image location of contact in order to assist the
detection of body regions in self-contact, as well as their
signature, defined as the correspondences between regions
on the surface of a human body model that touch. Conditioned on such detailed estimates self-contact can be recovered correctly in the 3d reconstruction. To train models and
for large-scale quantitative evaluation, we collect and annotate two large scale datasets containing images of people
in self-contact. HumanSC3D is an accurate 3d motion capture dataset containing 1, 032 sequences with 5, 058 contact
events and 1, 246, 487 ground truth 3d poses synchronized
with images captured from multiple views. We also collect
FlickrSC3D, a dataset of 3, 969 images, containing 25, 297
annotations of body part region pairs in contact, defined on
a 3d human surface model, together with their self-contact
localisation in the image.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:

Introduction
Most monocular 3d human reconstruction systems do not
directly infer human self-contact, although its central role in
correctly recognizing the subtleties of many iconic poses or
gestures is widely acknowledged perceptually. Current modeling deficiencies result in contact regions either far from
each other or self-intersecting in the final 3d reconstruction,
when they should instead just touch (e.g. contact between
one’s hand and chin). In turn, unpredictable reconstructions
of self-contact decrease the appeal of using 3d representations for fine grained analysis of behavior and intent, particularly as many self-touch events are elicited frequently,
and with little or no human awareness. Correctly tracking
self-contact would be invaluable not just for behavior analy-

• Introduce a first principled model to detect self-contact
body regions and their signature. Our novel deep neural
network SCP is assisted by an intermediate self-contact
image localisation (branch) predictor, leveraged both in
training, for local feature selection, and in testing, by enforcing consistency with the estimated 3d contact signature.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Novel, task-specific, large scale, valuable community
1343

