The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ACT: an Attentive Convolutional Transformer for Efficient Text Classification
Pengfei Li,1 Peixiang Zhong,1 Kezhi Mao,1 *
Dongzhe Wang,2 Xuefeng Yang,2 Yunfeng Liu,2 Jianxiong Yin,3 Simon See3
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
ZhuiYi Technology, Shenzhen, China, 3 NVIDIA AI Tech Center
{pli006,peixiang001,ekzmao}@ntu.edu.sg, {ethanwang,ryan,glenliu}@wezhuiyi.com, {jianxiongy,ssee}@nvidia.com
2

Abstract

capturing semantic and syntactic information of n-grams for
more abstract and discriminative representations (Kim 2014;
Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015; Li and Mao 2019). However,
CNN is relatively weak in capturing sequential information
and long-distance dependencies because convolutional filters normally have small kernel sizes focusing only on local
n-grams, and the pooling operation results in loss of position
information. Although we could apply dilated CNN (Yu and
Koltun 2015) or construct deep CNNs with one layer stack
on another to widen the convolution context to some extent,
the performance gain is normally marginal with the cost of
more data needed (Le, Cerisara, and Denis 2018). Besides,
the convolutional filters in CNN may misfit to task-irrelevant
words, hence producing non-discriminative features in the
feature map (Li et al. 2017, 2020).
RNN is well-known for processing sequential data recurrently and it is widely used for text classification (Tang, Qin,
and Liu 2015; Yogatama et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017a).
However, RNN suffers from two problems due to its recurrent nature: gradient vanishing and parallel-unfriendly.
Many works attempt to alleviate the gradient vanishing
problem by incorporating attention mechanisms to RNN
(Zhou et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017b). A
novel neural architecture called Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017) addresses both problems by relying entirely on selfattention to handle long-distance dependencies without recurrent computations. The emerging of Transformer-based
neural networks has led to a series of breakthroughs in a
wide range of NLP tasks (Zhang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019;
Zhong, Wang, and Miao 2019). Especially, the pre-trained
language models based on Transformer have achieved stateof-the-art performance in many benchmark datasets (Devlin
et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020). However,
the heavy architecture of Transformer often requires more
training data, CPU/GPU memory, and computational power,
especially for long texts. Besides, since self-attention takes
into account all the elements with a weighted averaging operation that disperses the attention distribution, Transformer
may overlook the relation of neighboring elements (i.e. ngrams) that are important for text classification tasks (Yang
et al. 2018, 2019a; Guo, Zhang, and Liu 2019).
To address the above-mentioned limitations of CNN and
Transformer, we propose an Attentive Convolutional Transformer (ACT) which takes the advantages of both Trans-

Recently, Transformer has been demonstrating promising
performance in many NLP tasks and showing a trend of replacing Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Meanwhile, less
attention is drawn to Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
due to its weak ability in capturing sequential and longdistance dependencies, although it has excellent local feature
extraction capability. In this paper, we introduce an Attentive
Convolutional Transformer (ACT) that takes the advantages
of both Transformer and CNN for efficient text classification.
Specifically, we propose a novel attentive convolution mechanism that utilizes the semantic meaning of convolutional filters attentively to transform text from complex word space to
a more informative convolutional filter space where important
n-grams are captured. ACT is able to capture both local and
global dependencies effectively while preserving sequential
information. Experiments on various text classification tasks
and detailed analyses show that ACT is a lightweight, fast,
and effective universal text classifier, outperforming CNNs,
RNNs, and attentive models including Transformer.

1

Introduction

Text classification is a fundamental problem behind many
research topics in Natural Language Processing (NLP), such
as topic categorization, sentiment analysis, relation extraction, etc. The key issue in text classification is text representation learning, which aims to capture both local and global
dependencies of texts with respect to class labels. Compared with traditional bag-of-words/n-grams model (Wang
and Manning 2012), deep neural networks have shown to be
more effective since word order information can be utilized
and more semantic features can be captured. The commonly
adopted neural architectures in deep neural networks include
CNN, RNN, and Transformer.
CNN is a special feed-forward neural network with convolutional layers interleaved with pooling layers. For NLP,
the convolutional kernels/filters in CNN can be treated as ngram extractors that convert n-gram in each position into a
vector showing its relevance to the filters. With the help of
pooling operations, the overall relevance of the text to each
filter can be captured. Therefore, CNN has advantages in
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13261

