The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Sample Complexity of Teaching-by-Reinforcement on Q-Learning
Xuezhou Zhang1 , Shubham Bharti1 , Yuzhe Ma1 , Adish Singla2 and Xiaojin Zhu1
1

UW Madison
MPI-SWS

2

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of teaching, termed as “teaching dimension” (TDim) in the literature, for the teachingby-reinforcement paradigm, where the teacher guides the
student through rewards. This is distinct from the teachingby-demonstration paradigm motivated by robotics applications, where the teacher teaches by providing demonstrations
of state/action trajectories. The teaching-by-reinforcement
paradigm applies to a wider range of real-world settings where
a demonstration is inconvenient, but has not been studied systematically. In this paper, we focus on a specific family of
reinforcement learning algorithms, Q-learning, and characterize the TDim under different teachers with varying control
power over the environment, and present matching optimal
teaching algorithms. Our TDim results provide the minimum
number of samples needed for reinforcement learning, and we
discuss their connections to standard PAC-style RL sample
complexity and teaching-by-demonstration sample complexity
results. Our teaching algorithms have the potential to speed up
RL agent learning in applications where a helpful teacher is
available.

Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has seen applications in a wide variety of domains, such as games (Silver et al.
2016; Mnih et al. 2015), robotics control (Kober, Bagnell, and
Peters 2013; Argall et al. 2009) and healthcare (Komorowski
et al. 2018; Shortreed et al. 2011). One of the fundamental
questions in RL is to understand the sample complexity of
learning, i.e. the amount of training needed for an agent to
learn to perform a task. In the most prevalent RL setting, an
agent learns through continuous interaction with the environment and learns the optimal policy from natural reward
signals. For standard algorithms such as Q-learning, naive
interaction with MDP suffers exp complexity (Li 2012). In
contrast, many real-world RL scenarios involve a knowledgable (or even omniscient) teacher who aims at guiding
the agent to learn the policy faster. For example, in the educational domain, a human student can be modeled as an
RL agent, and a teacher will design a minimal curriculum to
convey knowledge (policy) to the student (agent) (Chuang
et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10939

In the context of reinforcement learning, teaching has
traditionally been studied extensively under the scheme of
teaching-by-demonstration (TbD), where the teacher provides demonstrations of state/action trajectories under a good
policy, and the agent aims to mimic the teacher as closely as
possible (Hussein et al. 2017). However, in many applications,
it is inconvenient for the teacher to demonstrate because the
action space of the teacher is distinct from the action space of
the learner. In contrast, it is usually easier for the teacher to
teach by reinforcements (TbR), i.e. with rewards and punishments. For example, in dog training, the trainer can’t always
demonstrate the task to be learned, e.g. fetch the ball with
its mouth, but instead would let the dog know whether it
performs well by giving treats strategically (Chuang et al.
2020); In personalizing virtual assistants, it’s easier for the
user to tell the assistant whether it has done a good job than
to demonstrate how a task should be performed. Despite its
many applications, TbR has not been studied systematically.
In this paper, we close this gap by presenting to our knowledge the first results on TbR. Specifically, we focus on a
family of RL algorithms called Q-learning. Our main contributions are:
1. We formulate the optimal teaching problem in TbR.
2. We characterize the sample complexity of teaching,
termed as ”teaching dimension” (TDim), for Q-learning
under four different teachers, distinguid by their power
(or rather constraints) in constructing a teaching sequence.
See Table 1 for a summary of results.
3. For each teacher level, we design an efficient teaching
algorithm which matches the TDim.
4. We draw connections between our results and classic results on the sample complexity of RL and of TbD.

Related Work
Classic Machine Teaching Since computational teaching
was first proposed in (Shinohara and Miyano 1991; Goldman
and Kearns 1995), the teaching dimension has been studied in
various learning settings. The vast majority focused on batch
supervised learning. See (Zhu et al. 2018) for a recent survey.
Of particular interest to us though is teaching online learners
such as Online Gradient Descent (OGD) (Liu et al. 2017;
Lessard, Zhang, and Zhu 2018), active learners (Hanneke
2007; Peltola et al. 2019), and sequential teaching for learners
with internal learning state (Hunziker et al. 2019; Mansouri

