The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Attr2Style: A Transfer Learning Approach for Inferring Fashion Styles via
Apparel Attributes
Rajdeep H Banerjee, Abhinav Ravi, Ujjal Kr Dutta
Data Sciences, Myntra, India
{rajdeep.banerjee,abhinav.ravi,ujjal.dutta}@myntra.com

Abstract
Popular fashion e-commerce platforms mostly provide details about low-level attributes of an apparel (for example,
neck type, dress length, collar type, print etc) on their product detail pages. However, customers usually prefer to buy
apparel based on their style information, or simply put, occasion (for example, party wear, sports wear, casual wear etc).
Application of a supervised image-captioning model to generate style-based image captions is limited because obtaining
ground-truth annotations in the form of style-based captions
is difficult. This is because annotating style-based captions requires a certain amount of fashion domain expertise, and also
adds to the costs and manual effort. On the contrary, low-level
attribute based annotations are much more easily available. To
address this issue, we propose a transfer-learning based image
captioning model that is trained on a source dataset with sufficient attribute-based ground-truth captions, and used to predict
style-based captions on a target dataset. The target dataset has
only a limited amount of images with style-based ground-truth
captions. The main motivation of our approach comes from
the fact that most often there are correlations among the lowlevel attributes and the higher-level styles for an apparel. We
leverage this fact and train our model in an encoder-decoder
based framework using attention mechanism. In particular, the
encoder of the model is first trained on the source dataset to
obtain latent representations capturing the low-level attributes.
The trained model is fine-tuned to generate style-based captions for the target dataset. To highlight the effectiveness of
our method, we qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate
that the captions generated by our approach are close to the
actual style information for the evaluated apparel. A Proof
Of Concept (POC) for our model is under pilot at Myntra
(www.myntra.com) where it is exposed to some internal users
for feedback.

(a)

(b)

Introduction
Catalog images of fashion e-commerce websites are mostly
annotated with captions providing details about the low-level
attributes of an apparel (for example, neck type, dress length,
collar type, print etc). Such captions are easier to annotate as
low-level attributes being generic in nature are easier to obtain. Often, apparel manufacturers themselves provide such
information. However, captions providing nature or style (or
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15255

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of attribute and style based captions from source and target domains respectively, and (b)
Correlation among low-level attributes and higher-level style
information (for the vintage style, left quadrant shows the
print and pattern based attributes, and the right quadrant
shows the shape based attributes).

looks) information of an apparel (Figure 1a) are relatively
less common (for example, party wear, sports wear, casual
looks etc). This is despite the fact that users have a higher
preference for style information over low-level attributes
while buying apparel for occasions. A straightforward solution to address this problem would be to annotate a dataset

