The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Hybrid Relationships for Person Re-identification
Shuang Liu, Wenmin Huang, Zhong Zhang∗
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile Communications and Power Transmission,
Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, China.
shuangliu.tjnu@gmail.com, huangwenmin2018@gmail.com, zhong.zhang8848@gmail.com

Input

Abstract

Relationship Learning

GCN

(a)

GCN

(b)

CNN
CNN
CNN

1

CNN

Recently, the relationship among individual pedestrian images and the relationship among pairwise pedestrian images
have become attractive for person re-identification (re-ID) as
they effectively improve the ability of feature representation.
In this paper, we propose a novel method named Hybrid Relationship Network (HRNet) to learn the two types of relationships in a unified framework that makes use of their own advantages. Specifically, for the relationship among individual
pedestrian images, we take the features of pedestrian images
as the nodes to construct a locally-connected graph, so as to
improve the discriminative ability of nodes. Meanwhile, we
propose the consistent node constraint to inject the identity information into the graph learning process and guide the information to propagate accurately. As for the relationship among
pairwise pedestrian images, we treat the feature differences of
pedestrian images as the nodes to construct a fully-connected
graph so as to estimate robust similarity of nodes. Furthermore, we propose the inter-graph propagation to alleviate the
information loss for the fully-connected graph. Extensive experiments on Market-1501, DukeMTMCreID, CUHK03 and
MSMT17 demonstrate that the proposed HRNet outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods.

Feature Extraction

Figure 1: Two types of methods for learning the relationship among pedestrian images: (a) learning the relationship
among individual pedestrian images, and (b) learning the relationship among pairwise pedestrian images.

The booming Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has
attracted extensive attention because of the powerful ability to learn the relationship of nodes in the graph (Kipf and
Welling 2016; Zhou et al. 2018). Hence, several recent studies embed GCN into the person re-ID pipeline to establish
the relationship among pedestrian images. These studies are
roughly divided into two categories based on the type of relationship learning. The first category methods (Bao et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020) take single feature as the node of graph
and utilize the classification loss to learn the relationship among individual pedestrian images, aiming to improve the
discriminative ability of nodes, as shown in Figure 1 (a). As
for the second category methods (Shen et al. 2018; Yan et al.
2019), they treat pairwise features as the node of graph and
employ the verification loss to learn the relationship among
pairwise pedestrian images, aiming to estimate robust similarity of nodes, as shown in Figure 1 (b). Since the two types
of methods are different in node forms and loss functions, they could learn the relationship from different aspects.
Hence, this motivates us to learn more comprehensive relationships among pedestrian images.
In this paper, we propose a novel method named Hybrid

Introduction

Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at matching the pedestrian across non-overlapping camera views, and it has a wide
range of applications, such as picture grouping, activity analysis and multi-person tracking (Zheng et al. 2015; Fu et al.
2019; Zhou, Su, and Wu 2020). The challenges of person
re-ID lie in complex variations in viewpoints, poses, resolutions, illumination, etc.
So far, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) dominates the person re-ID field due to its promising performance (Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015; Park and Ham
2020). Most person re-ID methods utilize CNN to extract discriminative features from pedestrian images and then
employ the classification set-up or metric learning to optimize the deep model. However, they only rely on individual
pedestrian image in the feature learning process without providing the relationship among pedestrian images.
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2172

