The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generative Semi-supervised Learning for Multivariate Time Series Imputation
Xiaoye Miao1 , Yangyang Wu1 , Jun Wang3 , Yunjun Gao2 , Xudong Mao4 , Jianwei Yin1,2 *
1

Center for Data Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Information Hub, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
4
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
{miaoxy, zjuwuyy, junw, gaoyj}@zju.edu.cn, xudong.xdmao@gmail.com, zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

between the variables over time. In contrast, the time series
imputation approaches (Fortuin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019;
Luo et al. 2018, 2019; Ma et al. 2019), consider the temporal information in multivariate time series data to get better
time series imputation accuracy.
The ultimate goal of imputing missing values on multivariate time series data is to benefit the downstream
data analytics, e.g., classification. In practice, the time series datasets generally more or less take some labels in
many real-life scenarios. As an example, the PhysioBank
archive (Goldberger et al. 2000) contains more than 40 gigabytes of ECG medical time series data with some missing
values and a tiny subset of annotated labels. Hospitals often
archive even larger amounts of ECG data without labels for
legal reasons.
Accordingly, it drives to integrate the time series imputation and subsequent analysis. It is also promising and practical to make full use of valuable annotated labels in time
series data for missing value imputation in real-life applications. However, almost all existing time series imputation
approaches (Fortuin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Luo et al.
2018, 2019; Ma et al. 2019) do not consider the downstream
analysis when imputing the missing values in time series
data with a fraction of labels.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel semisupervised generative adversarial network model, termed as
SSGAN, to impute missing values in the general time series
data with a fraction of labels. SSGAN is composed of three
players, i.e., a generator, a discriminator, and a classifier. It
adopts a bidirectional recurrent neural network to learn the
temporal information in multivariate time series. We present
a semi-supervised classifier in SSGAN to fully use the labels existed in multivariate time series data, so as to take
into consideration the subsequent time series analysis task
at the same time. The generator estimates the missing values
conditioned on observed values/components and data labels
in time series. It outputs an imputed time series dataset. The
discriminator attempts to identify which components are observed and which ones are imputed by the generator. We
arm the discriminator with a temporal reminder matrix that
encodes a proportion of missing information in the original
time series data. Using the temporal reminder matrix and the
classifier forces the generator in SSGAN to accurately learn
the desirable true data distribution. In a nutshell, the main

The missing values, widely existed in multivariate time series
data, hinder the effective data analysis. Existing time series
imputation methods do not make full use of the label information in real-life time series data. In this paper, we propose a
novel semi-supervised generative adversarial network model,
named SSGAN, for missing value imputation in multivariate
time series data. It consists of three players, i.e., a generator, a discriminator, and a classifier. The classifier predicts
labels of time series data, and thus it drives the generator to
estimate the missing values (or components), conditioned on
observed components and data labels at the same time. We introduce a temporal reminder matrix to help the discriminator
better distinguish the observed components from the imputed
ones. Moreover, we theoretically prove that, SSGAN using
the temporal reminder matrix and the classifier does learn to
estimate missing values converging to the true data distribution when the Nash equilibrium is achieved. Extensive experiments on three public real-world datasets demonstrate that,
SSGAN yields a more than 15% gain in performance, compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Multivariate time series analysis (Shi et al. 2020; Song et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2018) is of great practicality in real-life
scenarios, such as stock price forecasting (Bai and Ng 2008),
health status predicting of patients (Esteban, Hyland, and
Rätsch 2017), and weather forecasting (Bright et al. 2015).
Incomplete time series data are ubiquitous in many applications (Miao et al. 2016, 2019), including medical logs, meteorology records, and traffic data, due to various reasons of
the collection device failure, instable system environment, or
privacy concerns. For example, the public real-world medical time series dataset PhysioNet takes above 80% average
missing rate, making it difficult to analyze and mine (Silva
et al. 2012). As a result, the missing data problem seriously
hinders the effective analysis of time series data.
Data imputation has been extensively explored to solve
the missing problem. Traditional methods (Mattei and
Frellsen 2019; Yoon, Jordon, and Schaar 2018) for static
data imputation have limited ability to impute missing values in time series data, since they disregard the relationship
* Corresponding author: zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8983

