The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Submodular Span, with Applications to Conditional Data Summarization
Lilly Kumari, Jeff Bilmes
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle
{lkumari, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract

framework, where the end result is a succinct summary of
the web that is relevant to the user query(s).
Conditional data summarization is related to generic
summarization (where there is no query to which relevance
is preferred), and is formulated as selecting a representative
subset of a large dataset, often based on maximizing a utility
function. The utility function captures properties such as
informativeness, diversity, and coverage and often satisfies
a submodularity property. Submodular functions possess
a natural diminishing returns property i.e., the incremental
value of a new element is less in a larger than in a smaller
context. Mathematically, a set function f : 2V → R is
submodular (Fujishige 2005) if for subsets S, T ⊆ V
such that S ⊆ T and j 6∈ T , f (j|S) ≥ f (j|T ) where
f (j|S) = f (S ∪ j) − f (S) is the marginal gain of adding j
to S. Given a submodular function f , generic summarization
can be addressed via cardinality constrained submodular
maximization maxA⊆V :|A|≤k f (A), which is solvable with
a constant factor i.e., (1 − 1/e) guarantee using the simple
greedy algorithm (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978).
In machine learning, and fields such as natural language
processing (NLP) and information retrieval (IR), various approaches have been used to solve this problem. Query-based
MDS can be in either supervised where labels are available
and a training phase occurs, for example (Lin and Bilmes
2011, 2012) or unsupervised where there are no target labels
to train on as in (He et al. 2012; Yao, Wan, and Xiao 2015;
Feigenblat et al. 2017). In query-based extractive video
summarization, recent methods include snippet selection
using sequential and hierarchical Determinantal Point
Processes (DPP) (Sharghi, Gong, and Shah 2016; Sharghi,
Laurel, and Gong 2017). Although applicable, these methods
are supervised and consider the query to be extraneous to the
data/corpus. Given the tremendous growth in data and expensive task-based data annotation, there is a pressing need for
an unifying conditional data summarization framework that
(a) generalizes to different queries i.e., query independent
function formulation, (b) supports multiple query summarization i.e., does not limit the query size to one, (c) considers the
query to be intrinsic to the data/corpus, and (d) is minimally
supervised i.e., uses pre-existing summarization labels only
on a limited validation set for hyperparameter tuning.
On this last point, extractive summarization labeling tasks
are much harder than standard machine learning labeling

As an extension to the matroid span problem, we propose the
submodular span problem that involves finding a large set of
elements with small gain relative to a given query set. We then
propose a two-stage Submodular Span Summarization (S3)
framework to achieve a form of conditional or query-focused
data summarization. The first stage encourages the summary
to be relevant to a given query set, and the second stage
encourages the final summary to be diverse, thus achieving
two important necessities for a good query-focused summary.
Unlike previous methods, our framework uses only a single
submodular function defined over both data and query. We analyze theoretical properties in the context of both matroids and
polymatroids that elucidate when our methods should work
well. We find that a scalable approximation algorithm to the
polymatroid submodular span problem has good theoretical
and empirical properties. We provide empirical and qualitative
results on three real-world tasks: conditional multi-document
summarization on the DUC 2005-2007 datasets, conditional
video summarization on the UT-Egocentric dataset, and
conditional image corpus summarization on the ImageNet
dataset. We use deep neural networks, specifically a BERT
model for text, AlexNet for video frames, and Bi-directional
Generative Adversarial Networks (BiGAN) for ImageNet
images to help instantiate the submodular functions. The result
is a minimally supervised form of conditional summarization
that matches or improves over the previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Conditional data summarization involves extracting, from
a large dataset, a subset that is both relevant to a given
query set and representative of the large dataset. Multiple
applications in machine learning and information retrieval
are related to this task. For example, in query based
extractive Multi-Document Summarization (MDS), given
a large collection of text documents, the aim is to produce
a short human-readable summary that is not only relevant
to the query, but also representative of the information in
the full suite of documents. Similarly, query based image
summarization aims at retrieving a subset of diverse images
which are similar to the query images, given a large image
dataset. In fact, general web search can be cast in this
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12344

