The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AttaNet: Attention-Augmented Network for Fast and Accurate Scene Parsing
Qi Song,1,3 Kangfu Mei,1,2 Rui Huang,1,2 *
1

Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Jilin University
{songqi, ruihuang}@cuhk.edu.cn, kangfumei@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
$FFXUDF\ P,R8

Two factors have proven to be very important to the performance of semantic segmentation models: global context and
multi-level semantics. However, generating features that capture both factors always leads to high computational complexity, which is problematic in real-time scenarios. In this
paper, we propose a new model, called Attention-Augmented
Network (AttaNet), to capture both global context and multilevel semantics while keeping the efficiency high. AttaNet
consists of two primary modules: Strip Attention Module
(SAM) and Attention Fusion Module (AFM). Viewing that
in challenging images with low segmentation accuracy, there
are a significantly larger amount of vertical strip areas than
horizontal ones, SAM utilizes a striping operation to reduce
the complexity of encoding global context in the vertical direction drastically while keeping most of contextual information, compared to the non-local approaches. Moreover, AFM
follows a cross-level aggregation strategy to limit the computation, and adopts an attention strategy to weight the importance of different levels of features at each pixel when
fusing them, obtaining an efficient multi-level representation. We have conducted extensive experiments on two semantic segmentation benchmarks, and our network achieves
different levels of speed/accuracy trade-offs on Cityscapes,
e.g., 71 FPS/79.9% mIoU, 130 FPS/78.5% mIoU, and 180
FPS/70.1% mIoU, and leading performance on ADE20K as
well.

85 7DR6DSUDDQG&DWDQ]DUR
'$1HW
2XUV ')
80 &&1HW
6)1HW 5HV1HW
2XUV 5HV1HW
3631HW
6)1HW ')
%L6H1HW9/DUJH
75
%L6H1HW9
6)1HW ')
6ZLIW1HWHQV
')6HJ
')$1HW$
5HILQH1HW
2XUV
')6HJ
&HOO1HW
70
')$1HW$
,&1HW
%L6H1HW9$
')$1HW%

65
60

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

6SHHG )UDPHV6HFRQG

Figure 1: Inference speed and mIoU performance on the
Cityscapes test set. Our method is marked as red points,
while grey dots represent other methods. ∗ indicates that the
model uses TensorRT for acceleration.

2016) as the backbone network. Besides, multi-level representations rely on both semantic information in high-level
features and spatial details in low-level features. Nevertheless, both of them almost always require huge computation
which is problematic to real-time applications.
On the other hand, in order to accelerate models for
real-time scenarios, many state-of-the-art methods adopt
light-weight backbone networks or restrict the size of input images. Though greatly boosting the inference speed,
their accuracy is still unsatisfying due to the compromise
on the aforementioned two factors. To achieve a better
speed/accuracy trade-off, we propose Attention-Augmented
Network (AttaNet) which can capture both global context
and multi-level representations while keeping high computational efficiency.
In order to capture non-local contextual information with
limited computation, we started by investigating one of
the most commonly used approaches in scene parsing, the
self-attention mechanism (Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016;
Vaswani et al. 2017), which is capable of capturing longrange dependencies. Yet we can observe that these selfattention based models need to generate huge attention maps
which are computationally expensive, e.g., the non-local
block in Non-local Networks (Wang et al. 2018) and the position attention module in DANet (Fu et al. 2019a) both have
a computational complexity of O((H × W ) × (H × W )),

Introduction
Scene parsing, also known as semantic segmentation, predicts dense labels for all pixels in an image. As one of the
fundamental tasks in computer vision, it has various applications in the fields of autonomous driving, video surveillance,
robot sensing, and so on, many of which have a high demand
for both segmentation accuracy and inference speed.
To achieve high accuracy, segmentation models need to
generate features with global context information and multilevel semantics, both of which are known to be important
factors in scene parsing. Global scene clues are typically
captured via heavy networks with sizable receptive fields,
e.g., PSPNet (Zhao et al. 2017), DANet (Fu et al. 2019a),
and AlignSeg (Huang et al. 2020) use ResNet101 (He et al.
* Rui Huang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2567

