The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Balanced Defect Prediction with Better Information Propagation
Xianda Zheng,1 Yuan-Fang Li,2 Huan Gao,3 Yuncheng Hua,4 Guilin Qi 1,4,5
1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
Microsoft Asia-Pacific Research and Development Group, Suzhou, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{zhengxianda, devinhua, gqi}@seu.edu.cn, yuanfang.li@monash.edu, huan.gao@microsoft.com
Abstract

label information (i.e. defective or not) for code artifacts is
lacking; and (3) the categories of data are severely imbalanced (i.e. non-defective artifacts are the vast majority).
Code artifacts communicate with each other via method
invocation and message passing, i.e. information propagation. The information propagated among code artifacts may
impact whether an artifact is defective or not. For instance,
a class containing a defective method is defective, but a subclass that overrides this method may not be defective. If
the information from this overridden method is not properly propagated, the subclass may be incorrectly classified as
defective by the classifier. Information propagation among
code artifacts is not well utilized by existing methods (Fan
et al. 2019; Wang, Liu, and Tan 2016). Instead, these models treat each code artifact as a separate data instance and
extract features of each instance to train a classifier. Some
models such as Node2defect (Qu et al. 2018) treat individual classes as nodes, and utilize Deepwalk in the node2vec
algorithm (Grover and Leskovec 2016) to propagate information among nodes. However, none of them specifically
distinguishes the information propagation between different
code artifacts. Hence, a mechanism to precisely describes
the information propagation needs to be designed.
Label scarcity refers to the absence of labeled artifacts
within source code. For instance, in three of the ELFF
datasets (Shippey et al. 2016), DrJava, Genoviz and Jmol,
the proportions of code artifacts with label information are
4.53%, 5.57% and 7.18%, respectively. Other datasets in
ELFF also suffer from the label scarcity issue to a similar degree. The lack of labeled data makes it more difficult to train
a defect prediction model with high accuracy. Recent works
such as DP-CNN (Li et al. 2017) use Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) to extract features from the Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST) and train the classifier. Our experimental results
show that the performance of DP-CNN in larger datasets is
worse than in smaller datasets, as larger datasets are more
susceptible to label scarcity. Therefore, mechanisms need to
be investigated to address the label scarcity challenge.
Class imbalance occurs when the vast majority of labeled
code artifacts are non-defective and it is a wide-spread phenomenon. For instance, the proportions of defective code artifacts among all labeled code artifacts are 1.79%, 3.60%
and 5.13% respectively in the three ELFF datasets mention
above. If no measure is taken to handle the imbalance be-

Defect prediction, the task of predicting the presence of defects in source code artifacts, has broad application in software development. Defect prediction faces two major challenges, label scarcity, where only a small percentage of code
artifacts are labeled, and data imbalance, where the majority of labeled artifacts are non-defective. Moreover, current defect prediction methods ignore the impact of information propagation among code artifacts, and this negligence
leads to performance degradation. In this paper, we propose
DPCAG, a novel model to address the above three issues.
We treat code artifacts as nodes in a graph, and learn to
propagate influence among neighboring nodes iteratively in
an EM framework. DPCAG dynamically adjusts the contributions of each node and selects high-confidence nodes for
data augmentation. Experimental results on real-world benchmark datasets show that DPCAG improves performance compare to the state-of-the-art models. In particular, DPCAG
achieves substantial performance superiority when measured
by Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), a metric that is
widely acknowledged to be the most suitable for imbalanced
data.

Introduction
The presence of undetected defects is a serious threat to
software quality and security. For instance, the Heartbleed
Bug was inadvertently introduced in OpenSSL in 2012 and
remained unpatched for more than two years. Heartbleed
can be exploited to steal confidential information in the
SSL/TLS protocol, including passwords and session cookies. Consequently, a large number of users were forced to
modify their passwords on popular websites including Amazon Web Services and GitHub.
Defect prediction aims at building classifiers to predict
whether code artifacts (e.g. classes, methods) are defective
or not (Bowes, Hall, and Petric 2018). Many defect prediction models have been proposed over the years (Wang, Liu,
and Tan 2016; Fan et al. 2019; Li et al. 2017; Qu et al. 2018).
However, most of them do not effectively handle the following three main challenges that arise from the inherent
characteristics of source code: (1) information propagation
among code artifacts needs to be well represented; and (2)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

759

