The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Detecting Adversarial Examples from Sensitivity Inconsistency of
Spatial-Transform Domain
Jinyu Tian,1 Jiantao Zhou,1, * Yuanman Li,2 Jia Duan1
1

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University
{yb77405, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, yuanmanli@szu.edu.cn, xuelandj@gmail.com
Abstract

Though many robust classification strategies have been proposed, most of them are still not powerful enough to defeat
the secondary attack or AEs generated by some advanced
attacks e.g., C&W (Carlini and Wagner 2017). In fact, in
(Tsipras et al. 2019), it was pointed out that the true robustness would lead to depreciation in accuracy. Alternatively,
a weaker version of the defense is just to detect the AEs,
while not ambiguously rectifying the classification results.
In many practical applications, such detection is still quite
meaningful, generating alarming signals to potential threats.
Further, the AE detection could guide a better defense strategy (Sun et al. 2020).
An AE can be regarded as the translation of a normal example (NE) along the adversarial direction. Geometrically,
the adversarial direction usually points toward the highlycurved region of the decision boundary, such that the decision boundary can be crossed with the minimized perturbation magnitude (Fawzi et al. 2018). A symmetric phenomenon we would like to point out is that if we can intentionally cause fluctuations at the highly-curved regions
of the decision boundary, then those AEs could easily lead
to different classification results, while NEs would exhibit
quite consistent behavior. Such phenomenon reveals that,
for NEs and AEs, there exists an inconsistency of sensitivity
to boundary fluctuation at highly-curved regions. This motivates us to design another classifier with transformed decision boundary, which can be collaboratively used with the
original classifier (called primal classifier) to detect AEs,
by virtue of the sensitivity inconsistency. Ideally, the designed classifier (called dual classifier) should have dissimilar structures at the highly-curved regions with the primal
classifier, while maintaining similar structures at the other
regions.
To design the dual classifier satisfying the above requirements, we resort to the transform domain techniques, i.e.,
design the classifier over the transform domain, rather than
the traditional spatial domain. In fact, some existing works
(Liu et al. 2016; Tramèr et al. 2017) pointed out that models trained on the same feature domain of a given dataset
tend to produce similar decision boundaries, especially their
curved regions. This would explain why AE has the ability of transferable attack on models with different architectures. More specifically, we construct the dual classifier

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to be vulnerable against adversarial examples (AEs), which are maliciously designed to cause dramatic model output errors. In
this work, we reveal that normal examples (NEs) are insensitive to the fluctuations occurring at the highly-curved region of the decision boundary, while AEs typically designed
over one single domain (mostly spatial domain) exhibit exorbitant sensitivity on such fluctuations. This phenomenon
motivates us to design another classifier (called dual classifier) with transformed decision boundary, which can be
collaboratively used with the original classifier (called primal classifier) to detect AEs, by virtue of the sensitivity inconsistency. When comparing with the state-of-the-art algorithms based on Local Intrinsic Dimensionality (LID), Mahalanobis Distance (MD), and Feature Squeezing (FS), our
proposed Sensitivity Inconsistency Detector (SID) achieves
improved AE detection performance and superior generalization capabilities, especially in the challenging cases where
the adversarial perturbation levels are small. Intensive experimental results on ResNet and VGG validate the superiority
of the proposed SID.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved the state-ofthe-art performance on a wide range of tasks including image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
speech recognition (Karpathy et al. 2014), etc. However, recent studies have shown that DNNs are vulnerable to crafted
adversarial examples (AEs), which are generally imperceptible to the sense of humanity while being able to cause severe model output errors. Such vulnerability leads to serious
security risks when deploying DNNs on critical scenarios,
e.g., self-driving cars. The attempts for defending against the
threat of AEs can be roughly categorized into two types: robust classification and AE detection. The former type aims to
eliminate the impact of the adversarial noise and make correct classification (e.g., adversarial training (Schmidt et al.
2018), denoising, (Liao et al. 2018; Akhtar, Liu, and Mian
2018), defensive distillation (Papernot et al. 2016b), etc.).
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9877

