The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Boundary-Aware Geometric Encoding for Semantic Segmentation of Point Clouds
Jingyu Gong,1∗ Jiachen Xu, 1 * Xin Tan, 1,3 Jie Zhou, 3 Yanyun Qu, 4 Yuan Xie, 2† Lizhuang Ma 1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
City University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China
4
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{gongjingyu, xujiachen, tanxin2017}@sjtu.edu.cn, jzhou67-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

junction of the sofa and the ground can be considered as the
boundary. Many works (Wang et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2018;
Wu, Qi, and Fuxin 2019) tackled the segmentation problem in point clouds without explicitly learning or using the
boundary information, hence they extracted features from
points with no differentiation between boundary and nonboundary points. It is noteworthy that extracted features on
the boundary are usually ambiguous, because they mix features of points belonging to different categories on different
sides of the boundary. As the network goes deeper, if other
points incorporate features of the boundary points, these ambiguous features on the boundary will inevitably propagate
to more other points hierarchically. So, the information of
different objects will spread across the boundary, leading to
a bad contour for final semantic segmentation.

Boundary information plays a significant role in 2D image
segmentation, while usually being ignored in 3D point cloud
segmentation where ambiguous features might be generated
in feature extraction, leading to misclassification in the transition area between two objects. In this paper, firstly, we propose a Boundary Prediction Module (BPM) to predict boundary points. Based on the predicted boundary, a boundaryaware Geometric Encoding Module (GEM) is designed to encode geometric information and aggregate features with discrimination in a neighborhood, so that the local features belonging to different categories will not be polluted by each
other. To provide extra geometric information for boundaryaware GEM, we also propose a light-weight Geometric Convolution Operation (GCO), making the extracted features
more distinguishing. Built upon the boundary-aware GEM,
we build our network and test it on benchmarks like ScanNet
v2, S3DIS. Results show our methods can significantly improve the baseline and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

To tackle this problem, we propose a Boundary Prediction
Module (BPM) to predict boundary points in point clouds.
In this module, we give a soft prediction for boundary and
this module is skillfully supervised by the ground truth of
boundary generated on the fly. It is noteworthy that, compared with semantic segmentation, boundary prediction is
easier and likely to obtain better results. So, we introduce the
light-weight BPM to predict the boundary. Then, we use the
prediction as auxiliary information to boost the performance
of segmentation. The BPM and segmentation network are
trained jointly in end-to-end manner. Fig. 1 illustrates the
predicted boundary in several scenes. Most of them are accurately located between different categories, which also visually reflects the effectiveness of our BPM.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation of point clouds has become an increasingly attended task. Because of the success of 2D image recognition (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen
et al. 2017), many works tried to extend 2D convolution
network to 3D space directly (Maturana and Scherer 2015;
Zhou and Tuzel 2018). However, this kind of methods is
limited by drastic increment of computational complexity.
On the other side, PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) utilized shared
Multi-Layer Perceptrons to directly process point clouds and
aggregates information through max-pooling, but it failed to
exploit the relationship among points in a local region. Due
to the unbalanced distribution of points and irregularity of
representation, semantic segmentation of point clouds is still
a challenging task.
The boundary plays an important role in the semantic
segmentation of point clouds, because lots of misclassifications happen nearby boundary points. In the point cloud, the
boundary refers to the transition area between two or more
objects belonging to different categories. For example, the

Based upon the BPM, we design a boundary-aware Geometric Encoding Module (GEM) to utilize the predicted
boundary in feature extraction. When aggregating local features, we only allow information sharing within each object
area by preventing the propagation of features across boundary. Because local features can provide more detail information, mixing local features of different categories will definitely destroy this detail information. Then, in the following
layers of encoder where representative points are sampled
and global features are encoded, information belonging to
different categories can be transferred through boundary to
obtain the global scene information. In this way, the predicted boundary would act as a barrier to prevent the information mixture from different categories in local feature ex-

* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1424

