The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-View Information-Bottleneck Representation Learning
Zhibin Wan,1 Changqing Zhang,1,2 Pengfei Zhu,1,2∗ Qinghua Hu1,2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
{wanzhibin, zhangchangqing, zhupengfei, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

the multi-view representation learning approaches can improve performance (Tao et al. 2019). To effectively explore
the multi-view data, a series of methods have been proposed
in recent years (Wang et al. 2015). The representative ways
are Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1992)
and its variants, which mainly maximize the consistency of
multiple views by projecting different views into a common
subspace. However, the main drawback of the CCA-based
algorithms is that it overemphasizes exploring common information, while the view-specific intrinsic information of
each view is also important, which may degrade the quality
of the learned representation.
Consequently, it is still a long-term challenge to jointly
exploit the view-specific information of each view and the
complex relationships among different heterogeneous views
under the context of multi-view representation learning. In
this work, to address the above issues, we propose an unsupervised multi-view representation learning method termed
Collaborative Multi-View Information Bottleneck Networks
(CMIB-Nets) based on the information bottleneck principle. The proposed CMIB-Nets aims to collaboratively encode and integrate the view-specific intrinsic information
and shared latent structure from heterogeneous views into
a comprehensive representation. Moreover, the model can
also adaptively balance the complementarity and consistency among different views.
Specifically, we realize this by maximizing the mutual information between multi-view information-bottleneck representation and shared representation (learning the common structure), while at the same time maximizing the mutual information between multi-view information-bottleneck
representation and view-specific representations (learning
the view-specific information). We also minimize the mutual information between original views and multi-view
information-bottleneck representation simultaneously (compressing data to remove useless information). The resulting multi-view information-bottleneck representation can
integrate the advantages of other multi-view representations, which not only encodes the view-specific information and cross-view underlying structure but also reduces
the influence of superfluous information in the multi-view
data. Therefore, it can be more robust to downstream tasks
and improve the generalization capability. Furthermore, by
utilizing the deep neural networks, the obtained represen-

In real-world applications, clustering or classification can
usually be improved by fusing information from different
views. Therefore, unsupervised representation learning on
multi-view data becomes a compelling topic in machine
learning. In this paper, we propose a novel and flexible unsupervised multi-view representation learning model termed
Collaborative Multi-View Information Bottleneck Networks
(CMIB-Nets), which comprehensively explores the common
latent structure and the view-specific intrinsic information,
and discards the superfluous information in the data significantly improving the generalization capability of the model.
Specifically, our proposed model relies on the information
bottleneck principle to integrate the shared representation
among different views and the view-specific representation
of each view, prompting the multi-view complete representation and flexibly balancing the complementarity and consistency among multiple views. We conduct extensive experiments (including clustering analysis, robustness experiment,
and ablation study) on real-world datasets, which empirically
show promising generalization ability and robustness compared to state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
For real-world applications, data are usually manifested in
multiple types of features (Dhillon, Foster, and Ungar 2011)
or multiple modalities (Ngiam et al. 2011; Baltrušaitis,
Ahuja, and Morency 2018) that are considered as multiple
views. For instance, an image can be described by color
(e.g., color histogram (Novak, Shafer et al. 1992)) or texture descriptor (e.g., GIST (Oliva and Torralba 2001), SIFT
(Lowe 2004), HOG (Dalal and Triggs 2005)). Basically,
due to the diversity of feature extraction or data acquirement, various views are usually heterogeneous. The ubiquity of multi-view data has attracted tremendous attention
to the multi-view representation learning (Sun 2013; Zhang
et al. 2020). Furthermore, integrating different views into a
compact representation is essential for the downstream specific tasks since the intact representation could be easily
developed by off-the-shelf algorithms (Zhang et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2018). Generally, when information from different views complements each other, it can be expected that
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10085

