The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Continual General Chunking Problem and SyncMap
Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas1,2 ,Toshitake Asabuki3
1

Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
3
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan
vargas@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, toshitake.asabuki2@oist.jp
2

Abstract
Humans possess an inherent ability to chunk sequences into
their constituent parts. In fact, this ability is thought to bootstrap language skills and learning of image patterns which
might be a key to a more animal-like type of intelligence.
Here, we propose a continual generalization of the chunking problem (an unsupervised problem), encompassing fixed
and probabilistic chunks, discovery of temporal and causal
structures and their continual variations. Additionally, we propose an algorithm called SyncMap that can learn and adapt to
changes in the problem by creating a dynamic map which preserves the correlation between variables. Results of SyncMap
suggest that the proposed algorithm learn near optimal solutions, despite the presence of many types of structures and their
continual variation. When compared to Word2vec, PARSER
and MRIL, SyncMap surpasses or ties with the best algorithm
on 66% of the scenarios while being the second best in the
remaining 34%. SyncMap’s model-free simple dynamics and
the absence of loss functions reveal that, perhaps surprisingly,
much can be done with self-organization alone.

Introduction
Humans are able to rapidly detect patterns in sequences
(Bekinschtein et al. 2009; Strauss et al. 2015). By detecting
and chunking together patterns found, even without a supervised signal, humans are able to classify sounds, images and
other information signals (Bulf, Johnson, and Valenza 2011),
(Orbán et al. 2008). Therefore, this unsupervised learning
process is thought to bootstrap many of the initial cognitive capabilities such as natural language processing, speech
recognition and even image recognition.
Here, motivated by this general learning ability we propose the continual general chunking problem. To evaluate
the quality of an algorithm in the proposed problem a set
of tests are defined, including chunks with fixed time series,
chunks based on graphs with probabilistic transitions, overlapping chunks, chunks with probabilistic cycles, temporal
and causal structures identification and continual scenarios.
In other words, the continual general chunking problem generalizes the chunking problem to the identification of temporal and causal structures. All this taking into consideration
continual learning (change of the underlying structure as well
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10006

as the probabilistic distribution of variables throughout the
experiment).Thus, the proposed problem joins the neuroscientific/psychologic chunking problem to the discovery of
causal/temporal structure and unsupervised feature learning
of time series.
To tackle the continual general chunking problem, we propose an algorithm, that without any parameter adjustment
between problems, works for all the continual general chunking problems and achieves near optimal solutions. In other
words, it can cope with probabilistic and fixed chunks as
well as causal structures. This algorithm is inspired by Hebbian learning and negative feedback signals. It works by first
converting inputs into spikes with slow decaying rate and
creating a map on which signals self-organize through neuron group attraction/repeal forces. By creating a dynamic in
which signals that activate together or deactivate together are
attracted to a common center, the self-organizing dynamics
are able to create clusters of correlated signals. It is worth
noticing that attraction of the activated signals (which is
closely related to Hebbian learning) by itself is not enough.
Attraction of both activated and deactivated signals are necessary for the dynamics to reach the cohesive behavior described here.

Our Contributions
In this paper, a general problem is proposed called Continual
General Chunking Problem as well as an algorithm to solve
it called SyncMap. The key contributions are as follows:
• We generalize various problems from neuroscience and
computer science (i.e., chunking problem, discovery of
causal/temporal communities, unsupervised feature learning of time series and their continual variations) into a problem called Continual General Chunking Problem (CGCP).
CGCP is defined formally and experiments are developed
to evaluate an algorithm’s performance. Chunking problem alone encompasses problems from learning image
features to sounds as shown in (Asabuki and Fukai 2020).
It originates from detecting repetitive patterns of neural
spike sequences, but its primitives are thought to be widely
used in the brain. Discovery of causal and/or temporal
communities was explored in (Schapiro et al. 2013) with
applications in (Jiao et al. 2018). Here we shown how all
these problems and their continual variations can be seen
as a single one.

