The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Explanation Consistency Training: Facilitating Consistency-Based
Semi-Supervised Learning with Interpretability
Tao Han,1 Wei-Wei Tu,2 Yu-Feng Li1∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
hant@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tuww.cn@gmail.com, liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

made much progress. One popular SSL paradigm was based
on smooth assumption (Zhu and Goldberg 2009), i.e., similar input data should own similar output labels. Recently,
deep SSL methods extend such an idea, by constraining the
outputs according to consistency assumption (Laine and Aila
2016; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Miyato et al. 2018), that
is, data perturbations or augmentations should own similar
output labels. Consistency assumption has been shown stateof-the-art performance in various mainstream SSL tasks
such as computer vision and NLP (Miyato et al. 2018).
Many SSL studies have been proposed to interesting data
perturbations or augmentations (Miyato et al. 2018; Berthelot et al. 2019) under consistency assumption. However,
it remains unclear why consistency assumption is effective,
and it is still hard for users to understand how particular decisions are made by state-of-the-art deep SSL models.
In this paper, we first realize that consistency assumption is closely related to causality invariance (Cartwright
2003). Specifically, the consistency assumption implies that
the causality to the class labels will not be destroyed by data
perturbation or augmentation. On the other hand, once the
data perturbation destroys or violates the causality invariance, the consistency assumption may no longer be effective.
In this case, consistency assumption behaves as a rough surrogate to causality invariance, and causality invariance plays
a key role to the success of SSL models.
However, direct learning of causality is infeasible, because of the high complexity of causal inference, especially
for big data and deep neural network models with high capacities (Spirtes 2010). Fortunately, recent studies discovered that model explanation may provide effective clues and
excellent support to the causal relationships (Lipton 2018;
Moraffah et al. 2020). In this paper, we regard model explanation as a better surrogate to causality invariance, and
propose a new SSL model E CT (Explanation Consistency
Training). E CT encourages a consistent reason for the model
decision under unlabeled data perturbation instead of output invariance in the consistency assumption. E CT is able to
bridge state-of-the-art model interpretations to SSL models.
Figure 1 illustrates the motivation. Our basic idea is that a
better surrogate for causality invariance may lead to better
performance and interpretability of SSL. We realize E CTSM for vision tasks and E CT-ATT for NLP tasks.
Our contributions mainly include the followings:

Unlabeled data exploitation and interpretability are usually
both required in reality. They, however, are conducted independently, and very few works try to connect the two. For
unlabeled data exploitation, state-of-the-art semi-supervised
learning (SSL) results have been achieved via encouraging
the consistency of model output on data perturbation, that is,
consistency assumption. However, it remains hard for users
to understand how particular decisions are made by state-ofthe-art SSL models. To this end, in this paper we first disclose
that the consistency assumption is closely related to causality
invariance, where causality invariance lies in the main reason
why the consistency assumption is valid. We then propose
E CT (Explanation Consistency Training) which encourages a
consistent reason of model decision under data perturbation.
E CT employs model explanation as a surrogate of the causality of model output, which is able to bridge state-of-the-art
interpretability to SSL models and alleviate the high complexity of causality. We realize E CT-SM for vision and E CTATT for NLP tasks. Experimental results on real-world data
sets validate the highly competitive performance and better
explanation of the proposed algorithms.

Introduction
Conventional machine learning assumes that a large number of labeled data are readily available for training, and
a black-box nature of complex models is readily excellent
for deployment. However, in many real tasks such as image
understanding or disease diagnosis, obtaining ample labeled
examples is difficult since labeling comes at costly human
resources, and it is desirable for users to understand how particular decisions are made by these models. Unlabeled data
exploitation and interpretability are usually both required in
reality. They, however, conduct independently and very few
works try to connect the two, although much progress has
been made in these two aspects recently (Miyato et al. 2018;
Berthelot et al. 2019; Lipton 2018; Etmann et al. 2019). In
this work, we try to consider the use of interpretability to
facilitate unlabeled data exploitation.
As a major paradigm of unlabeled data exploitation, semisupervised learning (SSL) has been extensively studied and
∗

Yu-Feng Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7639

