The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Theoretical Analyses of Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms on Multi-Modal
Objectives
Benjamin Doerr,1∗ Weijie Zheng2∗
1

2

Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), École Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
doerr@lix.polytechnique.fr, zhengwj13@tsinghua.org.cn

Abstract

benchmark functions used in evolutionary computation theory. For example, in the problems COCZ (Laumanns et al.
2002) and O NE M IN M AX (Giel and Lehre 2010), the two
objectives are both (conflicting) variants of the classic O NE M AX benchmark. The classic benchmark L EADING O NES
was used to construct the LOTZ (Laumanns, Thiele, and
Zitzler 2004) and WLPTNO (Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2013)
problems. These multi-objective benchmark problems are
among the most intensively studied (Giel 2003; Doerr, Kodric, and Voigt 2013; Doerr, Gao, and Neumann 2016; Bian,
Qian, and Tang 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Huang and Zhou
2020; Osuna et al. 2020). We note that these problems are
unimodal in the sense that from each set of solutions P a set
P 0 witnessing the Pareto front can be computed by repeatedly selecting a solution from P , flipping a single bit in it,
adding it to P , and removing dominated solutions from P .
They are thus relatively easy to solve.
As in the theory of single-objective evolutionary computation, multi-modal problems are much less understood
also in the theory of evolutionary multi-objective optimization. We defer a detailed discussion of the state of the art
to Section Related Works and state here only that, to the
best of our knowledge, there is not a single work discussing
in detail how MOEAs cope with multimodality.1 There are
works that contain multimodal problems, but they are using these problems mainly to study other research questions
or the multimodality is only minor (Brockhoff et al. 2007;
Friedrich, Hebbinghaus, and Neumann 2010; Qian, Tang,
and Zhou 2016; Li et al. 2016).
Our Contributions. This paper aims at a deeper understanding how MOEAs cope with multi-objective problems with natural, well-analyzed, multi-modal objectives.
In the theory of single-objective evolutionary computation,
the class of J UMP function is a natural and intensively used
multi-modal function class (Droste, Jansen, and Wegener
2002) that has inspired many interesting results including
that larger mutation rates, crossover, and estimation of distribution algorithms help in the optimization of multi-modal

Previous theory work on multi-objective evolutionary algorithms considers mostly easy problems that are composed
of unimodal objectives. This paper takes a first step towards a deeper understanding of how evolutionary algorithms
solve multi-modal multi-objective problems. We propose
the O NE J UMP Z ERO J UMP problem, a bi-objective problem
whose single objectives are isomorphic to the classic jump
functions benchmark. We prove that the simple evolutionary
multi-objective optimizer (SEMO) cannot compute the full
Pareto front. In contrast, for all problem sizes n and all jump
sizes k ∈ [4.. n2 − 1], the global SEMO (GSEMO) covers
the Pareto front in Θ((n − 2k)nk ) iterations in expectation.
To improve the performance, we combine the GSEMO with
two approaches, a heavy-tailed mutation operator and a stagnation detection strategy, that showed advantages in singleobjective multi-modal problems. Runtime improvements of
asymptotic order at least kΩ(k) are shown for both strategies.
Our experiments verify the substantial runtime gains already
for moderate problem sizes. Overall, these results show that
the ideas recently developed for single-objective evolutionary algorithms can be effectively employed also in multiobjective optimization.

Introduction
Many real-world applications contain multiple conflicting
objectives. For such problems, a single best solution cannot be determined. Therefore, the task is to compute a set of
solutions each of which cannot be improved without worsening in at least one objective (Pareto optima). With their
population-based nature, multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) have been successfully applied here (Zhou
et al. 2011). Similar to the situation in the theory of singleobjective evolutionary algorithms, rigorous theoretical analyses of MOEAs fall far behind their successful applications
in practice.
In order to reveal the working principles of MOEAs,
the research has resorted to multi-objective, especially biobjective, counterparts of well-analyzed single-objective

1

To prevent misunderstandings, let us stress that by multimodality, we refer to the fact that the optimization problems regarded are multi-modal, that is, have non-trivial local optima.
Our work is not concerned with multi-modal optimization, which
means finding all local optima of a problem.

∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work and both act as
corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12293

