The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

StarNet: towards Weakly Supervised Few-Shot Object Detection
Leonid Karlinsky*1 , Joseph Shtok*1 , Amit Alfassy*1,3 , Moshe Lichtenstein*1 ,
Sivan Harary1 , Eli Schwartz1,2 , Sivan Doveh1 , Prasanna Sattigeri1 ,
Rogerio Feris1 , Alexander Bronstein3 , Raja Giryes2
1

IBM Research AI
Tel-Aviv University
3
Technion
leonidka@il.ibm.com
2

Query

Abstract
Few-shot detection and classification have advanced significantly in recent years. Yet, detection approaches require
strong annotation (bounding boxes) both for pre-training and
for adaptation to novel classes, and classification approaches
rarely provide localization of objects in the scene. In this paper, we introduce StarNet - a few-shot model featuring an
end-to-end differentiable non-parametric star-model detection and classification head. Through this head, the backbone
is meta-trained using only image-level labels to produce good
features for jointly localizing and classifying previously unseen categories of few-shot test tasks using a star-model that
geometrically matches between the query and support images
(to find corresponding object instances). Being a few-shot detector, StarNet does not require any bounding box annotations, neither during pre-training, nor for novel classes adaptation. It can thus be applied to the previously unexplored
and challenging task of Weakly Supervised Few-Shot Object
Detection (WS-FSOD), where it attains significant improvements over the baselines. In addition, StarNet shows significant gains on few-shot classification benchmarks that are less
cropped around the objects (where object localization is key).

Query

Turtle support Parrot support

Query

Query

Dog support

Chicken support

Introduction
Recently, great advances have been made in the field of
few-shot learning using deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). This learning regime targets situations where only
a handful of examples for the target classes (typically 1 or
5) are available at test time, while the target classes themselves are novel and unseen during pre-training. Commonly,
models are pre-trained on a large labeled dataset of ‘base’
classes, e.g. (Lee et al. 2019; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017; Li et al. 2017). There, depending on the application,
label complexity varies from image-level class labels (classification), to labeled boxes (detection), to labeled pixelmasks (segmentation). As shown in (Chen et al. 2019), fewshot methods are highly sensitive to ’domain shift’. For
these methods to be effective, the base classes used for pretraining need to be in the same ‘visual domain’ as the target
(test) classes. That said, for applications which require richer
annotation, such as detection, entering new visual domains is

Figure 1: StarNet provides evidence for its predictions by
finding (semantically) matching regions between query and
support images of a few-shot task, thus effectively detecting object instances. Top: Matching regions are drawn as
heatmaps for each query and support pair. Clearly, in this situation there is no single correct class label for these queries.
Yet, StarNet successfully highlights the matched objects on
both the query and the support images, thus effectively explaining the different possible labels. Bottom: StarNet paves
the way towards previously unexplored Weakly-Supervised
Few-Shot Object Detection (WS-FSOD) task.

still prohibitively expensive due to thousands of base classes
images that need to be annotated in order to pre-train a Few-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1743

