The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling Expert Knowledge in a Heuristic-Based Gin Rummy Agent
Sarah Larkin, William Collicott, Jason Hiebel
Michigan Technological University
1400 Townsend Drive
Houghton, MI 49931
selarkin@mtu.edu,wccollic@mtu.edu,jshiebel@mtu.edu

Abstract

calculated, another hand begins unless one of the players has
a total score of at least 100 points. If this is the case, the game
is over and the player with 100 or more points is the winner.
This paper describes the construction of Tonic, a gin
rummy agent using heuristics based on domain knowledge, for the EAAI 2021 Undergraduate Research Challenge (Neller 2020). To achieve this, we synthesized strategies discussed by experts and hobbyists. Experts often
present strategies in a level of detail that does not dictate precisely in what circumstances those strategies are applicable.
For example, Brown (2019) suggests: ”If the deck is more
than halfway gone, your opponent has probably gotten rid
of the worst deadwood, so knocking with 10 points is an invitation to be undercut.” A human player could dynamically
interpret this and adjust play based on their human opponent
and how a game is going. However, this is sufficiently vague
enough to require analysis and experimentation to determine
effective and implementable strategies. Tonic uses opponent
hand estimation, pairs, and deadwood sum to dynamically
determine the utility of a card at any time during the game.
We first give a high-level description of conventional gin
rummy strategy. Next, we describe heuristics derived from
expert and hobbyist strategies. Finally, we discuss an estimator for estimating confidence in card position based on
observed play.

We developed a heuristic-based reflex agent, Tonic, for the
EAAI 2021 Undergraduate Research Challenge, which tasks
competitors to create an autonomous player to play the
card game gin rummy. Tonic’s heuristics originate in expert
knowledge and inform decision making for the three actions
comprising a turn: drawing a card, discarding a card, and deciding when to knock. However, because these strategies are
based in human intuition, there is often a lack of specificity to
directly model them as algorithms. We developed parameterized models describing that intuition based on factors such as
the number of turns played and an estimation of the opponent
hand. To hone their performance, we conducted both manual
analysis and parameter optimization (grid search) using selfplay and play against a simple baseline agent. These heuristic
models enable Tonic to win against the baseline agent at least
68% of the time.

Introduction
Gin rummy is a two-player card game played with a standard
52-card deck with aces having a value of one, face cards
having a value of ten, and all other cards having the value
printed on them. Gameplay consists of a series of hands
comprised of alternating turns in which each player attempts
to form melds of three or more cards of the same rank (a set)
or three or more cards of adjacent ranks within the same suit
(a run). The objective is to reduce the overall value of unmelded cards in their hands. Each player’s turn consists of
drawing, discarding, and deciding whether to end the current
hand (knock) when their deadwood (unmelded card) sum is
ten or less.
At the end of each hand, players’ scores are updated based
on their respective deadwood sums. First, the non-knocking
player may reduce their deadwood by laying off cards onto
the knocking player’s hand to form melds. After laying off,
the player with the least deadwood remaining scores the difference between theirs and their opponent’s. If the knocking player’s deadwood is greater than or equal to the opponent’s, the opponent scores an additional undercut bonus of
25 points. In the case that a player knocks with 0 deadwood,
meaning their hand is 100% melded, the player has “gone
gin” and earns an additional 25 points. Once the scores are

Related Work
Gin rummy is a sequential, imperfect information game. Sequential games consist of players alternating between actions, the outcomes of which they can remember and use
for future decision making. Common sequential games include chess, checkers, and Go. However, gin rummy is different from perfect information games like chess and Go in
that portions of the game state are hidden. For example, a
player may not always know their opponent’s cards or the
next card they will draw from the face down deck. Other
sequential, imperfect information games include poker, euchre, and Cluedo.
The most similar of these is poker, and considerable previous work has been published exploring different strategies. The most effective of these is Counterfactual Regret
Minimization (CFR), which provides state-of-the-art performance for Texas Hold’em and other poker variants (Brown
and Sandholm 2017; Moravčı́k et al. 2017a). Although this

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15577

