The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Random Forests for Opponent Hand Estimation in Gin Rummy
Anthony Hein1 , May Jiang1 , Vydhourie Thiyageswaran1 , Michael Guerzhoy1,2,3
1

Princeton University
University of Toronto
3
Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute
anhein@princeton.edu, mayjiang@princeton.edu, vrt2@princeton.edu, guerzhoy@cs.toronto.edu
2

Abstract

(ANN) as a value function. The ANN takes as an input a
52-dimensional encoding of the information state, with each
dimension corresponding to one of the cards in the deck,
with positive input values corresponding to possession of
the card, and negative values corresponding to the inaccessibility of the card to the agent. Our approach also utilizes
a learned non-parametric function of the information state.
However, our function is used for estimating the opponent’s
hand rather than the value of the information state.
We will first describe a baseline Gin Rummy agent due to
Todd Neller. We will then describe and evaluate our model
for estimating the opponent’s hand, show how the model can
be used to improve play, and evaluate the agent that uses
the model when playing. Our agent builds on the baseline
agent by incorporating the model’s predictions. Finally, we
analyze the model to show that it works as one would expect
some of the time, but its outputs sometimes diverge from
what we would expect some of the time.

We demonstrate an AI agent for the card game of Gin
Rummy. The agent uses simple heuristics in conjunction with
a model that predicts the probability of each card’s being in
the opponent’s hand. To estimate the probabilities for cards’
being in the opponent’s hand, we generate a dataset of Gin
Rummy games using self-play, and train a random forest on
the game information states. We explore the random forest
classifier we trained and study the correspondence between
its outputs and intuitively correct outputs. Our agent wins
61% of games against a baseline heuristic agent that does not
use opponent hand estimation.

Introduction
Gin Rummy is an imperfect-information card game. The
rules of the game, as well as Todd Neller’s baseline player,
are available at the EAAI 2021 Gin Rummy Challenge website1 .
Optimal play likely requires reasoning about the opponent’s strategy as well as reasoning about, for example,
which cards are in play. Instead of using only explicit reasoning, the agent we describe uses a statistical model that
predicts the opponent’s hand together with very simple reasoning in order to choose plays.
We fit a statistical model to game information states generated using self-play of a simple heuristic model. Specifically, we learn to predict, for each card, the probability that
it is in the opponent’s hand. The agent uses this information
as part of its strategy.
Statistical models are widely used in game-playing agents
instead of, or in conjunction with, explicit reasoning. For example, AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016) learns a value network,
which assigns scores to game states that correspond to how
good the states are for the agent. In (Veness et al. 2009),
the parameters of a heuristic evaluation function are learned
from game data. Learned models have been used to evaluate
properties of states in card games (Sang and Yoon 2019).
Kotnik and Kalita (2003) train an agent to play a version
of Gin Rummy using temporal difference learning (Sutton
and Barto 2018). They learn a feedforward neural network

A Simple Agent for Gin Rummy
In this Section, we describe a heuristic-based Gin Rummy
agent due to Todd Neller; our agent both builds on and is
evaluated against this baseline agent which will be explained
in the paragraphs to follow.
When prompted to draw a card, the baseline heuristic
agent will draw the face-up card if and only if it could be
melded with other cards in the agent’s hand. If the face-up
card appears in no prospective melds, the agent will instead
draw the face-down card. In doing so, the agent focuses itself
on melding cards so that it can get closer to knocking, and
avoids having a situation where the opponent knows which
cards the agent is holding.
To discard a card, the agent will consider all possible
hands created from the removal of one card and observe the
deadwood achieved with each possible hand (assuming the
best meld sets are played). The agent will then randomly
discard a card from the collection of candidate cards whose
removal leaves a hand with minimal deadwood. There are
two exceptions to this heuristic: the agent will not discard
a card they have just drawn from the face-up pile; and the
agent will not discard a card if it means that they will have
drawn and discarded the same card twice within the same
game. This strategy attempts to minimize the deadwood if
the opponent knocks at the next turn.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://cs.gettysburg.edu/∼tneller/games/ginrummy/eaai/

15545

