The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Lightweight Neural Model for Biomedical Entity Linking
Lihu Chen,1 Gaël Varoquaux,2 Fabian M. Suchanek,1
1 LTCI & Télécom Paris & Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2 Inria & CEA & Université Paris-Saclay, France

lihu.chen@telecom-paris.fr, suchanek@telecom-paris.fr, gael.varoquaux@inria.fr

Abstract

entity. Rather, the challenge is that the surface forms vary
markedly, due to abbreviations, morphological variations,
synonymous words, and different word orderings. For example, “Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2” is also written as “DM2”
and “lung cancer” is also known as “lung neoplasm malignant”. In fact, the surface forms vary so much that all the
possible expressions of an entity cannot be known upfront.
This means that standard disambiguation systems cannot be
applied in our scenario, because they assume that all forms
of an entity are known.
One may think that variation in surface forms is not such
a big problem, as long as all variations of an entity are
sufficiently close to its canonical form. Yet, this is not the
case. For example, the phrase ”decreases in hemoglobin”
could refer to at least 4 different entities in MedDRA,
which all look alike: ”changes in hemoglobin”, ”increase
in hematocrit”, ”haemoglobin decreased”, and ”decreases
in platelets”. In addition, biomedical entity linking cannot
rely on external resources such as alias tables, entity descriptions, or entity co-occurrence, which are often used in classical entity linking settings.
For this reason, entity linking approaches have been developed particularly for biomedical entity linking. Many
methods use deep learning: the work of Li et al. (2017) casts
biomedical entity linking as a ranking problem, leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNNs). More recently,
the introduction of BERT has advanced the performance
of many NLP tasks, including in the biomedical domain
(Huang, Altosaar, and Ranganath 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Ji,
Wei, and Xu 2020). BERT creates rich pre-trained representations on unlabeled data and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a large suite of sentence-level and token-level
tasks, outperforming many task-specific architectures. However, considering the number of parameters of pre-trained
BERT models, the improvements brought by fine-tuning
them come with a heavy computational cost and memory
footprint. This is a problem for energy efficiency, for smaller
organizations, or in poorer countries.
In this paper, we introduce a very lightweight model that
achieves a performance statistically indistinguishable from
the state-of-the-art BERT-based models. The central idea
is to use an alignment layer with an attention mechanism,
which can capture the similarity and difference of corresponding parts between candidate and mention names. Our

Biomedical entity linking aims to map biomedical mentions,
such as diseases and drugs, to standard entities in a given
knowledge base. The specific challenge in this context is
that the same biomedical entity can have a wide range of
names, including synonyms, morphological variations, and
names with different word orderings. Recently, BERT-based
methods have advanced the state-of-the-art by allowing for
rich representations of word sequences. However, they often have hundreds of millions of parameters and require
heavy computing resources, which limits their applications
in resource-limited scenarios. Here, we propose a lightweight
neural method for biomedical entity linking, which needs just
a fraction of the parameters of a BERT model and much less
computing resources. Our method uses a simple alignment
layer with attention mechanisms to capture the variations
between mention and entity names. Yet, we show that our
model is competitive with previous work on standard evaluation benchmarks.

Introduction
Entity linking (Entity Normalization) is the task of mapping
entity mentions in text documents to standard entities in a
given knowledge base. For example, the word “Paris” is ambiguous: It can refer either to the capital of France or to a
hero of Greek mythology. Now given the text “Paris is the
son of King Priam”, the goal is to determine that, in this
sentence, the word refers to the Greek hero, and to link the
word to the corresponding entity in a knowledge base such
as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007) or DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007).
In the biomedical domain, entity linking maps mentions
of diseases, drugs, and measures to normalized entities in
standard vocabularies. It is an important ingredient for automation in medical practice, research, and public health.
Different names of the same entities in Hospital Information
Systems seriously hinder the integration and use of medical data. If a medication appears with different names, researchers cannot study its impact, and patients may erroneously be prescribed the same medication twice.
The particular challenge of biomedical entity linking is
not the ambiguity: a word usually refers to only a single
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12657

