The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Scale Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional Network for Skeleton-Based
Action Recognition
Zhan Chen,1 Sicheng Li,2 Bing Yang,1 Qinghan Li,3 Hong Liu1 *
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
2
Institute of Information and Communication Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, USA
zhanchen cz@pku.edu.cn, jasonlisicheng@zju.edu.cn, bingyang@sz.pku.edu.cn, Qli160@syr.edu, hongliu@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Graph convolutional networks have been widely used for
skeleton-based action recognition due to their excellent modeling ability of non-Euclidean data. As the graph convolution is a local operation, it can only utilize the short-range
joint dependencies and short-term trajectory but fails to directly model the distant joints relations and long-range temporal information that are vital to distinguishing various actions. To solve this problem, we present a multi-scale spatial
graph convolution (MS-GC) module and a multi-scale temporal graph convolution (MT-GC) module to enrich the receptive field of the model in spatial and temporal dimensions.
Concretely, the MS-GC and MT-GC modules decompose
the corresponding local graph convolution into a set of subgraph convolution, forming a hierarchical residual architecture. Without introducing additional parameters, the features
will be processed with a series of sub-graph convolutions,
and each node could complete multiple spatial and temporal aggregations with its neighborhoods. The final equivalent
receptive field is accordingly enlarged, which is capable of
capturing both short- and long-range dependencies in spatial
and temporal domains. By coupling these two modules as a
basic block, we further propose a multi-scale spatial temporal
graph convolutional network (MST-GCN), which stacks multiple blocks to learn effective motion representations for action recognition. The proposed MST-GCN achieves remarkable performance on three challenging benchmark datasets,
NTU RGB+D, NTU-120 RGB+D and Kinetics-Skeleton, for
skeleton-based action recognition.

(a )

(b)

(c )

(d )

(e )

(f)
Time

Figure 1: Some samples from NTU RGB+D dataset. (a)
“walking” (b) “hand waving” (c) “jumping up” (d) “cheering up” (e) “wearing on glasses” (f) “taking off glasses”
.
based methods are more computationally efficient as skeleton data represents a human structure with 2D or 3D coordinates of a few dozen joints. Moreover, skeleton data conveys relatively high-level information for human actions,
which exhibits stronger robustness to appearance variation
and environmental noises, e.g., background clutter, illumination changes (Wang et al. 2018; Vemulapalli, Arrate, and
Chellappa 2014; Liu, Liu, and Chen 2017; Tu, Liu, and Liu
2018). Therefore, human action recognition with skeleton
data has been attracting increasing attention.
To extract discriminative spatial and temporal features for
skeleton-based action recognition, great efforts have been
made to learn patterns embedded in the spatial configuration of the joints and their temporal dynamics. Conventional deep-learning-based methods learn human action representations with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and

Introduction
Human action recognition has received a lot of attention
in various applications, such as video surveillance, humanmachine interaction, virtual reality, video analysis and so on
(Poppe 2010; Weinland, Ronfard, and Boyer 2011; Aggarwal and Ryoo 2011; Sudha et al. 2017). The current studies on human action recognition are mainly divided into
RGB video based and skeleton based. Compared with RGB
video based methods which require high-cost computing resources to process pixel-level information in RGB image or
temporal optical flow (Tran et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Zhang et al. 2016; Li et al. 2020), skeleton
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1113

