The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unifying Principles and Metrics for Safe and Assistive AI
Siddharth Srivastava
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA
siddharths@asu.edu

Abstract

is on elucidating the declarative principles and types of metrics that would lead to concerted progress on the problem.
The advantage of this declarative approach to framing the
problem is that it enables an assessment of progress independent of the internal design being used in an AI system, and it
will help draw out the strengths and weaknesses of different
design approaches. Without such a specification, design differences can make solution paradigms difficult to compare.
E.g., one might develop a complex system architecture that
builds user profiles and provides appropriate assistance. This
system would have very different input requirements and design and performance parameters than a formulation that addresses the same problem by computing assistance policies
using planning under partial observability while incorporating the value of information to learn more about a user’s
poorly articulated objectives and constraints. Better declarative objectives and metrics for assistive AI systems would
also help ensure that, regardless of the methods being used,
progress amounts to advancement towards safe and assistive
AI systems. More pragmatically, such metrics will not only
help end-users assess the utility of a given AI system but
they will also help AI researchers and developers identify
more readily the dimensions along which further research
will be beneficial for applications of their interest.
The next section presents a succession of intuitive principles for safe and assistive AI systems, and shows that evaluating the compatibility of a system with such principles (in
particular P2) helps clarify the required types of metrics.
The paper concludes by drawing the attention of our community towards research on the operationalization of such
metrics along with promising research directions on developing systems that do well on them.

The prevalence and success of AI applications have been tempered by concerns about the controllability of AI systems
about AI’s impact on the future of work. These concerns reflect two aspects of a central question: how would humans
work with AI systems? While research on AI safety focuses
on designing AI systems that allow humans to safely instruct
and control AI systems, research on AI and the future of work
focuses on the impact of AI on humans who may be unable
to do so. This Blue Sky Ideas paper proposes a unifying set
of declarative principles that enable a more uniform evaluation of arbitrary AI systems along multiple dimensions of the
extent to which they are suitable for use by specific classes
of human operators. It leverages recent AI research and the
unique strengths of the field to develop human-centric principles for AI systems that address the concerns noted above.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed immense progress in research
on safe and assistive AI systems as well as on the potential impact of AI on the future of work. These directions of
research address two sides of a common, fundamental concern: how would humans work with AI systems? While research on AI safety focuses on designing AI systems that
allow humans to safely instruct and control them (e.g., (Russell, Dewey, and Tegmark 2015; Zilberstein 2015; HadfieldMenell et al. 2016; Russell 2017; Hadfield-Menell et al.
2017)), research on AI and the future of work focuses on
the impact of AI on members of the workforce who may be
unable to do so (Arntz, Gregory, and Zierahn 2016; Manyika
et al. 2017; Nedelkoska and Quintini 2018).
This paper presents the view that in addition to the productive streams of research outlined above, we need unifying metrics and declarative objectives that would allow
a more uniform evaluation of AI systems on the extent to
which an AI system is suitable for working with specific
classes of human operators. It also presents a common principle for human-centered AI systems that allows the development of such metrics. Consequently, rather than proposing
a specific new design for AI systems, the focus of this paper

Unifying Principles for Safe and Assistive
AI Systems
We focus on taskable AI systems that carry out user-assigned
high-level tasks using arbitrary mechanisms for reasoning and planning over multiple time steps. E.g., household
robots that can be given objectives such as setting the table or doing laundry, co-manufacturing robots that can assist
workers in creating complex assemblies with heavy components, digital assistants that can plan a vacation given the

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15064

