The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DASZL: Dynamic Action Signatures for Zero-shot Learning
Tae Soo Kim* , Jonathan Jones* , Michael Peven∗ ,
Zihao Xiao , Jin Bai , Yi Zhang , Weichao Qiu , Alan Yuille , Gregory D. Hager
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21218
{tkim60, jdjones , mpeven, zxiao10, jbai12, yzhang286, wqiu7, ayuille1, hager}@jhu.edu
Abstract

using a composition of structured and deep-learned components. As we show in our experiments, this method is highly
flexible, and can be adapted to problem domains ranging
from video surveillance to surgery.
In our framework, an action signature is a particular configuration of visually detectable entities, such as attributes,
objects, and relations, which describe a segment of a video.
A key element of our approach is that we view these
signatures as time-varying, rather than static—i.e. an action’s attributes change over time in a characteristic manner. For example, the act of a person entering a vehicle
as shown in Figure 1 (Logic Acceptor) can be described
as the attribute sequences a person exists followed
by a person does not exist composed with a a
vehicle exists relational constraint.
In the remainder of this paper, we show that dynamic action signatures provide a powerful semantic label embedding for zero-shot action classification and establish a new
state-of-the-art on the Olympic Sports (Niebles, Chen, and
Fei-Fei 2010) and UCF101 (Soomro et al. 2012) datasets.
We also use our methodology to impose constraints on the
predicted action sequences themselves, leading to the first
zero-shot segmentation results on complex action sequences
in a widely-used surgical dataset (Gao et al. 2014), and establish, for the first time, a zero-shot baseline result that is
competitive with end-to-end trained methods.
The aforementioned experiments required training using
samples from the target dataset to acquire action signature
detectors. We show that we can eliminate any kind of supervised training on the dataset from which unseen (test)
cases are drawn by using publicly available, off-the-shelf
object detectors to construct action signatures. We combine
this with our framework to provide a true de novo model
of an activity. We evaluate quantitatively and qualitatively
our zero-shot framework using these “on the fly” models on
the challenging DIVA dataset1 , which contains fine-grained
human-object interactions under a real world video security
footage.
In summary, the main contributions of the paper are:

There are many realistic applications of activity recognition
where the set of potential activity descriptions is combinatorially large. This makes end-to-end supervised training of
a recognition system impractical as no training set is practically able to encompass the entire label set. In this paper, we
present an approach to fine-grained recognition that models
activities as compositions of dynamic action signatures. This
compositional approach allows us to reframe fine-grained
recognition as zero-shot activity recognition, where a detector is composed “on the fly” from simple first-principles state
machines supported by deep-learned components. We evaluate our method on the Olympic Sports and UCF101 datasets,
where our model establishes a new state of the art under multiple experimental paradigms. We also extend this method
to form a unique framework for zero-shot joint segmentation and classification of activities in video and demonstrate
the first results in zero-shot decoding of complex action sequences on a widely-used surgical dataset. Lastly, we show
that we can use off-the-shelf object detectors to recognize
activities in completely de-novo settings with no additional
training.

Introduction
Fine-grained activity recognition is a challenging problem
due to the combinatorial number of different fine-grained
activities that are possible, and the variety of ways that they
may be performed. For example, in video surveillance, we
are most often interested in unique instantiations of an event
— for example “locate an instance where a man wearing a
yellow jacket approaches a blue SUV and places a brown
package underneath it.” This particular combination of actor, attributes, activity, and sequence is unique, and represents only one of millions of other activity sequences that
are similar in structure, but unique in detail.
In this paper, we introduce the notion of dynamic action signatures as a representation for fine-grained problems
where there are a combinatorial number of potential finegrained activity labels. The key observation is that we can
translate this problem into one of zero-shot activity recognition, where a recognition method is constructed “on the fly”

• A zero-shot classification of actions with dynamic action signatures which establishes a new state-of-the-art on
Olympic Sports (Niebles, Chen, and Fei-Fei 2010) and

∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1817

https://actev.nist.gov/

