The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Spatial Regulated Patch-Wise Approach for Cervical Dysplasia Diagnosis
Ying Zhang1 ,2 ,Yifang Yin1 * , Zhenguang Liu3* , Roger Zimmermann1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University
{dcszyi, idsyin, dcsrz}@nus.edu.sg, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com
2

Abstract

visual inspection, a non-physician takes colposcopic photographs of the cervix after the application of 5% acetic acid
(VIA) to the cervix epithelium and submits them to a physician for further interpretation if certain visual characteristics
appear. In this paper, the cervical images refer to the colposcopic photographs taken by the VIA approach.
Naturally, visual inspection lends itself to a conversion of
the cervical dysplasia diagnosis problem into a binary image classification, solvable by computer. The CIN grades
0 and 1 are labeled as normal while CIN 2+ identifies abnormal cases. The cervical images have a few challenging
characteristics. (1) They are usually of high resolution. (2)
In a majority of cases the images contains a large amount
of irrelevant background as the non-cervix tissues or medical instruments (Gordon et al. 2006). (3) The transformation
zone, the most common area on the cervix for abnormal cells
to develop, takes up a relatively small fraction of the full
image. (4) The correlation between the visual clues of abnormal tissues and CIN grades is relatively weak (Xu et al.
2017). Thus, it is not very effective to directly import the
full images into modern classification models as the heavy
compression might lead to a loss of the weak visual details
of the abnormal tissue (Zhou, Zhang, and Wu 2018) and the
small part of cervical lesion results in information bias (Xue,
Ng, and Qiao 2020). To alleviate some of these challenges,
nearly all conventional approaches manually label a tight
bounding box of the cervical region or even the transformation zone and crop it for further examination (Xu et al.
2017; Hu et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2013). However, such manual
labeling is not always available and its quality strongly depends on the subjective experience of annotators (Xue, Ng,
and Qiao 2020). Different from such approaches, this paper
proposes a method that does not require such manual annotations but instead automatically focuses on the proper region
of interest (ROI) for detection.
The proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. Each
image is divided into sub-regions (patches), from which
the image-level features will eventually be reassembled and
trained together with the labels in a supervised manner. The
model leverages three sets of information during the training: (1) The patch visual contents, which is used to learn the
distinguishable local patterns of abnormal tissues. (2) The
patch–image relationship, which encapsulates that patches
should contribute to various image features differently. This

Cervical dysplasia diagnosis via visual investigation is a challenging problem. Recent approaches use deep learning techniques to extract features and require the downsampling of
high-resolution cervical screening images to smaller sizes for
training. Such a reduction may result in the loss of visual details that appear weakly and locally within a cervical image.
To overcome this challenge, our work divides an image into
patches and then represents it from patch features. We aggregate patch patterns into an image feature in a weighted manner by considering the patch–image relationship. The weights
are visualized as a heatmap to explain where the diagnosis
results come from. We further introduce a spatial regulator
to guide the classifier to focus on the cervix region and to
adjust the weight distribution, without requiring any manual
annotations of the cervix region. A novel iterative algorithm
is designed to refine the regulator, which is able to capture
the variations in cervix center locations and shapes. Experiments on an 18-year real-world dataset indicate a minimal of
3.47%, 4.59%, 8.54% improvements over the state-of-the-art
in accuracy, F1, and recall measures, respectively.

Introduction
Cervical cancer ranks fourth among the most frequent cancers in women and WHO reports approximately 90% of its
deaths occur in less developed countries. However, statistics
show that cervical cancer is more than 90% treatable if it is
detected at an early stage (Gotlieb et al. 2017). An abnormality might be identified by cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) which is the precancerous change and abnormal
growth of squamous cells on the surface of the cervix (Kumar V 2007). There exist a few screening methods to diagnose cervical dysplasia including but not limited to, a Pap
smear test, an HPV test, and visual examinations. The first
two are conducted in a laboratory setting and require professional medical devices as well as highly trained experts.
Thus, they might not be easily deployed in less developed
regions or countries where deaths from cervical cancer occur more often. Consequently, performing cost-effective and
non-invasive visual screening shows great potential in the
medical field (Do et al. 2018; Feng and Zhou 2016). In a
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

733

