The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private and Fair Deep Learning:A Lagrangian Dual Approach
Cuong Tran1 , Ferdinando Fioretto1 , Pascal Van Hentenryck 2
1

Syracuse University
Georgia Institute of Technology
cutran@syr.edu, ffiorett@syr.edu, pvh@isye.gatech.edu
2

Abstract

be used. There is thus a need to provide learning models that
can both guarantee non discriminatory decisions and protect
the privacy of the individuals’ sensitive attributes.
To this end, this paper introduces a differential privacy
framework to train deep learning models that satisfy several
group fairness notions, including equalized odds, accuracy
parity, and demographic parity (Zafar et al. 2017a; Hardt
et al. 2016; Agarwal et al. 2018), while providing privacy
of the protected attributes. The key elements of the framework can be summarized as follows: (1) The fairness requirement is captured by casting the learning task as a constrained optimization problem. A Lagrangian dual approach
is then applied to the learning task, dualizing the fairness
constraints using augmented Lagrangian terms (Hestenes
1969). (2) The privacy requirement is enforced by using a
clipping approach on the primal and dual steps and adding
noise calibrated by the sensitivities of the constraint terms
and their gradients. The primal step only applies clipping on
constraint gradients involving sensitive attributes, and thus,
does not have a major effect on the model accuracy. (3) The
framework addresses the bias-variance trade-off of clipping
by providing bounds on the expected errors of constraint
gradients and constraint violations. The clipping bounds can
then be calibrated by minimizing these upper bounds.
The rest of the paper presents the proposed Private and
Fair Lagrangian Dual (PF-LD) framework, its theoretical
results, and its empirical evaluation on several prediction
tasks. The empirical results show that, on selected benchmarks, PF-LD achieves an excellent trade-off among accuracy, privacy, and fairness. It may represent a promising step
towards a practical tool for privacy-preserving and fair decision making. An extended version of this work, that includes
proofs of all theorems, can be found in (Tran, Fioretto, and
Van Hentenryck 2020).

A critical concern in data-driven decision making is to build
models whose outcomes do not discriminate against some demographic groups, including gender, ethnicity, or age. To ensure non-discrimination in learning tasks, knowledge of the
sensitive attributes is essential, while, in practice, these attributes may not be available due to legal and ethical requirements. To address this challenge, this paper studies a model
that protects the privacy of the individuals’ sensitive information while also allowing it to learn non-discriminatory predictors. The method relies on the notion of differential privacy
and the use of Lagrangian duality to design neural networks
that can accommodate fairness constraints while guaranteeing the privacy of sensitive attributes. The paper analyses the
tension between accuracy, privacy, and fairness and the experimental evaluation illustrates the benefits of the proposed
model on several prediction tasks.

Introduction
A number of socio-technical decisions, such as criminal assessment, landing, and hiring, are increasingly being aided
by machine learning systems. A critical concern is that
the learned models are prone to report outcomes that are
discriminatory against some demographic group, including
gender, ethnicity, or age. These concerns have spurred the recent development of fairness definitions and algorithms for
decision-making, focusing attention on the tradeoff between
the model accuracy and fairness.
To ensure non-discrimination in learning tasks, knowledge of the sensitive attributes is essential. At the same
time, legal and ethical requirements often prevent the use
of this sensitive data. For example, U.S. law prevents using racial identifiers in the development of models for consumer lending or credit scoring. Other requirements may
be even more stringent, and prevent the collection of protected user attributes, such as for the case of racial attributes
in the E.U. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), or
require protection of the consumer data privacy. In this scenario, an important tension arise between (1) the demand
for models to be non-discriminatory, (2) the requirement for
such model to use the protected attribute during training, and
(3) the restriction on the data or protected attributes that can

Related Work
The topics of privacy and fairness have been study mostly
in isolation. A few exceptions are represented by the work
of Dwork et al. (2012), which is one of the earliest contribution linking fairness and differential privacy, showing that
individual fairness is a generalization of differential privacy.
More recently, Cummings et al. (2019) study the tradeoff
between differential privacy and equal opportunity, a notion
of fairness that restricts a classifier to produce equal true

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9932

