The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bayesian Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Variational Matrix Factorization
Takahiro Kawashima,1 Hayaru Shouno, 1 Hideitsu Hino 2
1

The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan
2
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan
kawashima@uec.ac.jp, shouno@uec.ac.jp, hino@ism.ac.jp

Abstract

a powerful method, it cannot capture the dynamics because
it does not assume any relationships among the samples.
Dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) (Schmid 2010;
Kutz et al. 2016) was proposed to overcome this limitation. In short, DMD is an efficient method for approximating the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of a Koopman operator governing multivariate sequential data. Because of the advantages of DMD, its variations have
also been developed, such as sparsity-promoting DMD
(spDMD) (Jovanović, Schmid, and Nichols 2014), higherorder DMD (HODMD) (Le Clainche and Vega 2017),
and graph DMD (Fujii and Kawahara 2019); extended
DMD (Williams, Kevrekidis, and Rowley 2015) and kernel DMD (Williams, Rowley, and Kevrekidis 2015; Kawahara 2016) are representatives of nonlinearized DMD. However, almost all extensions of DMD are deterministic. Because probabilistic perspectives provide a flexible representation in general, considering a probabilistic version of
DMD would offer many benefits, including missing data imputation and estimation from incomplete data.
In this paper, we propose a novel variational matrix factorization (VMF)-based Bayesian formulation of DMD (Lim
and Teh 2007; Nakajima and Sugiyama 2011; Seeger
and Bouchard 2012). We refer to our proposed model as
Bayesian DMD with VMF (BDMD-VMF). The learning
procedure of the BDMD-VMF model is consistent with
that of a standard DMD model; first determining a lowerdimensional representation of the data and then estimating
the dynamics on the latent space. The likelihood function of
BDMD-VMF has a projection matrix whose size depends
on the input dimensions. However, we can marginalize out
this projection matrix with the variational posterior of VMF.
After marginalization, the number of parameters to be estimated by BDMD-VMF solely depends on the dimensionality of the latent space, which corresponds to the number
of dominant modes. Moreover we derive the BDMD-VMF
model for cases with missing data values.
It is remarkable that Bayesian formulation of DMD was
pioneered by Takeishi et al. (2017). We refer to their model
as conventional Bayesian DMD. The conventional Bayesian
DMD model cannot capture the input dynamics appropriately because the degrees of freedom increases with the increase of data. We experimentally demonstrate the instability of conventional Bayesian DMD, which occurs with a

Dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) and its extensions are
data-driven methods that have substantially contributed to
our understanding of dynamical systems. However, because
DMD and most of its extensions are deterministic, it is difficult to treat probabilistic representations of parameters and
predictions. In this work, we propose a novel formulation
of a Bayesian DMD model. Our Bayesian DMD model is
consistent with the procedure of standard DMD, which is to
first determine the subspace of observations, and then compute the modes on that subspace. Variational matrix factorization makes it possible to realize a fully-Bayesian scheme
of DMD. Moreover, we derive a Bayesian DMD model for
incomplete data, which demonstrates the advantage of probabilistic modeling. Finally, both of nonlinear simulated and
real-world datasets are used to illustrate the potential of the
proposed method.

1

Introduction

Understanding dynamics of multivariate sequential data is
an essential task in many scientific fields, including biology (Aihara and Suzuki 2010), atmospheric science (Cotton and Anthes 1992; Vallis 2017), fluid dynamics (Dowell, Hall, and Romanowski 1997), and control engineering (Levin and Narendra 1993). Such data are often complex
and high-dimensional, and hence, data-driven approaches
rather than complicated models are required in many cases.
In fact, in recent years, several machine learning methods for
analyzing dynamical systems have been proposed including dynamic-inner partial least squares (DiPLS) (Dong and
Qin 2015) and dynamic-inner principal component analysis (DiPCA) (Dong and Qin 2018), neural ordinary differential equations (Chen et al. 2018), the second-order adjoint method (Ito et al. 2016), and sparse identification of
nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz
2016). Proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) (Kosambi
1943; Chatterjee 2000; Jolliffe 2002) has become a commonly used method in computational fluid dynamics since
it was employed for analyzing turbulent flow in (Lumley
1967). POD is essentially equivalent to principal component analysis (PCA), singular value decomposition (SVD),
and the Karhunen–Loéve decomposition. Although POD is
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8083

