The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Meta-Learning Framework with Applications to Zero-Shot Time-Series
Forecasting
Boris N. Oreshkin1 , Dmitri Carpov1 , Nicolas Chapados1 , Yoshua Bengio2
1 Element AI, 2 Mila
boris.oreshkin@gmail.com

Abstract

Ibrahim et al. 2016), as well as such critically important areas
as precision agriculture (Rodrigues Jr et al. 2019). In business
specifically, improved forecasting translates in better production planning (leading to less waste) and less transportation (reducing CO2 emissions) (Kahn 2003; Kerkkänen, Korpela, and Huiskonen 2009; Nguyen, Ni, and Rossetti 2010).
The progress made in univariate forecasting in the past four
decades is well reflected in the results and methods considered in associated competitions over that period (Makridakis
et al. 1982, 1993; Makridakis and Hibon 2000; Athanasopoulos et al. 2011; Makridakis, Spiliotis, and Assimakopoulos
2018a). Recently, growing evidence has started to emerge
suggesting that machine learning approaches could improve
on classical forecasting methods, in contrast to some earlier assessments (Makridakis, Spiliotis, and Assimakopoulos
2018b). For example, the winner of the 2018 M4 competition
(Makridakis, Spiliotis, and Assimakopoulos 2018a) was a
neural network designed by Smyl (2020).
On the practical side, the deployment of deep neural timeseries models is challenged by the cold start problem. Before
a tabula rasa deep neural network provides a useful forecasting output, it should be trained on a large problem-specific
time-series dataset. For early adopters, this often implies data
collection efforts, changing data handling practices and even
changing the existing IT infrastructures on a large scale. In
contrast, advanced statistical models can be deployed with
significantly less effort as they estimate their parameters on
single time series at a time. In this paper we address the problem of reducing the entry cost of deep neural networks in
the industrial practice of TS forecasting. We show that it is
viable to train a neural network model on a diversified source
dataset and deploy it on a target dataset in a zero-shot regime,
i.e. without explicit retraining on that target data, resulting
in performance that is at least as good as that of advanced
statistical models tailored to the target dataset. We would like
to clarify that we use the term “zero-shot” in our work in the
sense that the number of history samples available for the
target time series is so small that it makes training a deep
learning model on this time series infeasible.
Addressing this practical problem provides clues to fundamental questions. Can we learn something general about
forecasting and transfer this knowledge across datasets? If
so, what kind of mechanisms could facilitate this? The ability to learn and transfer representations across tasks via

Can meta-learning discover generic ways of processing time
series (TS) from a diverse dataset so as to greatly improve
generalization on new TS coming from different datasets?
This work provides positive evidence to this using a broad
meta-learning framework which we show subsumes many
existing meta-learning algorithms. Our theoretical analysis
suggests that residual connections act as a meta-learning adaptation mechanism, generating a subset of task-specific parameters based on a given TS input, thus gradually expanding
the expressive power of the architecture on-the-fly. The same
mechanism is shown via linearization analysis to have the
interpretation of a sequential update of the final linear layer.
Our empirical results on a wide range of data emphasize the
importance of the identified meta-learning mechanisms for
successful zero-shot univariate forecasting, suggesting that it
is viable to train a neural network on a source TS dataset and
deploy it on a different target TS dataset without retraining,
resulting in performance that is at least as good as that of
state-of-practice univariate forecasting models.

1

Introduction

Time series (TS) forecasting is both a fundamental scientific
problem and one of great practical importance. It is central
to the actions of intelligent agents: the ability to plan and
control as well as to appropriately react to manifestations
of complex partially or completely unknown systems often
relies on the ability to forecast relevant observations based on
past history. Moreover, for most utility-maximizing agents,
gains in forecasting accuracy broadly translate into utility
gains; as such, improvements in forecasting technology can
have wide impacts. Unsurprisingly, forecasting methods have
a long history that can be traced back to the very origins
of human civilization (Neale 1985), modern science (Gauss
1809) and have consistently attracted considerable research
attention (Yule 1927; Walker 1931; Holt 1957; Winters 1960;
Engle 1982; Sezer, Gudelek, and Ozbayoglu 2019). The applications of forecasting span a variety of fields, including highfrequency control (e.g. vehicle and robot control (Tang and
Salakhutdinov 2019), data center optimization (Gao 2014)),
business planning (supply chain management (Leung 1995),
workforce and call center management (Chapados et al. 2014;
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9242

