The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How Do We Move: Modeling Human Movement with System Dynamics
Hua Wei, Dongkuan Xu, Junjie Liang, Zhenhui (Jessie) Li
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University
{hzw77, dux19, jul672, jessieli}@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
Modeling how human moves in the space is useful for policymaking in transportation, public safety, and public health. The
human movements can be viewed as a dynamic process that
human transits between states (e.g., locations) over time. In
the human world where intelligent agents like humans or vehicles with human drivers play an important role, the states of
agents mostly describe human activities, and the state transition is influenced by both the human decisions and physical
constraints from the real-world system (e.g., agents need to
spend time to move over a certain distance). Therefore, the
modeling of state transition should include the modeling of
the agent’s decision process and the physical system dynamics. In this paper, we propose MoveSD to model state transition in human movement from a novel perspective, by learning the decision model and integrating the system dynamics.
MoveSD learns the human movement with Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning and integrates the stochastic constraints from system dynamics in the learning process. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to learn to model the
state transition of moving agents with system dynamics. In
extensive experiments on real-world datasets, we demonstrate
that the proposed method can generate trajectories similar to
real-world ones, and outperform the state-of-the-art methods
in predicting the next location and generating long-term future trajectories.

st+1
1

st+1
 st+1
2
n

at1

at2

P1

P2

 Pn

⇡1

⇡2  ⇡n

st1

st2



st1

st2

stn

(a) Conventional supervised
learning

atn

stn

(b) Learning policy without
system dynamics

S t+1
at1

⇡1

at2

⇡2

G


st1 st+1
st2 st+1
1
2

atn

⇡n
stn

st+1
n

St
(c) Learning policy with system dynamics

Figure 1: Three perspectives on modeling state transitions.
(a) Traditional methods directly predict the next state st+1
for an agent based on its past states with a model P . (b)
Direct learning of agent policy π that maps from state s to
action a. (c) Learning agent policy π with the system dynamics G. The agents observe its state st from the system
state S t , which is modeled by system dynamics model G.

Introduction
Modeling how human moves in space is useful for policymaking in various applications, ranging from transportation (Wu, Bayen, and Mehta 2018; Lian et al. 2014), public safety (Wang et al. 2017) to public health (Wang, Wang,
and Wu 2018). For example, modeling the movements of
vehicles with human drivers can help build a good simulator
and serve as a foundation and a testbed for reinforcement
learning (RL) on traffic signal control (Wei et al. 2018) and
autonomous driving (Wu, Bayen, and Mehta 2018). In fact,
lacking a good simulator is considered as one of the key
challenges that hinder the application of RL in real-world
systems (Dulac-Arnold, Mankowitz, and Hester 2019).

The modeling of human movements in space can be
viewed as modeling the state transition of intelligent agents
(e.g., human travelers, or vehicles with human drivers). The
state of an agent can include its historical locations and its
destination. Recently there are growing research studies that
have developed computational methods to model the state
transitions. One line of research directly predict the next
states based on the current state and historical states (Song
et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Feng et al. 2017; Baumann
et al. 2018; Feng et al. 2018; Gupta et al. 2018; Sadeghian,
Kosaraju et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019; Finn, Goodfellow, and
Levine 2016; Oh et al. 2015). As is shown in Figure 1 (a),
these methods focus on directly minimizing the error between estimated state ŝt+1 and true observed state st+1 , with

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4445

