The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HINT: Hierarchical Invertible Neural Transport
for Density Estimation and Bayesian Inference
Jakob Kruse∗1 , Gianluca Detommaso∗2 , Ullrich Köthe 1 , Robert Scheichl 1
1

Heidelberg University, 2 Amazon.com
jakob.kruse@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Many recent invertible neural architectures are based on coupling block designs where variables are divided in two subsets
which serve as inputs of an easily invertible (usually affine)
triangular transformation. While such a transformation is invertible, its Jacobian is very sparse and thus may lack expressiveness. This work presents a simple remedy by noting
that subdivision and (affine) coupling can be repeated recursively within the resulting subsets, leading to an efficiently
invertible block with dense, triangular Jacobian. By formulating our recursive coupling scheme via a hierarchical architecture, HINT allows sampling from a joint distribution p(y, x)
and the corresponding posterior p(x | y) using a single invertible network. We evaluate our method on some standard
data sets and benchmark its full power for density estimation
and Bayesian inference on a novel data set of 2D shapes in
Fourier parameterization, which enables consistent visualization of samples for different dimensionalities.

∇• fR (x)

∇• fC (x)

Abstract

x

x

Figure 1: Sparse (left) and dense (right) triangular Jacobian
of a standard coupling block and of our recursive design,
respectively. Nonzero parts of the Jacobian in gray.
deep networks with minimal memory footprint (Gomez et al.
2017), more expressive invertible building blocks are still of
great interest. The superior performance of autoregressive
approaches such as (Van den Oord et al. 2016) is due to the
stronger interaction between variables, reflected in a dense
triangular Jacobian matrix, at the expense of cheap inversion. The theory of transport maps (Villani 2008) provides
certain guarantees of universality for triangular maps, which
do not hold for the standard coupling block design with a
comparatively sparse Jacobian (figure 1, left).
Here, we propose an extension to the coupling block design that recursively fills in the previously unused portions of
the Jacobian using smaller coupling blocks. This allows for
dense triangular maps (figure 1, right), or any intermediate
design if the recursion is stopped before, while retaining the
advantages of the original coupling block architecture. Furthermore, the recursive structure of this mapping can be used
for efficient conditional sampling and Bayesian inference.
Splitting the variables of interest into two subsets x and y,
a single normalizing flow model can be built that allows efficient sampling from both the joint distribution p(x, y) and
the conditional p(x | y). It should be noted that our extension
would also work for convolutional architectures like GLOW.
Finally, we introduce a new family of data sets based on
Fourier parameterizations of two-dimensional curves. In the
normalizing flow literature, there is an abundance of twodimensional toy densities that provide an easy visual check
for correctness of the model output. However, the sparsity of
the basic coupling block only becomes an issue beyond two
dimensions where it is challenging to visualize the distribution or individual samples. Pixel-based image data sets, on
the other hand, quickly are too high dimensional for a mean-

Introduction
Invertible neural networks based on the normalizing flow
principle have recently gained increasing attention for generative modeling, in particular networks built on a coupling
block design (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2017).
Their success is due to a number of useful properties:
(a) they can tractably model complex high-dimensional
probability densities without suffering from the curse-ofdimensionality, (b) training via the maximum likelihood objective is generally very stable, (c) their latent space opens
up opportunities for model interpretation and manipulation,
and (d) the same trained model can be used for both efficient
data generation and efficient density calculation.
While autoregressive models can also be trained as normalizing flows and share properties (a) and (b), they sacrifice efficient invertibility for expressive power and thus
lose properties (c) and (d). In contrast, lack of expressive
power of a single invertible block is a core limitation of invertible networks, which needs to be compensated by extremely deep models with dozens or hundreds of blocks,
e.g., the GLOW architecture (Kingma and Dhariwal 2018).
While invertibility allows to back-propagate through very
∗

equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8191

