The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent for Extreme-Scale Recommender
Systems
∗

Lewis Liu,1, Kun Zhao2,*
1

University of Montreal, Quebec
2
Alibaba Group
allis.algo2@gmail.com, kun.zhao@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

many experiences show that the model will perform better
as the training data accumulated. Because of this, industry
models are often trained using data of several days, weeks
or even months, which makes the total data size aggravated.
To learn models from such huge data, effective training
methods must be developed. Currently, the main challenges
are:
• Data parallel training with hundreds and thousands of
workers, which compute gradients locally and update the
global parameters asynchronously, is necessary to consume so much data. The asynchrony causes stale gradients, which may lead to model divergence. The problem
will get worse as workers increased. How to guarantee the
model convergence as well as training speed?
• Adaptive optimizers are proved stable in many cases, especially for sparse data. But they will come to a bottleneck with continuous gradients accumulation (Zeiler
2012). Some variants with historical gradients decay at
each training step perform worse convergence. How to
balance the value between the new and the historical information in long-term training? And how to balance the
role between dense and sparse features?
To fill the mentioned above, we analyze the behavior of
gradient staleness in asynchronous distributed training, and
then clarify the key factors that impact model convergence in
extremely large-scale clusters. Based on our analysis, a staleness normalization framework is proposed to improve the
convergence in asynchronous distributed training. Besides,
we try to take time as a factor of training samples to address
the impact of infinite accumulated data, based on which a
method to balance the new and the historical data is proposed. It is suitable to any adaptive optimizers and performs
excellent. In general, our main contributions are:
• We analyze the behavior of gradient staleness as the number of distributed workers changes and also validate our
ideas by experiments. This will serve as a theoretical basis for many other works. Based on this, we can quantify
the optimization methods.
• To tackle the problems caused by huge data, we propose a
staleness normalization framework for large-scale asynchronous distributed training, and a periodic recession
based optimization method for infinite accumulated training data. Both of them can be integrated into any SGD

Recommender systems are influential for many internet applications. As the size of the dataset provided for a recommendation model grows rapidly, how to utilize such amount
of data effectively matters a lot. For a typical Click-ThroughRate(CTR) prediction model, the amount of daily samples
can probably be up to hundreds of terabytes, which reaches
dozens of petabytes at an extreme-scale when we take several days into consideration. Such data makes it essential to
train the model parallelly and continuously. Traditional asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) and its variants are proved efficient but often suffer from stale gradients.
Hence, the model convergence tends to be worse as more
workers are used. Moreover, the existing adaptive optimizers, which are friendly to sparse data, stagger in long-term
training due to the significant imbalance between new and
accumulated gradients.
To address the challenges posed by extreme-scale data, we
propose: 1) Staleness normalization and data normalization
to eliminate the turbulence of stale gradients when training
asynchronously in hundreds and thousands of workers; 2)
SWAP, a novel framework for adaptive optimizers to balance the new and historical gradients by taking sampling period into consideration. We implement these approaches in
TensorFlow and apply them to CTR tasks in real-world ecommerce scenarios. Experiments show that the number of
workers in asynchronous training can be extended to 3000
with guaranteed convergence, and the final AUC is improved
by more than 5 percentage.

Introduction
Deep Learning (DL), which involves a class of neural networks with deep architectures, is now a workhorse powering state-of-the-art results on a wide spectrum of data-driven
tasks. Since the model Wide & Deep (Cheng et al. 2016)
was proposed, it has been widely used and developed in
many recommender systems. For a typical industrial scenario, where the daily data can be up to hundreds of terabytes or even more, great amount of computation power
has to be leveraged. In view of the training efficiency, distributed DL, where a model is trained by hundreds and thousands of workers concurrently, becomes necessary. Besides,
* Equal contributions.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

328

