The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Novice-Reviewer Experiment to
Address Scarcity of Qualified Reviewers in Large Conferences
Ivan Stelmakh1 , Nihar B. Shah1 , Aarti Singh1 , Hal Daumé III2,3
1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
University of Maryland, College Park
3
Microsoft Research, New York
{stiv,nihars,aarti}@cs.cmu.edu, me@hal3.name

Abstract

Machine Learning (ICML) board John Langford (Langford
2018), “There is significant evidence that the process of reviewing papers in machine learning is creaking under several years of exponentiating growth.” Hence, it is important
to increase the number of qualified reviewers in the system
to keep up with the growing number of submissions.
When the size of a conference is small, program chairs
can extend the pool of reviewers by manually selecting new
reviewers among researchers who have enough expertise in
the area. The selection can be guided by the program chairs’
understanding of who might be a good reviewer or by personal recommendations made by other senior members of
the program committee. In what follows, we refer to the pool
of reviewers manually constructed by the program chairs as
the curated pool. However, with a massive increase in the
scale of the conference, such a manual addition to the curated pool does not allow bringing in enough reviewers to
cover the demand of the conference. The program chairs
must then rely on alternative ways of reviewer recruiting.
With this motivation in mind, in the present paper we aim
to design and evaluate modifications to the reviewer recruiting process that simultaneously address two challenges:

Conference peer review constitutes a human-computation
process whose importance cannot be overstated: not only it
identifies the best submissions for acceptance, but, ultimately,
it impacts the future of the whole research area by promoting some ideas and restraining others. A surge in the number
of submissions received by leading AI conferences has challenged the sustainability of the review process by increasing
the burden on the pool of qualified reviewers which is growing at a much slower rate. In this work, we consider the problem of reviewer recruiting with a focus on the scarcity of qualified reviewers in large conferences. Specifically, we design
a procedure for (i) recruiting reviewers from the population
not typically covered by major conferences and (ii) guiding
them through the reviewing pipeline. In conjunction with the
ICML 2020 — a large, top-tier machine learning conference
— we recruit a small set of reviewers through our procedure
and compare their performance with the general population
of ICML reviewers. Our experiment reveals that a combination of the recruiting and guiding mechanisms allows for a
principled enhancement of the reviewer pool and results in reviews of superior quality compared to the conventional pool
of reviews as evaluated by senior members of the program
committee (meta-reviewers).

1

• Challenge 1. To avoid overloading reviewers, conferences need to find new sources of reviewers as there are
not enough curated reviewers to review all papers.
• Challenge 2. Conferences need to ensure that newly
added reviewers do not compromise the quality of the
process, that is, are able to write reviews of quality at
least comparable to the curated reviewer pool.

Introduction

Over the last few years, Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) conferences have been experiencing rapid growth in the number of submissions: for example, the number of submissions to AAAI and NeurIPS —
popular AI and ML conferences — more than quadrupled
in the last five years. The explosion in the number of submissions has challenged the sustainability of the peer-review
process as the number of qualified reviewers is growing at a
much slower rate (Sculley, Snoek, and Wiltschko 2019; Shah
2019b). While especially prominent in ML and AI, the problem is present in many other fields where “submissions are
up, reviewers are overtaxed, and authors are lodging complaint after complaint” (McCook 2006).
The disparity between growth rates of the submission
and reviewer pools increases the burden on the reviewers,
thereby putting a severe strain on the review process. According to the president of the International Conference on

In the past, conference organizers have been trying to expand the reviewer pool by relaxing the qualification bar, that
is, by allowing researchers who meet some minimal requirements such as having one or two relevant publications to join
the pool of reviewers without further screening. For example, 1176 out of 3242 (that is, 36%) of the reviewers in the
NeurIPS 2016 conference were recruited by requesting authors of each submission to name at least one author who is
willing to become a reviewer, and 70% of these reviewers
were PhD students: researchers at very early stages of their
careers (Shah et al. 2018). Such practices have now become
conventional and are adopted by many other conferences, including a flagship conference in artificial intelligence AAAI
that in 2020 invited self-nominated individuals with publi-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4785

