The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contract Scheduling With Predictions
Spyros Angelopoulos,1,2 Shahin Kamali3
1

2

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
Sorbonne Université, Laboratoire d’informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, Paris, France
3
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
spyros.angelopoulos@lip6.fr, shahin.kamali@umanitoba.ca

Abstract

Although less flexible than interruptible algorithms, contract algorithms typically use simpler data structures, and
are thus often easier to implement and maintain (Bernstein,
Finkelstein, and Zilberstein 2003). Hence a natural question
arises: how can one convert a contract algorithm to an interruptible equivalent, and at which cost? This question can be
addressed in an ad-hoc manner, depending on the algorithm
at hand; however, there is a simple technique that applies to
any possible contract algorithm, and consists of repeated executions of the contract algorithm with increasing runtimes
(also called lengths). For example, consider a schedule of
executions of the contract algorithm in which the i-th execution has length 2i . Assuming that an interruption occurs
at time t, then the above schedule guarantees the completion of a contract algorithm of length at least t/4, for any
t, as shown in (Russell and Zilberstein 1991). The factor 4
measures the performance of the schedule, and quantifies the
penalty due to the repeated executions.
More formally, given a contract algorithm A, a schedule
X is defined by an increasing sequence (xi ) in which xi is
the length of the i-th execution of A. For simplicity, we call
the i-th execution of A in X the i-th contract, and we call xi
its length. The acceleration ratio of X, denoted by acc(X),
relates an interruption T to the length of the largest contract
that has completed by time T in X, which we denote by
`(X, T ), and is defined as

Contract scheduling is a general technique that allows to design a system with interruptible capabilities, given an algorithm that is not necessarily interruptible. Previous work on
this topic has largely assumed that the interruption is a worstcase deadline that is unknown to the scheduler. In this work,
we study the setting in which there is a potentially erroneous
prediction concerning the interruption. Specifically, we consider the setting in which the prediction describes the time
that the interruption occurs, as well as the setting in which
the prediction is obtained as a response to a single or multiple binary queries. For both settings, we investigate tradeoffs
between the robustness (i.e., the worst-case performance assuming adversarial prediction) and the consistency (i.e, the
performance assuming that the prediction is error-free), both
from the side of positive and negative results.

Introduction
One of the central objectives in the design of intelligent systems is the provision of anytime capabilities. In particular,
several applications such as medical diagnostic systems and
motion planning algorithms require that the system outputs
a reasonably efficient solution given the unavoidable constraints on computation time. Anytime algorithms offer such
a tradeoff between computation time and quality of the output. Namely, in an anytime algorithm the quality of output
improves gradually as the computation time increases. This
class of algorithms was introduced first in (Boddy and Dean
1994) in the context of time-depending planning, as well as
in (Horvitz 1988) in the context of flexible computation.
(Russell and Zilberstein 1991; Zilberstein and Russell
1996) introduced a useful distinction between two different types of anytime algorithms. On the one hand, there is
the class of contract algorithms, which describes algorithms
that are given the amount of allowable computation time (i.e,
the intended query time) as part of the input. However, if
the algorithm is interrupted at any point before this “contract time” expires, the algorithm may output a result that
is meaningless. On the other hand, the class of interruptible
algorithms consists of algorithms whose allowable running
time is not known in advance, and thus can be interrupted
(queried) at any given point throughout their execution.

acc(X) = sup
T

T
`(X, T )

(1)

Intuitively, the acceleration ratio describes a trade-off
between processor speed and resilience to interruptions.
Namely, by executing the schedule X to a processor of speed
equal to acc(X), one obtains a system that is as efficient as
a single execution of a contract algorithm that knows when
the interruption will occur, but runs in a unit-speed processor. Note that the schedule, and also its acceleration ratio,
are determined by the contract lengths.
Contract scheduling has been studied in a variety of settings related to AI. It has long been known that the schedule
X = (2i ) has optimal acceleration ratio equal to 4 (Russell
and Zilberstein 1991). Optimal schedules in multi-processor
systems were obtained in (Bernstein et al. 2002). The generalization in which there are more than one problem instances associated with the contract algorithm was first

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11726

