The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Audio-Visual Localization by Synthetic Acoustic Image Generation
Valentina Sanguineti,1, 2 Pietro Morerio, 1 Alessio Del Bue, 3 Vittorio Murino 1,4,5
1

Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
2
University of Genova, Genoa, Italy
3
Visual Geometry and Modelling, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
4
University of Verona, Verona, Italy
5
Huawei Technologies Ltd., Ireland Research Center, Dublin, Ireland
{valentina.sanguineti,pietro.morerio,alessio.delbue,vittorio.murino}@iit.it
Abstract

Acoustic images constitute an emergent data modality for
multimodal scene understanding. Such images have the peculiarity to distinguish the spectral signature of sounds coming
from different directions in space, thus providing richer information than the one derived from mono and binaural microphones. However, acoustic images are typically generated by
cumbersome microphone arrays, which are not as widespread
as ordinary microphones mounted on optical cameras. To exploit this empowered modality while using standard microphones and cameras we propose to leverage the generation
of synthetic acoustic images from common audio-video data
for the task of audio-visual localization. The generation of
synthetic acoustic images is obtained by a novel deep architecture, based on Variational Autoencoder and U-Net models, which is trained to reconstruct the ground truth spatialized audio data collected by a microphone array, from the
associated video and its corresponding monaural audio signal. Namely, the model learns how to mimic what an array of
microphones can produce in the same conditions. We assess
the quality of the generated synthetic acoustic images on the
task of unsupervised sound source localization in a qualitative
and quantitative manner, while also considering standard generation metrics. Our model is evaluated by considering both
multimodal datasets containing acoustic images, used for the
training, and unseen datasets containing just monaural audio
signals and RGB frames, showing to reach more accurate localization results as compared to the state of the art.

Figure 1: We achieve unsupervised sound source localization in videos through the generation of a spatialized audio
frequency map, called acoustic image: starting from an RGB
frame and the corresponding monaural audio (left), we synthesize the frequency distribution for each direction in space
and associate it to a pixel in the acoustic image (center). Localization is then obtained by extracting the energy of sound
(right).

are thus able to fuse the spatial clues elaborated from their
auditory system with those coming from their sight.
Binaural microphone configurations have been lately investigated in audiovisual learning (Vasudevan, Dai, and
Van Gool 2020; Yang, Russell, and Salamon 2020; Gao and
Grauman 2019a; Gan et al. 2019). However, binaural configurations are limited to the estimation of the direction of
arrival only along the azimuth direction and are not able to
compete with the performance achieved by the human auditory system in localization tasks (May, van de Par, and
Kohlrausch 2012).
In this work, we exploit instead the data gathered by a
planar array of microphones, which can produce more accurate spatial audio information and can better help to localize
sound sources than stereo audio. In fact, the acoustic signals acquired by an array can be combined via a filter-andsum beamforming algorithm (Van Trees 2002) to produce
an acoustic image allowing to localize sound sources on a
2-dimensional space, as we can see in Figure 1, rather than
along just one single direction (Yang, Russell, and Salamon
2020). Each pixel of such images contains the audio spectral properties of the sound coming from the corresponding direction in space. Acoustic images have already been
proven useful to learn good representations when used both
in supervised (Pérez et al. 2020) and self-supervised learning
(Sanguineti et al. 2020). Moreover, their spatial content can

Introduction
Humans interpret the world by means of several senses, being vision and hearing the most crucial ones. More specifically, for interacting with the surrounding environment vision is supported by binaural hearing, which helps people
focusing on the sources of sound to better understand what is
happening around them. In fact, sound signals are received
with a certain delay between the left and right ear (the socalled inter-aural time differences), as well as a slight difference in intensity (the so-called inter-aural level differences),
which are critical to perceive spatial clues about the direction of provenience of the sound (Rayleigh 1875). Besides,
humans associate what they hear with what they see, and
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2523

