The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RevMan: Revenue-aware Multi-task Online Insurance Recommendation
Yu Li,1 Yi Zhang, 2 Lu Gan, 2 Gengwei Hong, 2 Zimu Zhou, 3 Qiang Li 1,4 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
WeSure Inc.
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
4
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University
yuli19@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {jamesyzhang, matrixgan, weberhong}@wesure.cn, zimuzhou@smu.edu.sg, li qiang@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract
Online insurance is a new type of e-commerce with exponential growth. An effective recommendation model that maximizes the total revenue of insurance products listed in multiple customized sales scenarios is crucial for the success of
online insurance business. Prior recommendation models are
ineffective because they fail to characterize the complex relatedness of insurance products in multiple sales scenarios
and maximize the overall conversion rate rather than the total revenue. Even worse, it is impractical to collect training
data online for total revenue maximization due to the business
logic of online insurance. We propose RevMan, a Revenueaware Multi-task Network for online insurance recommendation. RevMan adopts an adaptive attention mechanism to allow effective feature sharing among complex insurance products and sales scenarios. It also designs an efﬁcient ofﬂine
learning mechanism to learn the rank that maximizes the expected total revenue, by reusing training data and model for
conversion rate maximization. Extensive ofﬂine and online
evaluations show that RevMan outperforms the state-of-theart recommendation systems for e-commerce.

澜濕澝澔濕濗濨濝濪濝濨濭澔

澜濖澝澔濧濤濙濗濝濕濠澔濧濕濠濙澔

澜濗澝澔濤濕濦濙濢濨澔濤濦濣濘濩濗濨濧澔

澜濘澝澔 濗濜濝濠濘濦濙濢澔濤濦濣濘濩濗濨濧澔

Figure 1: Screenshots of sales scenarios in the mobile app
of an insurance company: (a) activity page for new users;
(b) special sale page for loyal customers; (c) products customized for parents; (d) products customized for children.
Compared with generic recommendation for e-commerce,
designing an effective recommendation strategy for online
insurance products encounters unique challenges due to the
product complexity and business logic of online insurance.
On one hand, data sparsity is severe in online insurance because of the common misunderstanding of the general public
on insurance products (Bi et al. 2020). Compared with other
daily goods, there are considerably fewer trading data of online insurance products to train an accurate recommendation model. Even worse, the few (compared with the amount
of different products and customers) trading data available
come from different sales scenarios. The data distributions
of different sales scenarios often vary, making the training
dataset for each sales scenario even smaller. On the other
hand, there is a lack of training data for maximizing the total revenue. In the historical trading data, insurance products
are ranked according to the expected conversion rate, thus
failing to reﬂect the actual buying if the products are ranked
based on the expected revenue. Nevertheless, it is expensive
or impractical to collect new training samples where products are ranked for this goal due to the business logic of online insurance companies.
A natural solution to data sparsity is to jointly train multiple correlated tasks (sales scenarios in our case) via multitask learning (Ruder 2017). Multi-task learning proves ef-

Introduction
Technological advances such as artiﬁcial intelligence and
mobile computing have accelerated the digitization of the
insurance industry. Online insurance, which sells insurance
products via mobile apps, has emerged as a new sales mode
to reach a wide range of customers with prompt and ﬂexible
services. Reports predict an exponential growth in the global
online insurance market (Mordor 2019).
To provide personalized insurance products to customers
without overwhelming their attention, online insurance companies such as Tencent WeSure (Tencent 2017), Acko General Insurance (Acko 2017), PingAn JinGuanjia (PingAn
2016) etc. often group their complex and diverse insurance
products into sales scenarios, each targeting a different customer category. Fig. 1 shows an example of four sales scenarios in the mobile app of an online insurance company.
It is crucial that the recommended insurance products in all
the sales scenarios will convert to actual buying as much as
possible to maximize the total revenue.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

303

