The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Court Opinion Generation from Case Fact Description with Legal Basis
Quanzhi Li, Qiong Zhang
Alibaba Group, USA
{quanzhi.li, qz.zhang}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

果”), which is the court’s final decision based on the rationales described in the court view section. An example of a
Chinese case judgment document is shown in Figure 1. This
figure shows two parts of the judgment document, the fact
description and the court opinion parts. The words in red
indicates that it is the start of the corresponding part (fact
description or court view). And the words in blue indicate
the start of the final decision part.
This study focuses on generating the court view part, excluding the court final decision part. Automatic court opinion generation has many benefits and real applications. For
example, it can reduce the workload of judges on writing
court opinions, especially for simple cases but in large
amount. It also benefits the individuals seeking legal advices. Nowadays, more and more people seek legal advice
online. One common scenario is that the individual writes a
paragraph of text that describes the facts, and wants to know
the opinion of judges or legal professionals on that. Automatic court opinion generation is a good tool for this type of
scenarios, especially for types of legal cases that are simple
but with a large volume. Our algorithm is being deployed in
several Chinese intelligent court systems and some legal
consulting service platforms. These legal consulting service
systems provide free online services for individuals, especially for the ones in the remote areas in China, where it is
hard for low-income people to access in-person legal service, due to its expensiveness and the lack of legal professionals.
Court view generation is a text-to-text generation problem, but compared to other text generation problems, such
as text summarization, it is more challenging, since it needs
to deduce the latent information from the facts, and generate
the opinion text that is both law and charge discriminative.
In order to generate such type of court view, we proposed a
court opinion generation model that has the following features: 1. It is based on the Transformer (Vaswani et al.,

In this study, we proposed an approach to automatically generating court view from the fact description of a legal case.
This is a text-to-text natural language generation problem,
and it can help the automatic legal document generation. Due
to the specialty of the legal domain, our model exploits the
charge and law article information in the generation process,
instead of utilizing just the fact description text. The BERT
model is used as the encoder and a Transformer architecture
is used as decoder. To smoothly integrate these two parts together, we employ two separate optimizers for the two components during the training process. The experiments on two
data sets of Chinese legal cases show that our approach outperforms other methods.

Introduction
Previous studies in legal domain mainly focus on classifying
legal documents, retrieving relevant cases, and predicting
charge labels and law articles given the fact description of a
case. An area that has not been explored much is the automatic generation of legal text, especially the text that have
latent legal logic or knowledge, such as the court opinion
section of a written judgment.
One of the most common legal document types is the
document of written judgment. Almost for every case that is
processed by the court or judges, there will be such a document. In the Chinese legal system, it is called “判决书” or “
裁判文书”. In the judgment document, there is always a
section called “court view” or “court opinion” (“本院认为”
in Chinese), which explains the charge decision by the
judges and usually also cites the applied law articles. This
section is the core part of a legal judgment document. Another important section is the “fact description” (“案件事实
”) part, which describes the facts of the case. Judges write
the court view part based on the case facts, relevant law articles and charges. And following the court view part, there
is a section called “court decision” or “judgment” (“判决结
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14840

