The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Holistic Multi-View Building Analysis in the Wild with Projection Pooling
Zbigniew Wojna,1 3 Krzysztof Maziarz,* 2 Łukasz Jocz,1
Robert Pałuba,1 Robert Kozikowski,1 Iasonas Kokkinos3
1
Tensorflight
Jagiellonian University
3
University College London
zbigniew@tensorflight.com, krzysztof.maziarz@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

images taken from different angles. Our model uses both the
top-view image and numerous street-view photographs of
the same building to understand its fine-grained details.
In this work, we propose a new fusion technique, leveraging both the scene’s geometric structure and the highdimensional features extracted from the top and street-view
images. As a result, we obtain a single unified top-view representation of the scene, including information from side
views, building outline, and imagery metadata. Based on the
street-view photo location, direction, and the field of view,
i.e., angle representing the visible range, we construct a projection of the street-view features onto the building walls
outlined in the top-view image.
Understanding of physical structures, such as buildings,
may require integrating information from all possible input
sources. An example of a building scene from our dataset
is presented in Figure 1. The four camera marks on the
top-view image represent four different locations where the
street-view images were taken. The green mark and the blue
boundary on the top-view image point to the building of interest. The violet boundaries represent other visible buildings, which can be a source of confusion for the model.
We can easily see how different images complement each
other. The top-view image allows us to see that the roof is
not flat as there is a ridge joining the two opposite sides and
a skewed shadow. The roof geometry is only visible from the
top-view image. The construction type, number of floors, facade material, and occupancy class can be determined only
based on the street-view images.
Some decisions may require more sophisticated reasoning. A possible overlap of the features from different streetview photos might mitigate the errors caused by occlusions
and inaccuracies present in a single image. In the example in
Figure 1, the first street-view image points towards the center of the building but is occluded by an adjacent building
and could lead to classification errors. However, when looking at all four images, it is possible to classify the building’s
attributes correctly by combining several clues. The sideattached structure made of bricks may correctly suggest that
all buildings’ construction type along the street is masonry.
We are not able to estimate the exact roof pitch by looking
exclusively at the street-view images. We can only assume
that the roof is flat or has a low slope as it does not stick out
from the front.

We address six different classification tasks related to finegrained building attributes: construction type, number of
floors, pitch and geometry of the roof, facade material, and
occupancy class. Tackling such a remote building analysis
problem became possible only recently due to growing largescale datasets of urban scenes. To this end, we introduce a
new benchmarking dataset, consisting of 49426 images (topview and street-view) of 9674 buildings. These photos are
further assembled, together with the geometric metadata. The
dataset showcases various real-world challenges, such as occlusions, blur, partially visible objects, and a broad spectrum
of buildings. We propose a new projection pooling layer, creating a unified, top-view representation of the top-view and
the side views in a high-dimensional space. It allows us to utilize the building and imagery metadata seamlessly. Introducing this layer improves classification accuracy – compared to
highly tuned baseline models – indicating its suitability for
building analysis.

Introduction
This work aims to develop a deeper understanding of scenes
containing buildings based on aerial (top-view) and multiple side view (street-view) images. This problem is both
technically challenging and of great practical importance.
It allows for automatic pricing of an insurance policy, mechanical claims analysis, risk detection, understanding the
environment for self-driving cars, or socioeconomic statistics extraction. The onset of new computer vision techniques
and growing large-scale datasets of urban scenes naturally
lead to various new scientific challenges related to holistic building understanding, much deeper than simple singletask classification. We investigate a multi-task classification
problem of automated building analysis. The goal is to determine the following set of building attributes: construction
type, i.e., the material the building is made of, number of
floors, roof pitch, roof geometry, facade material, and occupancy type. Those features are crucial for catastrophic risk
estimation (Stone 2018). The real-world unconstrained environment is often poorly recognizable based on a single image. Rather, it requires more complex analyses of multiple
* Work done during an internship at Tensorflight. The author is
now at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2870

