The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncertainty-Aware Policy Optimization:
A Robust, Adaptive Trust Region Approach
James Queeney, Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis, Christos G. Cassandras
Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
{jqueeney, yannisp, cgc}@bu.edu

Abstract

variance, particularly for problems with long time horizons.
As a result, the use of sample-based estimates can be a major
source of error unless a sufficiently large number of samples
are collected.
Motivated by the need to make decisions from limited
data in real-world settings, we focus on addressing the instability caused by finite-sample estimation error in policy optimization. By directly accounting for the uncertainty present
in sample-based estimates when generating policy updates,
we can make efficient, robust use of limited data to produce
stable performance throughout the training process. In this
work, we develop an algorithm we call Uncertainty-Aware
Trust Region Policy Optimization (UA-TRPO) that controls
the finite-sample estimation error in the two main components of TRPO: (i) the policy gradient and (ii) the trust region metric. Our main contributions are as follows:

In order for reinforcement learning techniques to be useful
in real-world decision making processes, they must be able
to produce robust performance from limited data. Deep policy optimization methods have achieved impressive results on
complex tasks, but their real-world adoption remains limited
because they often require significant amounts of data to succeed. When combined with small sample sizes, these methods can result in unstable learning due to their reliance on
high-dimensional sample-based estimates. In this work, we
develop techniques to control the uncertainty introduced by
these estimates. We leverage these techniques to propose a
deep policy optimization approach designed to produce stable performance even when data is scarce. The resulting algorithm, Uncertainty-Aware Trust Region Policy Optimization, generates robust policy updates that adapt to the level of
uncertainty present throughout the learning process.

1. We construct a finite-sample policy improvement lower
bound that is accurate up to first and second order approximations, which we use to motivate an adaptive trust
region that directly considers the uncertainty in the policy
gradient estimate.

Introduction
By combining policy optimization techniques with rich
function approximators such as deep neural networks, the
field of reinforcement learning has achieved significant success on a variety of high-dimensional continuous control
tasks (Duan et al. 2016). Despite these promising results,
there are several barriers preventing the widespread adoption
of deep reinforcement learning techniques for real-world
decision making. Most notably, policy optimization algorithms can exhibit instability during training and high sample complexity, which are further exacerbated by the use of
neural network function approximators. These are undesirable qualities in important applications such as robotics and
healthcare, where data collection may be expensive and poor
performance at any point can be both costly and dangerous.
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman
et al. 2015) is one of the most popular methods that has been
developed to address these issues, utilizing a trust region in
policy space to generate stable but efficient updates. In order
to perform well in practice, however, TRPO often requires a
large number of samples to be collected prior to each policy
update. This is because TRPO, like all policy optimization
algorithms, relies on sample-based estimates to approximate
expectations. These estimates are known to suffer from high

2. We propose a computationally efficient technique to restrict policy updates to a subspace where trust region information is available from the observed trajectories.
3. We demonstrate the robust performance of our approach
through experiments on high-dimensional continuous
control tasks in OpenAI Gym’s MuJoCo environments
(Brockman et al. 2016; Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012).
We summarize our uncertainty-aware modifications to
TRPO in Figure 1.

Preliminaries
Notational Conventions. We use bold lowercase letters to
denote vectors, bold uppercase letters to denote matrices,
script letters to denote sets, and prime to denote transpose.
E [ · ] represents expectation, and we use hats (ˆ· ) to denote
sample-based estimates.
Reinforcement Learning Framework. We model the sequential decision making problem as an infinite-horizon,
discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the
tuple (S, A, p, r, ρ0 , γ). S is the set of states and A is the
set of actions, both possibly infinite. p : S × A → ∆S

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9377

