The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Progressing Robust Training
Minhao Cheng,1,2 Pin-Yu Chen,2 Sijia Liu,3 Shiyu Chang,2 Cho-Jui Hsieh,1 Payel Das2
1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA 2 IBM Research
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{mhcheng,chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu, {pin-yu.chen,shiyu.chang,daspa}@ibm.com, liusiji5@msu.edu
3

Abstract

(i) poor scalability – the process of generating adversarial
examples incurs considerable computation overhead. For instance, our experiments show that, with the same computation resources, standard adversarial training (with 7 attack
iterations per sample in every minibatch) of Wide ResNet
on CIFAR-10 consumes 10 times more clock time per training epoch when compared with standard training; (ii) attack
specificity – adversarially trained models are usually most
effective against the same attack they trained on, and the robustness may not generalize well to other types of attacks
(Tramèr and Boneh 2019; Kang et al. 2019); (iii) preference
toward wider network – adversarial training is more effective when the networks have sufficient capacity (e.g., having
more neurons in network layers) (Madry et al. 2018).
To address the aforementioned limitations, in this paper
we propose a new robust training method named SPROUT,
which is short for self-progressing robust training. We motivate SPROUT by introducing a general framework that formulates robust training objectives via vicinity risk minimization (VRM), which includes many robust training methods
as special cases. It is worth noting that the robust training
methodology of SPROUT is fundamentally different from
adversarial training, as SPROUT features self-adjusted label distribution during training instead of attack generation.
In addition to our proposed parametrized label smoothing
technique for progressive adjustment of training label distribution, SPROUT also adopts Gaussian augmentation and
Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) to further enhance robustness. We
show that they offer a complementary gain in robustness. In
contrast to adversarial training, SPROUT spares the need for
attack generation and thus makes its training scalable by a
significant factor, while attaining better or comparable robustness performance on a variety of experiments. We also
show exclusive features of SPROUT in terms of the novel
findings that it can find robust models from either randomly
initialized models or pretrained models, and its robustness
performance is less sensitive to network width. Our implementation is publicly available. 1 .

Enhancing model robustness under new and even adversarial
environments is a crucial milestone toward building trustworthy machine learning systems. Current robust training methods such as adversarial training explicitly uses an “attack”
(e.g., L-inf-norm bounded perturbation) to generate adversarial examples during model training for improving adversarial robustness. In this paper, we take a different perspective and propose a new framework called SPROUT, selfprogressing robust training. During model training, SPROUT
progressively adjusts training label distribution via our proposed parametrized label smoothing technique, making training free of attack generation and more scalable. We also motivate SPROUT using a general formulation based on vicinity
risk minimization, which includes many robust training methods as special cases. Compared with state-of-the-art adversarial training methods (PGD-L-inf and TRADES) under L-infnorm bounded attacks and various invariance tests, SPROUT
consistently attains superior performance and is more scalable to large neural networks. Our results shed new light
on scalable, effective and attack-independent robust training
methods.

Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented performance on a variety of datasets and across domains, developing better training algorithms that are capable
of strengthening model robustness is the next crucial milestone toward trustworthy and reliable machine learning systems. In recent years, DNNs trained by standard algorithms
(i.e., the natural models) are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial input perturbations (Biggio et al. 2013; Szegedy
et al. 2014). Adversarial examples crafted by designed input
perturbations can easily cause erroneous decision making of
natural models (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) and
thus intensify the demand for robust training methods.
State-of-the-art robust training algorithms are primarily
based on the methodology of adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018), which
calls specific attack algorithms to generate adversarial examples during model training for learning robust models. Albeit effective, these methods have the following limitations:

Contributions
Multi-dimensional performance enhancement. To illustrate the advantage of SPROUT over adversarial training

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7107

Code available at https://github.com/IBM/SPROUT

