The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Thou Shalt Love Thy Neighbor as Thyself When Thou Playest:
Altruism in Game Theory
Jörg Rothe
Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
rothe@hhu.de
Abstract

at leading AI conferences in recent years, including AAAI,
AAMAS, ECAI, and IJCAI. Interaction among agents in a
multiagent system is typically modeled via game-theoretic
means in AI. From the early beginnings of (noncooperative)
game theory due to von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944),
a player (or agent) in a game has been viewed as a homo
economicus: Such players are perfectly rational, narrowly
selfish, and interested only in maximizing their own gains,
no matter what the costs to the other players are. In spirit,
this assumption is somewhat related to Darwin’s thesis of
“survival of the fittest,” where “survival” essentially is measured by the ability of reproduction, propelling the biological evolution of the human species. However, even in terms
of biology and evolution, there are reasonable doubts if selfishness alone (in the sense that more aggressive behavior
yields more offspring) is really the key to success.
Recently, Hare and Woods (2020) countered Darwin’s
thesis with their “survival of the friendliest.” Specifically,
one of their many arguments is that of the two species making up the genus Pan among the great apes, bonobos and
chimpanzees, the bonobos benefit from their much friendlier
behavior: The most successful male bonobo has more progenies than the most successful male chimpanzee, i.e., has
a higher reproduction rate. Hare and Woods (2020) also argue that the evolutionary supremacy of the human species is
mainly due to their friendly behavior, which made it possible
for them to form larger social groups and even societies.
Now, if we agree that AI is best off when mimicking natural life and simulating real-world human behavior, the homo
economicus from the early days of game theory is obsolete
and better models are needed. Indeed, relentlessly aiming
at one’s own advantage and maximizing one’s own utility
regardless of the consequences for others in fact not only diminishes the individual gains of the agents, but it may also
harm the society of agents in a multiagent system as a whole.
This paper presents various ways of introducing altruism
into existing game-theoretic models, focusing both on noncooperative and cooperative game theory. This adds to previous approaches of taking ethics, psychology, emotions, and
behavioral dynamics into consideration in collective decision-making (Regenwetter et al. 2006; Popova, Regenwetter, and Mattei 2013; Rothe 2019b). The purpose of this paper is to make a case for better integrating altruism into AI
systems and AI research.

Game theory is typically used to model the interaction among
(software) agents in multiagent systems and, therefore, is a
key topic at leading AI conferences. Game-theoretic models,
however, are often based on the assumption that agents are
perfectly rational and narrowly selfish and are interested only
in maximizing their own gains, no matter what the costs to
the other agents are. This summary paper presents various
ways of introducing certain notions of altruism into existing
game-theoretic models in both noncooperative and cooperative games, in the hope that simulating altruistic behavior in
AI systems will make AI better suit real-world applications—
and thus may make the real world a better place.

Introduction
The breathtakingly rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) is largely based on mimicking—by means of
tools, methods, and insights from computer science, mathematics, and other fields of science—human intelligence and
human properties, attributes, and behavior as individuals and
in society. For example, the explosive recent successes of
machine learning and deep learning, a true success story
within AI, have been possible only by mimicking the human
brain through neural networks1 and by machines acquiring
the human ability to learn from previous experiences.
Other subareas of AI are concerned with using game theory, social choice theory, voting, and economic paradigms
so as to model interaction, coordination, collaboration, and
collective decision-making among the agents in a multiagent
system. For instance, social choice mechanisms and voting have been widely and successfully used in multiagent
systems and AI for preference aggregation and collective
decision-making in societies of (software) agents.
The rise of computational social choice (COMSOC, for
short; see, e.g., the comprehensive textbooks edited by
Brandt et al. (2016) and Rothe (2015) as well as the surveys
written by Chevaleyre et al. (2007), Bredereck et al. (2014),
Hemaspaandra (2018), and Rothe (2019a)) is another wellknown success story within AI, as witnessed by the fact that
numerous important COMSOC results have been presented
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An interpretation that some researchers disagree with, though.

15070

