The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Group-Wise Semantic Mining for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Xueyi Li1 , Tianfei Zhou2 * , Jianwu Li1 , Yi Zhou3 , Zhaoxiang Zhang4
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
4
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA, China
xueyili@bit.edu.cn tianfei.zhou@vision.ee.ethz.ch ljw@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

Lampert 2016; Qi et al. 2016; Wei et al. 2016; Chaudhry,
Dokania, and Torr 2017; Ahn and Kwak 2018; Fan et al.
2018), scribbles (Lin et al. 2016; Vernaza and Chandraker
2017) or bounding-box annotations (Dai, He, and Sun 2015;
Khoreva et al. 2017; Song et al. 2019), are less costly. Thus,
it is of interest to explore the potential of these weak supervision cues in providing a data-efﬁcient solution for semantic
segmentation. In this paper, we aim to address weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) under the supervision
of image-level tags, which can be obtained effortlessly.
WSSS based on image tags is extremely challenging because ﬁne-grained pixel-level annotations, which are typically required for semantic segmentation, are difﬁcult to obtain from class labels. The pioneering work, (Zhou et al.
2016), proposes an efﬁcient and straightforward way to
solve this by recognizing the discriminative regions speciﬁc
to a given category using class activation maps (CAMs),
which are then reﬁned to obtain pseudo ground-truths for supervising a semantic segmentation network. Along this line,
a number of approaches have been proposed to improve the
estimation of CAMs so that they cover the full extent of objects rather than only the most representative parts. For example, some approaches (Wei et al. 2017; Kolesnikov and
Lampert 2016; Choe and Shim 2019) manipulate internal
feature maps to guide the network to perceive easily ignored
but essential parts, while others (Hou et al. 2018; Chang
et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2020a; Wang et al. 2020b) adopt selfensembling or self-supervision to improve localization.
However, the mainstream methods above are merely
based on single images (Figure 1 (a)), ignoring the valuable
semantic context existing in a group of images. The very
recent studies (Fan et al. 2020b; Sun et al. 2020) utilized
Siamese networks to model the relations between a pair of
images, leading to a pair-wise solution (Figure 1 (b)). These
approaches have proven effective in locating more accurate
object regions. However, seeking relations between two images at a time is still limited in capturing substantial semantic context. Accordingly, we introduce a more promising,
and fundamentally different group-wise solution (Figure 1
(c)) which comprehensively mines richer semantics from a
group of images. Our main motivation is that the availability
of group images containing instances of the same semantic
classes can make up for the absence of detailed supervisory
information. From this perspective, we hypothesize that it is

Acquiring sufﬁcient ground-truth supervision to train deep visual models has been a bottleneck over the years due to the
data-hungry nature of deep learning. This is exacerbated in
some structured prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation, which requires pixel-level annotations. This work addresses weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS),
with the goal of bridging the gap between image-level annotations and pixel-level segmentation. We formulate WSSS as
a novel group-wise learning task that explicitly models semantic dependencies in a group of images to estimate more
reliable pseudo ground-truths, which can be used for training
more accurate segmentation models. In particular, we devise
a graph neural network (GNN) for group-wise semantic mining, wherein input images are represented as graph nodes, and
the underlying relations between a pair of images are characterized by an efﬁcient co-attention mechanism. Moreover,
in order to prevent the model from paying excessive attention to common semantics only, we further propose a graph
dropout layer, encouraging the model to learn more accurate
and complete object responses. The whole network is endto-end trainable by iterative message passing, which propagates interaction cues over the images to progressively improve the performance. We conduct experiments on the popular PASCAL VOC 2012 and COCO benchmarks, and our
model yields state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at: https://github.com/Lixy1997/Group-WSSS.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision, aiming to assign a semantic category to each pixel in
an image. It can beneﬁt a wide variety of applications including autonomous driving, image editing and medical diagnosis. With the recent renaissance of deep neural networks,
semantic segmentation has achieved tremendous progress.
However, most of the leading approaches (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015; Wang et al. 2019b; Zhou et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021b) are fully supervised, requiring massive amounts of pixel-level annotated training data, which
are extremely expensive and time-consuming to obtain. In
contrast, the weak supervision alternatives, e.g., image-level
tags (Pathak, Krahenbuhl, and Darrell 2015; Kolesnikov and
* Corresponding author: Tianfei Zhou
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1984

