The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Probabilistic Programming Bots in Intuitive Physics Game Play
Fahad Alhasoun, Sarah Alneghiemish
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
fha@mit.edu, smish@mit.edu

Abstract

Lake et al. developed a model for human-level concept learning through probabilistic induction (Lake, Salakhutdinov,
and Tenenbaum 2015). The approach deploys methods of
probabilistic programming (Ghahramani 2015) to construct
computational frameworks that capture human learning abilities in forming concepts. The construction of computational
frameworks was used to draw insights on human cognition
in other areas, Battaglia et al. proposed a model based on an
intuitive physics engine as a cognitive mechanism humans
use to make robust inferences in complex natural scenes
(Battaglia, Hamrick, and Tenenbaum 2013; Battaglia et al.
2016).
In human development, infants have primitive concepts
of how objects move in their environments, this is observed
through their ability to track moving objects around them. It is
through these primitive concepts infants grow to learn faster
and make more accurate predictions (McCloskey, Washburn,
and Felch 1983; Lake et al. 2016). Experiments on humans
cognitive processes of intuitive physics inference show that
as tasks of inference are harder, the response time of humans
increases (Hamrick et al. 2015). This is due to a trade off
between response time and number of physics simulations
performed, and the harder the task gets, the more simulation
runs humans seem to perform.
Several attempts proposed models for agents to develop a
sense of intuitive physics that humans possess (Watters et al.
2017; Agrawal et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2016, 2015; Bakhtin
et al. 2019). Agrawal et al. approached the problem by reverse
engineering intuitive physics (Agrawal et al. 2016). Using
robot arms, the agent performed enormous number of actions
(i.e. pokes) on objects placed on a table to understand the
process by how objects move. The approach is inspired by
how infants develop their physics intuition. The model is then
tested by requiring an agent to move objects on a table to
match a given final state of object positions on the table. Wu
et al. proposed a model capable of predicting the movement
of objects placed on an inclined surface given image pixel
data (Wu et al. 2015). The model incorporates deep learning
methods to learn physical features of objects and a 3D physics
simulation to predict their trajectories and where an object
will most likely stop, the approach was capable of achieving
an accuracy comparable to human subjects.
In this paper, we propose a framework for bots to deploy
tools for interacting with the physics of their environments.

Recent findings suggest that humans deploy cognitive mechanism of physics simulation engines to simulate the physics of
objects. We propose a framework for bots to deploy probabilistic programming tools for interacting with intuitive physics
environments. The framework employs a physics simulation
in a probabilistic way to infer about moves performed by an
agent in a setting governed by Newtonian laws of motion.
However, methods of probabilistic programs can be slow in
such setting due to their need to generate many samples. We
complement the model with a model-free approach to aid
the sampling procedures in becoming more efficient through
learning from experience during game playing. We present
an approach where combining model-free approaches (a convolutional neural network in our model) and model-based approaches (probabilistic physics simulation) is able to achieve
what neither could alone. This way the model outperforms
an all model-free or all model-based approach. We discuss a
case study showing empirical results of the performance of
the model on the game of Flappy Bird.

Introduction
The last few years have been marked with exceptional
progress in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Much of
the progress has come from recent advances in deep learning.
Models employing deep neural networks achieved remarkable performance in many areas including speech recognition,
object recognition and reinforcement learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Mnih et al. 2016, 2015; Gu et al. 2016).
In reinforcement learning, Mnih et al. proposed a deep learning approach to estimate Q-learning function of state and
action tuples in Atari games to achieve human-level performance (Mnih et al. 2015, 2013; Guo et al. 2014). Silver et al.
applied a similar approach of deep learning to learn policy
and value functions of states and action in the complex game
of AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016, 2017).
Another front where AI is progressing exceptionally is
approaching AI through drawing inspiration from human
cognitive processes (Lake et al. 2016; Kim, Banks, and Shah
2017; Battaglia et al. 2016; Nguyen et al. 2020; Rempe et al.
2020; Lerer, Gross, and Fergus 2016; Baradel et al. 2019).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

778

