The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Hybrid Probabilistic Approach for Table Understanding
Kexuan Sun, Harsha Rayudu, Jay Pujara
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute
kexuansu@usc.edu, hrayudu@usc.edu, jpujara@isi.edu

Abstract

and complexity of their layouts and contents. Figure 1 shows
such an example table. It consists of cells with various data
types and functional roles.
Tables generally contain relational information between
different types of values, such as entities and quantitative
measurements. To understand a table, an intelligent system
must be able to understand the types of data within a table
and the relationships between them. Tables are comprised of
individual cells which contain a particular type of information. Cells are spatially organized into regions (or blocks)
that share a common function. The relationship between
the values in a table can be expressed as a relationship between these blocks. Our table understanding system adopts
the paradigm of Pujara et al. (2019), which decomposes this
problem into three tasks: cell classification, block detection,
and layout prediction.
Many prior works have addressed the problems of table
understanding in different, piecemeal ways. Traditionally,
semantic typing approaches have sought to understand the
data types within tables, but only operate when data are
organized into well-defined, homogeneous columns. Prior
cell classification approaches have focused on identifying
functional roles at a cell level rather than capturing broader
spatial relationships between tabular regions. These methods range from using handcrafted cell stylistic, formatting typographic features (Koci et al. 2016; Chen and Cafarella 2013), or embedded vector representations to classify cells (Ghasemi-Gol, Pujara, and Szekely 2019). Koci
et al. (2019) have investigated finding larger, block structures in tables, however the primary goal of this approach
is to correct imperfect cell classification results as a postprocessing step for cell classification. To our knowledge,
the task of layout prediction in tables has not been studied in prior work, although the broader problem of semantic modeling (Rümmele, Tyshetskiy, and Collins 2018; Vu,
Knoblock, and Pujara 2019) is an active area of research.
Our work is the first to combine all three table understanding
tasks in a single, end-to-end system. Furthermore, our novel
neuro-symbolic method is able to capture both stylistic features and statistical patterns of prior approaches, and spatial
relationships that encode how humans organize tabular data.
Despite the availability of vast amounts of tabular data
on the Web, annotations for data types, functional regions,
and relationships within these tables are very rare. Our ap-

Tables of data are used to record vast amounts of socioeconomic, scientific, and governmental information. Although
humans create tables using underlying organizational principles, unfortunately AI systems struggle to understand the
contents of these tables. This paper introduces an end-to-end
system for table understanding, the process of capturing the
relational structure of data in tables. We introduce models that
identify cell types, group these cells into blocks of data that
serve a similar functional role, and predict the relationships
between these blocks. We introduce a hybrid, neuro-symbolic
approach, combining embedded representations learned from
thousands of tables with probabilistic constraints that capture regularities in how humans organize tables. Our neurosymbolic model is better able to capture positional invariants
of headers and enforce homogeneity of data types. One limitation in this research area is the lack of rich datasets for
evaluating end-to-end table understanding, so we introduce
a new benchmark dataset comprised of 431 diverse tables
from data.gov. The evaluation results show that our system
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on cell type classification, block identification, and relationship prediction, improving over prior efforts by up to 7% of macro F1 score.

Introduction
Tables are one of the most common ways to organize and
present data. Due to the explosion of information published
on the Web, billions of Web tables (Cafarella et al. 2008)
covering various topic domains are available. Such tables
typically contain valuable information in a richly structured,
relational form. Tables include information from UN surveys aiding developing nations 1 , efforts tracking the spread
of pandemics 2 , and the operation of the global economy 3 .
For intelligent systems to have meaningful impacts, they
must be able to understand the information contained within
these tables. However, although tables are created following established logical structures and topological arrangements (Wang 1996), it is difficult for a machine to understand and extract knowledge from them due to the diversity
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://data.un.org/
2
https://covidtracking.com/data/national/cases
3
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World economy

4366

