The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MERL: Multimodal Event Representation Learning
in Heterogeneous Embedding Spaces
Linhai Zhang1 , Deyu Zhou1 * , Yulan He2 , Zeng Yang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK
{lzhang472, d.zhou, yangzeng}@seu.edu.cn, yulan.he@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract

Previous work has shown the effectiveness of using event representations for tasks such as script event prediction and stock
market prediction. It is however still challenging to learn the
subtle semantic differences between events based solely on
textual descriptions of events often represented as (subject,
predicate, object) triples. As an alternative, images offer a
more intuitive way of understanding event semantics. We observe that event described in text and in images show different abstraction levels and therefore should be projected onto
heterogeneous embedding spaces, as opposed to what have
been done in previous approaches which project signals from
different modalities onto a homogeneous space. In this paper, we propose a Multimodal Event Representation Learning framework (MERL) to learn event representations based
on both text and image modalities simultaneously. Event textual triples are projected as Gaussian density embeddings by
a dual-path Gaussian triple encoder, while event images are
projected as point embeddings by a visual event componentaware image encoder. Moreover, a novel score function motivated by statistical hypothesis testing is introduced to coordinate two embedding spaces. Experiments are conducted
on various multimodal event-related tasks and results show
that MERL outperforms a number of unimodal and multimodal baselines, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

(𝑖)(𝐬𝐡𝐞, 𝐚𝐭𝐭𝐞𝐧𝐝, 𝐛𝐚𝐛𝐲) (𝑖𝑖)(𝐡𝐞, 𝐭𝐚𝐤𝐞 𝐜𝐚𝐫𝐞, 𝐤𝐢𝐝) (𝑖𝑖𝑖)(𝐬𝐡𝐞, 𝐚𝐭𝐭𝐞𝐧𝐝, 𝐦𝐞𝐞𝐭𝐢𝐧𝐠)
(𝐡𝐞, 𝐩𝐥𝐚𝐲, 𝐬𝐨𝐜𝐜𝐞𝐫)

Figure 1: Upper part: Event (i) and (iii) share the same subject and predicate and yet bear different semantic meanings.
On the contrary, Event (i) and (ii), despite having no event
element in common, are semantically more similar. Event
semantics could be distinguished more easily from eventassociated images. Lower part: an event triple can be associated with multiple images.

additive-based methods, the concatenation or addition of
event components (i.e. the subject, predicate and object) embeddings are projected onto an event embedding space with
a parameterized function using a neural network (Ashutosh
and Ivan 2014; Granroth-Wilding and Clark 2016; Modi
2016). For tensor-based methods, the event components are
composed by the tensor operation, where the multiplicative
interactions between event components could be captured
(Ding et al. 2015; Weber et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2019).
Despite the success of event representation learning approaches, it is still challenging for models to learn the subtle
semantic differences between events based solely on the text
modality. For example, as shown in the upper part of Figure
1, there are three events: (i) (she, attend, baby), (ii) (he, take
care, kid) and (iii) (she, attend, meeting). Both Event (i) and
(ii) share the same subject and predicate, however expressing totally different meanings. On the contrary, Event (i) and
(iii) do not have any event elements in common, yet they
describe the same event. In such situations, event semantics can be better captured by event-associated images rather
than the text description of event triples as shown in Figure

Introduction
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), it is important to
construct an event structure which represents what is going
on in text since it is crucial for language understanding and
reasoning. Transferring events into machine-readable form
is important for many NLP tasks such as question answering, discourse understanding, and information extraction. By
now, the mainstream practice is to represent prototype events
as low-dimensional dense vectors.
Notable progresses have been made in learning event representations or embeddings from structured event triples expressed as (subject, predicate, object). Event embeddings
are typically learned in a compositional manner from their
constituent embeddings. Two types of commonly-used composition methods are additive-based and tensor-based. For
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14420

