The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Heisenbot: A Rule-Based Game Agent for Gin Rummy
Matthew Eicholtz, Savanna Moss, Matthew Traino, Christian Roberson
Florida Southern College
111 Lake Hollingsworth Drive, Lakeland, Florida 33801
meicholtz@flsouthern.edu, smoss@mocs.flsouthern.edu, mtraino@mocs.flsouthern.edu, croberson@flsouthern.edu

Background

Abstract

Gin Rummy Rules and Terminology

Games are an excellent tool for undergraduate research in artificial intelligence because they typically have clear objectives, a limited action space, and well-defined constraints.
Nonetheless, games involving chance and imperfect information offer unique challenges for optimizing gameplay. In
this paper, we analyze one such card game, gin rummy, and
propose an artificial intelligence player based on empirically
driven strategies. Our approach separates gameplay into three
disjoint policies for drawing, discarding, and knocking. On
each turn, decisions are influenced by offensive considerations as well as defensive moves. Tournament-style simulations enable us to determine statistically which combination of policies achieves the highest win rate. Our resulting
player, dubbed Heisenbot, is competitive against strong baseline strategies.

Gin rummy is a non-cooperative, symmetric, sequential,
zero-sum, imperfect information game played between two
players. The goal is to score 100 points by forming groups of
three or more cards before the opponent over several hands
of play. To start each hand, ten cards from a standard 52-card
deck are dealt to each player and one card is placed face up
to form a discard pile. Players alternate turns drawing either
the top card from the discard pile or from the draw pile and
then discarding a card from their hand. A player cannot discard a card if it was drawn from the top of the discard pile on
that turn. The dealer switches each hand, and if the dealer declines the face-up discard on the first turn, then the opponent
can opt to take the discard and start the round themselves.
Although there are several variants of gin rummy, here are
the key terms and scoring mechanisms used in the current
EAAI Undergraduate Research Challenge:

Introduction

Melds During play, each player attempts to form combinations of three or more cards known as melds. There are
two meld types in gin rummy: (1) sets consist of cards of
the same rank and different suits; and (2) runs contain cards
of the same suit with adjacent ranks. For the purpose of this
game aces are considered rank one and are adjacent to twos,
but not to kings. There are 65 unique meld sets and 240
unique meld runs of ten or fewer cards, for a total of 305 possible melds. Cards cannot belong to more than one meld in a
hand, even though there may exist multiple possible collections of melds for a given hand. Knowing the state of a card
(i.e. discarded, in our opponent’s hand) can have important
implications for possible melds that are available. For example, if the 4 of clubs is buried in the discard pile, then 80%
of club sets and 52% of club runs are eliminated from the
game. Sevens contribute to the most run melds (160 out of
240), whereas aces and kings contribute to the fewest run
melds (32 out of 240).

Games can serve as a solid framework for students looking
to participate in undergraduate research. They provide welldefined problems with clear rulesets and a limited set of decisions, which are both useful traits for developing artificial
intelligence agents. Gin rummy is a particularly interesting
game in this regard because there has not been significant research developed in this space. While the rules of the game
are fairly simple, the strategy involved has much depth and
complexity. In this paper, we propose a novel artificial intelligence player capable of competing in an ELO tournament
against other players.
This paper is organized into several sections. The Background section provides an explanation of the rules for gin
rummy and an overview of artificial intelligence in games.
In the Methods section, we examine the three major policies
needed to implement an artificial intelligence player: a draw
policy, a discard policy, and a knock policy. We also describe
implementation details for our simulation setup. Next, the
Results section provides a breakdown of experimental tests
and analysis. Finally, we discuss conclusions and considerations for future work.

Deadwood Any unmelded cards in a player’s hand are
considered deadwood. Deadwood cards are counted against
the player and the sum of all deadwood cards is the score of
the hand. Aces have a deadwood value of one, number cards
have a deadwood value equal to their rank, and face cards all
have a deadwood value of ten.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15489

