The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Probabilistic Canonical Correlation Analysis
Mahdi Karami, Dale Schuurmans
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
{karami1, daes}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

It has been shown in (Chaudhuri et al. 2009) that projecting multi-view data onto low-dimensional subspaces using
CCA allows cluster memberships to be more easily recovered under a weak separation condition. Nevertheless, CCA
exhibits poor generalization when trained on small training
sets, hence (Klami and Kaski 2007; Klami, Virtanen, and
Kaski 2013; Mukuta et al. 2014) adopt a Bayesian approach
to solve a probabilistic interpretation of CCA. However, real
applications involve nonlinear subspaces where more than
two views are available. Recently, deep learning has received
renewed interest as an effective approach for recovering expressive models of complex datasets. For multi-view learning,
several deep learning based approaches have been successfully extended (Ngiam et al. 2011; Andrew et al. 2013; Wang,
Livescu, and Bilmes 2015). Subsequently (Wang et al. 2016;
Tang, Wang, and Livescu 2017) have proposed VCCA and
VCCA-private, which are deep two-view autoencoders that
integrate a generative two-view model over a shared representation with a generative model that combines shared plus
view-specific factors. However, these methods adopt a black
box variational inference approach that does not exploit the
probabilistic CCA formulation established in (Bach and Jordan 2005). These methods are also primarily targeted to the
two-view setting, and do not provide a simple extension to
the generic multi-modal setting (with an arbitrary number of
views) where all modalities are available at test time.

We propose a deep generative framework for multi-view learning based on a probabilistic interpretation of canonical correlation analysis (CCA). The model combines a linear multi-view
layer in the latent space with deep generative networks as
observation models, to decompose the variability in multiple
views into a shared latent representation that describes the
common underlying sources of variation and a set of viewspecific components. To approximate the posterior distribution
of the latent multi-view layer, an efficient variational inference
procedure is developed based on the solution of probabilistic
CCA. The model is then generalized to an arbitrary number of
views. An empirical analysis confirms that the proposed deep
multi-view model can discover subtle relationships between
multiple views and recover rich representations.

Introduction
When a dataset consists of multiple co-occurring groups of
observations, views or modalities from the same underlying source of variation, a learning algorithm should leverage
the complementary information to alleviate learning difficulty (Chaudhuri et al. 2009) and improve accuracy. A wellestablished method for two-view analysis is given by canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1992), a classical subspace learning technique that extracts the common
information between two multivariate random variables by
projecting them onto a subspace. Due to its ease of interpretation and closed-form solution, CCA has become a standard
model for unsupervised two-view learning (Klami, Virtanen,
and Kaski 2013) which has been used in a broad range of
tasks such as dimensionality reduction, visualization and time
series analysis (Xia et al. 2014).
The goal of representation learning is to capture the underlying essence of data and extract natural features; for example,
to reveal implicit categories or cluster memberships. In multiview data the relationship between different views should
also be leveraged to enhance feature extraction. Additionally,
given that representation learning in real-world applications
poses significant challenges, where data is typically highdimensional with complex structure, it is necessary to exploit
expressive yet scalable models such as deep generative neural
networks.

In this work, we first develop a modified formulation of
probabilistic CCA, then show how such a linear probabilistic layer can be extended to a deep generative multi-view
network. The proposed model captures data variation by a
shared latent representation that isolates the common underlying sources of variation (i.e. the essence of multi-view data)
while combining this with a set of view-specific latent factors
to obtain an interpretable latent representation. Importantly,
the model can be naturally extended to an arbitrary number of
views. We design the learning algorithm using a variational
inference method, which is known to be a powerful tool for
scaling probabilistic models to complex problems and large
datasets (Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014). In contrast to VCCA and VCCA-private (Wang et al. 2016; Tang,
Wang, and Livescu 2017), the proposed variational inference
is grounded in the probabilistic CCA formulation, yielding
a more principled and expressive multi-view approach. Furthermore, the learning algorithm offers a flexible data fusion

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8055

