The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Region-aware Global Context Modeling for
Automatic Nerve Segmentation from Ultrasound Images
Huisi Wu1∗ , Jiasheng Liu1 , Wei Wang1 , Zhenkun Wen1 , Jing Qin2
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

by and Jereesh 2017). Traditional ultrasound nerve segmentation relies on manual annotation by experienced doctors,
which is tedious, time-consuming and subjective. To the end,
automatic segmentation approaches are highly demanded in
clinical practice. However, automatic nerve segmentation remains a very challenging task due to (1) the large variation
and blurred boundaries of targets, (2) the large amount of
speckle noise in ultrasound images, and (3) the inherent realtime requirement of this task.
In last decade, despite convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieve remarkable success in medical image
segmentation, most of them are limited by local receptive
fields, which are incapable of tackling large variation and
blurred boundaries of targeting objects. To extract richer
contextual information, several approaches employ multiscale context fusion to capture long-range dependencies
have been proposed, such as large-size filters (Szegedy et al.
2015), dilated convolution (Chen et al. 2018), pyramid pooling (Zhao et al. 2017), etc. However, recent studies (Luo
et al. 2016) show that the effective receptive field of most of
these networks is much smaller than theoretical. Recently,
attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) has been widely
investigated to capture long-range dependencies and many
networks based on it have been proposed (Wang et al. 2018;
Fu et al. 2019) to improve segmentation accuracy. However, most of these networks employ pixel-wise modeling to
establish long-range correlation and use all positions to figure out the attention map (Li et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019),
which usually has high computation complexity and occupies a huge amount of memory in GPUs. In addition, studies
reported in (Cao et al. 2019) show that, on the one hand,
for different query positions in an image, the global context modeled by the non-local networks is almost the same.
On the other hand, more redundant features will inevitably
introduce more irrelevant noisy interference to degrade the
segmentation performance, which is in particular severe for
ultrasound images full of speckle noise.
In this paper, we present a novel deep learning model
equipped with a new region-aware global context modeling technique in order to improve the segmentation accuracy while maintaining real-time performance. The proposed
region-aware modeling technique is able to establish longrange dependencies based on a set of semantic regions instead of every pixel, and hence greatly reduce computation-

We present a novel deep learning model equipped with a new
region-aware global context modeling technique for automatic nerve segmentation from ultrasound images, which is a
challenging task due to (1) the large variation and blurred
boundaries of targets, (2) the large amount of speckle noise in
ultrasound images, and (3) the inherent real-time requirement of this task. It is essential to efficiently capture long-range
dependencies by global context modeling for a segmentation network to overcome these challenges. Traditional global context modeling techniques usually explore pixel-aware
correlations to establish long-range dependencies, which are
usually computation-intensive and greatly degrade time performance. In addition, in this application, pixel-aware modeling may inevitably introduce much speckle noise in the computation and potentially degrade segmentation performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel region-aware modeling
technique to establish long-range dependencies based on different regions to improve segmentation accuracy while maintaining real-time performance; we call it region-aware pyramid aggregation (RPA) module. In order to adaptively divide
the feature maps into a set of semantic-independent regions, we develop an attention mechanism and integrate it into
the spatial pyramid network to evaluate the semantic similarity of different regions. We further develop an adaptive pyramid fusion (APF) module to dynamically fuse the multi-level
features generated from the decoder to refining the segmentation results. We conducted extensive experiments on a famous
public ultrasound nerve image segmentation dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms our rivals in terms of segmentation accuracy. The
code is available at https://github.com/jsonliu-szu/RAGCM.

Introduction
Surgery not only brings discomfort to the patient but also
often causes severe post-surgical pain. Currently, the most
commonly undertaken solution in clinical practice is to use
anesthetics to relieve patient pain, which, however, may
bring a bevy of undesirable side effects. Accurate nerve segmentation based on ultrasound images is a key step in inserting an indwelling catheter, which can greatly reduce dependence on anesthetics and speed up patient recovery (Ba∗

Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2907

