The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Intelligent Recommendations for Citizen Science
Daniel Ben Zaken, 1 Kobi Gal, 1,3 Guy Shani 1 Avi Segal, 1 Darlene Cavalier. 2
1

Ben-Gurion University, 2 Arizona State University,
3
University of Edinburgh
benzaked@post.bgu.ac.il,
{kobig, shanigu, avise}@bgu.ac.il,
darlene@scistarter.com

Abstract

Citizen science brings significant scientific, pedagogical
and social benefits. It provides new ways for the public
to contribute to scientific research: Volunteers can share
and contribute to data monitoring and collection programs.
Community-based groups can generate ideas and engage
with scientists for advice, leadership, and program coordination (Silvertown 2009; Bonney et al. 2014; Ryan et al. 2018).
Citizen science can be used as an educational tool, allowing
students, educators and scientists to network and promote
new ideas to advance our understanding of the world (Vitone et al. 2016). Lastly, citizen science contributes to social
inclusion by increasingly engaging volunteers from underrepresented and marginalised communities (Haywood and
Besley 2014; Sorensen et al. 2019).
SciStarter (scistarter.org) is an online citizen science hub
which aggregates over 3,000 projects that are imported
through partnerships with federal governments, NGOs, and
universities. It is the world’s largest catalogue of citizen science projects. Projects span different topics, age groups, location, etc. As of July 2020, SciStarter had 82,014 registered
users from diverse age groups, socio-economic and educational backgrounds. Hundreds of the projects use SciStarter
supported APIs to collect data from volunteers, who can
track their participation across projects in their SciStarter
dashboard. SciStarter maintains an active forum where volunteers and researchers can communicate directly. In addition to its scientific contribution, SciStarter also plays an important educational and social role. It collaborates with different institutions (schools, universities, libraries, museums,
Girl Scouts, Discover magazine, and more) to customize citizen science pathways, and participates in organized events
such as “Citizen Science Month” that promote hundreds of
projects all over the world.
Volunteers visit SciStarter in order to discover new
projects and keep up to date with community events. Examples of popular projects on the SciStarter platform include iNaturalist 1 in which users map and share observations of biodiversity across the globe; CoCoRaHS 2 , where
volunteers share daily readings of precipitation; and StallCatchers 3 , where volunteers identify vessels in the brain as

Citizen science refers to scientKobiific research that is carried out by volunteers, often in collaboration with professional scientists. The spread of the internet has allowed volunteers to contribute to citizen science projects in dramatically new ways while creating scientific value and gaining
pedagogical and social benefits. Given the sheer size of available projects, finding the right project, which best suits the
user preferences and capabilities, has become a major challenge and is essential for keeping volunteers motivated and
active contributors. We address this challenge by developing
a system for personalizing project recommendations which
was fully deployed in the wild. We adapted several recommendation algorithms to the citizen science domain from the
literature based on memory-based and model-based collaborative filtering approaches. The algorithms were trained on
historical data of users’ interactions in the SciStarter platform - a leading citizen science site - as well as their contributions to different projects. The trained algorithms were
evaluated in SciStarter and involved hundreds of users who
were provided with personalized recommendations for new
projects they had not contributed to before. The results show
that using the new recommendation system led people to increased participation in new SciStarter projects when compared to groups that were recommended projects using nonpersonalized recommendation approaches, and compared to
behavior before recommendations. In particular, the group of
volunteers receiving recommendations created by an SVD algorithm (matrix factorization) exhibited the highest levels of
contributions to new projects, when compared to the other cohorts. A follow-up survey conducted with the SciStarter community confirmed that users felt that the recommendations
matched their personal interests and goals. Based on these results, our recommendation system is now fully integrated into
the SciStarter portal, positively affecting hundreds of users
each week, and leading to social and educational benefits.

1

Introduction

Citizen science engages people in scientific research by collecting, categorizing, transcribing, or analyzing scientific
data (Bonney et al. 2009; Funk, Gottfried, and Mitchell
2017; Brossard, Lewenstein, and Bonney 2005). These platforms offer thousands of different projects which rely on the
contributions of volunteers to extend scientific knowledge.

1

https://scistarter.org/seek-by-inaturalist
https://scistarter.org/cocorahs-rain-hail-snow-network
3
https://scistarter.org/stall-catchers-by-eyesonalz
2

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14693

