The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tool for Automated Tax Coding of Invoices
Tarun Tater1 , Sampath Dechu1 , Neelamadhav Gantayat1 , Meena Guptha2 , Sivakumar Narayanan2
1

IBM Research
IBM Services
[ttater24, sampath.dechu, neelamadhav, meenamga, sivakumar.narayanan]@in.ibm.com
2

Abstract

Value Added Tax (VAT) (Tait 1988; Keen and Lockwood
2010; Schenk, Thuronyi, and Cui 2015) or Goods and Services Tax (GST) (Khurana and Sharma 2016) or sales tax as
per the specific country’s regulations.
Interestingly, indirect taxes are imposed on sales of goods
by businesses at each stage of production and distribution (Decoster et al. 2010; Anderson, De Palma, and Kreider
2001; Little 1951). Tax code determination becomes complex as there can be variable number of steps and checks
for different goods and services. The objective of levying
accurate tax is achieved by an input/output system enabling
the following : (i) when a business operating in a VAT/GST
country buys goods or services, it pays tax to the supplier
which is called an input tax (Newbery 1986); (ii) when the
same business sells goods or services to another business
or to a final consumer, it is required to charge tax which
is called as output tax; (Hoff 1991) (iii) the business must
periodically sum up the input tax and deduct it from the
output tax and pay the difference of the output tax to the
government agency responsible for collecting it (Agha and
Haughton 1996; Keen and Lockwood 2010).

Accounts payable refer to the practice where organizations
procure goods and services on credit which need to be reimbursed to the vendors in due time. Once the vendor raises an
invoice, it undergoes through a complex process before the
final payment. In this process, tax code determination is one
of the most challenging steps, which determines the tax to be
levied and directly influences the amount payable to a vendor.
This step is also very important from a regulatory compliance
standpoint. However, it is error-prone, labor (resource) intensive, and needs regular training of the resources as it is done
manually. Further, an error in the tax code determination induces penalties on the organization. Automatically arriving at
a tax-code for a given product accurately and efficiently is a
daunting task. To address this problem, we present an automated end-to-end system for tax code determination which
can either be used as a standalone application or can be integrated into an existing invoice processing workflow. The
proposed system determines the most relevant tax code for
an invoice using attributes such as item description, vendor
details, shipping and delivery location. The system has been
deployed in production for a multinational consumer goods
company for more than 6 months. It has already processed
more than 22k items with an accuracy of more than 94% and
high confidence prediction accuracy of around 99.54%. Using this system, approximately 73% of all the invoices require
no human intervention.

Motivation
The challenges faced by the clients in tax determination (Hoppe et al. 2019, 2018; Devereux 2016) are further
amplified by the fact that the tax regulations go through lot
of changes over time. The breaking obstacle is that the compliance of taxes is governed by the regulations of the country and incorrect tax filed or noncompliance may lead to
interest, monetary penalties, or prosecution as per specific
country laws. Since compliance is mandatory, this complex
manual labour intensive process of tax code identification
consumes a lot of time and slows down the entire invoice
processing flow (Hoppe et al. 2018; Ingraham and Karlinsky 2005; McKerchar 2005; Spengel, Evers, and Zinn 2012).
There is every possibility for any of the novice processor to
make a mistake in tax code determination. This would result
in the invoice processor to pay the tax again under the correct code and then to apply for refund for the tax wrongly
paid within the limitation period. The current process also
requires regular training for existing and new resources.
One of the major tasks in a Accounts Payable system is
to determine the correct tax code, as some fraudulent vendors try to raise false invoices with wrong tax codes (Keen

Introduction
Accounts payable is a critical business process as it involves
the majority of a company’s bills and invoice payments.
Also, it is important to efficiently manage the process such
that the invoices are paid on time, accurately and avoiding penalties to ensure long-term relationship with the vendors (Schaeffer 2002).
One of the major steps while processing the invoices is
determining the right tax code associated with the applicable tax percentage to make sure that the accurate liability
is reported to the tax authorities. These are indirect taxes
that is, consumption taxes which are levied on commodities
or services before they reach the consumer. These are essentially paid by the consumer as part of the market price
before being paid to the government. They are known as
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15185

