The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Faster Depth-Adaptive Transformers
Yijin Liu, 1 Fandong Meng,2 Jie Zhou,2 Yufeng Chen1 and Jinan Xu1
1

2

Beijing Jiaotong University, China
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
{yijinliu, fandongmeng, withtomzhou}@tencent.com
{chenyf, jaxu}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

However, there is no explicit supervision to directly train
the halting unit of ACT, and thus how to measure the hardness of input words and decide required depths is the key
point. Given a task, previous works generally treat the loss
from different layers as a measure to implicitly estimate
the required depths, e.g., gradient estimation in ACT, or reinforcement rewards in SkipNet (Wang et al. 2018). Unfortunately, these approaches may lead to inaccurate depth
selections with high variances, and thus unstable performance. More recently, the depth-adaptive Transformer (Elbayad et al. 2020) directly trains the halting unit with the
supervision of ‘pseudo-labels’, which is generated by comparing task-specific losses over all layers. Despite its success, the depth-adaptive Transformer still relays on a halting
unit, which brings additional computing costs for depth predictions, hindering its potential performance.
In this paper, we get rid of a halting unit when building our
model, and thus no additional computing costs need to estimate depth. Instead, we propose two approaches to explicitly
estimate the required depths in advance, which yield a faster
depth-adaptive Transformer. Specifically, the MI-based approach calculates the mutual dependence between a word
and all categorical labels. The larger the MI value of the
word is, the more information of labels is obtained through
observing this word, thus fewer depths are needed to learn an
adequate representation for this word, and vice versa. Due
to the MI-based approach is purely conducted in the data
preprocessing stage, the computing cost is ignorable when
compared with training a neural model in the depth-adaptive
Transformer. The reconstruction loss based approach measures the hardness of learning a word by reconstructing it
with its contexts in a sentence. The less reconstruction loss
of the word is, the more easily its representation is learned.
Therefore the index of the layer with minimum reconstruction loss can be regarded as an approximation for required
depths. As a by-product, the reconstruction loss based approach is easy to apply to unsupervised scenarios, as it needs
no task-specific labels. Both of the above approaches aim to
find a suitable depth estimation. Afterward, the estimated
depths are directly used to guide our model to conduct corresponding depth for both training and testing.
Without loss of generality, we base our model on the
Transformer encoder. Extensive experiments are conducted
on the text classification task (24 datasets in various sizes

Depth-adaptive neural networks can dynamically adjust
depths according to the hardness of input words, and thus
improve efficiency. The main challenge is how to measure
such hardness and decide the required depths (i.e., layers)
to conduct. Previous works generally build a halting unit to
decide whether the computation should continue or stop at
each layer. As there is no specific supervision of depth selection, the halting unit may be under-optimized and inaccurate, which results in suboptimal and unstable performance
when modeling sentences. In this paper, we get rid of the
halting unit and estimate the required depths in advance,
which yields a faster depth-adaptive model. Specifically, two
approaches are proposed to explicitly measure the hardness
of input words and estimate corresponding adaptive depth,
namely 1) mutual information (MI) based estimation and
2) reconstruction loss based estimation. We conduct experiments on the text classification task with 24 datasets in various sizes and domains. Results confirm that our approaches
can speed up the vanilla Transformer (up to 7x) while preserving high accuracy. Moreover, efficiency and robustness
are significantly improved when compared with other depthadaptive approaches.

Introduction
In the NLP literature, neural networks generally conduct a
fixed number of computations over all words in a sentence,
regardless of whether they are easy or difficult. In terms of
both efficiency and ease of learning, it is preferable to dynamically vary the numbers of computations according to
the hardness of input words (Dehghani et al. 2019).
Graves (2016) firstly proposes adaptive computation time
(ACT) to improve efficiency of neural networks. Specifically, ACT employs a halting unit upon each word when
processing a sentence, then this halting unit determines a
probability that computation should continue or stop layerby-layer. Its application to sequence processing is attractive
and promising. For instance, ACT has been extended to reduce computations either by exiting early or by skipping layers for the ResNet (Figurnov et al. 2017), the vanilla Transformer (Elbayad et al. 2020), and the Universal Transformer
(Dehghani et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13424

