The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Linear Stochastic Bandits
Yu-Heng Hung1,2 , Ping-Chun Hsieh1,2 , Xi Liu3 , P. R. Kumar3
1
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
j5464654.cs08g@nctu.edu.tw, pinghsieh@nctu.edu.tw, xiliu.tamu@gmail.com, prk@tamu.edu
2

Abstract

ties broken according to any fixed priority order. Then apply the action u(t) = φ(x(t), θbML (t)) to the system. It was
shown in (Kumar and Becker 1982) that under an irreducibility assumption, the parameter estimates θbML (t) converge to a
random limit θ̌ satisfying

Modifying the reward-biased maximum likelihood method
originally proposed in the adaptive control literature, we propose novel learning algorithms to handle the explore-exploit
trade-off in linear bandits problems as well as generalized
linear bandits problems. We develop novel index policies that
we prove achieve order-optimality, and show that they achieve
empirical performance competitive with the state-of-the-art
benchmark methods in extensive experiments. The new policies achieve this with low computation time per pull for linear
bandits, and thereby resulting in both favorable regret as well
as computational efficiency.

1

p(i, j, φ(i, θ̌), θ̌) = p(i, j, φ(i, θ̌), θ∗ )

∀i, j ∈ X. (1)

That is, the closed-loop transition probabilities under the
control law φ(·, θ̌) are correctly determined. However, the
resulting feedback control law φ(·, θ̌) need not be optimal for
the true parameter θ∗ .
A key observation that permitted a breakthrough on this
problem was made by Kumar and Becker (Kumar and Becker
1982). Denote by J(φ, θ) the long-term average reward incurred when the stationary control law φ is used if the true
parameter is θ, and by J(θ) := Maxφ J(φ, θ) the optimal
long-term average reward attainable when the parameter is θ.
Then,

Introduction

The problem of decision making for an unknown dynamic
system, called stochastic adaptive control (Kumar 1985; Kumar and Varaiya 2015), was examined in the control theory
community beginning in the 1950s. It was recognized early
on by Feldbaum (Feldbaum 1960a,b) that control played a
dual role, that of exciting a system to learn its dynamics,
as well as satisfactorily regulating its behavior, therefore
dubbed as the problem of “dual control.” This leads to a
central problem of identifiability: As the controller begins to
converge, it ceases to learn about the behavior of the system
to other control actions. This issue was quantified by Borkar
and Varaiya (Borkar and Varaiya 1979) within the setting of
adaptive control of Markov chains. Consider a stochastic system with a state-space X, control or action set U , modelled
as a controlled Markov chain with transition probabilities
Prob(x(t + 1) = j|x(t) = i, u(t) = u) = p(i, j; u, θ∗ ) dependent on an unknown parameter θ∗ lying in a known set
Θ, where x(t) is the state of the system at time step t, and
u(t) is the action taken at that time. Given a one-step reward
function r(i, u), let φ : X × Θ → U denote the optimal
stationary control law as a function of θ ∈ Θ for the longPT −1
term average reward problem: max T1 t=0 r(x(t), u(t)),
i.e., u(t) = φ(x(t), θ) is the optimal action to take if
the true parameter is θ. Since θ∗ is unknown, consider a
“certainty-equivalent” approach: At each time step t, let
Pt−1
θbML (t) ∈ argmaxθ∈Θ s=0 log p(x(s), x(s + 1), u(s), θ)
denote the Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimate of θ∗ , with

(a)

(b)

(c)

J(θ̌) = J(φ(·, θ̌), θ̌) = J(φ(·, θ̌), θ∗ ) ≤ J(θ∗ ).

(2)

where the key equality (b) that the long-term reward under
φ(·, θ̌) is the same under the parameters θ̌ and θ∗ follows from
the equivalence of the closed-loop transition probabilities (1),
while (a) and (c) hold trivially since φ(·, θ̌) is optimal for
θ̌, but is not necessarily optimal for θ∗ . Therefore the maximum likelihood estimator is biased in favor of parameters
with smaller reward. To counteract this bias, (Kumar and
Becker 1982) proposed delicately biasing the ML parameter
estimation criterion in the reverse way in favor of parameters with larger reward by adding a term α(t)J(θ) to the
log-likelihood, with α(t) > 0, α(t) → +∞, and α(t)
t → 0.
This results in the Reward-Biased ML Estimate (RBMLE):
θbRBMLE (t) ∈
t−1
n
o
X
argmax α(t)J(θ) +
log p(x(s), x(s + 1), u(s), θ) .
θ∈Θ

s=0

(3)
This modification is delicate since α(t) = o(t), and therefore
retains the ability of the ML estimate to estimate the closedloop transition probabilities, i.e., (1) continues to hold, for

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7874

