The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TextGAIL: Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning for Text Generation
Qingyang Wu 1 , Lei Li 2 , Zhou Yu 1 ,
1

University of California, Davis,
2
ByteDance AI Lab,
{wilwu, joyu}@ucdavis.edu, lileilab@bytedance.com

Abstract

real samples from generated samples and the generator to improve its generated samples against the discriminator. Along
this direction, there have been many studies. Nevertheless,
there are increasing criticisms (Caccia et al. 2020; Tevet et al.
2019; Semeniuta, Severyn, and Gelly 2018) of text GANs
showing that GAN generated text is substantially worse than
the text generated by MLE. Especially, Caccia et al. (2020)
find that MLE has a better quality-diversity trade-off when
using the temperature sweep method for evaluation. More
recently, large generative pre-trained language models have
greatly improved the quality of MLE generations (Radford
and Sutskever 2018; Radford et al. 2019), which further increases the gap of performance between MLE and text GANs.

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for text generation
have recently received many criticisms, as they perform worse
than their MLE counterparts (Caccia et al. 2020; Tevet et al.
2019; Semeniuta, Severyn, and Gelly 2018). We suspect previous text GANs’ inferior performance is due to the lack of a
reliable guiding signal in their discriminators. To address this
problem, we propose a generative adversarial imitation learning framework for text generation that uses large pre-trained
language models to provide more reliable reward guidance.
As previous text GANs suffer from high variance of gradients, we apply contrastive discriminator, and proximal policy
optimization (PPO) to stabilize and improve text generation
performance. For evaluation, we conduct experiments on a
diverse set of unconditional and conditional text generation
tasks. Experimental results show that TextGAIL achieves better performance in terms of both quality and diversity than the
MLE baseline. We also validate our intuition that TextGAIL’s
discriminator demonstrates the capability of providing reasonable rewards with an additional task.

In this work, we investigate whether large pre-trained language models can improve GANs in text generation. We
propose TextGAIL, a generative adversarial training framework that leverages guidance from the large-scale pre-trained
language models RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) and GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019). We find that it does not work by simply
combining the previous adversarial approaches with large pretrained language models due to the high variance in gradients
and the architecture limitations.

Introduction
Automatic text generation has been used in tremendous applications such as machine translation, question answering, and
dialog system. The most widely used approach for neural text
generation is to maximize the probability of the target text sequence (Bengio, Ducharme, and Vincent 2000), which is also
referred to as maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, MLE suffers from the exposure bias problem which
is due to the discrepancy between training and inference.
During training, the model is trained on the ground truth,
but during inference, the model needs to autoregressively
predict the next word conditioned on its own previously generated words. This discrepancy hurts generalization of unseen
data and leads to lower quality of generated text (Welleck
et al. 2019; Wiseman and Rush 2016). Therefore, solving the
exposure bias problem becomes an promising approach to
improve text generation quality.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) are one of the
directions to solve the exposure bias problem. The main idea
is to alternately train between a discriminator to distinguish
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14067

To reduce variance and improve performance, we apply
generative imitation learning (GAIL) (Ho and Ermon 2016)
and proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.
2017) for the optimization. We also introduce contrastive
discriminator to better serve the conditional generation tasks.
For a fair comparison, we adopt temperature sweep approach (Caccia et al. 2020) to evaluate the quality-diversity
trade-off. Previous text GANs often only perform experiment
on unconditional generation tasks: COCO and EMNLP2017
News. We extend the experiments to conditional generation
tasks, as more practical applications. Specifically, we experiment our model on CommonGEN and ROCStories.
We make several contributions: (1) We propose a generative adversarial imitation learning framework TextGAIL,
which leverages large pre-trained language models. (2) We
conduct extensive evaluations to show TextGAIL achieves
better quality and diversity compared to an MLE fine-tuned
baseline. (3) We show that large pre-trained language models
can help the discriminator to provide useful rewards during
the adversarial training process.

