The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Supervised Hypergraph Convolutional Networks for
Session-based Recommendation
Xin Xia1 , Hongzhi Yin1 * , Junliang Yu1 , Qinyong Wang1 , Lizhen Cui2 , Xiangliang Zhang3
1

The University of Queensland,
2
Shandong University,
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
{x.xia, h.yin1, jl.yu, qinyong.wang}@uq.edu.au, clz@sdu.edu.cn, xiangliang.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

In RNNs-based approaches, modeling session-based data
as unidirectional sequences is deemed as the key to success,
since the data is usually generated in a short period of time
and is likely to be temporally dependent. However, this assumption may also trap these RNNs-based models because
it ignores the coherence of items. Actually, unlike linguistic sequences which are generated in a strictly-ordered way,
among user behaviors, there may be no such strict chronological order. For example, on Spotify1 , a user can choose
to shuffle an album or play it in order, which generates two
different listening records. However, both of these two play
modes serialize the same set of songs. In other words, reversing the order of two items in this case would not lead
to a distortion of user preference. Instead, strictly and solely
modeling the relative orders of items and ignoring the coherence of items would probably make the recommendation
models prone to overfitting.
Recently, the effectiveness of graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2019)
has been reported in many areas including SBR. Unlike the
RNNs-based recommendation method, the GNNs-based approaches (Wu et al. 2019b; Xu et al. 2019; Qiu et al. 2020b)
model session-based data as directed subgraphs and item
transitions as pairwise relations, which slightly relaxes the
assumption of temporal dependence between consecutive
items. However, existing models only show trivial improvements compared with RNNs-based methods. The potential
reason is that they neglect the complex item correlations in
session-based data. In real scenarios, an item transition is often triggered by the joint effect of previous item clicks, and
many-to-many and high-order relations exist among items.
Obviously, simple graphs are incapable of depicting such
set-like relations.
To overcome these issues, we propose a novel SBR approach upon hypergraph to model the high-order relations
among items within sessions. Conceptually, a hypergraph
(Bretto 2013) is composed of a vertex set and a hyperedge
set, where a hyperedge can connect any numbers of vertices,
which can be used to encode high-order data correlations.
We also assume that items in a session are temporally correlated but not strictly sequentially dependent. The character-

Session-based recommendation (SBR) focuses on next-item
prediction at a certain time point. As user profiles are generally not available in this scenario, capturing the user intent lying in the item transitions plays a pivotal role. Recent graph neural networks (GNNs) based SBR methods regard the item transitions as pairwise relations, which neglect the complex high-order information among items. Hypergraph provides a natural way to capture beyond-pairwise
relations, while its potential for SBR has remained unexplored. In this paper, we fill this gap by modeling sessionbased data as a hypergraph and then propose a hypergraph
convolutional network to improve SBR. Moreover, to enhance hypergraph modeling, we devise another graph convolutional network which is based on the line graph of the hypergraph and then integrate self-supervised learning into the
training of the networks by maximizing mutual information
between the session representations learned via the two networks, serving as an auxiliary task to improve the recommendation task. Since the two types of networks both are based
on hypergraph, which can be seen as two channels for hypergraph modeling, we name our model DHCN (Dual Channel Hypergraph Convolutional Networks). Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our model over the SOTA methods, and the results
validate the effectiveness of hypergraph modeling and selfsupervised task. The implementation of our model is available via https://github.com/xiaxin1998/DHCN.

Introduction
Session-based recommendation (SBR) is an emerging recommendation paradigm, where long-term user profiles are
usually not available (Wang, Cao, and Wang 2019; Guo
et al. 2019). Generally, a session is a transaction with multiple purchased items in one shopping event, and SBR focuses on next-item prediction by using the real-time user
behaviors. Most of the research efforts in this area regard
the sessions as ordered sequences, among which recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) based (Hidasi et al. 2015; Jannach
and Ludewig 2017; Hidasi and Karatzoglou 2018) and graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020) based approaches
have shown great performance.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4503

https://www.spotify.com/

