The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

What to Select: Pursuing Consistent Motion Segmentation
from Multiple Geometric Models
Yangbangyan Jiang 1,2 , Qianqian Xu 3∗ , Ke Ma 4 , Zhiyong Yang 1,2 ,
Xiaochun Cao 1,2,6 , Qingming Huang 3,4,5,6∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{jiangyangbangyan, yangzhiyong, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, {make, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

which might be caused by the perspective effect, scattered
feature points of moving objects, small objects.
According to how many frames involved in the segmentation at each time, studies on motion segmentation could
be divided into two camps: (a) two-frame-based methods
(Zhuo et al. 2020; Muthu et al. 2020; Ranjan et al. 2019)
and (b) multi-frame-based methods. Compared with twoframed-based methods, the multi-frame-based methods utilize all frames in a video clip to capture the motion information, which often owns higher performance. Existing multiframe based frameworks mainly fall into three directions.
The first direction is the subspace-based methods. Methods of this kind aim at exploring the subspace structure of
the trajectories, which is assumed to lie in the union of
several subspaces under the affine geometric model. Typical examples include algebraic (Vidal, Tron, and Hartley
2008), information-theoretic (Rao et al. 2010) and spectral clustering-based models (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Liu
et al. 2013; Lu et al. 2019). The second direction is targeted at exploring multi-model fitting methods that estimate
the model parameters using multiple model hypotheses in
the presence of data corruption and outliers. In the existing
literatures, such an idea is often implemented by consensus learning (Magri and Fusiello 2016; Kluger et al. 2020)
, preference fusion (Magri and Fusiello 2014; Tepper and
Sapiro 2017; Magri and Fusiello 2019), hyper-graph learning (Lin et al. 2019) and energy minimization (Barath and
Matas 2018; Baráth and Matas 2019). Last but not least, the
third direction studies fusion-based methods that aggregate
multiple geometric models (Lai et al. 2017; Xu, Cheong, and
Li 2018, 2021; Jung, Ju, and Kim 2019) into a single result.
Among these approaches, (Xu, Cheong, and Li 2018)
achieves a promising performance by aggregating the wellknown affine, homography, and fundamental geometric
models to overcome the disadvantage of each and seek out
a consistent result. The affine model could hardly deal with
the perspective effect in real-world scenes. For homography
models, the obtained affinities between different planes of
the same rigid motion are weak; thus, it is insufficient to
group dispersed objects. The fundamental model could dis-

Motion segmentation aims at separating motions of different
moving objects in a video sequence. Facing the complicated
real-world scenes, recent studies reveal that combining multiple geometric models would be a more effective way than
just employing a single one. This motivates a new wave of
model-fusion based motion segmentation methods. However,
the vast majority of models of this kind merely seek consensus in spectral embeddings. We argue that a simple consensus might be insufficient to filter out the harmful information which is either unreliable or semantically unrelated to
the segmentation task. Therefore, how to automatically select valuable patterns across multiple models should be regarded as a key challenge here. In this paper, we present
a novel geometric-model-fusion framework for motion segmentation, which targets at constructing a consistent affinity
matrix across all the geometric models. Specifically, it incorporates the structural information shared by affinity matrices
to select those semantically consistent entries. Meanwhile,
a multiplicative decomposition scheme is adopted to ensure
structural consistency among multiple affinities. To solve this
problem, an alternative optimization scheme is proposed, together with a proof of its global convergence. Experiments
on four real-world benchmarks show the superiority of the
proposed method.

Introduction
Motion segmentation has served as a crucial upstream task
in a broad spectrum of computer vision applications, such
as visual SLAM (Huang et al. 2019), video object detection
(Kamranian et al. 2020), video object tracking and segmentation (Zhuo et al. 2020), and visual surveillance (Sengar and
Mukhopadhyay 2020). The goal of motion segmentation is
to group multiple moving objects into different clusters. The
objects herein are usually represented by a set of trajectories
of feature points tracked in a video sequence. This problem’s
challenges mainly lie in the complexity of real-world scenes,
∗

Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1708

