The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revisiting Mahalanobis Distance for
Transformer-Based Out-of-Domain Detection
Alexander Podolskiy1 , Dmitry Lipin1 , Andrey Bout1 ,
Ekaterina Artemova1, 2 , Irina Piontkovskaya1
1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Moscow, Russia
2 HSE University, Moscow, Russia

{podolskiy.alexander, dmitry.lipin, bout.andrey, artemova.ekaterina, piontkovskaya.irina}@huawei.com
Abstract

distinguish between seen and unseen intents, i.e., to identify
out-of-domain (OOD) utterances. The OOD detection mechanism must handle unseen intents to prevent the erroneous
actions of dialog agents.
Multiple recent papers emphasize the increasing importance of OOD utterances detection caused by the spreading
integration of classification models to real-life applications
and dialog systems. Simultaneously, in the overwhelming
majority of papers, the task is approached in an unsupervised
way, see (Gangal et al. 2020; Larson et al. 2019; Zheng,
Chen, and Huang 2020). To this end, the primary approach
relies on a decision rule, which is defined to score each utterance. The scores are further used to reject OOD utterances
or to subject to further processing in-domain (ID) ones. An
intuitive yet efficient decision rule determines a threshold
for softmax output probabilities, measuring the classifier’s
confidence. The less confident the classifier is, the higher are
the chances to reject the utterance. Other decision rules rely
on distance-based approaches to check whether an utterance
falls out of ID space.
With Transformer-based contextual encoders becoming
core to almost, if not all, Natural Language Processing
(NLP) methods, undoubtedly, their performance for intent
classification is well-studied. However, the performance of
Transformers in the OOD detection task so far has been little explored. Hendrycks et al. (2020) provide evidence that
Transformers generalize well to unseen domains in sentiment classification and sentence pair modeling tasks, suggesting that Transformers will perform better than previous
models for the task of OOD utterance detection, too. This
paper fills this gap in the evaluation of Transformers.
The key idea of this paper is to conduct a comprehensive
comparison of the performance of different contextual encoders in multiple settings. We adopt three dialog datasets
designed for the task of OOD intent detection along with
the current best practices and state-of-the-art methods for
the task. Although Transformers primarily outperform other
contextual encoders by a wide margin, they serve as especially useful embedders for the distance-based methods of
OOD detection. When fine-tuned on ID data, Transformers
form dense clusters of ID utterances, which are easy to locate with Mahalanobis distance.
To summarize, the key contributions of the paper are as
follows:

Real-life applications, heavily relying on machine learning, such as dialog systems, demand out-of-domain
detection methods. Intent classification models should
be equipped with a mechanism to distinguish seen intents from unseen ones so that the dialog agent is capable of rejecting the latter and avoiding undesired behavior. However, despite increasing attention paid to the
task, the best practices for out-of-domain intent detection have not yet been fully established.
This paper conducts a thorough comparison of outof-domain intent detection methods. We prioritize the
methods, not requiring access to out-of-domain data
during training, gathering of which is extremely timeand labor-consuming due to lexical and stylistic variation of user utterances. We evaluate multiple contextual encoders and methods, proven to be efficient,
on three standard datasets for intent classification, expanded with out-of-domain utterances. Our main findings show that fine-tuning Transformer-based encoders
on in-domain data leads to superior results. Mahalanobis distance, together with utterance representations, derived from Transformer-based encoders, outperforms other methods by a wide margin (1-5% in
terms of AUROC) and establishes new state-of-the-art
results for all datasets.
The broader analysis shows that the reason for success
lies in the fact that the fine-tuned Transformer is capable of constructing homogeneous representations of
in-domain utterances, revealing geometrical disparity to
out of domain utterances. In turn, the Mahalanobis distance captures this disparity easily.

Introduction
The usability of dialog systems depends crucially on the capability of dialog agents to recognize user intents. Recently
deep classifiers have been widely used to recognize user intents, leveraging efficient pre-training, and large amounts
of labeled data. However, the scope of annotated corpora
is inherently limited, leading to unsatisfactory results when
presented with unseen intents. Rather than trying to match
user utterances to a limited number of intent classes, dialog agents may be equipped with an auxiliary mechanism to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13675

