The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Translate the Facial Regions You Like Using Self-Adaptive Region Translation
Wenshuang Liu1,2,3 , Wenting Chen1,2,3 , Zhanjia Yang1,2,3 , Linlin Shen1,2,3
1

∗

Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Society
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{liuwenshuang2018, chenwenting2017, yangzhanjia2019}@email.szu.edu.cn, llshen@szu.edu.cn
Content image

Reconstruction

Left eye

Right eye

Mouth

Hair

Hair and face

Figure 1: Eyes, mouth, hair and both hair&face translation for example faces in the CelebAMask-HQ dataset.
Abstract

ras et al. 2017; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019) and image
translation (Zhu et al. 2017a; Choi et al. 2018, 2020; Liu
et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2020). Though
achieved remarkably success in transferring complex appearances across different domains, most image translation
methods can only translate faces at image level. As shown in
Fig.2(a), for image level translations approaches like StarGAN(Choi et al. 2018), AttGAN(He et al. 2019) and FUNIT(Liu et al. 2019), the same translation is usually applied to different face regions and they can only transfer the
whole image from domain A to B. When image level approaches change the attribute of a specific region, e.g. hair
style and skin tone, using conditional attribute labels, other
regions could easily be changed as well, during the image
level translation. In contrast, our region level approach can
adaptively translate the styles of different regions to various domains like B, C, D and E, without affecting other
regions.
Recently, some region-level translation methods have
been proposed. While Jiang and Deng (Jiang et al. 2020;
Deng et al. 2020) use unsupervised attention to solve this
task, Zhu (Zhu et al. 2020) applied semantic image synthesis to generate different regions. However, the former fails
to precisely control the translated region and distinguish the
boundaries between translated and untranslated regions as
masks are not used to enforce constraints on the generation
of images. Fig. 2(b) shows the differences between our approach and semantic image synthesis methods like SPADE
(Park et al. 2019) and SEAN (Zhu et al. 2020). Given a face
mask with specified regions like eyes, nose, mouth, face and

With the progression of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), image translation methods has achieved increasingly remarkable performance. However, most available
methods can only achieve image level translation, which is
unable to precisely control the regions to be translated. In this
paper, we propose a novel self-adaptive region translation network (SART) for region-level translation, which uses regionadaptive instance normalization (RIN) and a region matching
loss (RML) for this task. We first encode the style and content image for each region with style and content encoder. To
translate both shape and texture of the target region, we inject region-adaptive style features into the decoder by RIN.
To ensure independent translation among different regions,
RML is proposed to measure the similarity between the nontranslated/translated regions of content and translated images.
Extensive experiments on three publicly available datasets,
i.e. Morph, RaFD and CelebAMask-HQ, suggest that our approach demonstrate obvious improvement over state-of-theart methods like StarGAN, SEAN and FUNIT. Our approach
has further advantages in precise control of the regions to be
translated. As a result, region level expression changes and
step-by-step make-up can be achieved. The video demo is
available at (https://youtu.be/DvIdmcR2LEc).

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has been widely
used for image generation, image super-resolution (Kar* Corresponding Author: Linlin Shen.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved

2180

