The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MetaAugment: Sample-Aware Data Augmentation Policy Learning
Fengwei Zhou∗ , Jiawei Li∗ , Chuanlong Xie∗ , Fei Chen, Lanqing Hong, Rui Sun, Zhenguo Li†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhoufengwei, li.jiawei, xie.chuanlong, chen.f, honglanqing, sun.rui3, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
Automated data augmentation has shown superior performance in image recognition. Existing works search for datasetlevel augmentation policies without considering individual
sample variations, which are likely to be sub-optimal. On the
other hand, learning different policies for different samples
naively could greatly increase the computing cost. In this paper,
we learn a sample-aware data augmentation policy efficiently
by formulating it as a sample reweighting problem. Specifically, an augmentation policy network takes a transformation
and the corresponding augmented image as inputs, and outputs
a weight to adjust the augmented image loss computed by a
task network. At training stage, the task network minimizes
the weighted losses of augmented training images, while the
policy network minimizes the loss of the task network on a
validation set via meta-learning. We theoretically prove the
convergence of the training procedure and further derive the
exact convergence rate. Superior performance is achieved on
widely-used benchmarks including CIFAR-10/100, Omniglot,
and ImageNet.

Introduction
Data augmentation is widely used to increase the diversity of training data in order to improve model generalization (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Srivastava,
Greff, and Schmidhuber 2015; Han, Kim, and Kim 2017;
DeVries and Taylor 2017; Zhang et al. 2017; Yun et al. 2019).
Automated data augmentation that searches for data-driven
augmentation policies improves the performance of deep
models in image recognition compared with the manually
designed ones. A data augmentation policy is a distribution of
transformations, according to which training samples are augmented. Reinforcement learning (Cubuk et al. 2019a; Zhang
et al. 2020), population-based training (Ho et al. 2019), and
Bayesian optimization (Lim et al. 2019) have been employed
to learn augmentation policies from target datasets. Despite
the difference of search algorithms, these approaches search
for policies at the dataset level, i.e., all samples in the dataset
are augmented with the same policy. For an image recognition task, left translation may be suitable for the image where
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11097

the target object is on the right, but may not be suitable for
the image where the target object is on the left (see Figure 4).
According to this observation, dataset-level polices may give
rise to various noises such as noisy labels, misalignment,
or image distortion, since different samples vary greatly in
object scale, position, color, illumination, etc.
To increase data diversity while avoiding noises, it is appealing to learn a sample-aware data augmentation policy,
i.e., learning different distributions of transformations for
different samples. However, it is time-consuming to evaluate
a large number of distributions and non-trivial to determine
the relation among the distributions. Augmenting training
samples with the corresponding policies, we consider the
augmented sample loss as a random variable and train a
task network to minimize the expectation of the augmented
sample loss. From this perspective, learning a sample-aware
policy can be regarded as reweighting the augmented sample
losses and the computing cost can be greatly reduced.
In this paper, we propose an efficient method, called
MetaAugment, to learn a sample-aware data augmentation
policy by formulating it as a sample reweighting problem. An
overview of the proposed method is illustrated in Figure 1.
Given a transformation and the corresponding augmented
image feature, extracted by a task network, an augmentation policy network outputs the weight of the augmented
image loss. The task network is optimized by minimizing the
weighted training loss, while the goal of the policy network
is to improve the performance of the task network on a validation set via adjusting the weights of the losses. This is a
bilevel optimization problem (Colson, Marcotte, and Savard
2007) which is hard to be optimized. We leverage the mechanism of meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Li
et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2019; Shu et al. 2019) to solve this problem. The
motivation is based on the ability of meta-learning to extract
useful knowledge from related tasks. During training, classification for each batch of samples is treated as a task. The
policy network acts as a meta-learner to adapt the task network with the augmented samples such that it can perform
well on a batch of validation samples. Instead of learning
an initialization for fast adaptation in downstream tasks, the
policy network learns to augment while guiding the actual
training process of the task network. We also propose a novel
transformation sampler that samples transformations accord-

