The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reaching Individually Stable Coalition Structures in Hedonic Games
Felix Brandt1 , Martin Bullinger1 , Anaëlle Wilczynski2
1

Institut für Informatik, Technische Universität München
MICS, CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay, France
brandtf@in.tum.de, bullinge@in.tum.de, anaelle.wilczynski@centralesupelec.fr
2

Abstract

titions in restricted classes of hedonic games and the computational complexity of finding a stable partition. However,
stability is only concerned with the end-state of the coalition
formation process and ignores how these desirable partitions
can actually be reached. Essentially, an underlying assumption in most of the existing work is that there is a central authority that receives the preferences of all agents, computes
a stable partition, and has the means to enforce this partition on the agents. By contrast, our work focuses on simple
dynamics, where starting with some partition (e.g., the partition of singletons), agents deliberately decide to join and
leave coalitions based on their individual preferences. We
study the convergence of such a process and the stable partitions that can arise from it. For example, in some cases
the only partition satisfying a certain stability criterion is the
grand coalition consisting of all agents, while the dynamics
based on the agents’ individual decisions can never reach
this partition and is doomed to cycle.
The dynamics we consider is based on individual stability, a natural notion of stability going back to Drèze and
Greenberg (1980): an agent will join another coalition if
she is better off and no member of the welcoming coalition is worse off. Individual stability is suitable to model
the situations mentioned above. For instance, by Article 49
of the Treaty on European Union, admitting new members
to the EU requires the unanimous approval of the current
members. Similarly, by Article 10 of their founding treaty,
unanimous agreement of all parties is necessary to become a
member of the NATO. Also, for joining a choir or orchestra
it is often necessary to audition successfully, and joining a
shared flat requires the consent of all current residents. This
distinguishes individual stability from Nash stability, which
ignores the consent of members of the welcoming coalition.
The analysis of coalition formation processes provides
more insight in the natural behavior of agents and the conditions that are required to guarantee that desirable social outcomes can be reached without a central authority. Similar
dynamic processes have been studied in the special domain
of matching, which only allows coalitions of size 2 (e.g.,
Roth and Vande Vate 1990; Abeledo and Rothblum 1995;
Brandt and Wilczynski 2019). More recently, the dynamics of coalition formation have also come under scrutiny in
the context of hedonic games (Bilò et al. 2018; Hoefer, Vaz,
and Wagner 2018; Carosi, Monaco, and Moscardelli 2019).

The formal study of coalition formation in multiagent systems is typically realized using so-called hedonic games,
which originate from economic theory. The main focus of this
branch of research has been on the existence and the computational complexity of deciding the existence of coalition structures that satisfy various stability criteria. The actual process
of forming coalitions based on individual behavior has received little attention. In this paper, we study the convergence
of simple dynamics leading to stable partitions in a variety
of classes of hedonic games, including anonymous, dichotomous, fractional, and hedonic diversity games. The dynamics
we consider is based on individual stability: an agent will join
another coalition if she is better off and no member of the
welcoming coalition is worse off. We identify conditions for
convergence, provide elaborate counterexamples of existence
of individually stable partitions, and study the computational
complexity of problems related to the coalition formation dynamics. In particular, we settle open problems suggested by
Bogomolnaia and Jackson (2002), Brandl, Brandt, and Strobel (2015), and Boehmer and Elkind (2020).

Introduction
Coalitions and coalition formation are central concerns in
the study of multiagent systems as well as cooperative
game theory. Typical real-world examples include individuals joining clubs or societies such as orchestras, choirs,
or sport teams, countries organizing themselves in international bodies like the European Union (EU) or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), students living together
in shared flats, or employees forming unions. The formal
study of coalition formation is often realized using so-called
hedonic games, which originate from economic theory and
focus on coalition structures (henceforth partitions) that satisfy various stability criteria based on the agents’ preferences over coalitions. A partition is defined to be stable if
single agents or groups of agents cannot gain by deviating
from the current partition by means of leaving their current
coalition and joining another coalition or forming a new one.
Which kinds of deviations are permitted depends on the underlying notion of stability. Two important and well-studied
questions in this context concern the existence of stable parCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5211

