The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PID-Based Approach to Adversarial Attacks
Chen Wan1, 2 , Biaohua Ye1, 2 , Fangjun Huang1, 2∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
wanchen18@outlook.com, yebh3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, huangfj@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

better performance in general, and it has received more and
more attention recently (Liu et al. 2017; Madry et al. 2018;
Cheng et al. 2019; Zheng, Chen, and Ren 2019).
The improved methods of FGSM include making full
use of the gradient (i.e., better optimization algorithm)
and data augmentation. Generally, better optimization algorithms such as Momentum Iterative (MI-FGSM) (Dong
et al. 2018) and Nesterov Iterative (NI-FGSM) (Lin et al.
2020) try to prevent the generated adversarial examples
from falling into poor local maxima, and data augmentation strategies, e.g., diverse inputs (DI) (Xie et al. 2019b),
translation-invariant (TI) (Dong et al. 2019) and scaleinvariant (SI) (Lin et al. 2020), strive to prevent the generated adversarial examples from overfitting the model. Nevertheless, the abovementioned adversarial attacks only consider the gradients in the present and past to update the added
adversarial perturbations. To the best of our knowledge, the
trend of gradient change in the future (i.e., the derivative of
gradient) has not been taken into consideration.
In this study, we propose a new PID-based approach to
generate the adversarial examples, which takes the present
gradient, past gradient, and the derivative of gradient of the
loss function into account. Note that PID controller is a classic controller in the field of automatic control (Ang, Chong,
and Li 2005). The basic philosophy behind it is to exploit
the present, past and derivative of the prediction error to
control a feedback system. An et al. (2018) firstly pointed
out that the backpropagation in neural networks employed
in machine learning shares some similarity to the feedback
in PID control, and the idea of PID control can be utilized to
optimize the parameters of DNNs. In our opinion, the PID
control also has a close relationship with the process of generating the adversarial examples. For example, if we view
the gradient of loss function in DNNs as prediction error in
PID controller, FGSM can be considered as a P controller
since it uses the present gradient to generate the added adversarial perturbations, and MI-FGSM and NI-FGSM can
be considered as two PI controllers since they both use the
gradients in the present and past to generate the added adversarial perturbations. In this paper, we integrate the idea of
PID control into adversarial attacks to form a series of new
PID-based adversarial attacks. Our contributions are listed
as follows.

Adversarial attack can misguide the deep neural networks
(DNNs) with adding small-magnitude perturbations to normal examples, which is mainly determined by the gradient of
the loss function with respect to inputs. Previously, various
strategies have been proposed to enhance the performance of
adversarial attacks. However, all these methods only utilize
the gradients in the present and past to generate adversarial
examples. Until now, the trend of gradient change in the future (i.e., the derivative of gradient) has not been considered
yet. Inspired by the classic proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controller in the field of automatic control, we propose
a new PID-based approach for generating adversarial examples. The gradients in the present and past, and the derivative
of gradient are considered in our method, which correspond
to the components of P, I and D in the PID controller, respectively. Extensive experiments consistently demonstrate that
our method can achieve higher attack success rates and exhibit better transferability compared with the state-of-the-art
gradient-based adversarial attacks. Furthermore, our method
possesses good extensibility and can be applied to almost all
available gradient-based adversarial attacks.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to
be highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which are designed carefully by adding small-magnitude perturbations
to original inputs (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014). Adversarial examples can be hardly distinguished from normal examples by human observers but
can misguide the DNNs to produce incorrect outputs. Thus,
adversarial examples may result in security risks of misidentification and misdirection in deep learning applications such
as autonomous vehicles and language translation systems
(Athalye et al. 2018; Hein and Andriushchenko 2017). Previously, a variety of algorithms have been proposed to generate adversarial examples such as fast gradient sign method
(FGSM) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014), Carlini
& Wagner’s method (C&W) (Carlini and Wagner 2017) and
generative adversarial networks method (GANs) (Xiao et al.
2018). Among these methods, FGSM has lower cost and
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We first revealed the relationship between the optimiza10033

