The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Lifelong and Continual Learning Dialogue Systems:
Learning during Conversation
Bing Liu, Sahisnu Mazumder
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
liub@uic.edu, sahisnumazumder@gmail.com

Abstract

them into some actions to be executed by the underlying application. Question-answering (QA) and conversational recommendation systems also fall into this category.
Earlier chatbots were mainly developed with handcrafted
rules. With the advent of deep learning, the trend has shifted
toward end-to-end conversation modeling (Vinyals and Le
2015; Wen et al. 2017). However, despite their widespread
applications, chatbots still have some serious weaknesses:
(1) A great deal of manual effort is needed to label training
data or write rules and compile knowledge bases (KBs). No
matter how much data is used to train a chatbot, it is impossible to cover all possible variations of natural language.
Thus, when deployed in practice, a well-trained chatbot often performs poorly. (2) The pre-compiled KBs cannot cover
the rich knowledge needed in practice.
This paper argues that a truly intelligent chatbot should
not be limited by its offline-trained model or pre-compiled
KB. It should also learn continuously on the job, i.e., after model deployment and during conversing or interacting
with the (human) end users and thereby, improve its capability over time in a self-motivated and self-supervised manner (Chen and Liu 2018; Liu 2020). Thus, this paper proposes a new paradigm, called Lifelong INteractive learning in Conversation (LINC). LINC is like human learning
during daily conversations. This paper focuses on three continuous learning capabilities of chatbots: (1) learning factual
knowledge in open-ended and information-seeking conversations, (2) learning to ground new NL commands (language
expressions), and (3) learning new conversational skills from
users. Some initial attempts have been made in (Mazumder
et al. 2020a,b, 2019; Hancock et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2019).
A key idea for solving the LINC problem is to exploit the
wisdom of the crowd in a multi-user environment (where almost all chatbots operate) to learn new knowledge by asking
or interacting with the current user and/or other users to enable the chatbot to learn quickly and effectively. This powerful approach, however, also comes with a shortcoming.
The knowledge learned from end-users can be erroneous and
some users may even purposely fool the system by providing wrong information or knowledge. We will discuss how
to solve this problem to ensure the credibility or trustworthiness of the learned knowledge from the end users. Note,
we use the terms: chatbot, bot, agent, NLI systems, dialogue
systems interchangeably in the rest of the paper.

Dialogue systems, also called chatbots, are now used in a
wide range of applications. However, they still have some
major weaknesses. One key weakness is that they are typically trained from manually-labeled data and/or written with
handcrafted rules, and their knowledge bases (KBs) are also
compiled by human experts. Due to the huge amount of manual effort involved, they are difficult to scale and also tend
to produce many errors ought to their limited ability to understand natural language and the limited knowledge in their
KBs. Thus, the level of user satisfactory is often low. In this
paper, we propose to dramatically improve the situation by
endowing the chatbots the ability to continually learn (1) new
world knowledge, (2) new language expressions to ground
them to actions, and (3) new conversational skills, during conversation by themselves so that as they chat more and more
with users, they become more and more knowledgeable and
are better and better able to understand diverse natural language expressions and to improve their conversational skills.

Introduction
Building dialogue systems capable of conversing with humans in natural language (NL) and understanding human
NL instructions is a long-standing goal of AI (Winograd
1972). These systems, also called chatbots, have become the
front runner of AI advancement due to wide-spread applications such as assisting customers in buying products, booking tickets, reducing stress, and executing actions like controlling house appliances and reporting weather information.
Dialogue systems can be broadly categorized into two
main types: (1) Chit-chat systems (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Li et al. 2016; Serban et al. 2016) designed to engage
users and provide mental support by conducting chit-chat
type of conversation in a wide range of topics without having a specific goal to complete. (2) Task-oriented chatbots (Williams and Young 2007; Wen et al. 2017) designed
to assist users to complete tasks based on users’ requests,
e.g., providing the requested information and taking actions.
Most of the popular personal assistants such as Alexa, Siri,
Google Home, and Cortana, are task-oriented chatbots. They
are primarily designed as Natural Language Interfaces (NLI)
that take human NL instructions (commands) and translate
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15058

