The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Edge-competing Pathological Liver Vessel Segmentation with Limited Labels
Zunlei Feng1,5# , Zhonghua Wang1# , Xinchao Wang2 , Xiuming Zhang1 , Lechao Cheng3 , Jie Lei4 ,
Yuexuan Wang1∗ , Mingli Song1,5
1
Zhejiang University
Stevens Institute of Technology
3
Zhejiang Lab
4
Zhejiang University of Technology
5
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{zunleifeng,wang97zh,1508056,amywang,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu, chenglc@zhejianglab.com,
jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The microvascular invasion (MVI) is a major prognostic factor in hepatocellular carcinoma, which is one of the malignant tumors with the highest mortality rate. The diagnosis of
MVI needs discovering the vessels that contain hepatocellular carcinoma cells and counting their number in each vessel, which depends heavily on experiences of the doctor, is
largely subjective and time-consuming. However, there is no
algorithm as yet tailored for the MVI detection from pathological images. This paper collects the first pathological liver
image dataset containing 522 whole slide images with labels of vessels, MVI, and hepatocellular carcinoma grades. The
first and essential step for the automatic diagnosis of MVI is
the accurate segmentation of vessels. The unique characteristics of pathological liver images, such as super-large size,
multi-scale vessel, and blurred vessel edges, make the accurate vessel segmentation challenging. Based on the collected
dataset, we propose an Edge-competing Vessel Segmentation
Network (EVS-Net), which contains a segmentation network
and two edge segmentation discriminators. The segmentation network, combined with an edge-aware self-supervision
mechanism, is devised to conduct vessel segmentation with
limited labeled patches. Meanwhile, two discriminators are
introduced to distinguish whether the segmented vessel and
background contain residual features in an adversarial manner. In the training stage, two discriminators are devised to
compete for the predicted position of edges. Exhaustive experiments demonstrate that, with only limited labeled patches, EVS-Net achieves a close performance of fully supervised
methods, which provides a convenient tool for the pathological liver vessel segmentation. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/zju-vipa/EVS-Net.

Figure 1: The overview of the edge-competing mechanism.
The Over-Segmentation Discriminator (OS-D) and UnderSegmentation Discriminator (US-D) are devised for distinguishing whether the segmented background and segmented vessel contain residual features. The over-segmented and
under-segmented patches are generated with different erosion and dilation operations following binarization processing. Only when the predicted mask depicts the precise segmentation will the true criterion of the two discriminators be
satisfied simultaneously for an input patch.
rumpail et al. 2017). The microvascular invasion (MVI) is a
major prognostic factor in hepatocellular carcinoma, which
significantly affects the choice of treatment and the overall survival of patients (Sumie et al. 2008; Rodriguezperalvarez et al. 2013). However, the current MVI detection
heavily depends on the experiences of doctors, which is a
largely subjective and time-consuming to diagnose. Existing
machine learning algorithms for predicting MVI mainly focused on computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission tomography (Cuccurullo et al.
2018), yet ignore pathological images. Even to data, there
is no learning-based method yet for automatically detecting
MVI in pathological liver images.
As deep learning approaches have achieved promising results in the medical image analysis area (Ker et al. 2018;

Introduction
Liver cancer is one of the malignant tumors with the highest
mortality rate, which witnesses an increasing number of cases in recent years (D, Suna, and Boyacioglu 2017). Hepatocellular carcinoma represents the most frequent primary liver tumor, taking up about 90% of all liver cancer cases (Pe∗
Corresponding author. # Both the authors have equal contribution to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1325

