The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Posted Pricing with Unknown Time-Discounted Valuations
Giulia Romano, Gianluca Tartaglia, Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
giulia.romano@polimi.it, gianluca.tartaglia@mail.polimi.it, alberto.marchesi@polimi.it, nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract

posted-price mechanisms. This happens, for example, in online travel agencies (e.g., Expedia), accommodation websites (e.g., Booking.com), and e-commerce platforms (e.g.,
Amazon, eBay). As studied by Einav et al. (2018), an increasing number of eBay users prefer buying goods via
posted prices rather than participating in auctions.
Posted-price mechanisms provide many advantages over
traditional auction-style mechanisms. From the designer’s
perspective, posting prices requires a much lower effort than
running an auction, since it avoids the burden of first eliciting information (the bids) from the agents, and then collecting the payments. At the same time, posted-price mechanisms retain most of the desirable properties of classical auctions, such as truthfulness. Indeed, even though the agents
are not required to report their valuations for the item, they
are always better off deciding whether to buy the item or not
on the basis of their true valuations, without acting strategically (Babaioff et al. 2017). From the agents’ perspective,
participating in a posted-price mechanism is preferable over
competing in an auction, for several reasons. For instance,
agents may prefer revealing minimal information about their
true preferences if they plan to participate in similar markets
in the future. Moreover, in some real-world settings, requiring the agents to figure out their true valuations for the item
might need some additional efforts on their behalf, while answering a take-it-or-leave-it offer is usually much easier.
In this work, we study posted-price mechanisms for selling a single unit of a single item within a finite period of
time, when the value of the item is discounted over time according to an arbitrary continuous and non-increasing discount function. Discounting is common in many real-world
applications and widely studied for a number of economic
situations, such, e.g., bargaining (Rubinstein 1982; Gatti,
Di Giunta, and Marino 2008) and auctions (Mao et al. 2018).
We tackle settings in which agents arrive sequentially—a
common assumptions in online mechanism design (Lavi and
Nisan 2004; Parkes 2007)—and the number of agents is unknown a priori. In particular, following a mainstream approach in economics (see, e.g., (Mason and Välimäki 2011;
Rosenthal 2011)), we assume that agents’ arrivals are governed by a Poisson process. Remarkably, posted pricing with
Poisson arrivals has been previously investigated by Wang
(1993) and Rong, Qin, and An (2018) for undiscounted settings, though without providing any theoretical result.

We study the problem of designing posted-price mechanisms
in order to sell a single unit of a single item within a finite period of time. Motivated by real-world problems, such as, e.g.,
long-term rental of rooms and apartments, we assume that
customers arrive online according to a Poisson process, and
their valuations are drawn from an unknown distribution and
discounted over time. We evaluate our mechanisms in terms
of competitive ratio, measuring the worst-case ratio between
their revenue and that of an optimal mechanism that knows
the distribution of valuations. First, we focus on the identical
valuation setting, where all the customers value the item for
the same amount. In this setting, we provide a mechanism
MC that achieves the best possible competitive ratio, discussing its dependency on the parameters in the case of linear
discount. Then, we switch to the random valuation setting.
We show that, if we restrict the attention to distributions of
valuations with a monotone hazard rate, then the competitive
ratio of MC is lower bounded by a strictly positive constant
that does not depend on the distribution. Moreover, we provide another mechanism, called MPC , which is defined by a
piecewise constant pricing strategy and reaches performances
comparable to those obtained with MC . This mechanism is
useful when the seller cannot change the posted price too often. Finally, we empirically evaluate the performances of our
mechanisms in a number of experimental settings.

Introduction
Posted-price mechanisms try to sell an item by proposing a
take-it-or-leave-it price to each arriving agent, who then decides whether to buy the item or not (Chawla et al. 2010).
If an agent opts for purchasing the item, then the mechanism terminates; otherwise, the agent leaves without any
further possibility of buying the item, and the mechanism
goes on by proposing prices to upcoming agents. Over the
last years, growing attention has been devoted to the analysis
of posted-price mechanisms, both in the classical economic
literature (Seifert 2006) and in computer science (Babaioff
et al. 2015, 2017; Adamczyk et al. 2017; Correa et al. 2017),
within artificial intelligence and machine learning in particular (Kleinberg and Leighton 2003; Shah, Johari, and
Blanchet 2019). This is mainly motivated by the overwhelming number of online economic transactions carried out by
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5682

