The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SCNet: Training Inference Sample Consistency for Instance Segmentation
Thang Vu, Haeyong Kang, Chang D. Yoo
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{thangvubk,haeyong.kang,cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

performance improvement. It consists of a sequence of detectors that progressively refine the box predictions to obtain
accurate localization at the final detection stage. The capability of this detector has been extended with the addition
of the mask branches for performing instance segmentation.
This architecture is referred to as the Cascade Mask R-CNN
(Cai and Vasconcelos 2019), which shows significant improvement compared to non-cascade ones. Although having better performance compared to non-cascade methods,
Cascade Mask R-CNN still exhibits inconsistency in training and inference sample distribution. At training time, the
outputs of all the box stages are used for mask predictions;
however, at inference time only the output of the last box
stage is used for mask predictions. It has been shown in (Cai
and Vasconcelos 2018) that the box stages produce different sample distributions since they are trained with different
Intersection over Union (IoU) thresholds. Such a mismatch
between training and inference sample distribution will potentially worsen the performance.
This paper proposes an architecture referred to as Sample
Consistency Network (SCNet) that ensures the IoU distribution of the samples at training time to be close to that at inference time. To this end, only the outputs of the last box stage
are used for mask predictions at both training and inference.
Figure 1 shows the IoU distribution of the samples going to
the mask branch at training time with/without sample consistency compared to that at inference time. The COCO (Lin
et al. 2014) train and val splits are using for training and
inference, respectively. When sample consistency is not ensured, nearly half of the training samples (49.1%) are at a
low IoU region (IoU <= 0.75), which are much larger than
that of training with sample consistency (34.2%) and inference (38.5%). Overall, training with sample consistency produces closer IoU distribution between training and inference
compared to that of training without sample consistency.
Instance segmentation requires synergy among the three
sub-tasks: detecting, classifying, and segmenting objects.
To further reinforce the reciprocal relationships among subtasks, feature relay and global context are proposed. It is
well-known that joint training of closely related tasks can
improve the overall performance (He et al. 2017; Chen et al.
2019a). For instance, adding an extra mask branch to a detector improves the detection performance, although there
is no direct information flow between the box and mask

Cascaded architectures have brought significant performance
improvement in object detection and instance segmentation.
However, there are lingering issues regarding the disparity
in the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) distribution of the samples between training and inference. This disparity can potentially exacerbate detection accuracy. This paper proposes
an architecture referred to as Sample Consistency Network
(SCNet) to ensure that the IoU distribution of the samples
at training time is close to that at inference time. Furthermore, SCNet incorporates feature relay and utilizes global
contextual information to further reinforce the reciprocal relationships among classifying, detecting, and segmenting subtasks. Extensive experiments on the standard COCO dataset
reveal the effectiveness of the proposed method over multiple evaluation metrics, including box AP, mask AP, and inference speed. In particular, while running 38% faster, the
proposed SCNet improves the AP of the box and mask predictions by respectively 1.3 and 2.3 points compared to the
strong Cascade Mask R-CNN baseline. Code is available at
https://github.com/thangvubk/SCNet.

Introduction
In recent years, instance segmentation has received considerable attention for its applications in autonomous driving (Neven et al. 2018; Zhang, Fidler, and Urtasun 2016),
robotics (Danielczuk et al. 2019; Pathak et al. 2018), surveillance (Mao et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018), and other vision
tasks (Kim et al. 2019, 2020). Given an image, instance segmentation aims to predict class labels and instance masks
for objects of interest at pixel-level. Achieving an accurate and robust instance segmentation in a real-world environment is challenging: object occlusion, deformation, and
scale changes are of concern.
State-of-the-art instance segmentation methods attempt to
benefit from high performing object detectors, where the
predicted boxes are segmented using a fully convolutional
network (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), such as Mask
R-CNN (He et al. 2017), and PANet (Liu et al. 2018). For
accurate object detection, Cascade R-CNN (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018) has been recently proposed, showing significant
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2701

