The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Non-Autoregressive Coarse-to-Fine Video Captioning
Bang Yang,1 Yuexian Zou, 1,2 * Fenglin Liu, 1 Can Zhang 1
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shen Zhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{yb.ece, zouyx, fenglinliu98, zhangcan}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
It is encouraged to see that progress has been made to bridge
videos and natural language. However, mainstream video
captioning methods suffer from slow inference speed due to
the sequential manner of autoregressive decoding, and prefer generating generic descriptions due to the insufficient
training of visual words (e.g., nouns and verbs) and inadequate decoding paradigm. In this paper, we propose a nonautoregressive decoding based model with a coarse-to-fine
captioning procedure to alleviate these defects. In implementations, we employ a bi-directional self-attention based network as our language model for achieving inference speedup,
based on which we decompose the captioning procedure into
two stages, where the model has different focuses. Specifically, given that visual words determine the semantic correctness of captions, we design a mechanism of generating visual words to not only promote the training of scene-related
words but also capture relevant details from videos to construct a coarse-grained sentence “template”. Thereafter, we
devise dedicated decoding algorithms that fill in the “template” with suitable words and modify inappropriate phrasing
via iterative refinement to obtain a fine-grained description.
Extensive experiments on two mainstream video captioning
benchmarks, i.e., MSVD and MSR-VTT, demonstrate that
our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, generates
diverse descriptions, and obtains high inference efficiency.

[ ] man [ ] driving [ ] [ ] road
Visual Words (related to this video)
Noun: car, man, road, jeep, cherokee, …
Verb : driving, discussing, reviews, …
(a) Visual Word Generation

Decoding Algorithms
Sentence Making

Iterative Refinement

a man is driving down the road
a man is driving a jeep cherokee
(b) Caption Generation

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed coarse-to-fine captioning procedure, where (a) visual words (i.e., nouns and verbs
in this paper) are generated in parallel first to form a coarsegrained “template”, based on which (b) a fine-grained description is yielded via dedicated decoding algorithms.
For caption generation, current methods are stick to autoregressive (AR) decoding, i.e., conditioning each word on
the previously generated outputs. Such sequential manner
results in high inference latency, which is especially amplified by the fact that fine-grained descriptions are generally long (Gella, Lewis, and Rohrbach 2018). Recently,
non-autoregressive (NA) decoding that generates words in
parallel to achieve significant inference speedup becomes an
emerging focus in neural machine translation (NMT) (Gu
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019b; Shao et al. 2020). Nevertheless, NA decoding suffers from poor approximation to the
target distribution after removing the sequential dependency
(Gu et al. 2018), leading to a large performance gap compared with AR counterparts.
For describing scene-related details, visual words (e.g.,
nouns and verbs), which are visually-grounded and highly
associated with semantic correctness (Song et al. 2017), deserve more attention than non-visual words (e.g. determiners
and prepositions). By analyzing the existing caption corpora
(Chen and Dolan 2011; Xu et al. 2016), it is found that visual words are much less than non-visual words in number.
Therefore, treating these two kinds of words equally to train
a captioning model, as most of previous works do (Aafaq
et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020), will cause insufficient training of meaningful words, which could manifest as the lack of
relevant details and diversity in generated descriptions (Dai,
Fidler, and Lin 2018; Sammani and Melas-Kyriazi 2020).
Besides, it is challenging for the models to generate satisfy-

Introduction
Video captioning aims to automatically describe video contents with plausible sentences, which could be helpful for
video retrieval, assisting visually-impaired people and so
on. In recent years, neural captioning methods have risen to
prominence and they generally adopt the encoder-decoder
framework (Venugopalan et al. 2015), where videos are encoded to sequences of vectors with Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), and captions are often decoded from
these vectors via Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) or
Transformer (Hori et al. 2017). For real-time industrial applications, a good video captioning system may have low inference latency and describe scene-related details. However,
existing methods mostly have deficiencies in both aspects.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3119

