The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Scalar Embedding of Relative Positions in Attention Models
Junshuang Wu,1,2 Richong Zhang,1,2∗ Yongyi Mao,3 Junfan Chen1,2
1

Beijing Advanced Institution for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
wujs@act.buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca, chenjf@act.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

𝛼𝑖𝑗

Attention with positional encoding has been demonstrated as
a powerful component in modern neural network models, such
as transformers. However, why positional encoding works
well in attention models remains largely unanswered. In this
paper, we study the scalar relative positional encoding (SRPE)
proposed in the T5 transformer. Such an encoding method has
two features. First, it uses a scalar to embed relative positions.
Second, the relative positions are bucketized using a fixed
heuristic algorithm, and positions in the same bucket share the
same embedding. In this work, we show that SRPE in attention
has an elegant probabilistic interpretation. More specifically,
the positional encoding serves to produce a prior distribution
for the attended positions. The resulting attentive distribution
can be viewed as a posterior distribution of the attended position given the observed input sequence. Furthermore, we
propose a new SRPE (AT5) that adopts a learnable bucketization protocol and automatically adapts to the dependency
range specific to the learning task. Empirical studies show that
the AT5 achieves superior performance than the T5’s SRPE.

+
𝑠𝑖𝑗

𝑒 (𝑙)

x
𝑔

𝑊𝑄

𝑊𝐾

𝑏

𝑤𝑖

𝑤𝑗

𝑙 =𝑗−𝑖

Figure 1: The framework of SRPE. b is the bucketing function
and g is the bucket-embedding function. sij is the context
score computed by the dot-product of the transformed word
embedding pair; el is the scalar embedding for relative position l. αij is the final attentive score, a summation of the
scalar embedding and the context score.

Introduction
Self-attention (SA) has been demonstrated as a key and powerful module for building modern neural networks, such as
the Transformer. It has been used in many NLP tasks, including machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017), natural
language inference (Guo, Zhang, and Liu 2019) and text classification (Dai, Li, and Xu 2020). However, without relying
on the recurrent structure or the convolutional module, the
operations in SA are agnostic to the word order in the input
sequence. Thus positional encoding plays a crucial role in SA
to capture the temporal information of the text. In general, to
incorporate the positional information, previous researchers
have proposed varied positional encoding approaches. These
approaches can be divided into two types: absolute positional
encoding and relative positional encoding.
The absolute positional encoding represents the absolute
position of the word in an input sentence as embedding vector,
with dimension usually taken the same as the token embedding so that the two embeddings can be summed as the word
representation. The absolute positional encoding includes
∗

Corresponding author: zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14050

Trigonometric Position Embedding (TPE) (Vaswani et al.
2017) and the learnable position embedding (Devlin et al.
2019).
The relative positional encoding (RPE) represents the relative position of the word in an input sentence either as a
vector (VRPE) (Shaw, Uszkoreit, and Vaswani 2018; Dai et al.
2019) or as a scalar (SRPE) (Raffel et al. 2019). In VRPE,
the embedding vectors of relative positions have the same
dimension with the word embedding. The SRPE approach
used in the T5 Transformer (Raffel et al. 2019), the focus of
study in this paper, consists of bucketing function and bucket
embedding (Figure 1). The bucketing function assigns the relative positions into different buckets through a fixed heuristic
algorithm, and the bucket embedding component maps each
bucket to a learnable scalar value; this “scalar embedding” is
then added to the corresponding context score to obtain the
final attentive score, giving rise to the self-attention weights.
Despite its power demonstrated in practice, how positional
encoding functions remains largely a mystery and lacks principled explanation. This research is driven by a curiosity to
understand how positional encoding takes effect in SA, where
focus on the relative positional encoding approach designed
in the T5 transformer. To that end, we arrive at an elegant
probabilistic interpretation of the positional encoding in the

