The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Continual Learning by Using Information of Each Class Holistically
Wenpeng Hu1,* , Qi Qin2,∗ , Mengyu Wang3 , Jinwen Ma1 , and Bing Liu3,†
1

Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{wenpeng.hu, qinqi, wangmengyu, jwma, dcsliub}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

case is classified only by the model of that task. This paper
works in the CCL scenario and also assumes after learning a
task, its training data is forgotten or no longer accessible in
subsequent learning. The inaccessibility of the old task data
could be due to many reasons, e.g., unrecorded legacy data,
proprietary data, and privacy concerns such as in federated
learning where the model can be shared from one party to
another but the data must be kept private (Zhang et al. 2020).
There are three main approaches to dealing with CF (Chen
and Liu 2018; Parisi et al. 2019). The first approach tries to
avoid modifying those important parameters learned for old
tasks in learning the new task (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Zenke,
Poole, and Ganguli 2017; Li and Hoiem 2017). The second
approach memorizes a small set of training data of each old
task and use them in learning the new task (replaying) (LopezPaz and Ranzato 2017; Rusu et al. 2016; Rebuffi, Kolesnikov,
and Lampert 2017). The third approach builds data generators
to generate pseudo-examples for old tasks to be used used in
learning the new task (Shin et al. 2017; Kamra, Gupta, and
Liu 2017; Seff et al. 2017; Hu et al. 2019).
Before proposing our new approach, we first discuss a
major cause for CF. Existing CL techniques mainly take the
traditional approach of learning the discriminative information among classes during training to classify the classes.
This approach is prone to CF because the discriminative
information learned for old classes (from old tasks) may
not be discriminative between the new classes and between
old classes and the new classes. Thus, in learning the new
classes, the network parameters for old classes have to be
revised, which causes CF. The first approach for dealing with
CF above tries to avoid revising those important parameters
learned for old tasks (although it should), which leads to suboptimal solutions. The second and third approaches both try
to revise the old parameters using a small amount of saved
old training examples or generated pseudo-examples.
Unlike the existing approaches, which deal with CF directly due to the above problem, this work proposes an entirely different approach, called Per-class Continual Learning
(PCL), based on one-class learning, which aims to avoid CF
altogether. PCL makes two main contributions. First, it
proposes to use one-class learning for CCL. PCL learns one
class at a time (one class per task) considering the features of
the class holistically without overly biasing any specific features. This is crucial because the system does not know what

Continual learning (CL) incrementally learns a sequence of
tasks while solving the catastrophic forgetting (CF) problem.
Existing methods mainly try to deal with CF directly. In this
paper, we propose to avoid CF by considering the features
of each class holistically rather than only the discriminative
information for classifying the classes seen so far. This latter
approach is prone to CF because the discriminative information for old classes may not be sufficiently discriminative for
the new class to be learned. Consequently, in learning each
new task, the network parameters for previous tasks have to be
revised, which causes CF. With the holistic consideration, after
adding new tasks, the system can still do well for previous
tasks. The proposed technique is called Per-class Continual
Learning (PCL). PCL has two key novelties. (1) It proposes a
one-class learning based technique for CL, which considers
features of each class holistically and represents a new approach to solving the CL problem. (2) It proposes a method
to extract discriminative information after training to further
improve the accuracy. Empirical evaluation shows that PCL
markedly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines for one or
more classes per task. More tasks also result in more gains.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) of a sequence of tasks in a neural
network often suffers from catastrophic forgetting (CF) (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). CF means that in learning a new
task, the network parameters learned for old tasks have to
be modified, which can cause accuracy degrading for the
old tasks. There are two main CL scenarios: class continual
learning (CCL) and task continual learning (TCL), which are
also called class incremental learning and task incremental
leaning respectively. In both scenarios, each task consists of
a number of classes. Once a task is learned, its training data
(as least the bulk of it) is discarded or forgotten. In CCL, only
a single classifier is built for all classes seen so far, which is
used to classify each test case of any class without the task-id
provided. In TCL, each task builds a separate classifier. In
testing, each test case and its task-id are given so that the test
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author. The work was done when Bing Liu was
at Peking University on leave of absence from University of Illinois
at Chicago, liub@uic.edu.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7797

