The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Learning in Variable Feature Spaces under Incomplete Supervision
Yi He,1 Xu Yuan,1 Sheng Chen,1 Xindong Wu2,3
1

2

Center for Advanced Computer Studies (CACS), University of Louisiana at Lafayette, USA
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology, China
3
Mininglamp Academy of Sciences, Mininglamp Technology, China
{yi.he1, xu.yuan, chen}@louisiana.edu, xwu@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract

refer to as online semi-supervised learning, has also drawn
extensive attention (Goldberg, Li, and Zhu 2008; Goldberg
et al. 2011; Chu et al. 2011; Mohamad, Bouchachia, and
Sayed-Mouchaweh 2018; Wagner et al. 2018).
Surprisingly, although supporting flexible features and
flexible labeling are two important aspects in online learning, no method has been developed to support the both. The
goal of this paper is to fill this critical gap. To this end,
we explore a new problem, termed Online learning in Variable feature Spaces under Incomplete Supervision (OVSIS),
where a data stream lives in a feature space being arbitrarily
variable with labels rarely given.
A main challenge of solving OVSIS lies to effectively exploit the very limited labeled instances to update the online
learner. A plausible idea is to uncover the geometric relations among the input points and propagate the label information from labeled instances to their unlabeled neighbors.
However, it suffers from two limitations. First, as different
points may live in disparate feature spaces, no metric can be
applied directly to measure their distances. Second, the geometric shape is formed by all previously arrived points, so
storing them can incur excessive memory overhead.
To overcome the first limitation, we first draw insights
from (Hou, Zhang, and Zhou 2017; He et al. 2019) to capture
stationarity in a variable feature space. Namely, we construct
a universal feature space that embodies all features emerged
in arrived instances. We can then project the input points
onto this universal feature space and measure distance between them as they now have equal dimensions.
To address the second limitation, we use manifold structures that underlie the universal feature space to embed the
point-wise geometric relations. To maintain the “online”
property of our system, the manifold is sparsely approximated by a random projection tree (RP-Tree) (Freund et al.
2008). Such an approximation allows to store only a handful
of representatives, each of which corresponds to a leaf of the
RP-Tree. Each leaf governs a local region on the manifold,
representing the points that fall into this region.
Specific contributions of this paper are as follows:

This paper explores a new online learning problem where the
input sequence lives in an over-time varying feature space and
the ground-truth label of any input point is given only occasionally, making online learners less restrictive and more applicable. The crux in this setting lies in how to exploit the very
limited labels to efficiently update the online learners. Plausible ideas such as propagating labels from labeled points to
their neighbors through uncovering the point-wise geometric relations face two challenges: (1) distance measurement
fails to work as different points may be described by disparate
sets of features and (2) storing the geometric shape, which is
formed by all arrived points, is unrealistic in an online setting. To address these challenges, we first construct a universal feature space that accumulates all observed features, making distance measurement feasible. Then, we use manifolds
to represent the geometric shapes and approximate them in
a sparse means, making manifolds computational and memory tractable in online learning. We frame these two building
blocks into a regularized risk minimization algorithm. Theoretical analysis and empirical evidence substantiate the viability and effectiveness of our proposal.

Introduction
Nowadays, huge volumes of data abound in all domains of
human endeavour, calling for learning systems that can process and make decisions in real-time. Online learning is proposed to build such systems: when data streaming in continuously, it initiates the learning process at any time without waiting all data instances to be arrived. Considering that
data streams usually span a long time, data instances arriving at different time steps may be described by very disparate features. For this reason, a line of research, aiming
to learn data streams in variable feature spaces, has been
explored to relax the constraint that all data instances must
be described by the same set of features (Masud et al. 2010;
Gomes et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2015; Hou, Zhang, and Zhou
2017; Beyazit, Alagurajah, and Wu 2019; He et al. 2019).
Besides, providing full labeling to data instances in an online setting is prohibitive due to the speed, volume, and duration of streaming data. To lift the restriction that all data instances must be labeled, another line of research, which we

1. This is the first work to explore the OVSIS problem,
where the online learner faces a variable feature space and
receives incomplete supervision labels.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. A novel AGDES algorithm is proposed to tackle the OV4106

