The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Synthesis of Search Heuristics for Temporal Planning via Reinforcement Learning
Andrea Micheli, Alessandro Valentini
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
amicheli@fbk.eu, alvalentini@fbk.eu

Abstract

existing tools are unable to cope with very small and simple industrial problems when rich temporal constraints need
to be modeled. From a practical standpoint, in many scenarios one wants to have a planner that is able to quickly solve
problems on the same domain: for this reason, many practitioners resort to domain-dependent planners.
In order to mitigate this issue and retain a domainindependent framework, we propose to leverage recent advances in model-free reinforcement learning (RL), in particular Value Iteration using Neural Networks, to automatically
construct temporal planning heuristics for a specific domain.
Ideally, we want to take a temporal planning domain, analyze it off-line using RL and produce a heuristic function
that allows a planning technique to extend the coverage of
solved problems in that domain. To the best of our knowledge, no previous work addressed the problem of learning
heuristics for temporal planning.
We present a domain-independent learning and planning
framework that, given a planning domain and a set of training problems (not solution plans), synthesizes a temporal
planning heuristic for problems in the same domain, under
the assumption of knowing the maximum number of objects
in each problem. We empirically show how this method outperforms existing symbolic heuristics on two use-case domains with rich temporal constraints. Our results emphasize
how this approach truly requires a combination of learning and reasoning, because the learned policy alone and the
purely-symbolic planner are dramatically outperformed.

Automated temporal planning is the problem of synthesizing, starting from a model of a system, a course of actions
to achieve a desired goal when temporal constraints, such as
deadlines, are present in the problem. Despite considerable
successes in the literature, scalability is still a severe limitation for existing planners, especially when confronted with
real-world, industrial scenarios.
In this paper, we aim at exploiting recent advances in reinforcement learning, for the synthesis of heuristics for temporal planning. Starting from a set of problems of interest for a
specific domain, we use a customized reinforcement learning
algorithm to construct a value function that is able to estimate
the expected reward for as many problems as possible. We use
a reward schema that captures the semantics of the temporal
planning problem and we show how the value function can
be transformed in a planning heuristic for a semi-symbolic
heuristic search exploration of the planning model. We show
on two case-studies how this method can widen the reach of
current temporal planners with encouraging results.

Introduction
Automated temporal planning concerns the synthesis of
strategies to reach a desired goal with a system that is formally specified by providing an initial condition together
with the possible actions that can drive it in presence of temporal constraints. In this context, actions become intervals
(instead of being instantaneous as in classical planning) that
have a duration (possibly subject to metric constraints). Similarly, plans are no longer simple sequences of actions, but
they are schedules. Automated temporal planning received
considerable attention in the literature, and the definition
of the standard PDDL 2.1 language (Fox and Long 2003)
fueled the research of effective search-based techniques to
solve the problem (Coles et al. 2010; Eyerich, Mattmüller,
and Röger 2012; Rankooh and Ghassem-Sani 2015).
Despite considerable success stories, scalability is still
a major hindrance for the adoption of automated temporal
planning in real-world industrial scenarios. For example, the
experiments reported in (Micheli and Scala 2019) and, more
recently in (Valentini, Micheli, and Cimatti 2020) show how

Problem Definition
We start by defining the syntax of temporal planning: we
formalize an abstract syntax adherent to the ANML (Smith,
Frank, and Cushing 2008) fragment supported by (Valentini,
Micheli, and Cimatti 2020) using a lifted representation to
separate domain and problem specifications.
For the sake of simplicity, we formalize a language that is
un-typed and with Boolean predicates only; our implementation supports the entire ANML typing system and finiteand infinite-codomain functions.
Definition 0.1. An atom is a tuple hp, ~v i where p is a predicate with arity n and ~v is a vector of n variables.
In our temporal language specification, conditions and effects can be declared to happen at any time within the dura-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11895

