The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ethical Dilemmas in Strategic Games
Pavel Naumov,1 Rui-Jie Yew2
1

King’s College, Pennsylvania, USA
Scripps College, California, USA
pgn2@cornell.edu, ryew8098@scrippscollege.edu
2

Abstract

have done otherwise” (Frankfurt 1969). For example, if the
system transitions from state w to state u on either of the diagrams, then the agent will be blamed for the death of Alice
because the agent had a strategy (action R) to prevent Alice’s
death. However, the agent is not blamable for the statement
“either Alice or Bob is dead”, because, in both diagrams, the
agent does not have a strategy to prevent the statement from
being true.
However, there is a difference in the types of choices the
agent must make in these two diagrams. In the left diagram,
the agent has to make a hard choice between either consciously killing Alice or consciously killing Bob. On the
right diagram, the agent can avoid this choice by selecting
action N . We say that, on the left diagram, the agent is facing a moral dilemma between killing Alice and killing Bob,
while on the second diagram the agent does not.

An agent, or a coalition of agents, faces an ethical dilemma
between several statements if she is forced to make a conscious choice between which of these statements will be true.
This paper proposes to capture ethical dilemmas as a modality in strategic game settings with and without limit on sacrifice and for perfect and imperfect information games. The
authors show that the dilemma modality cannot be defined
through the earlier proposed blameworthiness modality. The
main technical result is a sound and complete axiomatization
of the properties of this modality with sacrifice in games with
perfect information.

Introduction
In this paper we study ethical dilemmas faced by agents and
coalitions of agents in multiagent systems. As an example,
consider the two diagrams in Figure 1. In the situation depicted in the left diagram, an agent must choose between
action left (L) and action right (R). These actions will result in the death of Alice and Bob, respectively. The right
diagram adds an additional neutral action (N ) that results in
the system nondeterministically transitioning either in state
u or state v and killing Alice or Bob, respectively.
Alice is dead

Bob is dead

Alice is dead

Bob is dead

u

v

u

v

L

R

L, N

w

d
b
a
c

Figure 2: Road traffic situation.
As another example, consider the traffic situation depicted
in Figure 2. Here, four pedestrians (red circles in the middle)
are stranded on a busy four-lane highway. Self-driving cars a
and b are on the path to run them over. It is too late for either
of the cars to stop. Car a has three options: to pull left, to
keep driving straight, or to pull right into bus c. Similarly,
car b can pull left, drive straight, or pull right into bus d.

R, N
w

Figure 1: Two situations.
The situations represented by these two diagrams are similar in many respects. In both of them, in state w the agent
has a strategy to kill Alice (action L) and a strategy to kill
Bob (action R). Additionally, in both settings, the agent will
be blamed for the same outcomes. To claim this, we use
an oft-cited (Widerker 2017) definition of blameworthiness
through the principle of alternative possibilities: “a person is
morally responsible for what he has done only if he could

a\b

left

straight

right

left
straight
right

ϕp
ϕa ∧ ϕ b
ϕa ∧ ϕc

ϕ a ∧ ϕb
ϕp
ϕa ∧ ϕc

ϕb ∧ ϕ d
ϕb ∧ ϕ d
ϕa ∧ ϕb ∧ ϕc ∧ ϕd

Table 1: Strategic game between cars a and b.
Table 1 shows different outcomes of this strategic game
between players a and b. In this table, letters ϕp , ϕa , ϕb , ϕc ,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11613

