The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Real-time Tropical Cyclone Intensity Estimation by Handling Temporally
Heterogeneous Satellite Data
Boyo Chen, Buo-Fu Chen∗ , Yun-Nung Chen
National Taiwan University
boyochen722@gmail.com, bfchen777@gmail.com, y.v.chen@ieee.org

Abstract

Note that high quality SATCON estimates could be obtained
at an approximate three-hour frequency.
Recently, several studies have applied convolutional neural networks (CNN) on satellite images to estimate TC intensity (Pradhan et al. 2018; Chen, Chen, and Lin 2018;
Chen et al. 2019; Wimmers, Velden, and Cossuth 2019).
The previous work released a benchmark dataset ”TCIR”
for the TC-image-to-intensity regression task (Chen, Chen,
and Lin 2018), which consists of satellite images including
four channels (fig. 1 (a)-(d)). The CNN-TC network(Chen
et al. 2019) 1 utilized IR1 (Infrared) and PMW (passive microwave rain rates) channels and achieved a state-of-the-art
performance also at a three-hour frequency.
Notably, the VIS (visible) channel was not utilized in the
past, because it only provides meaningful cloud information
during the daytime. Besides, PMW channel images can only
be collected at the frequency of ≈ 3 hours while the observations from IR1 and water vapor (WV) channel are available
almost anytime.2 As real-time intensity estimations are required for pragmatic disaster management, we must be able
to handle temporally-heterogeneous satellite observations.
This work proposes a novel deep learning model combining CNN and GAN (generative adversarial network) to
deal with the temporally heterogeneous datasets. Our goal
is to eliminate the dependency on PMW channel and perform the prediction with only IR1 and WV channels, so that
24/7 intensity estimations could be provided. To keep the
performance comparable to the state-of-the-art model, we
also make use of the most of the information provided by
good quality VIS images. We proposed a novel 5-stage training strategy, with which two separated generators are trained
for producing simulated VIS and PMW images. Afterward,
generated VIS and PMW images can be used along with IR1
images to conduct the estimates. fig. 2 is a schematic of our
inference model.
We summarize related work about GAN in section 2 and
provide analysis of various used satellite observations in sec-

Analyzing big geophysical observational data collected by
multiple advanced sensors on various satellite platforms promotes our understanding of the geophysical system. For instance, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved
great success in estimating tropical cyclone (TC) intensity
based on satellite data with fixed temporal frequency (e.g.,
3 h). However, to achieve more timely (under 30 min) and
accurate TC intensity estimates, a deep learning model is demanded to handle temporally-heterogeneous satellite observations. Specifically, infrared (IR1) and water vapor (WV)
images are available within every 15 minute period, while
passive microwave rain rate (PMW) is available about every
3 hours. Meanwhile, the visible (VIS) channel is severely affected by noise and sunlight intensity, making it difficult to
be utilized. Therefore, we propose a novel framework that
combines generative adversarial network (GAN) with CNN.
The model utilizes all data during the training phase including VIS and PMW information and eventually uses only
the high-frequent IR1 and WV data for providing intensity
estimates during the predicting phase. Experimental results
demonstrate that the hybrid GAN-CNN framework achieves
comparable precision to the state-of-the-art models, while
possessing the capability of increasing the maximum estimation frequency from 3 hours to less than 15 minutes. Please
visit https://github.com/BoyoChen/CNN-GAN-TC for codes
and implementation details.

1

Introduction

Tropical cyclone (TC) is a type of low-pressure weather system that forms and develops over the warm tropical ocean. It
is characterized by intense rotating winds and severe rainfall
associated with eyewall clouds and spiral rainbands. A TC
hitting the land poses severe threats to society by producing
gusty wind, sea surge, flooding, and landslide.
TC intensity (i.e., the maximum sustained surface wind
near the center) is one of the most critical factors in disaster management. The state-of-the-art SATCON (Velden and
Herndon 2014), widely used in operational forecasting, estimates TC intensity based on consensus decision-making
procedures using infrared images from geostationary satellites and other observations from low-Earth-orbit satellites.

1
This article is published in Weather and Forecasting, one of
the best journals in the relevant research field.
2
PMW is collected by low-Earth-orbit microwave satellites.
Meanwhile, IR1, WV, and VIS are collected by geostationary
satellites. Normally, geostationary satellites collect data at the frequency of 15 min. In a super rapid scan mode, a geostationary satellite provides observations every 2 min.

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14721

