The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Switching Auto-Regressive Factorization:
Application to Time Series Forecasting
Amirreza Farnoosh, Bahar Azari, Sarah Ostadabbas
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
{afarnoosh, azari, ostadabbas}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Accordingly, Bayesian probabilistic global matrix/tensor factorization has been investigated in Salakhutdinov and Mnih
(2008); Zhao, Zhang, and Cichocki (2015); Chen et al. (2019)
for time series imputation. Besides, linear temporal dynamics have been adapted into this framework in Xiong et al.
(2010); Charlin et al. (2015); Sun and Chen (2019). A number of non-Bayesian dynamical matrix factorization methods have been explored in Rogers, Li, and Russell (2013);
Sun, Parthasarathy, and Varshney (2014); Bahadori, Yu, and
Liu (2014); Cai et al. (2015); Yu, Rao, and Dhillon (2016);
Takeuchi, Kashima, and Ueda (2017); Jing et al. (2018).
Amongst these methods, some assume a linear vector autoregressive model for the temporal weights (Bahadori, Yu, and
Liu 2014; Yu, Rao, and Dhillon 2016), and spatial factors
(Takeuchi, Kashima, and Ueda 2017) to model higher-order
auto-regressive dependencies in multivariate time series data.
From another perspective, Bayesian switching linear statespace models, (Chang and Athans 1978; Hamilton 1990;
Ghahramani and Hinton 2000; Murphy 1998; Fox et al. 2009;
Linderman et al. 2017; Nassar et al. 2019; Becker-Ehmck,
Peters, and Van Der Smagt 2019), have provided a more flexible structure for modeling temporal dynamics characterized
by several modes. These models are specifically useful in the
applications where complex dynamical behaviors can be broken down into simpler potentially interpretable units, which
in turn provides additional insight into the rich processes generating complex natural phenomena. These models achieve
globally nonlinear dynamics by composing linear systems
through switching, (Sontag 1981). Besides, Gaussian state
space models adapting neural networks have been used for
approximating nonlinear first-order temporal dynamics in Krishnan, Shalit, and Sontag (2015); Watter et al. (2015); Karl
et al. (2017); Krishnan, Shalit, and Sontag (2017); Fraccaro
et al. (2017); Becker et al. (2019); Farnoosh et al. (2020).
In this paper, we introduce deep switching auto-regressive
factorization (DSARF) in a Bayesian framework. Our method
adds to the current body of knowledge by extending switching linear dynamical system models and Bayesian dynamical
matrix factorization methods and combining their favorable
properties. Specifically, for temporal dynamic modeling, we
employ a non-linear vector auto-regressive latent model parameterized by neural networks and governed by a Markovian
chain of discrete switches to capture higher-order multimodal
latent dependencies. This will provide a more flexible model

We introduce deep switching auto-regressive factorization
(DSARF), a deep generative model for spatio-temporal data
with the capability to unravel recurring patterns in the data
and perform robust short- and long-term predictions. Similar to other factor analysis methods, DSARF approximates
high dimensional data by a product between time dependent
weights and spatially dependent factors. These weights and
factors are in turn represented in terms of lower dimensional
latent variables that are inferred using stochastic variational
inference. DSARF is different from the state-of-the-art techniques in that it parameterizes the weights in terms of a deep
switching vector auto-regressive likelihood governed with
a Markovian prior, which is able to capture the non-linear
inter-dependencies among weights to characterize multimodal
temporal dynamics. This results in a flexible hierarchical deep
generative factor analysis model that (i) provides a collection
of potentially interpretable states abstracted from the process
dynamics, and (ii) performs short- and long-term vector time
series prediction in a complex multi-relational setting. Our
extensive experiments, which include simulated data and real
data from a wide range of applications such as climate change,
weather forecasting, traffic, infectious disease spread and nonlinear physical systems attest the superior performance of
DSARF in terms of long- and short-term prediction error,
when compared with the state-of-the-art methods1 .

Introduction
Ever-improving sensing technologies offer fast and accurate
collection of large-scale spatio-temporal data in various applications, ranging from medicine and biology to marketing
and traffic control. In these domains, modeling the temporal
dynamics and spatial relations of data have been investigated
and analysed from different perspectives.
As these multivariate spatio-temporal data often exhibit
high levels of correlation between dimensions, they can naturally be thought of as governed by a smaller number of
underlying components. Tensor/matrix factorization frameworks are used to describe variability in these correlated
dimensions in terms of potentially lower dimensional unobserved variables, namely temporal weights and spatial factors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The source code and experiments are available at
https://github.com/ostadabbas/DSARF

7394

