The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enabling Fast Instruction-Based Modification of Learned Robot Skills
Tyler Frasca1 , Bradley Oosterveld2 , Meia Chita-Tegmark1 , and Matthias Scheutz1,2
1

Human-Robot Interaction Laboratory, Tufts University, 200 Boston Ave, Medford, MA 02155
2
Thinking Robots, Inc., 12 Channel St STE 202, Boston, MA 02210
tyler.frasca@tufts.edu, brad@thinkingrobots.ai, mihaela.chita tegmark@tufts.edu, matthias.scheutz@tufts.edu

Abstract

function under which the policy was generated could lead to
the action being changed back if the agent continues to learn
based on its existing reward function. Both types of action
representation thus likely require complete retraining of all
learned skills with the modified skill included.
To enable fast modification, we present a knowledge representation framework which allows a user to modify skills
to take effect immediately without the need for relearning all
existing skills. We accomplish this by explicitly representing
all relevant aspects of a skill – its signature with arguments
and parameters, and its action steps with and pre-, operating,
and post-conditions – which then allows for quick modifications of any of these components through formal operators
defined on them. Since all modifiable aspects are explicit
and can be described in natural language, robots can narrate or visualize their knowledge in a way that is intuitive to
humans, and humans can give robots verbal (or graphical)
instructions to perform the necessary modifications which
are mapped onto formal operators that perform the necessary changes to the scripts. We evaluated the implemented
framework and demonstrated in four case studies in which
a human instructs different robots to modify their known
actions that the robots are able to accommodate and execute the modifications immediately. We also verified in a
user study that people, indeed, want the option of instructing
robots to modify their knowledge.
This paper thus makes the following contributions towards correcting, generalizing/specializing learned actions:
• a formal skill modification framework that allows users to
modify a robot’s stored skills through verbal or graphical
instructions,
• an implementation and evaluation of the framework in a
cognitive robotic architecture,
• four HRI case studies demonstrating the operation of the
algorithms on different autonomous robots, and
• a user study showing if and to what extend human users
would want to modify a robot’s skills and in what form.

Much research effort in HRI has focused on how to enable robots to learn new skills from observations, demonstrations, and instructions. Less work, however, has focused
on how skills can be corrected if they were learned incorrectly, adapted to changing circumstances, or generalized/specialized to different contexts. In this paper, a skill
modification framework is introduced that allows users to
modify a robot’s stored skills quickly through instructions to
(1) reduce inefficiencies, (2) fix errors, and (3) enable generalizations, all in a way for modified skills to be immediately available for task performance. A thorough evaluation
of the implemented framework shows the operation of the
algorithms integrated in a cognitive robotic architecture on
different fully autonomous robots in various HRI case studies. An additional online HRI user study verifies that subjects
prefer to quickly modify robot knowledge in the way we proposed in the framework.

Introduction
Consider a household robot that has learned how to prepare (regular) pancakes (e.g., from an online how-to website,
Beetz et al. 2011) and already prepared them for its owner
multiple times. One day, however, the owner decides to try
out vegan pancakes and tells the robot to replace the regular
milk with soy milk in the pancake recipe, rather than teaching the modified recipe from scratch.
Such adaptations of known recipes and processes are very
natural for humans, but they are currently not easy to make
for robots. For one, because they require a knowledge representation format where different components of a script
representing a skill are accessible and can be replaced without negatively impacting other parts, or other scripts in the
robot’s knowledge base. For example, skill representations
in terms of large weight vectors embedded in a neural network do not lend themselves to easy modification (even if
one knew how each weight was related to each particular
skill, changing a few of those weights to accommodate the
modified skill might also modify other stored skills given the
distributed data representations in most neural networks).
Similarly, modifying an action for a particular state in a
given action policy without modifying an RL agent’s reward

Related Work
Prior approaches to skill learning differ with respect to their
required input modalities as well as their employed knowledge representations for the learned skills. While some
methods are purely data-driven (e.g., RL methods), others are purely knowledge-based (e.g., some NL methods).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6075

