The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private Stochastic Coordinate Descent
Georgios Damaskinos,1 * Celestine Mendler-Dünner,2 *
Rachid Guerraoui,1 Nikolaos Papandreou,3 Thomas Parnell3
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
2
University of California, Berkeley
3
IBM Research, Zurich
georgios.damaskinos@epfl.ch, mendler@berkeley.edu, rachid.guerraoui@epfl.ch, {npo,tpa}@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract

Our goal is to extend SCD with mechanisms that preserve
data privacy, and thus enable the reuse of large engineering efforts invested in SCD (Bradley et al. 2011a; Ioannou,
Mendler-Dünner, and Parnell 2019), for privacy-critical usecases. In this paper we therefore ask the question: Can SCD
maintain its benefits (convergence guarantees, low tuning
cost) alongside strong privacy guarantees?
We employ differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, Roth et al.
2014) as our mathematical definition of privacy. DP provides
a formal guarantee for the amount of leaked information regarding participants in a database, given a strong adversary
and the output of a mechanism that processes this database.
DP provides a fine-grained way of measuring privacy across
multiple subsequent executions of such mechanisms and is
thus well aligned with the iterative nature of ML algorithms.
The main challenge of making SCD differentially private
is that an efficient implementation stores and updates not
only the model vector α but also an auxiliary vector v :=
Xα to avoid recurring computations. These two vectors are
coupled by the data matrix X and need to be consistent for
standard convergence results to hold. However, to provide
rigorous privacy guarantees, it is vital to add independent
noise to both vectors which prohibits this consistency.

In this paper we tackle the challenge of making the stochastic
coordinate descent algorithm differentially private. Compared to the classical gradient descent algorithm where updates operate on a single model vector and controlled noise
addition to this vector suffices to hide critical information
about individuals, stochastic coordinate descent crucially relies on keeping auxiliary information in memory during training. This auxiliary information provides an additional privacy
leak and poses the major challenge addressed in this work.
Driven by the insight that under independent noise addition,
the consistency of the auxiliary information holds in expectation, we present DP-SCD, the first differentially private
stochastic coordinate descent algorithm. We analyze our new
method theoretically and argue that decoupling and parallelizing coordinate updates is essential for its utility. On the empirical side we demonstrate competitive performance against
the popular stochastic gradient descent alternative (DP-SGD)
while requiring significantly less tuning.

1

Introduction

Stochastic coordinate descent (SCD) (Wright 2015) is an appealing optimization algorithm. Compared with the classical
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), SCD does not require a
learning rate to be tuned and can often have favorable convergence behavior (Fan et al. 2008; Dünner et al. 2018; Ma
et al. 2015; Hsieh, Yu, and Dhillon 2015). In particular, for
training generalized linear models, SCD is the algorithm of
choice for many applications and has been implemented as
a default solver in several popular packages such as Scikitlearn, TensorFlow and Liblinear (Fan et al. 2008).
However, SCD is not designed with privacy concerns in
mind: SCD builds models that may leak sensitive information regarding the training data records. This is a major issue
for privacy-critical domains such as health care where models are trained based on the medical records of patients.
Nevertheless, the low tuning cost of SCD is a particularly
appealing property for privacy-preserving machine learning
(ML). Hyperparameter tuning costs not only in terms of additional computation, but also in terms of spending the privacy budget.

Contributions. We present DP-SCD, a differentially
private version of the SCD algorithm (Shalev-Shwartz and
Zhang 2013b) with formal privacy guarantees. In particular,
we make the following contributions.
• We extend SCD to compute each model update as an aggregate of independent updates computed on a random
data sample. This parallelism is crucial for the utility of
the algorithm because it reduces the amount of the noise
per sample that is necessary to guarantee DP.
• We provide the first analysis of SCD in the DP setting
and derive a bound on the maximum level of noise that
can be tolerated to guarantee a given level of utility.
• We empirically show that for problems where SCD has
closed form updates, DP-SCD achieves a better privacyutility trade-off compared to the popular DP-SGD algorithm (Abadi et al. 2016) while, at the same time, being free of a learning rate hyperparameter that needs tuning. Our implementation is available1 .

* Work partially conducted while at IBM Research, Zurich.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7176

https://github.com/gdamaskinos/dpscd

