The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Utility Functions
Porter Jenkins 1 , Ahmad Farag 2 , J. Stockton Jenkins 3 ,
Huaxiu Yao 1 , Suhang Wang 1 , Zhenhui Li 1
1

Pennsylvania State University
2
Georgia Tech University
3
Brigham Young University

Abstract

also is seen in the real world. When a consumer is choosing
items at a grocery store he or she is likely to choose Coke
or Pepsi, but not both. The consumer reasons about the item
relationship and decides that the two drinks are substitutes.
Additionally, the consumer is likely reason about the complementary relationship between hamburgers and buns and
purchase them together.
Typical recommender systems minimize an objective
function of either ratings or choice prediction error. This can
be viewed as a utility function since the recommendation
agent learns a function that maps item alternatives to an ordinal, real-value from a user’s history. Our goal in this work
is to learn a function that better mirrors a user’s internal utility function and to increase his or her overall utility. However, current deep learning based recommender systems cannot reason about the trade-offs between items (e.g. substitutes and complements) because they are not quasi-concave
in their inputs. One key assumption of microeconomic theory is that utility functions are quasi-concave. This property
ensures the slope of indifference curves are negative and that
proper item trade-offs occur (Nicholson and Snyder 2012).
We analytically show that a two-layer neural network is not
guaranteed to be quasi-concave, and therefore common networks trained to minimize error will not have the desirable
properties of theoretical utility functions.
Therefore, in this paper, we seek to integrate ideas from
microeconomics and deep learning and imbue neural networks with economic inductive biases, which we call Neural Utility Functions (NUFs). NUFs are capable of reasoning
about supplementary and complementary relations among
sets of items. Our hypothesis is that a network capable of
learning economic relationships is better suited for common
tasks such as recommendation. We empirically demonstrate
that Neural Utility Functions can recover theoretical substitution effects better than networks trained to only minimize errors. Additionally, we show that augmenting common recommendation architectures with our proposed NUF
loss function can improve performance on the Movielens
25M and Amazon 18 datasets using both explicit and implicit feedback.
In summary, the main contributions of the paper are: First,
we analytically show that neural networks are not guaranteed to be quasi-concave, and therefore are not guaranteed
to discover proper item relationships in data. Second, we

Current neural network architectures have no mechanism for
explicitly reasoning about item trade-offs. Such trade-offs are
important for popular tasks such as recommendation. The
main idea of this work is to give neural networks inductive
biases that are inspired by economic theories. To this end, we
propose Neural Utility Functions, which directly optimize the
gradients of a neural network so that they are more consistent with utility theory, a mathematical framework for modeling choice among items. We demonstrate that Neural Utility Functions can recover theoretical item relationships better than vanilla neural networks, analytically show existing
neural networks are not quasi-concave and do not inherently
reason about trade-offs, and that augmenting existing models with a utility loss function improves recommendation results. The Neural Utility Functions we propose are theoretically motivated, and yield strong empirical results.

Introduction
Recommendation systems are ubiquitous in daily life and
have been built into applications for products, music, and
movies. The explicit goal of such systems is to connect users
with the items they like. Implicitly, recommendation systems seek to discover user preference relationships among
items. In recent years, many methods have been developed
to tackle this problem at scale, such as computing empirical
item-to-item similarities (Linden, Smith, and York 2003),
matrix factorization (Koren and Bell 2009; Zhang et al.
2019), and most recently deep neural networks (He et al.
2017; Chen et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019;
Hidasi et al. 2016). While many of these methods have produced strong results, they are mostly atheoretical and are
unable to reason about the economic relationships between
items.
Theoretical economics provides a useful framework for
reasoning about choice among items. In particular, utility
theory postulates that consumers have rational preferences
and that a function exists by which consumers rank items.
A consumer assigns more utility to desirable items and less
utility to undesirable ones. These utility functions have useful analytical properties that shed light on the trade-offs people make when choosing between alternatives. The theory
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7917

