The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Proxy Wasserstein Classifier for Image Classification
Benlin Liu1∗ , Yongming Rao2∗ , Jiwen Lu2 , Jie Zhou2 , Cho-jui Hsie1
1

UCLA
Tsinghua University
{liubenlin, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu, raoyongming95@gmail.com,
{lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

𝑊

Abstract
Most widely-used convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
end up with a global average pooling layer and a fullyconnected layer. In this pipeline, a certain class is represented
by one template vector preserved in the feature banks of
fully-connected layer. Yet, a class may have multiple properties useful for recognition while the above formulation only
captures one of them. Therefore, it is desired to represent a
class by multiple proxies. However, directly adding multiple linear layers turns out to be a trivial solution as no improvement can be observed. To tackle this problem, we adopt
optimal transport theory to calculate a non-uniform matching flow between the elements in the feature map of a sample and the proxies of a class in a closed way. By doing
so, the models are enabled to achieve partial matching as
both the feature maps and the proxy set can now focus on
a subset of elements from the counterpart. Such formulation also enables us to embed the samples into the Wasserstein metric space, which has many advantages over the original Euclidean space. This formulation can be achieved by
a lightweight iterative algorithm, which can be easily embedded into the automatic differentiation framework. Empirical studies are performed on two widely-used classification
datasets, CIFAR, and ILSVRC2012, and the substantial improvements on these two benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

GAP

𝐻

×
𝐶-dim
feature

𝐶

𝐶-dim
center

class score

feature maps
(a) GAP-FC Classifier

𝑊

Flatten

𝐻

…

×

…
class score

𝐶

𝐶𝐻𝑊-dim 𝐶𝐻𝑊-dim
feature
center

feature maps

(b) Flatten-FC Classifier

𝑊

𝐻

Optimal
Transport
𝐶
feature maps

Introduction

class score
𝑀 proxies

(c) Multi-Proxy Wasserstein Classifier

Recent years have witnessed the great progress brought by
deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs), in various vision tasks, ranging from recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al.
2016), object detection (He et al. 2017) and segmentation (Chen et al. 2017). Such strong power of neural network
is mainly attributed to its great capability in extracting feature map directly from an input sample X , which contains
the high-level information that is useful for downstream
tasks. For recognition tasks, the extracted feature map is then
usually aggregated across spatial domain through a pooling
operation to get a feature vector of Rd to represent the input sample. Then we can calculate the inner product of this
feature vector with the template vector of a certain class C

Figure 1: Comparison between the conventional (a) GAPFC classifier, (b) Flatten-FC classifier, and (c) the proposed multi-proxy Wasserstein classifier. Our method utilizes matching flow between the feature maps of a sample
and the template feature vectors of a class, and thus embeds
the samples into the Wasserstein metric space and facilitates
CNNs to learn multiple diverse clues for classification.

preserved in the fully-connected layer as the similarity score
for this hsample, classi pair.
In the above framework, each class is represented by a
single template vector of Rd in the fully-connected layer,
which is expected to capture the most discriminative pat-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

*Equal contribution.

8618

