The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proxy Graph Matching with Proximal Matching Networks
Hao-Ru Tan1, 2 , Chuang Wang1, 2 , Si-Tong Wu2 ,
Tie-Qiang Wang1, 2 , Xu-Yao Zhang 1,2 ,Cheng-Lin Liu1,2, 3 *
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
tanhaoru2018@ia.ac.cn, wusitong98@gmail.com, {chuang.wang, tieqiang.wang, xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

quadratic assignment optimization problem (Koopmans and
Beckmann 1957; Rainer et al. 1998), which can be solved
approximately by adopting a variety of relaxation strategies (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005; Caelli and Caetano 2005;
Marius, Martial, and Sukthankar 2009). Meanwhile, the features fed into the GM objective are majorly handcrafted, for
example, coordinate positions for geometric features (Zhou
and la Torre 2016).
A line of recent works considered the above two tasks
for solving feature matching as a joint problem by utilizing the graph neural network (GNN). The general idea is to
build an end-to-end model consisting of a feature extractor
and a feature matching module. For visual input, the feature
extractor is a deep convolutional neural network, e.g. VGG
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), and for geometric features
that only involve coordinate information, the higher-order
local feature is generated by a graph neural network (Zhang
and Lee 2019). The feature matching module can either be
the Sinkhorn-Knopp transform of a proper mutual distance
of node features (Wang, Yan, and Yang 2019) or a differentiable module of a more involved GM algorithm (Zanfir
and Sminchisescu 2018). Since the whole model is differentiable with respect to the model parameters, the model can
be trained in an end-to-end fashion. More recently, SuperGlue (Sarlin et al. 2020) proposed an approach based on a
combination of the convolutional neural network and graph
neural network for the feature matching tasks.
Compared with the traditional methods, the contemporary
data-driven approaches improve the matching accuracy by a
large margin. However, these learning-based methods usually require a large number of labeled training data, which
are expensive to collect. In addition, we found existing methods are highly sensitive to global transform, e.g. rotational
transform, raising a generalization issue to many real-world
applications, where global calibration is not possible at inference stage (Zhang and Lee 2019). On the contrary, traditional methods with geometric feature input are robust to
global rotational transform though the overall performance
is not as good as the GNN-based methods. See Figure 1 for
a detailed experimental example.
In this work, we proposed a new GNN framework. Our
model enjoys the advantages of both the classical method
and the GNN based method. Using purely geometric information as input, the performance is on a par with the

Estimating feature point correspondence is a common technique in computer vision. A line of recent data-driven
approaches utilizing the graph neural networks improved
the matching accuracy by a large margin. However, these
learning-based methods require a lot of labeled training data,
which are expensive to collect. Moreover, we find most methods are sensitive to global transforms, for example, a random rotation. On the contrary, classical geometric approaches
are immune to rotational transformation though their performance is generally inferior. To tackle these issues, we propose a new learning-based matching framework, which is
designed to be rotationally invariant. The model only takes
geometric information as input. It consists of three parts: a
graph neural network to generate a high-level local feature, an
attention-based module to normalize the rotational transform,
and a global feature matching module based on proximal optimization. To justify our approach, we provide a convergence
guarantee for the proximal method for graph matching. The
overall performance is validated by numerical experiments.
In particular, our approach is trained on the synthetic random
graphs and then applied to several real-world datasets. The
experimental results demonstrate that our method is robust to
rotational transform and highlights its strong performance of
matching accuracy.

Introduction
Graph matching (GM) is a ubiquitous technique in computer vision and pattern recognition to establish the correspondence between two sets of feature points. Its applications range from object recognition (Brendel and Todorovic 2011), tracking (Hwann-Tzong Chen, Horng-Horng
Lin, and Tyng-Luh Liu 2001) and shape matching (Berg,
Berg, and Malik 2005). Practitioners encounter two major
challenges when deploying GM. First, one has to make considerable efforts to seek a robust feature representation for
constructing the GM objective. Second, the graph matching
algorithm is often hard to reach satisfiable performance due
to its intrinsic nature of NP-hardness.
Traditionally, people consider developing a GM algorithm and finding a good feature extractor as two separated
problems. The GM problem is commonly formulated as a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9808

