The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploration-Exploitation in Multi-Agent Learning:
Catastrophe Theory Meets Game Theory
Stefanos Leonardos, Georgios Piliouras
Singapore University of Technology and Design,
8 Somapah Road, 487372 Singapore, {stefanos leonardos ; georgios}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Exploration-exploitation is a powerful and practical tool in
multi-agent learning (MAL), however, its effects are far from
understood. To make progress in this direction, we study a
smooth analogue of Q-learning. We start by showing that our
learning model has strong theoretical justification as an optimal model for studying exploration-exploitation. Specifically,
we prove that smooth Q-learning has bounded regret in arbitrary games for a cost model that explicitly captures the
balance between game and exploration costs and that it always
converges to the set of quantal-response equilibria (QRE), the
standard solution concept for games under bounded rationality, in weighted potential games with heterogeneous learning
agents. In our main task, we then turn to measure the effect of
exploration in collective system performance. We characterize
the geometry of the QRE surface in low-dimensional MAL
systems and link our findings with catastrophe (bifurcation)
theory. In particular, as the exploration hyperparameter evolves
over-time, the system undergoes phase transitions where the
number and stability of equilibria can change radically given
an infinitesimal change to the exploration parameter. Based on
this, we provide a formal theoretical treatment of how tuning
the exploration parameter can provably lead to equilibrium
selection with both positive as well as negative (and potentially
unbounded) effects to system performance.

Introduction
The problem of optimally balancing exploration and exploitation in multi-agent systems (MAS) has been a fundamental
motivating driver of online learning, optimization theory and
evolutionary game theory (Claus and Boutilier 1998; Panait
and Luke 2005). From a behavioral perspective, it involves
the design of realistic models to capture complex human
behavior, such as the standard Experienced Weighted Attraction model (Ho and Camerer 1999; Ho, Camerer, and Chong
2007). Learning agents use time varying parameters to explore suboptimal, boundedly rational decisions, while at the
same time, they try to coordinate with other interacting agent
and maximize their profits (Ho and Camerer 1998; Bowling
and Veloso 2002; Kaisers et al. 2009).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11263

From an AI perspective, the exploration-exploitation
dilemma is related to the optimization of adaptive systems.
For example, neural networks are trained to parameterize
policies ranging from very exploratory to purely exploitative, whereas meta-controllers decide which policy to prioritize (Puigdomènech Badia et al. 2020). Similar techniques
have been applied to rank agents in tournaments according to
performance for preferential evolvability (Lanctot et al. 2017;
Omidshafiei et al. 2019; Rowland et al. 2019) and to design
multi-agent learning (MAL) algorithms that prevent collective learning from getting trapped in local optima (Kaisers
and Tuyls 2010, 2011).
Despite these notable advances both on the behavioral
modelling and AI fronts, the theoretical foundations of learning in MAS are still largely incomplete even in simple settings (Wunder, Littman, and Babes 2010; Bloembergen et al.
2015). While there is still no theory to formally explain the
performance of MAL algorithms, and in particular, the effects
of exploration in MAS (Klos, Van Ahee, and Tuyls 2010), existing research suggests that many pathologies of exploration
already emerge at stateless matrix games at which naturally
emerging collective learning dynamics exhibit a diverse set
of outcomes (Sato and Crutchfield 2003; Sato, Akiyama, and
Crutchfield 2005; Tuyls and Weiss 2012).
The reasons for the lack of a formal theory are manifold.
First, even without exploration, MAL in games can result in
complex behavior that is hard to analyze (Balduzzi et al.
2020; Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018;
Mazumdar, Ratliff, and Shankar Sastry 2018). Once explicit
exploration is enforced, the behavior of online learning becomes even more intractable as Nash Equilibria (NE) are no
longer fixed points of agents’ behavior. Finally, if parameters
are changed enough, then we get bifurcations and possibly
chaos (Wolpert et al. 2012; Palaiopanos, Panageas, and Piliouras 2017; Sanders, Farmer, and Galla 2018).
Our approach & results. Motivated by the above, we study
a smooth variant of stateless Q-learning, with softmax or
Boltzmann exploration (one of the most fundamental models of exploration-exploitation in MAS), termed Boltzmann
Q-learning or smooth Q-learning (SQL), which has recently
received a lot of attention due to its connection to evolutionary game theory (Tuyls, Verbeeck, and Lenaerts 2003;

