The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GANs Unplugged
Patrick Virtue
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15206
pvirtue@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We aim to achieve the following student learning outcomes:
• Explain how the different components of GANs work together to generate realistic fake data.
• Describe how learning to detect real versus fake is an integral part of GANs ability to create fake data.
• Discuss societal impacts of successful fake data generators.
These learning outcomes are achieved through three stages
of the GANs Unplugged activity: preparing the students,
running the game itself, and debriefing the students.

With the influx of deepfake and style transfer technology in
today’s news and social media, everyone is told that these
applications are powered by artificial intelligence and deep
learning, but too often the explanation of how it works goes
no further. Rather than waiting until second semester of computer science grad school to learn about generative adversarial networks (GANs), we propose a classroom activity to introduce GANs to secondary school students.
Our GANs Unplugged activity steps outside a traditional
classroom environment and forms groups of students that
physically act as the various components of a GAN. Students in the Real and Generator (i.e. Fake) groups both draw
sketches of animals on index cards, but only the Real group
has the secret, specific instructions on how to draw their animals. A third Discriminator group tries to determine if each
card it receives came from the Real group or the Fake group.
The Discriminator group also makes a single feedback mark
on the drawing to suggest how that drawing could be more
“real” before passing the card back to the group that drew it.
As this game progresses, the Discriminators get better at determining real and fake, that is until the Generators adapt and
learn to draw more and more realistic “fake” images.
We describe the details of GANs Unplugged and present our
experience running this activity at three different artificial intelligence summer camps for high school students.

Related Work
Our GANs Unplugged activity is part of the larger Computer
Science Unplugged initiative that allows students to step
away from the computer, and potentially out of the classroom, to focus on computational thinking without being distracted by the mechanics of coding or mathematics (Bell,
Witten, and Fellows 1998; Bell 2020; Bell and Vahrenhold
2018). Unplugged activities also have the added benefit of
broadening participation in computing, as they may be used
in schools with limited resources for educational technology
(Cortina 2015). Unplugged activities have been developed
for artificial intelligence topics. For example, the “Intelligent Piece of Paper” exercise engages students in an activity
and subsequent discussion about the intelligence of a piece
of paper containing logic to play a perfect game of tic-tactoe (Curzon 2016).
The unplugged activities that are most closely related to
GANs Unplugged are the neural network unplugged exercises within the Artificial Intelligence unit of the Exploring Computer Science high school curriculum (Clarke et al.
2020). In their Forward Propagation activity, students act
as different neurons in the network, passing messages to
student-neurons in later layers, and ultimately classifying
the contents of the input image. Linder, et al. describe a
similar forward propagation exercise as part of their series
of AI unplugged activities (Lindner, Seegerer, and Romeike
2019).
In addition to being an unplugged activity, our proposed
exercise engages students in a discussion about the societal
impacts of GAN technology. This complements related AI
education efforts to teach primary/ middle school students

Introduction
In 2014, Goodfellow et al. introduced Generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) as an effective
means to generate unique data that can be indistinguishable
from those in the training dataset. This has lead to a surge in
breakthrough technology in tasks such as image reconstruction, style transfer, and both benign and malignant fake data
generation. While it takes quite a bit of training in machine
learning to understand the details in the original GAN paper,
we argue that the fundamental concepts behind GAN technology may be presented to secondary school students with
little or no artificial intelligence training.
We present our GANs Unplugged activity where students
physically act out the different components of GANs while
playing an engaging game to ultimately sketch realisticlooking fake images, Figure 1.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15664

