The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spatiotemporal Graph Neural Network for Performance Prediction of
Photovoltaic Power Systems
Ahmad Maroof Karimi1,2,4 , Yinghui Wu2 , Mehmet Koyuturk1,2 , Roger H. French1,2,3
1

SDLE Research Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
3
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
4
Oak Ridge National Lab, Oak Ridge, TN
{ahmadmaroof.karimi, yinghui.wu2, mehmet.koyuturk, roger.french}@case.edu
2

Abstract

and Zhu 2018; Diao et al. 2019). Researchers’ advantage
in using st-GNNs for forecasting traffic variables is that the
traffic features at a particular intersection are correlated with
the nearby traffic intersections, thus resembling the spatial
and temporal coherence, which can help improve the prediction of future values. Similarly, in PV power forecasting, the
PV power plants located in the same region will have similar
power output patterns due to commonalities in weather and
solar irradiance. Thus, a GNN model in which nodes of the
graph represents power plants and pair of nodes in the same
region are connected such that connected power plants are
useful in improving the power forecasting accuracy.

In recent years, a large number of photovoltaic (PV) systems
have been added to the electrical grid as well as installed as
off-grid systems. The trend suggests that the deployment of
PV systems will continue to rise in the future. Thus, accurate
forecasting of PV performance is critical for the reliability
of PV systems. Due to the complex non-linear variability in
power output of the PV systems, forecasting PV power is a
non-trivial task. This variability affects the stability and planning of a power system network, and accurate forecasting of
the performance of the PV system can reduce the uncertainty
caused during PV operation. In this work, we leverage spatial and temporal coherence among the power plants for PV
power forecasting. Our approach is motivated by the observation that power plants in a region undergo similar environmental exposure. Thus, one power plant’s performance can
help improve the forecast of other power plants’ power values
in the region. We utilize the relationship between PV plants
to build a spatiotemporal graph neural network (st-GNN) and
train machine learning models to forecast the PV power. The
computational experiments on large-scale data from a network of 316 systems show that spatiotemporal forecasting of
PV power performs significantly better than a model that only
applies temporal convolution to isolated systems or nodes.
Furthermore, the longer the future forecast time, the difference between the spatiotemporal forecasting and the isolated
system forecast when only temporal convolution is applied
increases further.

Related Work
A large number of studies have been published on forecasting PV power timeseries using various methods (Wu
et al. 2020; Sobri, Koohi-Kamali, and Rahim 2018; Das
et al. 2018). ARIMA, a conventional statistical method, is
typically used to solve these kinds of problems. To make
the statistical models reliable against non-stationary and
highly nonlinear timeseries, recent forecasting approaches
exploit neural network models (Cococcioni, D’Andrea, and
Lazzerini 2012; Nespoli et al. 2019). The multi-layer perceptron artificial neural network (ANN) is more robust to
non-linearity and sharp dips or rises in values. Radial basis function used in a neural network approach modeled
the PV modules’ electrical characteristics (Bonanno et al.
2012). The recurrent neural network (RNN) is a technique
widely used in timeseries modeling, and it has been used
in PV power output correction with high accuracy (Yona
et al. 2013). Classification of timeseries into cloudy, rainy,
and clear sky is an another improvement to enhance the accuracy of the learning model (Shi et al. 2012; Yang, Thatte,
and Xie 2015).
Another set of approaches relies on functions and equations from physical models, clarifying the association between measurement values and environmental factors (Das
et al. 2018). Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models are another approach for forecasting PV power output (Larson, Nonnenmacher, and Coimbra 2016). Some research on forecasting power generation uses ensemble approaches of the methods mentioned above. The hybrid models try to maximize the benefits of different models and min-

Introduction
Due to the rapid increase in installation of commercial PV
power plants having 25 years or longer lifetimes, the operation and planning for their reliable performance is a crucial challenge (Yang, French, and Bruckman 2019). Ensuring reliable performance includes monitoring the slow loss
of electricity output and effectively planning based on the
PV power output. We can achieve the required reliability
when we accurately forecast power output.
To our knowledge, no work using st-GNNs is published
for forecasting PV power output. However, st-GNNs have
been used successfully in addressing other forecasting problems such as traffic forecasting (Guo et al. 2019; Yu, Yin,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15323

