The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Free Lunch for Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Object Detection
without Source Data
Xianfeng Li, 1 * Weijie Chen, 3,2 Di Xie, 2 Shicai Yang, 2
Peng Yuan, 2 Shiliang Pu, 2† Yueting Zhuang3
1

South China University of Technology
2
Hikvision Research Institute
3
Zhejiang University
lockonlxf@163.com, {chenweijie5, xiedi, yangshicai, yuanpeng7, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com, yzhuang@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) assumes that source
and target domain data are freely available and trained together to reduce the domain gap. Considering the data privacy, it is impractical in real scenarios. Hence, it draws our
eyes to optimize the network in the target domain without
labeled source data. To explore this direction in object detection, for the first time, we propose a source data-free domain
adaptive object detection (SFOD) framework via modeling it
into learning with noisy labels. A straightforward method is
to leverage the pre-trained network from the source domain
to generate the pseudo labels for target domain. However, it
is difficult to evaluate the quality of pseudo labels since no labels are available in target domain. In this paper, self-entropy
descent (SED) is a metric proposed to search an appropriate confidence threshold for reliable pseudo label generation.
Nonetheless, completely clean labels are still unattainable.
After an experimental analysis, false negatives are found to
dominate in the generated noisy labels. Undoubtedly, false
negatives mining is helpful for improvement, and we ease
it to false negatives simulation through data augmentation
like Mosaic. Extensive experiments conducted in four adaptation tasks have demonstrated that the proposed framework
can easily achieve state-of-the-art performance. From another
view, it also reminds the UDA community that the labeled
source data are not fully exploited in the existing methods.

Figure 1: The comparison between conventional UDA object detection and our proposed source data-free domain
adaptive object detection.

distribution of the domain in the image space (Liu, Breuel,
and Kautz 2017; Hoffman et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 2020),
or using pseudo label techniques by measuring the similarity between two domains (C.Chen et al. 2019; Q.Wang
and T.Breckon 2020). These methods assume that the data
distribution of labeled source domain and unlabeled target domain is related but different (Sugiyama and Storkey
2007) and needing access freely to both source and target
domain samples. However, this assumption will encounter
challenges in practical application.
Some classification methods (Li et al. 2020; Kim, Hong,
and Cho 2020; Peng et al. 2020) about source data-free have
made good progress, but there is still a blank in the source
data-free unsupervised domain adaptive object detection.
This paper proposes a simple yet effective approach to solve
the above problems named source data-free domain adaptive object detection (SFOD), which decouples the domain
adaptation process by leveraging a pre-trained source model.
The key idea is to train the target model with reliable pseudo
labels in a self-learning manner. The natural question is how
to evaluate the quality of pseudo labels for object detection
and learn with noisy labels. In the classification task, the total number of samples is fixed. It is challenging in the object detection task, since the negative samples are countless
and various, and lots of hard positive samples are difficult
to box out and mixed with negative samples. Only relying
on a small number of reliable samples cannot achieve good
performance. A method is to directly filter out the bounding

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have improved object detection performance (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016) but
rely on large quantities of manual annotated training data.
This limits the ability to generalize when facing new environments or data distributions where the object appearance,
scene type or weather are various. It attracts us to study how
to transfer the pre-trained model from a label-rich source
domain to an unlabeled target domain without supervision.
Various unsupervised domain adaptive methods had been
proposed to tackle this problem, whether using domaininvariant features for alignment (Chen et al. 2018; Saito et al.
2019; He and Zhang 2020; Xu et al. 2020), or narrowing the
* Internship at Hikvision Research Institute.
†

Shiliang Pu is the Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8474

