The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tempered Sigmoid Activations for
Deep Learning with Differential Privacy
Nicolas Papernot1 , Abhradeep Thakurta1 , Shuang Song1 , Steve Chien1 , Úlfar Erlingsson2∗
1
Google Brain, 2 Apple
{papernot, athakurta, shuangsong, schien}@google.com, ulfar@apple.com

Abstract

is the differentially private stochastic gradient descent, or
DP-SGD, of Abadi et al. (Abadi et al. 2016). The technique
is a generally-applicable modification of stochastic gradient
descent. In addition to its rigorous privacy guarantees, it has
been empirically shown to stop known attacks against the
privacy of training data; a representative example being the
leaking of secrets (Carlini et al. 2019).
Beyond privacy, training using DP-SGD offers advantages
such as strong generalization and the promise of reusable
holdouts (Dwork et al. 2015). Yet, its advantages have not
been without cost: empirically, the test accuracy of differentially private ML is consistently lower than that of nonprivate learning unless the dataset is very large (McMahan
et al. 2017). Such accuracy loss may sometimes be inevitable:
for example, the task may involve heavy-tailed distributions
and noise added by DP-SGD hinders visibility of examples in
the tails (Feldman 2019; Bagdasaryan and Shmatikov 2019).
However, this does not explain the accuracy loss of differentially private ML on benchmarks that are known to be relatively simple when learning without privacy: e.g., MNIST,
FashionMNIST, and CIFAR10.
An important step in providing differential privacy guarantees for an algorithm is to assess its sensitivity. A learning
algorithm’s sensitivity characterizes how much an individual
training point can, in the worst case, affect the learning algorithm’s outputs (i.e., values of the model parameters). The
ability to more strictly bound sensitivity leads to stronger
privacy guarantees. To strictly bound the impact of any training example, DP-SGD makes two changes to every step of
gradient-descent optimization: first, each example’s gradient
contribution is limited to a fixed bound – usually referred to
as the clipping norm (in practice, by clipping all per-example
gradients to a maximum `2 norm); second, random (Gaussian) noise of the scale of the clipping norm is added to each
batch’s combined gradient, before it is backpropagated to update model parameters. Together, these changes create a new,
artificial noise floor at each step of gradient descent, such that
the unique signal of any individual example is below this new
noise floor; this allows differential privacy to be guaranteed
for all training examples (Dwork and Roth 2014). However,
the combined effect of clipping and noising also degrades the
model’s performance. Attempts to mitigate this have included
new definitions of differential privacy (Dong, Roth, and Su
2019) or new learning algorithms (McMahan et al. 2018).

Because learning sometimes involves sensitive data, machine
learning algorithms have been extended to offer differential
privacy for training data. In practice, this has been mostly
an afterthought, with privacy-preserving models obtained by
re-running training with a different optimizer, but using the
model architectures that already performed well in a nonprivacy-preserving setting. This approach leads to less than
ideal privacy/utility tradeoffs, as we show here. To improve
these tradeoffs, prior work introduces variants of differential
privacy that weaken the privacy guarantee proved to increase
model utility. We show this is not necessary and instead propose that utility be improved by choosing activation functions
designed explicitly for privacy-preserving training.
A crucial operation in differentially private SGD is gradient
clipping, which along with modifying the optimization path (at
times resulting in not-optimizing a single objective function),
may also introduce both significant bias and variance to the
learning process. We empirically identify exploding gradients
arising from ReLU may be one of the main sources of this. We
demonstrate analytically and experimentally how a general
family of bounded activation functions, the tempered sigmoids,
consistently outperform the currently established choice: unbounded activation functions like ReLU. Using this paradigm,
we achieve new state-of-the-art accuracy on MNIST, FashionMNIST, and CIFAR10 without any modification of the
learning procedure fundamentals or differential privacy analysis. While the changes we make are simple in retrospect, the
simplicity of our approach facilitates its implementation and
adoption to meaningfully improve state-of-the-art machine
learning while still providing strong guarantees in the original
framework of differential privacy.

Introduction
Machine learning (ML) can be usefully applied to the
analysis of sensitive data, e.g., in the domain of healthcare (Kononenko 2001). However, ML models may unintentionally reveal sensitive aspects of their training data, e.g., due
to overfitting (Shokri et al. 2017; Song and Shmatikov 2019).
To counter this, ML techniques that offer strong guarantees
expressed in the framework of differential privacy (Dwork
and Roth 2014) have been developed. A seminal example
∗

Work done while at Google. The author is now at Apple.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9312

