The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Locate Globally, Segment Locally: A Progressive Architecture With Knowledge
Review Network for Salient Object Detection
Binwei Xu, Haoran Liang∗ , Ronghua Liang, Peng Chen
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
{xubinwei, haoran, rhliang, chenpeng}@zjut.edu.cn

Human

Abstract
Salient object location and segmentation are two different
tasks in salient object detection (SOD). The former aims to
globally find the most attractive objects in an image, whereas
the latter can be achieved only using local regions that contain salient objects. However, previous methods mainly accomplish the two tasks simultaneously in a simple end-to-end
manner, which leads to the ignorance of the differences between them. We assume that the human vision system orderly
locates and segments objects, so we propose a novel progressive architecture with knowledge review network (PA-KRN)
for SOD. It consists of three parts. (1) A coarse locating module (CLM) that uses body-attention label locates rough areas containing salient objects without boundary details. (2)
An attention-based sampler highlights salient object regions
with high resolution based on body-attention maps. (3) A fine
segmenting module (FSM) finely segments salient objects.
The networks applied in CLM and FSM are mainly based
on our proposed knowledge review network (KRN) that utilizes the finest feature maps to reintegrate all previous layers,
which can make up for the important information that is continuously diluted in the top-down path. Experiments on five
benchmarks demonstrate that our single KRN can outperform
state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, our PA-KRN performs
better and substantially surpasses the aforementioned methods.

Ours

MINet

GateNet

PoolNet

ITSD

PA-KRN(Ours)

GT

KRN

Location
Move closer

Sampler

KRN

Restore

Segmentation

Figure 1: An illustration of our proposed PA-KRN that simulates the human biological process of globally locating
salient objects then locally segmenting them. And compared
with MINet (Pang et al. 2020), GateNet (Zhao et al. 2020),
PoolNet (Liu et al. 2019), and ITSD (Zhou et al. 2020), our
proposed method has clearer object boundaries.
salient objects results in rough edge details. In particular, the
segmentation of small salient objects is extremely poor. Another key issue is that the simple end-to-end structure may
not be good at implementing SOD. SOD actually involves
two tasks: locating and segmenting salient objects. Specifically, locating salient objects is to find the local region of
salient objects from the global perspective of the whole image, whereas segmenting salient objects is to distinguish the
boundary of salient objects from the local perspective of the
regions that contain salient objects and their surrounding
background. They are two completely different tasks and
have an obvious sequence order. Moreover, the size of the
images in a dataset is relatively uniform, but the size of the
salient objects varies over a large range. Location is based on
the relatively stable scale of global image, whereas segmentation is related to the salient objects with various scales, so
segmentation clearly faces more challenges of scale variations. Many recent methods (Zhao et al. 2019; Wei, Wang,
and Huang 2019; Zhao and Wu 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Feng,
Lu, and Ding 2019; Pang et al. 2020) implement these two
tasks simultaneously by a single end-to-end network. They
don’t take the differences between the two tasks into account, so breaking out of the existing results to achieve finer
ones is difficult.
Unlike most of the existing end-to-end deep learning
methods, the human vision system orderly locates and segments salient objects. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, hu-

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) has been rapidly developed
recently and widely applied in many computer vision fields.
As is known to all, the edge of salient objects contains rich
detailed information. Hence, many methods (Zhou et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2019; Zhao and Wu 2019; Zhang et al.
2017; Qin et al. 2019; Feng, Lu, and Ding 2019; Wu, Su, and
Huang 2019b) introduce edge-related information to help
identify the boundary regions of salient objects and substantially improve the accuracy of SOD. Moreover, some methods add post-processing operations (e.g., CRF) (Hou et al.
2017; Li and Yu 2016; Liu, Han, and Yang 2018) to preserve fine boundary details. Although the above methods
have made some progress, refining the boundaries remains
a huge challenge. The first issue is that the low resolution of
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3004

