The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

StrokeGAN: Reducing Mode Collapse in Chinese Font Generation
via Stroke Encoding
Jinshan Zeng1 , Qi Chen1 , Yunxin Liu1 , Mingwen Wang1∗ , Yuan Yao2∗
1

School of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang, China
2
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
jinshanzeng@jxnu.edu.cn, chenqi970226@gmail.com, 201841600023@jxnu.edu.cn, mwwang@jxnu.edu.cn, yuany@ust.hk

Abstract

of Chinese characters and then utilize some traditional machine learning methods to generate new characters (Xu et al.
2005; Lin et al. 2016). The quality of feature extraction plays
a central role in the first category of Chinese font generation
methods. However, such feature extraction procedure is usually hand-crafted, and thus time and effort consuming.
The second category of Chinese font generation methods
has been recently studied in (Tian 2017; Chang et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2019; Gao and Wu 2020; Wu, Yang, and Hsu
2020; Zhang et al. 2020) with the development of deep learning (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), particularly the generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014). Due to the powerful expressivity and approximation ability of deep neural networks, feature extraction
and generation procedures can be combined into one procedure, and thus, Chinese font generation methods in the second category can be usually realized in an end-to-end training way. Instead of using the stroke or radical features of
Chinese characters, the methods in the second category usually regard Chinese characters directly as images, and then
translate the Chinese font generation problem into certain
image style translation problem (Zhu et al. 2017; Isola et al.
2017), for which GAN and its variants are the principal techniques. However, it is well-known that GAN usually suffers
from the issue of mode collapse (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
that is, producing the same patterns for different inputs by
generator. Such issue will significantly degrade the diversity and quality of the generated results (see, Figure 1 below).
When adapted to Chinese font generation problem, the mode collapse issue will happen more frequently due to there are
many Chinese characters with very similar strokes.
Due to the artificial nature of Chinese characters, the explicit stroke information contains amount of mode information of Chinese characters (see Figure 2). This is very different from natural images, which are usually regarded to
be generated according to some probability distributions at
some latent spaces. Inspired by this observation, in this paper, we at first introduce a one-bit stroke encoding to preserve the key mode information of a Chinese character, and
then suggest certain stroke-encoding reconstruction loss to
reconstruct the stroke encoding of the generated character
such that the key mode information can be well preserved,
and finally incorporate them into CycleGAN for Chinese
font generation (Chang et al. 2018). Thus, our suggested

The generation of stylish Chinese fonts is an important problem involved in many applications. Most of existing generation methods are based on the deep generative models, particularly, the generative adversarial networks (GAN) based
models. However, these deep generative models may suffer
from the mode collapse issue, which significantly degrades
the diversity and quality of generated results. In this paper, we
introduce a one-bit stroke encoding to capture the key mode
information of Chinese characters and then incorporate it into CycleGAN, a popular deep generative model for Chinese
font generation. As a result we propose an efficient method
called StrokeGAN, mainly motivated by the observation that
the stroke encoding contains amount of mode information of
Chinese characters. In order to reconstruct the one-bit stroke
encoding of the associated generated characters, we introduce a stroke-encoding reconstruction loss imposed on the
discriminator. Equipped with such one-bit stroke encoding
and stroke-encoding reconstruction loss, the mode collapse
issue of CycleGAN can be significantly alleviated, with an
improved preservation of strokes and diversity of generated
characters. The effectiveness of StrokeGAN is demonstrated
by a series of generation tasks over nine datasets with different fonts. The numerical results demonstrate that StrokeGAN
generally outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of
content and recognition accuracies, as well as certain stroke
error, and also generates more realistic characters.

Introduction
The stylish Chinese font generation has attracted rising attention within recent years (Lin et al. 2016; Cha et al. 2020;
Chang, Gu, and Zhang 2017; Tian 2017; Kong and Xu 2017;
Jiang et al. 2017, 2019; Chang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019;
Wu, Yang, and Hsu 2020; Gao and Wu 2020; Zhang et al.
2020), since it has a wide range of applications including
but not limited to the automatic generation of artistic Chinese calligraphy (Zhao et al. 2020), art font design (Lin et al.
2014) and personalized style generation of Chinese characters (Liu, Xu, and Lin 2012).
The existing Chinese font generation methods can be generally divided into two categories. The first category is firstly
to extract some explicit features such as strokes and radicals
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3270

