The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Warm Starting CMA-ES for Hyperparameter Optimization
Masahiro Nomura* †1,2 , Shuhei Watanabe* ‡3 , Youhei Akimoto4,5 ,
Yoshihiko Ozaki2,6 , Masaki Onishi2
1
CyberAgent, Inc.
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST.
3
University of Freiburg.
4
University of Tsukuba.
5
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project.
6
GREE, Inc.
2

Abstract

learning setting on HPO often appears in practical situations
and is actively studied in HPO literature (Vanschoren 2019).
The covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy
(CMA-ES) (Hansen and Ostermeier 2001; Hansen 2016) is
one of the most powerful methods for BBO and has a high
degree of parallelism. The CMA-ES facilitates optimization by updating the parameters of the multivariate Gaussian distribution (MGD). Subsequently, the CMA-ES samples candidate solutions, which can be evaluated in parallel, from the MGD. It has been applied widely in practice, including in HPO often under parallel evaluation settings (Loshchilov and Hutter 2016; Friedrichs and Igel 2005;
Watanabe and Le Roux 2014). The CMA-ES is particularly useful for solving difficult BBO problems such as nonseparable, ill-conditioned, and rugged problems (Rios and
Sahinidis 2013); furthermore, it has shown the best performance among more than 100 optimization methods for
various BBO problems (Loshchilov, Schoenauer, and Sebag
2013) with moderate to large evaluation budgets (> 100×
the number of variables).
However, the CMA-ES does not necessarily outperform
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Frazier 2018) in the context
of HPO, in which the evaluation budget is severely limited (Loshchilov and Hutter 2016). This is because the
CMA-ES requires a relatively long adaptation phase to sample solutions into promising regions, especially at the beginning of optimization. Thus, the CMA-ES has received much
less attention in the context of HPO, despite the excellent
performance verified empirically in BBO.
In this work, to address the inefficiency of the CMA-ES
when the evaluation budget is severely limited, we introduce
a simple and effective warm starting method WS-CMA-ES.
This warm starting strategy can shorten the CMA-ES adaptation phase significantly by utilizing the relationship between source and target tasks.
We first define a promising distribution in the search
space and task similarity. The proposed method is designed to perform successful warm starting when the defined task similarity between a source task and a target task is high. To warm-start the optimization, we estimate a promising distribution of the source task. The

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO), formulated as blackbox optimization (BBO), is recognized as essential for automation and high performance of machine learning approaches. The CMA-ES is a promising BBO approach with
a high degree of parallelism, and has been applied to HPO
tasks, often under parallel implementation, and shown superior performance to other approaches including Bayesian optimization (BO). However, if the budget of hyperparameter
evaluations is severely limited, which is often the case for
end users who do not deserve parallel computing, the CMAES exhausts the budget without improving the performance
due to its long adaptation phase, resulting in being outperformed by BO approaches. To address this issue, we propose
to transfer prior knowledge on similar HPO tasks through the
initialization of the CMA-ES, leading to significantly shortening the adaptation time. The knowledge transfer is designed
based on the novel definition of task similarity, with which the
correlation of the performance of the proposed approach is
confirmed on synthetic problems. The proposed warm starting CMA-ES, called WS-CMA-ES, is applied to different
HPO tasks where some prior knowledge is available, showing
its superior performance over the original CMA-ES as well as
BO approaches with or without using the prior knowledge.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is an essential for
achieving effective performance in a wide range of machine
learning algorithms (Feurer and Hutter 2019). HPO is formulated as a black-box optimization (BBO) problem because the objective function of the task of interest (referred
to as the target task) cannot be described using an algebraic
representation in general. One way to accelerate the optimization for HPO on the target task is to exploit results from
a related task (referred to as the source task). This transfer
* These authors contributed equally in this work.
†

Corresponding author: nomura masahiro@cyberagent.co.jp
The work was done at Artificial Intelligence Research Center,
AIST.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

9188

