The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private and Communication Efficient Collaborative Learning
Jiahao Ding, 1 Guannan Liang, 2 Jinbo Bi, 2 Miao Pan1
1

University of Houston
University of Connecticut
{jding7, mpan2}@uh.edu, {guannan.liang, jinbo.bi}@uconn.edu
2

Abstract

While communication is a key concern in collaborative
machine learning, an equally important consideration is
the critical privacy leakage of sensitive training data during the training process (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart
2015; Agarwal et al. 2018). Fortunately, differential privacy (Dwork et al. 2006) has been exploited as a welldefined framework for providing privacy protection in machine learning, which guarantees that the adversary with arbitrary background knowledge cannot extract any sensitive
information about the training data. Many existing mechanisms have been proposed to ensure DP, like gradient perturbation (Wang, Ye, and Xu 2017; Abadi et al. 2016b) and output perturbation approaches (Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and
Sarwate 2011; Wu et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2019b). However,
directly hammering those centralized mechanisms into distributed settings will potentially introduce a heavy communication burden.
A majority of the existing research focuses on either communication efficiency (Wang et al. 2018; Bernstein et al.
2018; Rothchild et al. 2020) or data privacy (Shokri and
Shmatikov 2015; Ding et al. 2019b; Jayaraman et al. 2018).
However, only a limited amount of works consider both
(Agarwal et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Wang, Jia, and
Song 2021). Agarwal et al. (Agarwal et al. 2018) proposed
the cpSGD algorithm based on the randomized quantization
and Binomial mechanism. However, the method was specialized for the distributed mean estimation problem under
the server/worker architecture. The performance of collaborative learning is not clear in general network topologies.
Furthermore, in (Zhang et al. 2020), Zhang et al. adopted a
sparsification operator to compress the differentially private
local differentials before transmitting to neighboring agents
to reduce the communication cost while guaranteeing privacy. However, the above works ignore the critical impact
of the straggling agents, which may significantly slow down
the wall-clock time of the convergence.
In this paper, we propose two differentially private and
communication efficient algorithms, named Q-DPSGD-1
and Q-DPSGD-2, by considering different orders between
the random quantization and DP mechanism. Particularly,
in Q-DPSGD-1, a Gaussian mechanism is applied before
random quantization, and the privacy guarantee of quantized model roots from the post-processing property of DP.
In Q-DPSGD-2, we consider an alternative design in re-

Collaborative learning has received huge interests due to its
capability of exploiting the collective computing power of the
wireless edge devices. However, during the learning process,
model updates using local private samples and large-scale parameter exchanges among agents impose severe privacy concerns and communication bottleneck. In this paper, to address
these problems, we propose two differentially private (DP)
and communication efficient algorithms, called Q-DPSGD-1
and Q-DPSGD-2. In Q-DPSGD-1, each agent first performs
local model updates by a DP gradient descent method to provide the DP guarantee and then quantizes the local model
before transmitting it to neighbors to improve communication efficiency. In Q-DPSGD-2, each agent injects discrete
Gaussian noise to enforce DP guarantee after first quantizing
the local model. Moreover, we track the privacy loss of both
approaches under the Rényi DP and provide convergence
analysis for both convex and non-convex loss functions. The
proposed methods are evaluated in extensive experiments on
real-world datasets and the empirical results validate our theoretical findings.

Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly deployed into large-scale
distributive systems that can improve the quality of our life,
such as smart home security (Komninos, Philippou, and Pitsillides 2014), and AI-aided medical diagnosis (Jiang, Li,
and Lv 2017). With the proliferation of mobile phone devices, a vast amount of data has been generated at an everincreasing rate, which leads to significant computational
complexity for data collection and processing via a centralized machine learning approach. Therefore, collaborative
training of a machine learning model among edge computing devices is beneficial and essential in dealing with large
scale decentralized learning tasks (Abadi et al. 2016a; Dean
et al. 2012; McDonald, Hall, and Mann 2010). However,
since the dimension of learning model increases (which is
the current trend in large-scale distributed machine learning), model exchanges among agents become the significant communication bottleneck. Moreover, the computation
speed and computational load of local agents vary greatly,
which can substantially slow down the overall system efficiency.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7219

