The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Forecasting Reservoir Inflow via Recurrent Neural ODEs
Fan Zhou, Liang Li*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn, liliang2333@gmail.com

Abstract

downstream water regulation and agriculture irrigation), optimal reservoir operation is difficult (Petrik and Zilberstein
2011). For example, excess water in summer should have
been stored for future hydropower generation, but the storage capacity needs to be maintained at a low level to tolerate
the possible flood peaks. However, water discharge may result in significant loss of electricity revenue, which may be
fundamentally reduced if accurate and reliable inflow forecast can be made in advance (Ahmad and Hossain 2019).
Related work. Traditionally, reservoirs are operated based
on the knowledge of experts who usually design mathematical/physical models to simulate the dynamics of inflow/outflow. For example, earlier works (Sigvaldson 1976;
Cuena 1983; Georgakakos and Marks 1987) prescribe timebased rules based on which different operations of the reservoir system can be simulated and configured for making
optimal policies. However, predefined rule-based models
cannot handle sudden events (e.g., flood and dam break),
which prevents their applicability in real-time reservoir operation. (Petrik and Zilberstein 2011) propose to optimize
hydroelectric systems using the knowledge of inflow and
water discharge and introduce linear dynamic programs to
solve the partially observable Markov decision processes.
Typical machine learning methods have shown the ability
to fit complex multivariate time series data (e.g., inflow and
outflow), and extract empirical knowledge and time-varying
demands for improving reservoir operation. For instance,
AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) family models have been used to model hydrological time series (Wang et al. 2015). Bayesian networks, as well as Kmeans clustering, were applied for predicting annual and
monthly inflow (Noorbeh, Roozbahani, and Moghaddam
2020). Other algorithms, such as support vector regression
and neural networks, have also been employed for learning nonlinear and nonstationary characteristics of hydrological data in the literature (Aboutalebi, Bozorg Haddad, and
Loáiciga 2015; Hadiyan, Moeini, and Ehsanzadeh 2020).
Recent advances in deep learning, especially the recurrent neural networks (RNN), spurs a few of these studies on
applying RNNs for modeling the hydrological time series
and predicting reservoir inflow (Yang et al. 2019; Babaei,
Moeini, and Ehsanzadeh 2019) due to the ability of RNNs
on learning intricate dynamic temporal dependencies. (Yang
et al. 2019) develops a real-time reservoir operation system

Forecasting reservoir inflow is critical for making many policies, ranging from flood control and agriculture irrigation
to water ecology management, hydropower generation, and
landslide prevention. Prior studies mainly exploit autoregressive models – e.g., recurrent neural networks (RNN) and its
many variants – to model the flow time series’s temporal pattern. However, existing approaches rely on regular and accurate inflow observations, which either fail to predict multiscale inflow (e.g., an hour, a day, or a month ahead prediction)
or ignore the uncertainty of observations due to confounding factors such as snowmelt and precipitation. To address
the limitations, we propose a novel inflow forecasting model
by incorporating the uncertainty of the observations into the
RNN model and the continuous-time dynamics of the latent
states with neural ordinary differential equations (ODE). Our
method, called FlowODE, explicitly encodes the stochasticity of hidden conditions in addition to the temporal dependencies among inflow observations. Moreover, FlowODE explores a continuum of layers instead of discrete RNNs to
model the hidden states’ dynamics, allowing us to infer the
inflow at any time horizon flexibly. We conduct extensive experiments on the real-world datasets collected from two largescale hydropower dams. The results show that our method
consistently outperforms previous inflow forecasting models
while providing adaptable predictions and a flexible balance
between prediction accuracy and computational cost.

Introduction
Artificial reservoirs are built by constructing dams on rivers,
regulating natural streams by storing excess water in the
rainy season, and supplying the stored water for future use.
Large-scale reservoirs play vital roles in optimizing water
resources management, such as water supply, flood/drought
regularization, hydropower maximization, aquatic ecosystem balance, sediment transportation, and potential geological hazards (e.g., landslide and fluvial deposit) (Cuena
1983; Yin et al. 2016; Chang and Tsai 2016; Moshe et al.
2020). Most of the dams operate according to the predefined
rules depending on climate change and historical observations. Because of numerous influencing factors, both intrinsic (e.g., precipitation and snowmelt) and extrinsic (e.g.,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15025

