The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bidirectional RNN-based Few Shot Learning for 3D Medical Image Segmentation
Soopil Kim, Sion An, Philip Chikontwe, Sang Hyun Park
Department of Robotics Engineering, DGIST
soopilkim, sion an, philipchicco, shpark13135@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract

few shot learning is to learn generalizable knowledge across
several related tasks that can be used to predict the label of a
query sample with support data and labels. Therefore, in the
ideal setting, when this idea is applied to medical datasets, a
model trained with several existing organ annotations should
be able to accurately segment unseen target organs with only
a few samples. However, most few shot methods that focus
on natural 2D images are not directly applicable for 3D image based analysis since such models are prone to overfitting
when trained with few observations.
In general, 3D operations for dense pixel-level high dimensional predictions incur increased high memory usage
and often lead to constraining the batch size to be small. Recently, (Roy et al. 2020) proposed a framework for organ
segmentation in 3D CT scans using few shot learning. Volumetric segmentation is performed in 2D slice by slice in the
coronal view with careful selection of potential query and
support slices. Though successful, their approach does not
consider the relation between adjacent slices and 3D structural information, therefore the segmentation result may often be inaccurate and not smooth.
In this paper, we propose a novel few shot segmentation
framework that models the relation between support and
query data from other few shot tasks alongside 3D structural
information between adjacent slices. We integrate a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (GRU) between the encoder and
decoder of a 2D few shot segmentation model for efficient
representation learning. In this way, encoded features of both
the support set and adjacent slices capture key characteristics to predict the segmentation of a query image in the
decoding layers. Furthermore, we propose a transfer learning strategy to adapt the characteristics of a target domain in
multi-shot segmentation setting. For a given task, we re-train
the model parameters using the given support data by arbitrarily dividing them into support and query data using data
augmentation. We evaluated our method using 3 datasets (1
for internal test and the rest for external validation) to verify
the generalization ability of the model.
In our experiments, the proposed model using less than 5
support samples could achieve performance comparable to
a supervised learning method used a large number of data
samples. The contribution points of this paper are summarized as follows:

Segmentation of organs of interest in 3D medical images
is necessary for accurate diagnosis and longitudinal studies.
Though recent advances using deep learning have shown success for many segmentation tasks, large datasets are required
for high performance and the annotation process is both time
consuming and labor intensive. In this paper, we propose a
3D few shot segmentation framework for accurate organ segmentation using limited training samples of the target organ
annotation. To achieve this, a U-Net like network is designed
to predict segmentation by learning the relationship between
2D slices of support data and a query image, including a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (GRU) that learns consistency
of encoded features between adjacent slices. Also, we introduce a transfer learning method to adapt the characteristics of
the target image and organ by updating the model before testing with arbitrary support and query data sampled from the
support data. We evaluate our proposed model using three 3D
CT datasets with annotations of different organs. Our model
yielded significantly improved performance over state-of-theart few shot segmentation models and was comparable to a
fully supervised model trained with more target training data.

Introduction
Deep learning based segmentation models have achieved
success in various applications (Gu et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
2018; Alom et al. 2019; Nie et al. 2019) for both natural and
medical images. Despite their success, it is often difficult to
make a robust model for segmentation especially for medical
images since constructing a large-scale dataset incurs a high
cost in scanning, and manually creating annotations for volumetric images is laborious and time-consuming. Above all,
each hospital acquires images with different resolutions and
modalities given that medical experts are interested in different tasks. Consequently, it would constitute designing a separate model for each task, which is not practical. Moreover,
each task may have a low data regime with limited annotated samples, and training based on fine-tuning or transfer
learning may fail and lead to overfitting.
Recently, few shot learning methods (Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018; Garcia and Bruna 2017; Liu
et al. 2018) have been proposed in the field of machine learning to efficiently address these challenges. The key idea of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel 3D few shot segmentation model able
1808

