The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Outlier Impact Characterization for Time Series Data
Jianbo Li, 1 Lecheng Zheng, 2 Yada Zhu, 3 Jingrui He 2
1

Three Bridges Capital, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3 IBM Research
jianboliru@gmail.com, {lecheng4, jingrui}@illinois.edu, yzhu@ibm.us.com

Abstract

On the other hand, as machine learning techniques become an indispensable tool in many real applications, there
are growing interests to gain insights into the working mechanism of machine learning models. Despite the recent surge
of efforts devoted to providing explanations to black-box
machine learning models (including outlier detection methods) (Kauffmann, ller, and Montavon 2018; Koh and Liang
2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Micenková et al.
2013), the vast majority (if not all) of existing techniques
focus on static data with feature representations. However,
many high-impact application domains (e.g., national security, finance) exhibit the time-evolving nature. The occasional outliers in the time series data can significantly affect
the performance of the generated models, rendering the predicted future values not trustworthy. Despite the plethora of
outlier detection techniques for time series data, interpretation the detected outliers (especially the recurrent ones) and
their underlying generation mechanism is far from solved.
To bridge this gap, in this paper, we tackle the challenge
of outlier interpretation in time series data via contamination
processes. We start from the influence functional for time
series data proposed in (Martin and Yohai 1986), which assumes that the observed input time series is obtained from
separate processes for both the core input and the recurring
outliers, i.e., the core process and the contaminating process. At each time stamp, with a certain (small) probability, the observed value of the contaminated process comes
from the contaminating process, which corresponds to the
outliers. In our work, we focus on the generic patchy outliers
where the outlying patterns can be present over consecutive
time stamps, and aim to study the impact of the contaminating process on both parameter estimation and future value
prediction. In particular, we propose a single-valued metric
named SIF to characterize the impact of the contaminating
process on future predictions. Gaining insights on such outlier impact can shed light on not only the relative performance of existing outlier detection techniques but also the
type of outliers that a predictive model is robust/sensitive to.

For time series data, certain types of outliers are intrinsically more harmful for parameter estimation and future predictions than others, irrespective of their frequency. In this
paper, for the first time, we study the characteristics of such
outliers through the lens of the influence functional from robust statistics. In particular, we consider the input time series as a contaminated process, with the recurring outliers
generated from an unknown contaminating process. Then we
leverage the influence functional to understand the impact of
the contaminating process on parameter estimation. The influence functional results in a multi-dimensional vector that
measures the sensitivity of the predictive model to the contaminating process, which can be challenging to interpret especially for models with a large number of parameters. To
this end, we further propose a comprehensive single-valued
metric (the SIF) to measure outlier impacts on future predictions. It provides a quantitative measure regarding the outlier
impacts, which can be used in a variety of scenarios, such
as the evaluation of outlier detection methods, the creation
of more harmful outliers, etc. The empirical results on multiple real data sets demonstrate the effectivenss of the proposed
SIF metric.

Introduction
Outlier analysis has been studied for several decades for
the sake of data cleaning, fraud detection, gaining insights
into the hidden patterns, etc. Numerous models and methods
have been proposed to detect outliers either for static data
(Aggarwal and Yu 2001; Xiong, Chen, and Schneider 2011;
Liu, Huang, and Hu. 2017) or for dynamic data (González
and Dasgupta 2003; Rebbapragada et al. 2009; Habler and
Shabtai 2017). In the dynamic settings, outliers often exhibit
recurring patterns, which can be seen across multiple application domains, such as manufacturing process trace data (Li
et al. 2014), medical records (Li et al. 2011; Hauskrecht et al.
2013), sensor data (Subramaniam et al. 2006; Shcherbakov
et al. 2016), time-evolving social network data (He, Liu, and
Lawrence 2008; Savage et al. 2014), etc. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the outliers follow an unknown contaminating process, which contributes to the observed input
time series in a probabilistic way.

Related Work
Since the pioneering work in (Fox 1972), outlier detection
in time series has been well studied over the past decades.
Notable distance-based approaches include k nearest neighbor (kNN) (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2008) and k-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11595

