The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-aware Named Entity Recognition with Alleviating Heterogeneity
Binling Nie,1 * Ruixue Ding, 2 Pengjun Xie, 2 Fei Huang, 2 Chen Qian, 3 Luo Si 2
1

HangZhou Dianzi University
2
Alibaba Group
3
Tsinghua University
binlingnie@hdu.edu.cn, {ada.drx, f.huang, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com,
chengchen.xpj@taobao.com, qc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

(Lample et al. 2016), are widely used for NER due to their
power to effectively capture the sequential dependency observed in training data. Nevertheless, simply learning from
the labeled data is far from enough when it comes to domainspecific or temporally-evolving entities (e.g. medical terminologies or restaurant names). Luckily, many open-source
Knowledge Bases (KBs) (e.g. Wikipedia and Freebase)
(Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014) contain the well-structured
NEs that are manually assigned with predefined types in
different domains, which is potentially beneficial for NER
to locate entity boundaries and recognize entity types. For
example, in the text “colon carcinoma cells”, utilizing the
prior knowledge that the mention “colon carcinoma” is associated with the KB entity colorectal cancer with the type
of Disease, it generally falls into the Disease category
with a much higher probability than other candidates such
as colon or carcinoma.

Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental and important research topic for many downstream NLP tasks, aiming at detecting and classifying named entities (NEs) mentioned in unstructured text into pre-defined categories. Learning from labeled data only is far from enough when it comes
to domain-specific or temporally-evolving entities (e.g. medical terminologies or restaurant names). Luckily, open-source
Knowledge Bases (KBs) (e.g. Wikidata and Freebase) contain NEs that are manually labeled with predefined types in
different domains, which is potentially beneficial to identify
entity boundaries and recognize entity types more accurately.
However, the type system of a domain-specific NER task is
typically independent of that of current KBs and thus exhibits heterogeneity issue inevitably, which makes matching
between the original NER and KB types (e.g. Person in
NER potentially matches President in KBs) less likely,
or introduces unintended noises without considering domainspecific knowledge (e.g. Band in NER should be mapped
to Out of Entity Types in the restaurant-related task).
To better incorporate and denoise the abundant knowledge in
KBs, we propose a new KB-aware NER framework (KaNa),
which utilizes type-heterogeneous knowledge to improve
NER. Specifically, for an entity mention along with a set of
candidate entities that are linked from KBs, KaNa first uses
a type projection mechanism that maps the mention type and
entity types into a shared space to homogenize the heterogeneous entity types. Then, based on projected types, a noise
detector filters out certain less-confident candidate entities in
an unsupervised manner. Finally, the filtered mention-entity
pairs are injected into a NER model as a graph to predict answers. The experimental results demonstrate KaNa’s state-ofthe-art performance on five public benchmark datasets from
different domain.

However, the key challenge of incorporating KB knowledge into NER task is the heterogeneity issue between KB
and NER type systems. Specifically, there are usually thousands of types in a KB type system but a NER type system usually has no more than hundred of types (even less),
which shows a gap and further leads to a divergent design philosophy. We here summarize the main issues derived from the heterogeneity problem into the following aspects: 1) Type system generalizability. KB types are predefined relatively stably for general purposes while NER
types are domain-specific (i.e. varying from one task to another). 2) Different namespace. The possible names of the
same entity type could be largely different among different
type systems. 3) One-to-many matching. A NER entity usually has one type but a KB entity often has multiple types.
The three classes of heterogeneity would cause the following problems respectively if careful designs were not considered: 1) Task-irrelevant noise. Since the number of entity types in NER is much smaller than KB types and NER
types are usually task specific, many task-irrelevant entities
could be unintentionally introduced via the use of KBs. Take
a restaurant-related NER task as an example, as shown in
Figure 1 (a), the subword cracker in “cracker barrel” (a
restaurant name) is linked to a KB entity Cracker with type
Band. The association between mention cracker and KB
entity Cracker could mislead model to predict wrong entity boundaries and types. 2) Complex Noise Identification.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental and important research topic in the area of natural language processing (NLP), aiming at detecting and classifying named
entities (NEs) mentioned in unstructured text into predefined categories (Ngo, Dien, and Winiwarter 2014). The
data-driven methods, e.g. conditional random fields (CRF)
(Li, Bontcheva, and Cunningham 2005) and BiLSTM-CRF
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13595

