The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Lay Language Summarization of Biomedical Scientific Reviews
Yue Guo,∗1 Wei Qiu, ∗2 Yizhong Wang, 2 Trevor Cohen1
1

Biomedical and Health Informatics, University of Washington
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
yguo50@uw.edu, {wqiu0528, yizhongw}@cs.washington.edu, cohenta@uw.edu
2

Abstract

language (Friedman, Kra, and Rzhetsky 2002). Furthermore,
knowledge in the health domain evolves over time, presenting laypeople with the additional challenge of discerning the
most up-to-date information. The COVID-19 pandemic has
cast a spotlight on the challenges in the general public’s ability to obtain, interpret, and apply knowledge to guide their
health-related behavior. These challenges are exemplified by
difficulties in interpreting articles from the biomedical literature, for those without specific training in this domain. Our
project aims to bridge the gap between the increasing availability of health information and the difficulty the public has
understanding it. To do so, we confront the task of rendering
the biomedical literature comprehensible to the lay public,
which can be framed as a type of translation problem: from
the language of healthcare professionals to plain language.
A systematic review, such as those in the widely-used
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1 (CDSR), is a
type of biomedical scientific publication that synthesizes
current empirical evidence for a research question, to identify the strongest evidence to inform decision making while
minimizing bias. Of importance for the current research, reviews in the CDSR include lay language summaries, written
by review authors or Cochrane staff. In this paper, we introduce the novel task of automated generation of lay language
summaries of biomedical scientific reviews. We introduce a
dataset constructed by extracting 7,805 high-quality abstract
pairs that consist of both abstracts intended for professional
readers, and plain language versions written by domain experts. The source in the training dataset is the healthcare professional version of an abstract, with an average length of
714 words. The target is the corresponding plain language
version, with an average length of 371 words.
This dataset is the first corpus developed to facilitate development of methods to improve document-level understandability of biomedical narratives for the general public, and covering a broad range healthcare topics. The closest parallel in the literature may be the manually annotated
dataset, MSD, which was developed recently to improve bidirectional communication between clinicians and patients
(Cao et al. 2020). MSD is focused on communication of
clinical topics at the sentence level, and the accompanying work approached the problem using text style trans-

Health literacy has emerged as a crucial factor in making appropriate health decisions and ensuring treatment outcomes.
However, medical jargon and the complex structure of professional language in this domain make health information especially hard to interpret. Thus, there is an urgent unmet need
for automated methods to enhance the accessibility of the
biomedical literature to the general population. This problem
can be framed as a type of translation problem between the
language of healthcare professionals, and that of the general
public. In this paper, we introduce the novel task of automated
generation of lay language summaries of biomedical scientific reviews, and construct a dataset to support the development and evaluation of automated methods through which
to enhance the accessibility of the biomedical literature. We
conduct analyses of the various challenges in performing this
task, including not only summarization of the key points but
also explanation of background knowledge and simplification
of professional language. We experiment with state-of-the-art
summarization models as well as several data augmentation
techniques, and evaluate their performance using both automated metrics and human assessment. Results indicate that
automatically generated summaries produced using contemporary neural architectures can achieve promising quality and
readability as compared with reference summaries developed
for the lay public by experts (best ROUGE-L of 50.24 and
Flesch-Kincaid readability score of 13.30). We also discuss
the limitations of the current effort, providing insights and directions for future work.

Introduction
The ability to understand scientific concepts, content, and
research in the medical domain is defined as health literacy
(Parker et al. 1999), which is crucial to making appropriate
health decisions and ensuring treatment outcomes. The development of the internet has enabled the general population
to access health information, greatly expanding the volume
of available health education materials. However, challenges
arise in reading and understanding these materials because
of the inability to identify credible resources (Howes et al.
2004), unfamiliarity with medical jargon (Korsch, Gozzi,
and Francis 1968), and the complex structure of professional
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

160

http:///www.cochranelibrary.com

