The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GATE: Graph Attention Transformer Encoder for Cross-lingual
Relation and Event Extraction
Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Nanyun Peng, Kai-Wei Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
{wasiahmad, violetpeng, kwchang}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in cross-lingual relation and event extraction
use graph convolutional networks (GCNs) with universal dependency parses to learn language-agnostic sentence representations such that models trained on one language can be
applied to other languages. However, GCNs struggle to model
words with long-range dependencies or are not directly connected in the dependency tree. To address these challenges,
we propose to utilize the self-attention mechanism where we
explicitly fuse structural information to learn the dependencies between words with different syntactic distances. We introduce GATE, a Graph Attention Transformer Encoder, and
test its cross-lingual transferability on relation and event extraction tasks. We perform experiments on the ACE05 dataset
that includes three typologically different languages: English,
Chinese, and Arabic. The evaluation results show that GATE
outperforms three recently proposed methods by a large margin. Our detailed analysis reveals that due to the reliance on
syntactic dependencies, GATE produces robust representations that facilitate transfer across languages.

1

Figure 1: A relation (red dashed) between two entities and
an event of type Attack (triggered by “firing”) including two
arguments and their role labels (blue) are highlighted.
Bangladeshi garment factory has left at least 37 people dead
and 100 hospitalized, the sequential and syntactic distance
between “fire” and “hospitalized” is 15 and 4, respectively.
Therefore, encoding syntax structure helps capture longrange dependencies (Liu, Luo, and Huang 2018). Second,
languages have different word order, e.g., adjectives precede
or follow nouns as (“red apple”) in English or (“pomme
rouge”) in French. Thus, processing sentences sequentially
suffers from the word order difference issue (Ahmad et al.
2019a), while modeling dependency structures can mitigate
the problem in cross-lingual transfer (Liu et al. 2019).
A common way to leverage dependency structures for
cross-lingual NLP tasks is using universal dependency
parses.2 A large pool of recent works in IE (Liu, Luo, and
Huang 2018; Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018; Subburathinam et al. 2019; Fu, Li, and Ma 2019; Sun et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019) employed Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) to learn sentence representations based on their universal dependency parses, where a
k-layers GCN aggregates information of words that are k
hop away. Such a way of embedding structure may hinder
cross-lingual transfer when the source and target languages
have different path length distributions among words (see
Table 1). Presumably, a two-layer GCN would work well on
English but may not transfer well to Arabic.
Moreover, GCNs have shown to perform poorly in modeling long-distance dependencies or disconnected words in
the dependency tree (Zhang, Li, and Song 2019; Tang et al.
2020). In contrast, the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al. 2017) is capable of capturing long-range dependencies.
Consequently, a few recent studies proposed dependency-

Introduction

Relation and event extraction are two challenging information extraction (IE) tasks; wherein a model learns to identify
semantic relationships between entities and events in narratives. They provide useful information for many natural
language processing (NLP) applications such as knowledge
graph completion (Lin et al. 2015) and question answering
(Chen et al. 2019). Figure 1 gives an example of relation
and event extraction tasks. Recent advances in cross-lingual
transfer learning approaches for relation and event extraction
learns a universal encoder that produces language-agnostic
contextualized representations so the model learned on one
language can easily transfer to others. Recent works (Huang
et al. 2018; Subburathinam et al. 2019) suggested embedding universal dependency structure into contextual representations improves cross-lingual transfer for IE.
There are a couple of advantages of leveraging dependency structures. First, the syntactic distance between two
words1 in a sentence is typically smaller than the sequential distance. For example, in the sentence A fire in a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The shortest path in the dependency graph structure.

2

12462

https://universaldependencies.org/

