The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

i-Algebra: Towards Interactive Interpretability of Deep Neural Networks
Xinyang Zhang,1 Ren Pang,1 Shouling Ji,2 Fenglong Ma,1 Ting Wang1
1

Pennsylvania State University,
2
Zhejiang University
{xqz5366, rbp5354, fenglong, ting}@psu.edu, sji@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Yet, despite the enhanced interpretability, today’s IDLSes
are still far from being practically useful. In particular, most
IDLSes provide interpretability in an ad hoc, single-shot,
and static manner, without accounting for the perception,
understanding, and response of the users, resulting in their
poor usability in practice. For instance, most IDLSes generate a static saliency map to highlight the most informative
features of a given input; however, in concrete analysis tasks,
the users often desire to know more, for instance,

Providing explanations for deep neural networks (DNNs) is
essential for their use in domains wherein the interpretability
of decisions is a critical prerequisite. Despite the plethora of
work on interpreting DNNs, most existing solutions offer interpretability in an ad hoc, one-shot, and static manner, without accounting for the perception, understanding, or response
of end-users, resulting in their poor usability in practice.
In this paper, we argue that DNN interpretability should be
implemented as the interactions between users and models.
We present i-Algebra, a first-of-its-kind interactive framework for interpreting DNNs. At its core is a library of atomic,
composable operators, which explain model behaviors at
varying input granularity, during different inference stages,
and from distinct interpretation perspectives. Leveraging a
declarative query language, users are enabled to build various
analysis tools (e.g., “drill-down”, “comparative”, “what-if”
analysis) via flexibly composing such operators. We prototype i-Algebra and conduct user studies in a set of representative analysis tasks, including inspecting adversarial inputs,
resolving model inconsistency, and cleansing contaminated
data, all demonstrating its promising usability.

• How does the feature importance change if some other
features are present/absent?
• How does the feature importance evolve over different
stages of the DNN model?
• What are the common features of two inputs that lead to
their similar predictions?
• What are the discriminative features of two inputs that result in their different predictions?
Moreover, the answer to one question may trigger followup
questions from the user, giving rise to an interactive process. Unfortunately, the existing IDLSes, limited by their
non-interactive designs, fail to provide interpretability tailored to the needs of individual users.
Our Work – To bridge the striking gap, we present iAlgebra, a first-of-its-kind interactive framework for interpreting DNN models, which allows non-expert users to easily explore a variety of interpretation operations and perform
interactive analyses. The overall design goal of i-Algebra is
to implement the DNN interpretability as the interactions between the user and the model.
Specifically, to accommodate a range of user preferences
for interactive modes with respect to different DNN models and analysis tasks, we design an expressive algebraic
framework, as shown in Figure 1. Its fundamental building
blocks are a library of atomic operators, which essentially
produce DNN interpretability at varying input granularity,
during different model stages, and from complementary inference perspectives. On top of this library, we define a SQLlike declarative query language, which allows users to flexibly compose the atomic operators and construct a variety of
analysis tasks (e.g., “drill-down,” “what-if,” “comparative”
analyses). As a concrete example, given two inputs x and
x0 , the query below compares their interpretation at the l-th

Introduction
The recent advances in deep learning have led to breakthroughs in a number of long-standing artificial intelligence
tasks, enabling use cases previously considered strictly experimental. Yet, the state-of-the-art performance of deep
neural networks (DNNs) is often achieved at the cost of their
interpretability: it is challenging to understand how a DNN
arrives at a particular decision, due to its high non-linearity
and nested structure (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville
2016). This is a major drawback for domains wherein the
interpretability of decisions is a critical prerequisite.
A flurry of interpretation methods (Sundararajan, Taly,
and Yan 2017; Dabkowski and Gal 2017; Fong and Vedaldi
2017; Zhang, Nian Wu, and Zhu 2018) have since been
proposed to help understand the inner workings of DNNs.
Typically, a DNN (classifier), coupled with an interpretation model (interpreter), forms an interpretable deep learning system (IDLS), which is believed to improve the model
trustworthiness (Tao et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2018).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11691

