The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Benchmarking Knowledge-Enhanced Commonsense Question Answering
via Knowledge-to-Text Transformation
Ning Bian,1,3 Xianpei Han,1,2,* Bo Chen,1,2 Le Sun1,2,*
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{bianning2019, xianpei, chenbo, sunle}@iscas.ac.cn
Knowledge
Question &
Base
Answer candidates

Abstract
A fundamental ability of humans is to utilize commonsense
knowledge in language understanding and question answering.
In recent years, many knowledge-enhanced Commonsense
Question Answering (CQA) approaches have been proposed.
However, it remains unclear: (1) How far can we get by exploiting external knowledge for CQA? (2) How much potential
of knowledge has been exploited in current CQA models? (3)
Which are the most promising directions for future CQA? To
answer these questions, we benchmark knowledge-enhanced
CQA by conducting extensive experiments on multiple standard CQA datasets using a simple and effective knowledgeto-text transformation framework. Experiments show that: (1)
Our knowledge-to-text framework is effective and achieves
state-of-the-art performance on CommonsenseQA dataset, providing a simple and strong knowledge-enhanced baseline for
CQA; (2) The potential of knowledge is still far from being
fully exploited in CQA — there is a significant performance
gap from current models to our models with golden knowledge; and (3) Context-sensitive knowledge selection, heterogeneous knowledge exploitation, and commonsense-rich language models are promising CQA directions.

Knowledge Retrieval

What is a person looking for when completing
puzzles or riddles?
A. avoid pain | B. intellectual challenge |
C. compliments | D. attention | E. passing grade
person

puzzle

Facts

Knowledge-to-Text
Transformation
Knowledge
Description

Reading Comprehension

Answer

riddle
problem

Intellectual_challenge

challenge

Person desires intellectual challenge.
Puzzle is a problem. Riddle is a problem.
Problem is the same as challenge. Puzzle
is used for challenge.

B. intellectual challenge

Figure 1: Our knowledge-to-text framework for benchmarking knowledge-enhanced CQA with an example from CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019).

Introduction
Using a variety of knowledge to help in understanding the
meaning of language is one of the key abilities of humans
(Minsky 2000). Commonsense question answering (CQA)
evaluates whether machines can understand language like
humans do by asking questions whose answers rely on commonsense knowledge. For example, Figure 1 shows a question, and the answer to this question needs commonsense
knowledge “puzzle is used for intellectual challenge”.
Witnessed the importance of commonsense knowledge
for CQA, many studies have been conducted to incorporate
external knowledge bases (KBs) in CQA models. These approaches usually leverage knowledge to enhance a specific
CQA component: 1) enhancing representations (Weissenborn,
Kočiskỳ, and Dyer 2017; Bauer, Wang, and Bansal 2018;
Mihaylov and Frank 2018; Ma et al. 2019); 2) enhancing attention mechanism (Chen et al. 2018; Wang and Jiang 2019);
and 3) enhancing reasoning mechanism (Lin et al. 2019; Lv
et al. 2020).
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12574

Although many knowledge-enhanced CQA approaches
have been proposed, we found it is still unclear: (1) How far
can we get by exploiting external knowledge for CQA? (2)
How much potential of knowledge has been exploited in current models? For example, can GNN-based models (Lin et al.
2019; Lv et al. 2020) encode and exploit all useful evidence
provided by external knowledge? (3) Which are the most
promising directions for knowledge-enhanced CQA? We believe answering these questions can provide valuable insights
for future CQA studies and shed light on other knowledgedependent tasks like reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al.
2016) and conversation generation (Zhou et al. 2018).
To answer the above questions, we benchmark knowledgeenhanced CQA by conducting extensive experiments on multiple standard datasets via a simple and effective knowledgeto-text transformation framework. Intuitively, to benchmark
knowledge-enhanced CQA, external knowledge should be
incorporated in a simple way that is not specialized to specific
models/components. This is challenging, due to 1) the heterogeneity between structured knowledge and unstructured
textual questions/answers, i.e., knowledge facts are usually
triples such as <person, Desires, Intellectual challenge>,
but questions and answers are text; and 2) the context-

