The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Causal Learning of Retail Delinquency
Yiyan Huang,2∗ Cheuk Hang Leung,2∗ Xing Yan,3 Qi Wu,2†
Nanbo Peng,1 Dongdong Wang,1 Zhixiang Huang1
1
JD Digits
City University of Hong Kong
3
ISBD, Renmin University of China
yiyhuang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {chleung87, qiwu55}@cityu.edu.hk, xingyan@ruc.edu.cn
{pengnanbo, wangdongdong9, huangzhixiang}@jd.com
2

Abstract

is the platform lender, and they are expected to make installments according to the payment schedules. These loan decisions, especially the loan amount and loan interest, are far
more individualized than those made in the traditional credit
card business and are frequently adjusted. The e-commerce
lenders observe that their credit policies have a systematic
causal impact, which alters borrowers’ payment behavior,
irrespective of age, income, education, occupation, and so
forth.
It is conceivable that machine learning (ML) algorithms
can effectively tap into the information advantage for accurate estimations of delinquency rate (Khandani, Kim, and
Lo 2010). However, the existing retail credit risk studies do
not recognize the essential of action-response causalities as
far as we know. Indeed, obtaining an accurate estimation of
the delinquency rate does not mean that we can obtain an
accurate estimation of the action-response causality. Generally, we face two biases in estimating the action-response
causality. The first bias is due to the neglect of the confounding effects. In reality, loan decisions are the results of
the lender’s decision algorithms that use an overlapping set
of borrowers’ features with those used for risk assessments,
e.g., past shopping and financing records. Thus, ignoring the
modelling of the relation between the credit policies and the
credit features may cause a big bias in estimating the actionresponse causality. The second bias comes from the estimation of the predictors-response relation. This is a regression
bias related to data and ML algorithm, e.g., the sample size,
the feature dimensions and the regressor selections.
The goal of this paper is to construct the estimators of
the causal parameters which can address both the confounding bias and the regression bias. It is equivalent to finding
the score functions with specific conditions (detailed discussions will be presented in the later sections) such that we
can recover the estimators from the score functions. To obtain the corresponding estimates of the estimators, we need
to estimate the “counterfactuals”, which are the potential
outcomes in delinquent probabilities of borrowers if they
were given different amounts of credit lines from the ones
they had received. Once the counterfactuals are estimated,
we would like to assess both the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) and the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated
(ATTE). For new customers, the lender can use the ATE to

This paper focuses on the expected difference in borrower’s
repayment when there is a change in the lender’s credit decisions. Classical estimators overlook the confounding effects
and hence the estimation error can be magnificent. As such,
we propose another approach to construct the estimators such
that the error can be greatly reduced. The proposed estimators are shown to be unbiased, consistent, and robust through
a combination of theoretical analysis and numerical testing.
Moreover, we compare the power of estimating the causal
quantities between the classical estimators and the proposed
estimators. The comparison is tested across a wide range of
models, including linear regression models, tree-based models, and neural network-based models, under different simulated datasets that exhibit different levels of causality, different degrees of nonlinearity, and different distributional properties. Most importantly, we apply our approaches to a large
observational dataset provided by a global technology firm
that operates in both the e-commerce and the lending business. We find that the relative reduction of estimation error
is strikingly substantial if the causal effects are accounted for
correctly.

Introduction
A growing number of technology conglomerates provide
lending services to shoppers who frequent their e-commerce
marketplaces. Technology firms have the information advantage that commercial banks lack. A vast amount of proprietary digital footprints are now at their fingertips. Study
shows the information content of proxies for human behavior, lifestyle, and living standard in the non-transnational
data are just effective, hence highly valuable for default prediction (Berg et al. 2020). However, managing retail credit
risks in online marketplaces differs in one fundamental way
from managing credit-card default risks faced by commercial banks. It comes from the pronounced “action-response”
relationship between the lender’s credit decisions and the
borrowers’ delinquency outcomes. When customers apply
for credit to finance their online purchases, they effectively
enter into an unsecured loan contract where the counterparty
∗

Co-first authors are in alphabetical order.
Qi Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

204

