The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evidence Aware Neural Pornographic Text Identification for Child Protection
Kaisong Song1 , Yangyang Kang1 , Wei Gao2 , Zhe Gao3 , Changlong Sun1 , Xiaozhong Liu4
1

Alibaba Group, China
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Ant Financial Services Group, China
4
Indiana University Bloomington, USA
kaisong.sks@alibaba-inc.com, yangyang.kangyy@alibaba-inc.com, weigao@smu.edu.sg
gaozhe.gz@alibaba-inc.com, changlong.scl@taobao.com, liu237@indiana.edu
2

Abstract

submit

Identifying pornographic text online is practically useful to
protect children from access to such adult content. However,
some authors may intentionally avoid using sensitive words in
their pornographic texts to take advantage of the lack of human audits. Without prior knowledge guidance, real semantics of such pornographic text is difficult to understand by existing methods due to its high context-sensitivity and heavy
usage of figurative language, which brings huge challenges
to the porn detection systems used in social media platforms.
In this paper, we approach to the problem as a document-level
porn identification task by locating and integrating sentencelevel evidence and propose a novel Evidence-Aware Neural
Porn Classification (eNPC) model. Specifically, we first propose a basic model which locates porn indicative sentences
in the document with a multiple instance learning model, and
then aggregate the sentence-level evidence to induce document label with self-attention mechanism. Moreover, we consider label dependencies within local context. Finally, we further enhance the sentence representation with prior knowledge produced by an automatic porn lexicon construction
strategy. Extensive experimental results show that our model
exhibits consistent superiority over competitors on two realworld Chinese novel datasets and an English story dataset.

authors

complain

figurative
breast

readers

pass
auditors

report

peak

s1 ： Li Xiang closed his
eyes and then reluctantly
removed his left hand
from her jade peak.
s2 ： After she stood up
from the ground, she
suddenly hugged Li Xiang.
s3：Li Xiang felt a sharp
pain on his left shoulder.

Figure 1: A typical content rating system. A pornographic
example with highlighted sentence-level evidences is given.

The workflow of a typical online content rating system is
displayed in Figure 1. Texts such as comments, blogs, and
novels submitted to websites by authors are first checked by
the content rating system which can refute plenty of obvious pornographic texts and send the suspicious texts to the
auditor for confirmation. With long time struggling experience against such content rating systems, some authors may
purposely avoid using sensitive words in their pornographic
texts to get away with the automatic screening process. For
example, the pornographic sentence s1 in Figure 1 may be
misidentified as a normal type by using figurative words
“jade peak” instead of sensitive word “breast”. Obviously,
identifying such pornographic texts is difficult due to highly
context-sensitive and figurative arousal content. In particular, the battle against such pornographic texts is regularly
considered as one of the key challenges in text classification
and semantic understanding of long texts.
Intuitively, pornographic text identification can be formulated as a text classification task (Lee, Hui, and Fong 2002,
2005; Hu et al. 2007). Classification models are trained on
documents annotated with labels and used to predict predefined categories such as “porn” or “normal” given unseen texts. However, this kind of model based on traditional
or neural text classification lacks of result interpretability,
which cannot provide indicative porn evidence to back up
manual reaffirmation and maybe cause bias and misuse.
Rooted from the need in real-world applications, we define
the pornographic text identification as a task that aims at
predicting whether the given document is “porn” or “nor-

Introduction

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2

pass
Content
Rating
System
not sure

refute

The proliferation of pornographic content online can create salient personal and social issues. Such adult content
are not suitable for children and may cause juvenile delinquency. Many platforms have built their content rating systems which rate the suitability of TV broadcasts, movies,
comic books, online literature or video games for their audiences1 . For example, 9/10 boys and 6/10 girls will be exposed to pornography before they turn 18, and the majority
of online exposures are unwanted and unwarranted, which
may escape from existing content rating systems2 and bring
negative social impact. Pornographic text identification (and
rating) is a rarely studied and important problem, which has
recently drawn much attention from both research communities (Hu et al. 2007) and industries (He et al. 2020a,b).

1

refute

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content rating
everaccountable.com/blog/how-pornography-affects-teenagers-and-children/

14939

