The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Bandit Learning with Imperfect Context
Jianyi Yang, Shaolei Ren
University of California, Riverside
{jyang239, shaolei}@ucr.edu

Abstract

Krause 2019), but can be predicted using predictors, such as
time series prediction(Brockwell et al. 2016; Gers, Schmidhuber, and Cummins 2000), to facilitate the agent’s arm selection. For example, in wireless communications, the channel condition is subject to various attenuation effects (e.g.,
path loss and small-scale multi-path fading), and is critical
context information for the transmitter configuration such
as modulation and rate adaption (i.e., arm selection) (Goldsmith 2005; Saxena et al. 2019). But, the channel condition
context is predicted and hence can only be coarsely known
until the completion of transmission. For another example,
the exact workload arrival rate is crucial context information for cloud resource management, but cannot be known
until the workload actually arrives. Naturally, context prediction is subject to prediction errors. Moreover, it can also
open a new attack surface — an outside attacker may adversarially modify the predicted context. For example, a recent
study (Chen, Tan, and Zhang 2019) shows that the energy
load predictor in smart grid can be adversarially attacked to
produce load estimates with higher-than-usual errors. More
motivating examples are provided in (Yang and Ren 2021).
In general, imperfectly predicted and even adversarially presented context is very common in practice.
As motivated by practical problems, we consider a bandit
setting where the agent receives imperfectly predicted context and selects an arm at the beginning of each round and
the context is revealed after arm selection. We focus on robust arm optimization given imperfect context, which is as
crucial as robust reward function estimation or exploration
in contextual bandits (Dudı́k, Langford, and Li 2011; Neu
and Olkhovskaya 2020; Zhu et al. 2018). Concretely, with
imperfect context, our goal is to select arms online in a robust manner to optimize the worst-case performance in a
neighborhood domain with the received imperfect context
as center and a defense budget as radius. In this way, the
robust arm selection can defend against the imperfect context error ( from either context prediction error or adversarial
modification) constrained by the budget.
Importantly and interestingly, given imperfect context,
maximizing the worst-case reward (referred to as type-I robustness objective) and minimizing the worst-case regret
(referred to as type-II robustness objective) can lead to different arms, while they are the same under the setting of
perfect context (Saxena et al. 2019; Li et al. 2010; Slivkins

A standard assumption in contextual multi-arm bandit is that
the true context is perfectly known before arm selection.
Nonetheless, in many practical applications (e.g., cloud resource management), prior to arm selection, the context information can only be acquired by prediction subject to errors or
adversarial modification. In this paper, we study a contextual
bandit setting in which only imperfect context is available for
arm selection while the true context is revealed at the end of
each round. We propose two robust arm selection algorithms:
MaxMinUCB (Maximize Minimum UCB) which maximizes
the worst-case reward, and MinWD (Minimize Worst-case
Degradation) which minimizes the worst-case regret. Importantly, we analyze the robustness of MaxMinUCB and
MinWD by deriving both regret and reward bounds compared
to an oracle that knows the true context. Our results show
that as time goes on, MaxMinUCB and MinWD both perform as asymptotically well as their optimal counterparts that
know the reward function. Finally, we apply MaxMinUCB
and MinWD to online edge datacenter selection, and run synthetic simulations to validate our theoretical analysis.

Introduction
Contextual bandits (Lu, Pál, and Pál 2010; Chu et al. 2011)
concern online learning scenarios such as recommendation
systems (Li et al. 2010), mobile health (Lei, Tewari, and
Murphy 2014), cloud resource provisioning (Chen and Xu
2019), wireless communications (Saxena et al. 2019), in
which arms (a.k.a., actions) are selected based on the underlying context to balance the tradeoff between exploitation
of the already learnt knowledge and exploration of uncertain arms (Auer et al. 2002; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012; Dani et al. 2008).
The majority of the existing studies on contextual bandits
(Chu et al. 2011; Valko et al. 2013; Saxena et al. 2019) assume that a perfectly accurate context is known before each
arm selection. Consequently, as long as the agent learns increasingly more knowledge about reward, it can select arms
with lower and lower average regrets. In many cases, however, the perfect (or true) context is not available to the agent
prior to arm selection. Instead, the true context is revealed
after taking an action at the end of each round (Kirschner and
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10594

