The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modular Graph Transformer Networks for Multi-Label Image Classification
Hoang D. Nguyen 1 , Xuan-Son Vu 2 , Duc-Trong Le 3
1

School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Singapore
Department of Computing Science, Umeå University, Sweden
3
University of Engineering and Technology, Vietnam National University, Vietnam
harry.nguyen@glasgow.ac.uk, sonvx@cs.umu.se, trongld@vnu.edu.vn
2

Abstract
With the recent advances in graph neural networks, there is
a rising number of studies on graph-based multi-label classification with the consideration of object dependencies within
visual data. Nevertheless, graph representations can become
indistinguishable due to the complex nature of label relationships. We propose a multi-label image classification framework based on graph transformer networks to fully exploit
inter-label interactions. The paper presents a modular learning scheme to enhance the classification performance by segregating the computational graph into multiple sub-graphs
based on modularity. Our approach, named Modular Graph
Transformer Networks (MGTN), is capable of employing
multiple backbones for better information propagation over
different sub-graphs guided by graph transformers and convolutions. We validate our framework on MS-COCO and Fashion550K datasets to demonstrate improvements for multilabel image classification. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ReML-AI/MGTN.

person, chair,
umbrella, car

person, chair,
dining table, cup

person, umbrella

dining table, cup,
bowl
car

Sub-graph A

Graph-Information

Sub-graph B

umbrella

person

chair

cup

dining
table
bowl

Figure 1: We segregate the graph into sub-graphs to learn
inter-connected dependencies over the object labels to better
model the multi-label image recognition task. In this figure,
“person, chair, umbrella, car” is in one sub-graph, “dining
table, cup, bowl” is in another sub-graph.

Introduction

graph convolutional network (GCN) unveiled spectral graph
convolutions for classification tasks. The graph-based approach was adopted with images by Chen et al. (2019b) to
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance for multi-label
image recognition. Furthermore, Li et al. (2019) and Wang
et al. (2020b) proposed several topological and architectural
changes to enhance the learning capabilities with minor performance improvements.
This paper introduces Modular Graph Transformer Networks (MGTN) for multi-label image recognition by integrating semantic and topological label information in
a harmonious way. Multi-label classification is decomposed into the segregated learning of multiple sub-graphs
based on the modularity of object dependencies, leading to better performance in visual representation learning. In Figure 1, objects such as bowl, cup, dining table, chair, umbrella, car and person may co-occur in
the physical world; nevertheless, the object labels appear
to be clustered into sub-networks in the data. Therefore,
multi-label learning entails better designated visual representation understanding as well as to reduce overfitting of the popular labels. In this example, we segregate
the network into sub-graphs: G1 (“bowl, cup, dining table”)
and G2 (“person, chair, umbrella, car”) to model the multi-

Real-world images generally embodies rich and diverse semantic information with multiple objects or actions; therefore, multi-label classification has attracted a large number
of recent studies in the artificial intelligence (AI) community (Wang et al. 2020a; Yeh et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017).
Recognising object labels in images has many applications,
ranging from social tag recommendation (Nam et al. 2019;
Vu et al. 2020) and fashion trend analysis (Inoue et al. 2017)
to functional genomics (Bi and Kwok 2011). The core challenge in multi-label learning is to understand and model object dependencies to exploit attributive knowledge. One of
the early approaches developed by Wang et al. (2016) combined convolutional neural networks (CNN) with recurrent
neural networks (RNN) to learn the semantic relevance and
dependency of multiple labels in order to boost the classification performance. Nevertheless, this approach is prone
to the high computational cost and the sub-optimal reciprocity between visual and semantic information. In reality,
objects are inter-connected which reflect as the network nature of object label dependencies. Kipf and Welling (2017)
proposed semi-supervised learning on network data using
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9092

