The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improved Mutual Information Estimation
Youssef Mroueh, Igor Melnyk, Pierre Dognin, Jarret Ross, Tom Sercu *
IBM Research AI

Abstract

(Nguyen, Wainwright, and Jordan 2008; Nowozin, Cseke,
and Tomioka 2016; Sriperumbudur et al. 2009). Specifically of interest to us is the Donsker-Varadhan (DV) representation of the KL divergence (Donsker and Varadhan
1976) that was used recently with neural networks estimators
(Belghazi et al. 2018; Poole et al. 2019). Other approaches
to estimating the MI are through finding lower bounds using variational Bayesian methods (Alemi et al. 2017, 2018;
Barber and Agakov 2003; Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe
2017), through geometric methods like binning (Kraskov,
Stögbauer, and Grassberger 2004a), k-nearest neighbors
(Kraskov, Stögbauer, and Grassberger 2004b), kernel density
(Kandasamy et al. 2015; Han et al. 2017), ensemble estimation (Moon, Sricharan, and Hero 2017), jackknife approach
(Zeng, Xia, and Tong 2018), Gaussian copula (Singh and
Póczos 2017), to name a few.
In this paper, we propose a new estimator of MI that can
be used in direct MI maximization or as a regularizer, thanks
to its unbiased gradients. Our starting point is the DonskerVaradhan (DV) lower bound of the KL divergence that we
represent equivalently via a joint optimization that we call
η-DV on a witness function f and an auxiliary variable η
in Section 2. In Section 3, we show that when the witness
function f is learned in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) the η-DV problem is jointly convex in both f and
η. The dual of this problem sheds the light on this estimator
as a constrained ratio estimation where η plays the role of
a Lagrange multiplier that ensures proper normalization of
the likelihood ratio. We also show how the witness function
can be estimated as a neural network akin to (Belghazi et al.
2018). We specify our estimator for MI in Section 4, and show
how it compares to alternatives in the literature (Nguyen,
Wainwright, and Jordan 2008; Belghazi et al. 2018; Poole
et al. 2019). The experiments are presented in Section 5. On
synthetic data, we validate our estimators by estimating MI
on Gaussian variables and by regularizing GAN training as
in (Chen et al. 2016). On real data, we explore our estimator
in deep MI maximization for learning representation from
unlabeled data. Figure 1 shows an overview of all the bounds
and related MI estimators discussed in this paper.

We propose to estimate the KL divergence using a relaxed
likelihood ratio estimation in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
space. We show that the dual of our ratio estimator for KL
in the particular case of Mutual Information estimation corresponds to a lower bound on the MI that is related to the so
called Donsker Varadhan lower bound. In this dual form, MI
is estimated via learning a witness function discriminating
between the joint density and the product of marginal, as well
as an auxiliary scalar variable that enforces a normalization
constraint on the likelihood ratio. By extending the function
space to neural networks, we propose an efficient neural MI
estimator, and validate its performance on synthetic examples,
showing advantage over the existing baselines. We demonstrate its strength in large-scale self-supervised representation
learning through MI maximization.

1

Introduction

Mutual information (MI) is an ubiquitous measure of dependency between a pair of random variables, and is one of the
corner stones of information theory. In machine learning,
the information maximization principle for learning representation from unlabeled data through self-supervision (Bell
and Sejnowski 1995) motivated the development of many
MI estimators and applications (Hjelm et al. 2019; Noroozi
and Favaro 2016; Kolesnikov, Zhai, and Beyer 2019; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018;
Hu et al. 2017). The information bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira,
and Bialek 1999; Kolchinsky, Tracey, and Wolpert 2017)
is another principle that triggered recent interest in mutual
information estimation. MI is also used to understand the
information flow in neural networks, in learning clusters
(Krause, Perona, and Gomes 2010) and in regularizing the
training of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Chen
et al. 2016).
In many of these machine learning applications and other
scientific fields, one has to estimate MI given samples from
the joint distribution of high dimensional random variables.
Since MI is defined as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the joint distribution and the product of marginals,
one can leverage non parametric estimators of f-divergences

2

* Tom Sercu is now with FAIR.

Lower Bounds on KL Divergences and MI

Consider two probability distributions P and Q, where P is
absolutely continuous w.r.t. Q. Let p and q be their respective

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9009

