The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relative Variational Intrinsic Control
Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Steven Hansen, Volodymyr Mnih
DeepMind
{baumli, dwf, stevenhansen, vmnih} @google.com

Abstract

learned skills to solve more challenging downstream tasks
specified by extrinsic rewards.
These methods rely on the idea of inverse predictability
for skill learning, i.e. that it should be possible to infer the
skill used to generate a trajectory from the states in the trajectory. This requires each skill to be distinguishable from
the others, ensuring a diverse set of skills. The conditioning of the inverse predictor varies from relying on any state
along the trajectory in DIAYN to using the whole trajectory
in VALOR (Achiam et al. 2018). We focus on a common intermediate case, introduced by VIC, where the inverse predictor relies on the first and last states in the trajectory.
In practice, these inverse predictability objectives are often trivial enough to achieve using only information from
the end of the trajectory that they ignore given information
about the beginning of the trajectory. This results in a set of
skills that simply partitions the state space based on where
the agent ends up at the end of each skill. We argue that
this behavior is undesirable because it limits the usefulness
(in terms of transferability and generalizability) of the skill
set. A set of skills which each correspond to a specific target
state (or a small cluster of nearby target states) is limited to
only ever going between those specific regions of the state
space.
In this paper, we propose a way of acquiring more composable and generalizable skills, making note that a skill’s
behavior should differ depending on the current state of the
agent. For example, the skills an agent is afforded while sitting on an airplane with a fastened seatbelt are different than
the skills afforded on a spacious football field. However,
skills should generalize between different areas of the state
space; picking up a dropped pen on the airplane and picking
up a football are in a sense the same skill, but performing the
”picking up” skill doesn’t arrive at the same target state in
both cases. After performing the skill, the agent’s new state
should be on the plane with a pen in hand and on the field
with a football in hand, respectively. In other words, the final
state that the skill arrives at should depend on both the skill
itself and the agent’s initial state.
To incentivize more meaningfully diverse skill sets, we
propose a new skill learning method, Relative Variational
Intrinsic Control (Relative VIC / RVIC) that utilizes two
inverse predictors: one which relies on the first and last
states of the trajectory and one that only relies on the last

In the absence of external rewards, agents can still learn useful behaviors by identifying and mastering a set of diverse
skills within their environment. Existing skill learning methods use mutual information objectives to incentivize each
skill to be diverse and distinguishable from the rest. However,
if care is not taken to constrain the ways in which the skills
are diverse, trivially diverse skill sets can arise. To ensure useful skill diversity, we propose a novel skill learning objective,
Relative Variational Intrinsic Control (RVIC), which incentivizes learning skills that are distinguishable in how they
change the agent’s relationship to its environment. The resulting set of skills tiles the space of affordances available to
the agent. We qualitatively analyze skill behaviors on multiple environments and show how RVIC skills are more useful
than skills discovered by existing methods when used in hierarchical reinforcement learning.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods have demonstrated the ability to successfully learn to achieve a task defined by a reward function in a variety of domains (Sutton
and Barto 1998; Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017a,b).
However, the knowledge obtained by an RL agent is usually
highly specific to the particular task it was trained on, and is
not well suited towards transfer or generalization (Whiteson
et al. 2011; Cobbe et al. 2019).
In contrast, humans can obtain and maintain repurposable
knowledge about their environments and how they can behave in them, even in the absence of an explicit end goal or
reward. We maintain sets of skills that can transfer from one
task to the next. For example, we can learn a general skill
to throw an object and we can apply slightly modified versions of that skill in different contexts to enable us to throw
a paper airplane, a baseball, or a water balloon.
Mutual information based skill discovery methods such as
Variational Intrinsic Control (VIC) (Gregor, Rezende, and
Wierstra 2017) and Diversity Is All You Need (DIAYN)
(Eysenbach et al. 2019) offer a promising direction for increasing practical applicability of deep reinforcement learning methods to real-world problems. By first learning useful
skills purely from intrinsic rewards, agents can repurpose the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6732

