The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Class-Attentive Diffusion Network for Semi-Supervised Classification
Jongin Lim1 , Daeho Um1 , Hyung Jin Chang2 , Dae Ung Jo1 , Jin Young Choi1
1

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
1
{ljin0429,daehoum1,mardaewoon,jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, 2 h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk
2

Abstract

et al. 2020; Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2020). In particular, graph
convolutions (Kipf and Welling 2016; Gilmer et al. 2017)
have received great attention due to its flexibility and good
performances. Underlying these methods is a neighborhood
aggregation that forms a new representation of a node by aggregating features of itself and its neighbors. The neighborhood aggregation is essentially a type of Laplacian smoothing (Li, Han, and Wu 2018), i.e., making the features of
neighboring nodes similar, which makes the subsequent
classification task easier. Built on this, several methods have
developed the weighted aggregation using attention mechanisms (Veličković et al. 2017; Thekumparampil et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018) where the attention weights are determined by the features of each neighboring node pair.
However, one of the fundamental weaknesses with neighborhood aggregation methods is the lack of ability to capture
long-range dependencies caused by over-smoothing (Chen
et al. 2019). When stacking multiple layers to expand their
range, the diameter of the smoothed area grows large, and
eventually, the node representations in the entire graph become indistinguishable. Although there have been miscellaneous efforts to overcome this issue (Xu et al. 2018; Abu-ElHaija et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019), the range of these methods
is still limited. Therefore, it is desirable to have the ability to
propagate the label information over long-range, especially
for large graphs or under sparsely labeled settings.
Recently, diffusion-based methods (Klicpera, Bojchevski,
and Günnemann 2018; Jiang et al. 2019; Klicpera, Weißenberger, and Günnemann 2019) have demonstrated the capability of capturing long-range dependencies without leading
to over-smoothing. These methods utilize graph diffusion as
an alternative to neighborhood aggregation. Graph diffusion
is a Markov process which spreads the information from
the node to the adjacent nodes at each time step (Masuda,
Porter, and Lambiotte 2017). Theoretically, K-steps of feature diffusion means that features of up to K-hop neighbors
are aggregated to each node. This aggregation-by-diffusion
scheme allows the model to achieve a larger range without
changing the neural network, whereas in the neighborhood
aggregation scheme expanding the range would require additional layers. However, a major limitation of these methods is that they only utilize the graph structure with a transition matrix of diffusion determined by the graph adjacency
matrix. Since edges in real graphs are often noisy (Khan, Ye,

Recently, graph neural networks for semi-supervised classification have been widely studied. However, existing methods
only use the information of limited neighbors and do not deal
with the inter-class connections in graphs. In this paper, we
propose Adaptive aggregation with Class-Attentive Diffusion
(AdaCAD), a new aggregation scheme that adaptively aggregates nodes probably of the same class among K-hop neighbors. To this end, we first propose a novel stochastic process,
called Class-Attentive Diffusion (CAD), that strengthens attention to intra-class nodes and attenuates attention to interclass nodes. In contrast to the existing diffusion methods with
a transition matrix determined solely by the graph structure,
CAD considers both the node features and the graph structure with the design of our class-attentive transition matrix
that utilizes a classifier. Then, we further propose an adaptive update scheme that leverages different reflection ratios
of the diffusion result for each node depending on the local
class-context. As the main advantage, AdaCAD alleviates the
problem of undesired mixing of inter-class features caused
by discrepancies between node labels and the graph topology. Built on AdaCAD, we construct a simple model called
Class-Attentive Diffusion Network (CAD-Net). Extensive experiments on seven benchmark datasets consistently demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method and our CAD-Net
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Code
is available at https:// github.com/ ljin0429/ CAD-Net.

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning is a long-standing problem in machine learning. Many semi-supervised learning algorithms
rely on the geometry of the data induced by both labeled and
unlabeled data points (Chapelle, Scholkopf, and Zien 2006).
Since this geometry can be naturally represented by a graph
whose nodes are data points and edges represent relations
between data points, graph-based semi-supervised learning
has been extensively studied for decades (Zhu, Ghahramani,
and Lafferty 2003; Zhou et al. 2004; Belkin, Niyogi, and
Sindhwani 2006; Yang, Cohen, and Salakhutdinov 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2016). In this paper, we focus on the problem of semi-supervised node classification on graphs.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable progress in this field recently (Zhou et al. 2018; Wu
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8601

