The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revisiting Dominance Pruning in Decoupled Search
Daniel Gnad
Saarland University
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
gnad@cs.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

Decoupled search is a form of factored planning (Amir
and Engelhardt 2003; Brafman and Domshlak 2006, 2008;
Fabre et al. 2010) that partitions the variables of a planning
task into components such that the causal dependencies between the components form a star topology. The center C of
this topology can interact arbitrarily with the other components, the leaves L = {L1 , . . . , Ln }, while any interaction
between leaves has to involve the center, too. A decoupled
state sF corresponds to a single center state, an assignment
to C, and a non-empty set of leaf states (assignments to an
Li ) for each Li . The member states of sF , i. e., the set of
explicit states it represents, result from all combinations of
leaf states across leaf factors, sharing the same center state.
Thereby, a decoupled state represents exponentially many
explicit states, leading to a reduction in search effort. Prior
work has shown that the reduction achieved by decoupled
search can be exponentially larger than it is for other statespace-reduction methods like partial-order reduction (Gnad,
Hoffmann, and Wehrle 2019), symmetry breaking (Gnad
et al. 2017), symbolic representations (Gnad and Hoffmann
2018), and Petri-net unfolding (Gnad and Hoffmann 2019).
Since a decoupled state corresponds to a set of states,
namely its member states, the standard concept of duplicate
elimination, ignoring a state that has already been visited
(on a cheaper path) to avoid repeated work, cannot be applied so easily. More importantly, it is not as effective as
in explicit state search, because two decoupled states are
only equal if the entire sets of member states they represent are equal. Therefore, prior work only considered dominance pruning (Torralba et al. 2016; Gnad and Hoffmann
2018), where a decoupled state sF
1 with member states S1 is
dominated by a decoupled state sF
2 that represents the set of
states S2 if S1 ⊆ S2 . In optimal planning the pricing function has to be checked, too. Only if each member state of sF
2
F
is reached in sF
1 with at most the price it has in s2 , we can
safely prune sF
1 , like duplicate states in explicit state search.
Initiating this work was the observation that in optimal
planning on average around 60% of the overall runtime of
decoupled search is spent on dominance checking (on instances from our evaluation solved in ≥ 0.1s). Thus, we take
a closer look at (1) algorithmic improvements that lead to an
increased pruning power for optimal planning, and (2) ways
to make the dominance check more efficient in general. Regarding (1), we introduce two new extensions to the domi-

In classical planning as search, duplicate state pruning is a
standard method to avoid unnecessarily handling the same
state multiple times. In decoupled search, similar to symbolic
search approaches, search nodes, called decoupled states,
do not correspond to individual states, but to sets of states.
Therefore, duplicate state pruning is less effective in decoupled search, and dominance pruning is employed, taking into
account the state sets. We observe that the time required for
dominance checking dominates the overall runtime, and propose two ways to tackle this issue. Our main contribution is
a stronger variant of dominance checking for optimal planning, where efficiency and pruning power are most crucial.
The new variant greatly improves the latter, without incurring a computational overhead. Moreover, we develop three
methods that make the dominance check more efficient: exact
duplicate checking, which, albeit resulting in weaker pruning,
can pay off due to the use of hashing; avoiding the dominance
check in non-optimal planning if leaf state spaces are invertible; and exploiting the transitivity of the dominance relation
to only check against the relevant subset of visited decoupled
states. We show empirically that all our improvements are indeed beneficial in many standard benchmarks.

Introduction
In classical planning, the most popular approach to solve
planning tasks is heuristic search in the explicit state
space (Bonet and Geffner 1999). Heuristic search, however,
suffers from the state explosion problem that arises from
the fact that the size of the state space of a task is exponential in the size of its description. Many methods have
been introduced to tackle this explosion, such as partialorder reduction (Valmari 1989; Godefroid and Wolper 1991;
Edelkamp, Leue, and Lluch-Lafuente 2004; Alkhazraji et al.
2012; Wehrle et al. 2013; Wehrle and Helmert 2014), symmetry breaking (Starke 1991; Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011; Domshlak, Katz, and Shleyfman 2012), dominance pruning (Hall et al. 2013; Torralba and Hoffmann
2015; Torralba 2017), or symbolic representations (Bryant
1986; Edelkamp and Helmert 1999; Torralba et al. 2017). In
this work, we look into a recent addition to this set of techniques, namely star-topology decoupled state space search,
or decoupled search for short (Gnad and Hoffmann 2018).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11809

