The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the PTAS for Maximin Shares in an Indivisible Mixed Manna
Rucha Kulkarni1 , Ruta Mehta1 , Setareh Taki1
1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

ruchark2@illinois.edu, rutameht@illinois.edu, staki2@illinois.edu

Abstract

partitions the items into n bundles assuming she will get to
choose last. As she may end up with the least valued bundle, naturally, she will partition the items in such a way that
the value of the least valued bundle is maximized. This is
called her MMS value. An allocation where every agent receives a bundle of at least her MMS value is called an MMS
allocation.
This problem is well studied for the good manna where all
items are valued non-negatively by every agent, and for the
bad (chore) manna where items are valued non-positively
by everyone (See Section 1.1 for related work). We consider
a mixed manna setting, where every item can be positively
valued by some agents, and negatively valued by some. A
natural starting question in the quest to find MMS allocations is,
Q: Given a mixed manna, what is the MMS value of every
agent?
This question is NP-hard, even for the good manna. Note
that finding the MMS value of an agent is equivalent to
finding an MMS allocation when all agents have valuations identical to this agent. Hence, the problem of finding MMS allocations is also NP-hard, even with identical
agents and a good manna. However, (Woeginger 1997) gave
a PTAS for this setting. This PTAS was later used in several works to find approximate MMS allocations with nonidentical agents (Procaccia and Wang 2014; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2016; Amanatidis et al. 2017; Ghodsi et al.
2018; Garg and Taki 2020). The best known approximation
result for the MMS problem with nonidentical agents in a
chore manna (Huang and Lu 2019) also uses a PTAS for
finding MMS values (Jansen, Klein, and Verschae 2016) as
a subroutine. The next question then is,
Q: Is there a PTAS to find the MMS values of agents in a
mixed manna setting?
Surprisingly, (Kulkarni, Mehta, and Taki 2020a) showed
that even in a highly restricted setting of two identical agents
where the mixed manna has only two chores, it is NP-hard
to find approximate MMS values within any constant factor. Their reduction indicates that perhaps the bottleneck issue that makes the problem hard, is that the absolute MMS
value can be arbitrarily small. Intuitively speaking, as the
MMS value approaches arbitrarily close to zero, the prob-

We study fair allocation of indivisible items, both goods and
chores, under the popular fairness notion of maximin share
(MMS). The problem is well-studied when there are only
goods (or chores), where a PTAS to compute the MMS values
of agents is well-known.
In contrast, for the mixed manna, a recent result showed that
finding even an approximate MMS value of an agent up to
any approximation factor in (0,1] is NP-Hard for general instances. In this paper, we complement the hardness result by
obtaining a PTAS to compute the MMS value, when its absolute value is at least 1/p times either the total value of all
the goods or total cost of all the chores, for some constant p
valued at least 1.

1

Introduction

Finding fair and efficient allocations is a fundamental problem in algorithmic game theory. The problem has been extensively studied for divisible resources, phrased as the cake
cutting problem; see (Robertson and Webb 1998) for a summary. Here, a division of a cake that gave one piece to each
of n agents was termed fair if it ensured properties like (a)
envy-freeness, meaning every agent values her own piece
more than those allocated to other agents, and (b) proportionality, meaning every agent values her piece at least 1/n
fraction of her total value for the cake.
When there are two agents, the simple cut and choose
protocol is known to work since the biblical era, where one
agent cuts the cake into two pieces and the other agent gets to
choose first. Recent years have seen a surge of works on the
fair division of indivisible items, like school/course seats,
assets and liabilities, and computing resources on networks,
due to their wide applications (Steinhaus 1948; Brams and
Taylor 1996; Vossen 2002; Moulin 2004; Etkin, Parekh, and
Tse 2007; Budish 2011; Ghodsi et al. 2018). A simple example of allocating a single indivisible item among two agents
shows that both envy-free and proportional allocations may
not exist. Therefore, Budish (2011) defined the notion of
maximin share (MMS) based on the following extension of
the cut and choose protocol. If there are n agents, an agent
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5523

