The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Using Unsupervised Learning for
Data-Driven Procurement Demand Aggregation
Eran Shaham, 1 Adam Westerski, 2 Rajaraman Kanagasabai, 3 Amudha Narayanan, 4
Samuel Ong, 5 Jiayu Wong, 6 Manjeet Singh 7
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore,1,2,3,4 ComfortDelGro, Singapore,5
A*STAR Procurement Office, A*STAR, Singapore,6,7
eran-shaham@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, adam-westerski@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, kanagasa@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, naraa@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,
samuelong@comfortdelgro.com, wong_jiayu@hq.a-star.edu.sg, manjeet_singh@hq.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

(Bartolini 2011). Knowing its magnitude, companies increasingly invest in optimizing procurement operations by
reorganizing their practices to root out any inefficiencies or
problems. This paper describes our experience in developing an AI solution for demand aggregation and deploying it
in A*STAR, a large governmental research organization in
Singapore with procurement expenditure in the scale of hundreds of millions of dollars annually. We were presented
with a set of digitalized procurement data and had to work
with certain constraints, such as noisy, incomplete and unlabeled data scattered across multiple legacy data management systems. This is in contrast to academic literature
which discusses different aspects of procurement management based on theoretical frameworks and strong assumptions on data scale, labeling and consistency.
Large enterprises like A*STAR spend millions on purchases of goods and services. Demand aggregation is the
process of aggregating the demands for better value-formoney due to: (1) lower bulk prices; (2) larger vendor tendering; (3) lower shipping and handling fees; and (4) reduced legal and administration overheads.
Our key insight is in formulating the demand aggregation
problem using a bipartite graph model which depicts the relationship between procured items and target vendors. The
need for an AI solution is mainly due to the dataset size.
While small datasets could settle for eyeballing, datasets of
moderate size are already hard to handle. In addition, employing simple techniques (e.g., clustering) will not be adequate due to the “curse of dimensionality” (Bellman 1961;
Beyer et al. 1999; Kriegel, Kröger, and Zimek 2009). Thus,
for a solution to be successfully deployed on an unlabeled
large dataset, and to successfully scale (the dataset might increase in size over time), unsupervised learning techniques

Procurement is an essential operation of every organization
regardless of its size or domain. As such, aggregating the demands could lead to better value-for-money due to: (1) lower
bulk prices; (2) larger vendor tendering; (3) lower shipping
and handling fees; and (4) reduced legal and administration
overheads. This paper describes our experience in developing
an AI solution for demand aggregation and deploying it in
A*STAR, a large governmental research organization in Singapore with procurement expenditure to the scale of hundreds
of millions of dollars annually. We formulate the demand aggregation problem using a bipartite graph model depicting the
relationship between procured items and target vendors, and
show that identifying maximal edge bicliques within that
graph would reveal potential demand aggregation patterns.
We propose an unsupervised learning methodology for efficiently mining such bicliques using a novel Monte Carlo subspace clustering approach. Based on this, a proof-of-concept
prototype was developed and tested with the end users during
2017, and later trialed and iteratively refined, before being
rolled out in 2019. The final performance was 71% of past
cases transformed into bulk tenders correctly detected by the
engine; for new opportunities pointed out by the engine 81%
were deemed useful for potential bulk tender contracts in the
future. Additionally, per each valid pattern identified, the engine achieved 100% precision (all aggregated purchase orders were correct), and 79% recall (the engine correctly identified 79% of orders that should have been put into the bulk
tenders). Overall, the cost savings from the true positive contracts spotted so far are estimated to be S$7 million annually.

Introduction
Procurement is an essential operation of every organization
regardless of its size, business domain, and sector (i.e., private or public). A typical procurement budget can be a significant portion of total expenditure, up to 60% of revenues
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15175

