The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Entity Guided Question Generation with Contextual Structure and Sequence
Information Capturing
Qingbao Huang,1,2 Mingyi Fu,2 Linzhang Mo,2 Yi Cai,1,3 *
Jingyun Xu,1 Pijian Li,2 Qing Li,4 Ho-fung Leung5
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Electrical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, China
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (SCUT), MOE of China
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
qbhuang@gxu.edu.cn, {1812392009, 1912302009, 1912302005}@st.gxu.edu.cn, ycai@scut.edu.cn
Syntactic structure：

Abstract
Question generation is a challenging task and has attracted
widespread attention in recent years. Although previous studies have made great progress, there are still two main shortcomings: First, previous work did not simultaneously capture
the sequence information and structure information hidden
in the context, which results in poor results of the generated questions. Second, the generated questions cannot be answered by the given context. To tackle these issues, we propose an entity guided question generation model with contextual structure information and sequence information capturing. We use a Graph Convolutional Network and a Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory Network to capture the
structure information and sequence information of the context, simultaneously. In addition, to improve the answerability of the generated questions, we use an entity-guided approach to obtain question type from the answer, and jointly
encode the answer and question type. Both automatic and
manual metrics show that our model can generate comparable
questions with state-of-the-art models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/VISLANG-Lab/EGSS.

Context sequence：
Tom was officially promoted to deputy financial manager.
entity
Question： To what position was Tom promoted ?

Figure 1: An example from SQuAD (Simplified for the sake
of description). The phrase in red is the target answer. Syntactic structure information (obtained by Universal Stanford
dependencies tool), sequence information of the context, and
entities in the answer will boost question generation.

achieved promising results. Since then, a surge of follow-up
enhanced models (Zhou et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018a; Kumar et al. 2018a) have been proposed, most of them purely
leverage Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to capture sequence information of the context to generate questions.
However, these sequence-information-aware models ignore
rich structure information (e.g., syntactic dependency relations) hidden in the context.
Dependency relations, especially long distance syntactic
relations, are very useful for understanding complex sentence structures (e.g., long clauses or complex scoping). For
the strong ability of aggregation, Graph Neural Networks
(GNN) are applied to capture the dependency structure of
the input passage to generate questions (Chen et al. 2020;
Chai et al. 2020). Chen et al. (2020) applied a Bidirectional Gated GNN to capture the structure information between words in a sentence. Chai et al. (2020) used GNNs
to encode the context and answer, respectively, to obtain the
fused representations. Pan et al. (2020) used semantic information to construct an attention-based Gated Graph Neural
Networks for generating deep questions. All of these models
have shown strong abilities to capture structure information.
Although these graph-based studies have made marked
progress in QG, a significant gap on performance still re-

Introduction
The Question Generation (QG) task is defined as the generation of a sentence-related, answerable, and grammatically
correct question from a given passage, which is widely applied in the dialogue system (Wang et al. 2018), question answering (Tang et al. 2017), machine reading comprehension
(Yuan et al. 2017), and automatic tutoring systems (Danon
et al. 2017).
Traditional QG methods rely on manually curated rules
or templates (Heilman et al. 2009; Hussein et al. 2014),
which usually suffer from time-consuming, low generalizability and low scalability. Benefiting from the success of
the encoder-decoder structure in machine translation (Bahdanau et al. 2015), Du et al. (2017) proposed a sequenceto-sequence model with attention mechanism for QG and
* Corresponding author: Yi Cai (ycai@scut.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13064

