The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Few Queries Go a Long Way: Information-Distortion Tradeoffs in Matching
Georgios Amanatidis,1,2 Georgios Birmpas,3 Aris Filos-Ratsikas,4 Alexandros A. Voudouris5
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Essex
2
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
3
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool
5
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex
georgios.amanatidis@essex.ac.uk, george.birbas@diag.uniroma1.it, aris.filos-ratsikas@liverpool.ac.uk,
alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk
by these values. Crucially, most of the related literature asAbstract
sumes that the designer only has access to the preference
We consider the one-sided matching problem, where n agents
rankings of the agents over the items (i.e., the ordinal prefhave preferences over n items, and these preferences are inerences) induced by the underlying values, but not to the
duced by underlying cardinal valuation functions. The goal
values themselves.1 This is motivated by the fact that it is
is to match every agent to a single item so as to maximize
fairly standard to ask the agents to simply order the items,
the social welfare. Most of the related literature, however, aswhile it is arguably much more demanding to require them
sumes that the values of the agents are not a priori known, and
only access to the ordinal preferences of the agents over the
to specify exact numerical values for all of them.
items is provided. Consequently, this incomplete information
This begs the following natural question: What is the efleads to loss of efficiency, which is measured by the notion
fect of this limited information on the goals of the algorithm
of distortion. In this paper, we further assume that the agents
designer? In 2006, Procaccia and Rosenschein defined the
can answer a small number of queries, allowing us partial acnotion of distortion to measure precisely this effect, when
cess to their values. We study the interplay between elicited
the goal is to maximize the social welfare. Their original recardinal information (measured by the number of queries per
search agenda was put forward for settings in general social
agent) and distortion for one-sided matching, as well as a
choice (also referred to as voting), but has since then flourwide range of well-studied related problems. Qualitatively,
ished to capture several different scenarios, including the
our results show that with a limited number of queries, it is
possible to obtain significant improvements over the classic
one-sided matching problem. For the latter problem, Filossetting, where only access to ordinal information is given.
Ratsikas, Frederiksen, and Zhang (2014), showed that the
best√possible distortion achieved by any ordinal algorithm is
Θ( n), even if one allows randomization, and even if the
1 Introduction
valuations are normalized. For deterministic algorithms, the
In the one-sided matching problem (often referred to as the
corresponding bound is Θ(n2 ) (Theorem 1).
house allocation problem), n agents have preferences over
While the aforementioned bounds establish a stark imposa set of n items, and the goal is to find an allocation in
sibility when one has access only to ordinal information,
which every agent receives a single item, while maximizing
they do not rule out the prospect of good approximations
some objective. Typically, as well as in this paper, this obwhen it is possible to elicit some cardinal information. Injective is the (utilitarian) social welfare, i.e., the total utility
deed, the cognitive burden of eliciting cardinal values in the
of the agents. Since its introduction by Hylland and Zeckliterature has mostly been considered in the two extremes;
hauser (1979), this has been one of the most fundamental
either full cardinal information or not at all. Conceivably
problems in the literature of economics (e.g., see (Bogomolthough, if the agents needed to come up with only a few
naia and Moulin 2001; Svensson 1999)), and has also been
cardinal values, the elicitation process would not be very
extensively studied in computational social choice (e.g., see
demanding, while it could potentially have wondrous ef(Klaus, Manlove, and Rossi 2016)).
fects on the social welfare. This approach was advocated reThe classic work on the problem (including Hylland and
cently by Amanatidis et al. (2020b), who proposed to study
Zeckhauser’s seminal paper) assumes that the preferences of
the tradeoffs between the number of cardinal value queries
the agents are captured by cardinal valuation functions, asper agent and distortion. For the general social choice setsigning numerical values to the different items; these can
ting of Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006), Amanatidis et al.
be interpreted as their von Neuman-Morgenstern utilities
(2020b) actually showed that with a limited number of such
(Von Neumann and Morgenstern 1947). From a more algoqueries, one can significantly improve upon the existing
rithmic viewpoint, one can envision a weighted complete bistrong impossibilities (Boutilier et al. 2015; Caragiannis
partite graph (with agents and items forming the two sides
et al. 2017).
of the partition), where the weights of the edges are given
1
The pseudo-market mechanism of Hylland and Zeckhauser
(1979) is a notable exception to this.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5078

