The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Task-Distribution Reward Shaping with Meta-Learning
Haosheng Zou1 , Tongzheng Ren2 , Dong Yan1 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1 *
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Lab, Bosch-Tsinghua Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
zouhaosheng@163.com, {rtz19970824, sproblvem}@gmail.com, {suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

solving multiple similar tasks as a whole (e.g., training one
general agent for all possible 2D mazes instead of one per
map). Such shared but not identical task-structures naturally
induce a distribution over tasks, such as distributions over
maze configurations (Wilson et al. 2007), system parameters
for different robot-hand sizes (Lazaric and Ghavamzadeh
2010) and game maps for RTS games (Jaderberg et al. 2019).
The ability to quickly solve new similar tasks drawn from
such distributions is mastered by human infants quite young
(Smith and Slone 2017). However, the human effort in reward
shaping for RL would be further exacerbated as we have to
either design a different shaping per task or come up with a
general shaping function presumably harder to design.
Motivated by such inconvenience under task multiplicity,
we study the generally hard problem of learning automatic
reward shaping on a distribution of tasks (termed learning
task-distribution reward shaping). Our goal is not to propose
new general meta-learning algorithms, but instead use them
to learn good shaping. To the best of our knowledge, the only
previous such works are (Konidaris and Barto 2006; Snel and
Whiteson 2014), both using naive objectives and simple models. They first learn optimal Q-/V-values for each task and
then fit one potential function to all the learned values. They
have to learn as many value functions as tasks in the first
step. More importantly, some tasks’ value functions might
be in disagreement with others’ and would be inappropriately averaged out in the second step. Besides, its training
doesn’t prepare for adaptation to individual tasks at all. To
mitigate those problems, our main novelties are an overall
framework that formulates task-distribution reward shaping
as meta-learning, and an original algorithm for reward shaping in meta-testing. Our contributions include: 1) we present
a state-of-the-art method using meta-learning and deep nets to
learn a general and flexible task-distribution reward shaping,
requiring only shared state space and applicable to new tasks
either directly or adaptively; 2) we provide insightful theory,
and extensive empirical improvements over strong competitors including Rainbow (Hessel et al. 2018), MQL (Fakoor
et al. 2020), hand-designed shaping and learning intrinsic
rewards (Zheng et al. 2020).

Reward shaping is one of the most effective methods to tackle
the crucial yet challenging problem of credit assignment and
accelerate Reinforcement Learning. However, designing shaping functions usually requires rich expert knowledge and handengineering, and the difficulties are further exacerbated given
multiple tasks to solve. In this paper, we consider reward shaping on a distribution of tasks that share state spaces but not
necessarily action spaces. We provide insights into optimal
reward shaping, and propose a novel meta-learning framework to automatically learn such reward shaping to apply
on newly sampled tasks. Theoretical analysis and extensive
experiments establish us as the state-of-the-art in learning
task-distribution reward shaping, outperforming previous such
works (Konidaris and Barto 2006; Snel and Whiteson 2014).
We further show that our method outperforms learning intrinsic rewards (Yang et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020), outperforms
Rainbow (Hessel et al. 2018) in complex pixel-based CoinRun
games, and is also better than hand-designed reward shaping
on grid mazes. While the goal of this paper is to learn reward
shaping rather than to propose new general meta-learning algorithms as PEARL (Rakelly et al. 2019) or MQL (Fakoor
et al. 2020), our framework based on MAML (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017) also outperforms PEARL / MQL, and could
combine with them for further improvement.

1

Introduction

Credit assignment (Minsky 1961) remains a key challenge on
the learning efficiency (sample complexity) of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2018), which
usually requires many samples from the environment to learn
well. Reward shaping is one of the most intuitive, popular and
effective remedies to accelerate RL (Dorigo and Colombetti
1994; Mataric 1994; Randløv and Alstrøm 1998). It also
played an important role in recent successes like Doom (Wu
and Tian 2017) and Dota (OpenAI et al. 2019).
However, most shaping functions are hand-designed by
human experts and are potentially tedious and inconvenient
to code in especially complex environments (Wu and Tian
2017; OpenAI et al. 2019). Direct shaping functions may
also change the optimal policies (Ng, Harada, and Russell
1999). Furthermore, in practice we are usually interested in

2

*J.Z is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Preliminaries

We consider the setting of multi-task model-free RL, where
the tasks follow a distribution p(T ). Each sampled task
11210

