The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cross-Layer Distillation with Semantic Calibration
Defang Chen,1,2,3 Jian-Ping Mei,4 Yuan Zhang,1,3
Can Wang,1,2,3 * Zhe Wang,1,3 Yan Feng,1,3 Chun Chen,1,3
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China.
2
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot.
3
Zhejiang University-LianlianPay Joint Research Center.
4
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, China.
defchern@zju.edu.cn, jpmei@zjut.edu.cn, {yuan zhang, wcan, fengyan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

the relative probabilities assigned to different classes provide an intuitive understanding about how a model generalize, knowledge transfer in such a highly abstract form
ignores a wealth of information contained in intermediate
layers. Intending to further boost effectiveness of distillation, recent works proposed to align feature maps or their
transformations of manually selected teacher-student layer
pairs (Romero et al. 2015; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017;
Ahn et al. 2019; Tung and Mori 2019; Passalis, Tzelepi, and
Tefas 2020). An interpretation for the success of feature-map
based distillation is that the multi-layer feature representations respect hierarchical concept learning process which
may entail reasonable inductive bias (Bengio, Courville, and
Vincent 2013).
Intermediate layers of teacher and student models with
different capacity tend to have different levels of abstraction
(Passalis, Tzelepi, and Tefas 2020). A peculiar challenge
is thus to ensure appropriate layer associations in featuremap based distillation to achieve maximum performance improvement. However, existing efforts mainly focus on particular representations of feature maps to capture the enriched
knowledge and enable knowledge transfer based on handcrafted layer assignments, such as random selection or oneto-one association (Romero et al. 2015; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2017; Ahn et al. 2019; Tung and Mori 2019; Passalis, Tzelepi, and Tefas 2020). A naive allocation strategy
may cause semantic mismatch between feature maps of candidate teacher-student layer pairs, leading to negative regularization effect in training of the student model. Since we
have no access to prior knowledge of the semantic level of
each intermediate layer, layer association becomes a nontrivial problem. Therefore, systematic approaches need to be
developed for more effective and flexible knowledge transfer
with feature maps.
In this paper, we propose Semantic Calibration for Crosslayer Knowledge Distillation (SemCKD) to exploit intermediate knowledge by keeping the transfer in a matched
semantic level. An attention mechanism is applied in our
approach for automatic soft layer association, which effectively binds a student layer with those semantically similar
target layers in the teacher model. Learning from multiple
target layers with an attention allocation rather than turning
to a fixed assignment can suppress over-regularization effect
in training. To align the spatial dimension of each layer pair

Recently proposed knowledge distillation approaches based
on feature-map transfer validate that intermediate layers of
a teacher model can serve as effective targets for training a
student model to obtain better generalization ability. Existing studies mainly focus on particular representation forms
for knowledge transfer between manually specified pairs of
teacher-student intermediate layers. However, semantics of
intermediate layers may vary in different networks and manual association of layers might lead to negative regularization caused by semantic mismatch between certain teacherstudent layer pairs. To address this problem, we propose Semantic Calibration for Cross-layer Knowledge Distillation
(SemCKD), which automatically assigns proper target layers of the teacher model for each student layer with an attention mechanism. With a learned attention distribution, each
student layer distills knowledge contained in multiple layers
rather than a single fixed intermediate layer from the teacher
model for appropriate cross-layer supervision in training.
Consistent improvements over state-of-the-art approaches are
observed in extensive experiments with various network architectures for teacher and student models, demonstrating the
effectiveness and flexibility of the proposed attention based
soft layer association mechanism for cross-layer distillation.

Introduction
The generalization ability of a lightweight model can be improved by training to match the prediction of a powerful
model (Bucilua, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Ba and
Caruana 2014). This idea is popularized by knowledge distillation (KD) in which temperature scaling outputs from the
teacher model are exploited to improve the performance of
the student model (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). Compared to discrete labels, soft targets predicted by the teacher
model serve as an effective regularization to prevent the student model from being trapped in over-confident solutions
during optimization (Pereyra et al. 2017; Müller, Kornblith,
and Hinton 2019; Yuan et al. 2020).
In the vanilla KD framework, the knowledge learned by a
classification model is represented only by the prediction of
its final layer (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). Although
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7028

