The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Amnesiac Machine Learning
Laura Graves, Vineel Nagisetty, Vijay Ganesh
University of Waterloo
laura.graves@uwaterloo.ca, vineel.nagisetty@uwaterloo.ca, vganesh@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

data records that companies, governments, or other entities
hold.
In light of the GDPR law, the existence of attacks on neural networks that leak information about the data they were
trained on, such as the Model Inversion Attack (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015) and the Membership Inference Attack (Shokri et al. 2017), present a problem for companies or researchers that use personal data to train neural
network models. If an individual’s data has been used to
train a model and that individual subsequently invokes the
right to be forgotten, simply deleting the training data is
insufficient to protect the individual’s privacy. The reason
is that neural networks, whose training set contains a specific datum, are vulnerable to leakage of that datum via the
above-mentioned attacks. Although this problem is recent,
legal scholars have underlined that the potential cost due to
GDPR can be significant and potentially crippling to businesses and entities (Humerick 2017; Villaronga, Kieseberg,
and Li 2018). If a malicious entity or attacker can attack a
trained model and learn private information about an individual who has invoked the right to be forgotten, the model
owner can be held liable since he or she has not taken the
appropriate steps to protect the individual.
In this paper, we address the question of efficiently removing learned data from a trained neural network without
harming the performance of the network. We call our approach amnesiac unlearning and provide extensive empirical analysis to highlight its strengths as well as understand
its weaknesses. The obvious solution to this problem is to
entirely discard the trained model and train a new one from
scratch. Unfortunately, training machine learning models is
known to be an expensive and time-consuming proposition.
Model owners are likely to be disinclined to continually train
new models to be compliant with regulations every time an
individual invokes their right to be forgotten. Hence, it is in
their best interest to have efficient deletion methods to remove learned data that ensure compliance with regulations
and retain the fidelity of their model. Humerick (Humerick
2017) highlights the importance of having a method that effectively removes learned data, as well as the potential economic harm that could be caused by requiring model owners
to continually replace trained models.
Problem Statement: In short, our work focuses on the following problem: how can learned data be safely and ef-

The Right to be Forgotten is part of the recently enacted
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) law that affects
any data holder that has data on European Union residents.
It gives EU residents the ability to request deletion of their
personal data, including training records used to train machine learning models. Unfortunately, Deep Neural Network
models are vulnerable to information leaking attacks such as
model inversion attacks which extract class information from
a trained model and membership inference attacks which determine the presence of an example in a model’s training data.
If a malicious party can mount an attack and learn private
information that was meant to be removed, then it implies
that the model owner has not properly protected their user’s
rights and their models may not be compliant with the GDPR
law. In this paper, we present two efficient methods that address this question of how a model owner or data holder may
delete personal data from models in such a way that they may
not be vulnerable to model inversion and membership inference attacks while maintaining model efficacy. We start by
presenting a real-world threat model that shows that simply
removing training data is insufficient to protect users. We follow that up with two data removal methods, namely Unlearning and Amnesiac Unlearning, that enable model owners to
protect themselves against such attacks while being compliant with regulations. We provide extensive empirical analysis that show that these methods are indeed efficient, safe to
apply, effectively remove learned information about sensitive
data from trained models while maintaining model efficacy.

Introduction
In 2016 the European Union (EU) established the General
Data Protect Regulation (GDPR) which is intended to provide individuals in EU nations control over their personal
data. This includes regulations for businesses that handle
personal data, requiring them to provide safeguards to protect data and use the highest possible privacy settings by
default (Commission 2018). In particular, article 17 of the
GDPR gives individuals the right to be forgotten and states
that ... (businesses) have the obligation to erase personal data
without undue delay (Commission 2018). Individuals who
invoke this right must have their personal data removed from
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11516

