The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Systematic Evaluation of Object Detection Networks for Scientific Plots
Pritha Ganguly∗ , Nitesh S Methani* , Mitesh M. Khapra, Pratyush Kumar
Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and AI (RBC-DSAI),
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India.
{prithag, nmethani, miteshk, pratyush}@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Are existing object detection methods adequate for detecting text and visual elements in scientific plots which are arguably different than the objects found in natural images?
To answer this question, we train and compare the accuracy
of Fast/Faster R-CNN, SSD, YOLO and RetinaNet on the
PlotQA dataset with over 220, 000 scientific plots. At the
standard IOU setting of 0.5, most networks perform well with
mAP scores greater than 80% in detecting the relatively simple objects in plots. However, the performance drops drastically when evaluated at a stricter IOU of 0.9 with the best
model giving a mAP of 35.70%. Note that such a stricter evaluation is essential when dealing with scientific plots where
even minor localisation errors can lead to large errors in
downstream numerical inferences. Given this poor performance, we propose minor modifications to existing models
by combining ideas from different object detection networks.
While this significantly improves the performance, there are
still two main issues: (i) performance on text objects which
are essential for reasoning is very poor, and (ii) inference time
is unacceptably large considering the simplicity of plots. To
solve this open problem, we make a series of contributions:
(a) an efficient region proposal method based on Laplacian
edge detectors, (b) a feature representation of region proposals that includes neighbouring information, (c) a linking component to join multiple region proposals for detecting longer
textual objects, and (d) a custom loss function that combines
a smooth `1 -loss with an IOU-based loss. Combining these
ideas, our final model is very accurate at extreme IOU values
achieving a mAP of 93.44%@0.9 IOU. Simultaneously, our
model is very efficient with an inference time 16x lesser than
the current models, including one-stage detectors. Our model
also achieves a high accuracy on an extrinsic plot-to-table
conversion task with an F1 score of 0.77. With these contributions, we make a definitive progress in object detection for
plots and enable further exploration on automated reasoning
of plots.

Figure 1: Demonstrating sensitivity to IOU on images from
(a) PASCAL VOC and (b) PlotQA dataset. Localising on the
natural images in (a) is accurate even at low IOU thresholds
of 0.5 and 0.75. For the plots in (b), the comparison of plotted values for the two years is incorrect at lower IOU values
of 0.5 (left) and 0.75 (centre), and is correct for 0.9 (right).

with real-life objects. For instance, in the PASCAL VOC
dataset (Everingham et al. 2010), the four major classes
of objects are people, animals, vehicles, and indoor objects
such as furniture. In this work, we study object detection for
a very different class of images, namely computer-generated
scientific plots. Fig. 1b shows an example of a scientific plot:
It is a bar plot depicting the number of neonatal deaths in
Bulgaria and Cuba over two years. Object detection on this
plot would be required to identify different visual and textual elements of the plot such as bars, legend previews and
labels for ticks, axes & legend entries. Such object detection
can then enable a question-answering task. For instance, for
Fig. 1b we could ask “In which year does Cuba have lower
neonatal deaths?”. Clearly, this has use-cases in data analytics, and has been studied in recent research (Kafle et al.
2018; Kahou et al. 2018; Methani et al. 2020).
It should be clear that scientific plots differ significantly
from natural images. Firstly, plots have a combination of textual and visual elements interspersed throughout. The text
can either be very short (such as numerical tick labels) or
span multiple lines (such as in plot-titles). Secondly, objects
in a plot have a large range of sizes and aspect ratios. Depending on the value represented, a bar in a bar-plot can be
short or long, while in a line-plot a thin line could depict the
data. Thirdly, plots impose structural relationships between
some of the objects. For instance, the legend preview and the
close-by title text denote a correspondence map. This also

Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision with the aim of answering what objects are
where in a given input image. Most of the object detection
research in the past few years has been on natural images
∗

The first two authors have contributed equally
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1379

