The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Optimizing Information Theory Based Bitwise Bottlenecks for
Efficient Mixed-Precision Activation Quantization
Xichuan Zhou1 2 , Kui Liu1 , Cong Shi1 , Haijun Liu1 , Ji Liu3
1

2

School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University
Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber-Physical-Society, Ministry of Education
3
AI platform, Kwai Inc.
zxc@cqu.edu.cn
Abstract

One challenge of the researches for activation quantization is the lack of theoretical ground (Sze et al. 2017). The
performance of existing approaches relies on their choices of
quantization strategy, and no minimal loss of representation
precision can be determined given the average code rate. Recently, the concept of information theory based bottleneck
is attracting attention for its potential to bring a better understanding of the deep learning optimization process (Tishby and Zaslavsky 2015; Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017). The
key idea of these approaches is to maintain the most valuable
information of a signal X using a short code of X̂. In the
context of deep neural network, X̂ is the signal of quantized
activation, and we formalize this problem as that of finding
a shortcode for X̂ that preserves the maximum information
about X. That is, we minimize the loss of the information
caused by signal quantization through a ’bottleneck’ in the
deep neural network.
Technically, the proposed Bitwise Bottleneck approach
is based on the rate-distortion theory (Berger 2003). As a
lossy data compression operation, we attempt to determine
the most significant bits in the activation by minimizing the
quantization distortion. To achieve this, the Bitwise Bottleneck approach directly minimizes the distortion of quantization given the constraint of the maximum code rate of the
compressed activation. Specifically, the bitwise bottleneck
optimization is formulated as a sparse convex optimization
problem, which attempts to minimize the distortion given
constrained code rate. Since the nonsignificant bits generally
have near-zero coefficients, the activation can be optimally
compressed in a bitwise way.
The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, this
paper presents an information theory based method for bitwise activation quantization and compression. Specifically,
different from recent researches, the proposed method is the
first attempt to optimize bitwise bottleneck for DNN activation quantization. Second, the code rates of different bottlenecks can be tuned adaptably by a single hyperparameter
of the threshold of peak-signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR) loss,
allowing the proposed method to flexibly make a trade-off
between efficiency and accuracy for different applications. Finally, the bitwise bottleneck minimizes the loss of information caused by activation quantization; therefore, the
proposed method suffers almost no loss of classification accuracy while obtaining over six times of memory and com-

Recent researches on information theory shed new light on
the continuous attempts to open the black box of neural signal
encoding. Inspired by the problem of lossy signal compression for wireless communication, this paper presents a Bitwise Bottleneck approach for quantizing and encoding neural network activations. Based on the rate-distortion theory,
the Bitwise Bottleneck attempts to determine the most significant bits in activation representation by assigning and approximating the sparse coefficients associated with different bits. Given the constraint of a limited average code rate,
the bottleneck minimizes the distortion for optimal activation quantization in a flexible layer-by-layer manner. Experiments over ImageNet and other datasets show that, by minimizing the quantization distortion of each layer, the neural
network with bottlenecks achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy with low-precision activation. Meanwhile, by reducing
the code rate, the proposed method can improve the memory and computational efficiency by over six times compared
with the deep neural network with standard single-precision
representation. The source code is available on GitHub: https:
//github.com/CQUlearningsystemgroup/BitwiseBottleneck.

Introduction
Research on activation compression for efficient neural computing is an emerging popular topic, which reveals great potential for a variety of edge-computing and computer vision
applications (Chen et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2017; McCool,
Perez, and Upcroft 2017; Xu et al. 2017). Both stochastic and deterministic approaches were proposed for neural
network activation quantization (Gupta et al. 2015; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Zhou et al. 2016; Wu et al.
2016), which adopted various quantization functions to reduce the precision of activation representation while training
the neural network. Though the loss of activation precision
causes notable loss of classification accuracy, yet by reducing the number of bits required, the deep neural networks
with quantized activation could improve both memory and
time efficiency by orders of magnitude compared with the
standard floating-point implementation (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Kim and Smaragdis 2016; Courbariaux
et al. 2016; Rastegari et al. 2016).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3590

