The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Mutual Information Maximin for Cross-Modal Clustering
Yiqiao Mao,∗ Xiaoqiang Yan,∗ Qiang Guo, Yangdong Ye†
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
ieyqmao@gs.zzu.edu.cn, iexqyan@zzu.edu.cn, ieqguo@gs.zzu.edu.cn, ieydye@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract

with the aid of the complementary information from different modalities.
In recent years, cross-modal clustering (CMC) has made
significant progress in machine learning and computer vision communities (Zhang et al. 2018, 2019; Guo and Ye
2019; Xing et al. 2019; Yan, Hu, and Ye 2017; Yan et al.
2020a). One of the most prevalent CMC approaches is to
learn a shared subspace such that the mutual agreement between multiple modalities is maximized (Kim, Kittler, and
Cipolla 2007; Akaho 2006; Chen et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2019; Peng et al. 2019; Xing et al. 2019). In this research direction, the early and representative one is canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Kim, Kittler, and Cipolla 2007), which
seeks the shared subspace representations of two vectors by
maximizing their correlations. After that, a variety of extensions of CCA have been proposed to learn a shared lowdimensional subspace of multiple modalities, such as kernel
CCA (Akaho 2006), kernel information embedding (Wang
et al. 2020) and generalized multi-view analysis (Sharma
et al. 2012).
However, in these CMC methods, the original feature representations are destroyed and some necessary information
is lost when the original features of different modalities are
compressed into a shared low-dimensional subspace. Besides of learning a shared subspace, there are many other types of CMC approaches, such as matrix factorization
based methods (Xing et al. 2019), graph model based methods (Gao et al. 2020b; Yan et al. 2020b). Although these
aforementioned methods have made encouraging progress,
they rely on hand-crafted features and linear embedding
functions and cannot capture the non-linear structure of
complex cross-modal data.
Recently, deep neural networks (DNN) have made vast inroads into unsupervised clustering due to their commendable
performance. Motivated by this, DNN for cross-modal clustering has been increasingly exploited with the state-of-theart results (Andrew et al. 2013; Abavisani and Patel 2018;
Zhu et al. 2019; Federici et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019; Zhou
and Shen 2020). Existing multi-modal clustering methods based on DNN are usually classified into the following
two categories. The first category adopts a two-stage strategy (Wang et al. 2015; Abavisani and Patel 2018; Zhang,
Liu, and Fu 2019), i.e., extracting features based on DNN
and then learning the final clustering results by traditional

Cross-modal clustering (CMC) aims to enhance the clustering performance by exploring complementary information
from multiple modalities. However, the performances of existing CMC algorithms are still unsatisfactory due to the conflict of heterogeneous modalities and the high-dimensional
non-linear property of individual modality. In this paper, a
novel deep mutual information maximin (DMIM) method
for cross-modal clustering is proposed to maximally preserve
the shared information of multiple modalities while eliminating the superfluous information of individual modalities in
an end-to-end manner. Specifically, a multi-modal shared encoder is firstly built to align the latent feature distributions by
sharing parameters across modalities. Then, DMIM formulates the complementarity of multi-modalities representations
as a mutual information maximin objective function, in which
the shared information of multiple modalities and the superfluous information of individual modalities are identified by
mutual information maximization and minimization respectively. To solve the DMIM objective function, we propose
a variational optimization method to ensure it converge to
a local optimal solution. Moreover, an auxiliary overclustering mechanism is employed to optimize the clustering structure by introducing more detailed clustering classes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of DMIM method over the state-of-the-art cross-modal clustering
methods on IAPR-TC12, ESP-Game, MIRFlickr and NUSWide datasets.

Introduction
With the rapid development of information technology, massive amounts of unlabeled data from multiple sources or
views are generated in real-world applications every day.
Usually, data from multiple sources is exhibited in a multimodal form. For example, web news consists of pictures and
corresponding texts. In live streaming, a video contains visual appearance and acoustic signal. Although multi-modal
data appears in different modalities, sources and spaces, they
often have similar high-level semantic information or cluster
structures (Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019). Thus,
it is rational to learn cluster structures in cross-modal data
∗

Yiqiao Mao and Xiaoqiang Yan are joint first authors.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8893

