The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Negative Binomial Factorization
for Recommender Systems on Implicit Feedback
Li-Yen Kuo, Ming-Syan Chen
National Taiwan University
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd.
Taipei 10617, Taiwan
lykuo@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract

tational cost. The Gaussian-based models that model user
exposure (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008; Liang et al. 2016)
achieve better performance. However, they are not feasible
for large datasets with limited computational resources since
they require much time and memory to compute an inverse
matrix for each user and each item per iteration. By contrast, Poisson-based models (Cemgil 2009; Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2015) can efficiently update with time linear to the number of nonzero entries despite sacrificing performance and thus widely applied to various applications,
such as recommender systems and topic modeling (Charlin
et al. 2015; Schein et al. 2015; Hosseini et al. 2018; da Silva,
Langseth, and Ramampiaro 2017). To the best of our knowledge, there have been no works yet to bridge the gap between performance and computational cost, which inspires
us to find a trade-off from the perspective of the negative
binomial distribution (NB) since modeling implicit count as
Poisson suffers the following problems.
Firstly, real-world implicit data are often overdispersed
(Basbug and Engelhardt 2016; Kuo, Chou, and Chen 2018;
Gouvert, Oberlin, and Févotte 2018) since a user may always consume a handful few items she likes (Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2015), which causes substantial values of the
corresponding entries in a utility matrix. Kuo et al. (Kuo,
Chou, and Chen 2018) address that these entries (called outliers in their paper) may disturb optimizing a PF model and
the effect of outliers is unavoidable since the consuming distribution follows a power-law distribution approximately in
real-world data. Since the problem is attributable to the limited variance of the Poisson distribution, the effect of data
overdispersion could be mitigated as long as the variance
assumed by the model is larger than the variance of data.
Moreover, the failure exposure, which denotes the event
that a user saw an item but neglected it, is difficult to be
modeled. The value of an entry in a utility matrix denotes
the number of times by which a user consumed an item,
which is called success exposure count (SEC) in the paper. By contrast, the number of times a user neglected an
exposed item is called failure exposure count (FEC). To
model FEC, prior works (Gouvert, Oberlin, and Févotte
2018; Zhou 2018; Gouvert, Oberlin, and Févotte 2019) assume an entry in a utility matrix to be a negative binomial distribution (NB). However, in those NB-based models,
the structure for modeling FEC is single-layered to avoid

When exposed to an item in a recommender system, a user
may consume it (known as success exposure) or neglect it
(known as failure exposure). The recently proposed methods that consider both success and failure exposure merely
regard failure exposure as a constant prior, thus being capable of neither modeling various user behavior nor adapting to
overdispersed data. In this paper, we propose a novel model,
hierarchical negative binomial factorization, which models
data dispersion via a hierarchical Bayesian structure, thus alleviating the effect of data overdispersion to help with performance gain for recommendation. Moreover, we factorize
the dispersion of zero entries approximately into two lowrank matrices, thus reducing the updating time linear to the
number of nonzero entries. The experiment shows that the
proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art Poisson-based
methods merely with a slight loss of inference speed.

Introduction
In personalized recommender systems, a principal goal is
to recommend each user a set of previously unseen items
that she likes and will likely consume in the future. We use
historical user feedback, which often appears in the form of
user-item relationship, to infer user’s preference, and then
suggest items according to the inferred preference.
In general, recommendation can be categorized into two
modes: explicit rating and implicit feedback. In the first
mode, an explicit rating can be regarded as a positive or negative response from a user to an item, which may represent
that a user likes an item or not, and then we can use ratings to
infer user’s preference to predict the missing ratings. Practically, explicit rating is of limited use due to data acquisition
difficulty since it needs users to take part in rating directly.
In the second mode, implicit feedback expresses one or a set
of binary decisions of item consuming (also called implicit
count), e.g., clicking, purchasing, and playing, and then we
aim to predict which previously unseen items she would like.
Compared with its counterpart, implicit feedback, which is
obtained from the record of user behavior, is much more easily accessible but difficult to exploit for recommendation.
The current challenges of recommendation on implicit
feedback include recommendation performance and compuCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4181

