The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relational Boosted Bandits
Ashutosh Kakadiya,1 Sriraam Natarajan, 2 Balaraman Ravindran 1
1

Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
2
The University of Texas at Dallas
kashutosh@cse.iitm.ac.in, Sriraam.Natarajan@utdallas.edu, ravi@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

tion of contextual bandit and Statistical Relational Learning
(SRL).
SRL (Getoor and Taskar 2007) combines the power of relational/symbolic representations with the ability of probabilistic/machine learning models to handle uncertainty. Consequently, it is well suited for several real-world tasks such
as social network analysis, recommendation and biomedical applications. Initial research focused on the development
of several models – directed models (Friedman et al. 1999;
Kersting and De Raedt 2007), undirected models (Richardson and Domingos 2006) and bi-directed models (Neville
and Jensen 2007). More recently, focus has rightly turned to
learning SRL models (Getoor and Taskar 2007; De Raedt,
Kimmig, and Toivonen 2007; Natarajan et al. 2012b). Arguably, learning in these models is computationally intensive as it requires exploring multiple levels of abstractions (at the object level, partial instance level or fully
ground level). One of the recent successful methods is to
learn a set of relational regression trees using gradientboosting (RRTGB) (Natarajan et al. 2012b). The key advantage of this method is that it learns a set of weak classifiers
and can avoid searching for a single model. This method
has been successfully applied for many applications such as
recommendation (Yang et al. 2017), cardiovascular conditions (Natarajan et al. 2012a), PPMI (Dhami et al. 2017) and
rare diseases (MacLeod et al. 2016) to name a few. While
successful, these models are restricted to only batch mode
learning. While a previous online algorithm exists (Huynh
and Mooney 2011) for learning an undirected model, this
algorithm does not have the distinct advantage of bandit approaches - the ability to explore or exploit.
Motivated by the success of the boosting method in
batch settings, we propose a new relational contextual bandit framework based on RRTGB. The resulting framework,
called Relational Boosted Bandits (RB2 ), combines the
power of a powerful learning algorithm with the explorationexploitation abilities of bandits. One of the key motivations
of this combination is that the structure and parameters of
the underlying model can be learned simultaneously, thus
allowing for effective learning in online settings. Our key
insight is to represent the policy as a set of relational regression trees (RRT) (Blockeel and De Raedt 1998). Consequently, the online relational learning algorithm RB2 has
the ability to learn using relational data while employing

Contextual bandits algorithms have become essential in realworld user interaction problems in recent years. However,
these algorithms represent context as attribute value representation, which makes them infeasible for real-world domains like social networks, which are inherently relational.
We propose Relational Boosted Bandits (RB2 ), a contextual
bandits algorithm for relational domains based on (relational)
boosted trees. RB2 enables us to learn interpretable and explainable models due to the more descriptive nature of the
relational representation. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness and interpretability of RB2 on tasks such as link
prediction, relational classification, and recommendation.

Introduction
The contextual bandit framework has gained a lot of attention in several real-world personalization applications from
news recommendation to online advertising (Li et al. 2010),
comments recommendation (Mahajan et al. 2012), clinical
trials (Durand et al. 2018), A/B testing, and dialogue systems (Liu et al. 2018). Contextual bandit is an extension of
multi-armed bandits with a context vector for each user. This
context about the individual user allows the personalization
of the actions than calculating a simple argmax over all actions. The general framework of contextual bandits (Langford and Zhang 2008) can be formalized as follows: at each
time instance t, a user arrives with a vector of information
(or features) referred to as a context vector. The goal is to
choose one action for the user among K actions given the
context (user and actions). The reward r is observed for only
the chosen action and the objective is to maximize the total
reward over time.
Most of the contextual bandit algorithms (Zhou 2015)
have focused on propositional domains, where the context
is described using a flat feature-vector representation. Typically however, many real-world domains are naturally structured and are described by interacting objects and relations
between them. This representation allows for learning richer
models. Additional domain knowledge in the form of inductive/search bias is typically employed for learning in such
domains. Inspired by this direction, we explore the combinaCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12123

