The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Prediction Intervals for Model Performance
Benjamin Elder, Matthew Arnold, Anupama Murthi, Jiri Navratil
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
benjamin.elder@ibm.com, marnold@us.ibm.com, anupama.murthi@ibm.com, jiri@us.ibm.com

Abstract

a base model’s behavior in these scenarios. It is, however,
reasonable to ask a performance predictor to quantify the
uncertainty of its predictions so the application (or end user)
can take appropriate precautions.
This paper describes a technique for computing prediction intervals on meta-model based performance predictions, to convey the degree to which the performance prediction should be trusted. Our technique uses meta-metamodeling in a multi-task setting to train an uncertainty model
to compute prediction intervals. Our approach makes no assumptions about the base model or performance predictor,
and can easily be applied in other settings. The use of a separate meta-meta-model to perform the uncertainty quantification allows the simultaneous prediction of both aleatoric
(data-driven) and epistemic (model-driven) uncertainty.
A key challenge for an uncertainty model is predicting
the unseen - ie, data that is substantially different than anything the model has seen in train or test. A simple cross validation or leave-one-out training is unlikely to produce sufficient feature-space drift to be informative in this regard.
Our technique trains for these extreme cases by (1) simulating various levels of drift ranging from mild to extreme, and
(2) training on these drift scenarios using external data sets
that are different from the base model training set but of the
same modality. This approach enables the uncertainty model
to learn how the performance predictor behaves in a variety
of challenging scenarios, and uses this information to help
predict risk when challenging scenarios arise in production.
Due to its prevalence and commercial importance, we focus
on tabular data, and therefore chose logistic regression and
random forest base models.
We evaluate our uncertainty model on four different performance predictors and compare the uncertainty model
against four different model-free baseline algorithms. In every scenario, our uncertainty model outperforms all baselines, often by a large margin. Even without the use of an
uncertainty model, our approach of using drift simulation
for calibration yielded significant improvements over traditional baselines.

Understanding model performance on unlabeled data is a fundamental challenge of developing, deploying, and maintaining AI systems. Model performance is typically evaluated
using test sets or periodic manual quality assessments, both
of which require laborious manual data labeling. Automated
performance prediction techniques aim to mitigate this burden, but potential inaccuracy and a lack of trust in their predictions has prevented their widespread adoption. We address
this core problem of performance prediction uncertainty with
a method to compute prediction intervals for model performance. Our methodology uses transfer learning to train an uncertainty model to estimate the uncertainty of model performance predictions. We evaluate our approach across a wide
range of drift conditions and show substantial improvement
over competitive baselines. We believe this result makes prediction intervals, and performance prediction in general, significantly more practical for real-world use.

Introduction
Knowing when a model’s predictions can be trusted is one of
the key challenges in AI today. From an operational perspective, understanding the quality of model predictions impacts
nearly all stages in the model lifecycle, including pre-deploy
testing, deployment, and production monitoring. From a social perspective, prediction trust impacts society’s willingness to accept AI as it continues replacing human decision
making in increasingly important roles.
Techniques such as performance prediction (Guerra,
Prudêncio, and Ludermir 2008; Schat et al. 2020; Talagala,
Li, and Kang 2019) strive to automatically predict the performance of a model with no human intervention. Unfortunately these techniques have not yet gained mainstream
adoption, ironically enough, due to their potential unreliability and the resulting lack of trust in their predictions. Performance predictors are often surprisingly accurate when a
base model is predicting on data similar to what it has already seen in training and test. However, it is well known
that model behavior can be extremely difficult to predict on
previously unseen data (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015;
Su, Vargas, and Sakurai 2019). It is not reasonable to expect a performance prediction algorithm to perfectly predict

Related Work
Prior work exists on performance prediction (Guerra,
Prudêncio, and Ludermir 2008; Chen et al. 2019; Finn et al.
2019; Redyuk et al. 2019; Schat et al. 2020; Talagala, Li, and

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7305

