The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Context Matters: Graph-based Self-supervised Representation Learning for
Medical Images
Li Sun∗ , Ke Yu∗ , and Kayhan Batmanghelich
University of Pittsburgh, USA
{lis118, key44, kayhan}@pitt.edu
Abstract

principled variant of self-supervised learning, relies on instance discrimination (Wu et al. 2018) or contrastive predictive coding (CPC) (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018). It has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in many aspects, and
can produce features that are comparable to those produced by supervised methods (He et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020a). However, for medical images, the generic formulation of self-supervised learning doesn’t incorporate domainspecific anatomical context.
For medical imaging analysis, a large-scale annotated
dataset is rarely available, especially for emerging diseases,
such as COVID-19. However, there are lots of unlabeled
data available. Thus, self-supervised pre-training presents
an appealing solution in this domain. There are some existing works that focus on self-supervised methods for learning image-level representations. (Chen et al. 2019) proposed
to learn image semantic features by restoring computerized
tomography (CT) images from the corrupted input images.
(Taleb et al. 2019) introduced puzzle-solving proxy tasks using multi-modal magnetic resonance images (MRI) scans for
representation learning. (Bai et al. 2019) proposed to learn
cardiac MR image features from anatomical positions automatically defined by cardiac chamber view planes. Despite their success, current methods suffer from two challenges: (1) These methods do not account for anatomical
context. For example, the learned representation is invariant
with respect to body landmarks which are highly informative for clinicians. (2) Current methods rely on fix-sized input. The dimensions of raw volumetric medical images can
vary across scans due to the differences in subjects’ bodies, machine types, and operation protocols. The typical approach for pre-processing natural images is to either resize
the image or crop it to the same dimensions, because the
convolutional neural network (CNN) can only handle fixed
dimensional input. However, both approaches can be problematic for medical images. Taking chest CT for example,
reshaping voxels in a CT image may cause distortion to the
lung (Singla et al. 2018), and cropping images may introduce undesired artifacts, such as discounting the lung volume.
To address the challenges discussed above, we propose
a novel method for context-aware unsupervised representation learning on volumetric medical images. First, in order
to incorporate context information, we represent a 3D im-

Supervised learning method requires a large volume of annotated datasets. Collecting such datasets is time-consuming
and expensive. Until now, very few annotated COVID19 imaging datasets are available. Although self-supervised
learning enables us to bootstrap the training by exploiting unlabeled data, the generic self-supervised methods for natural
images do not sufficiently incorporate the context. For medical images, a desirable method should be sensitive enough
to detect deviation from normal-appearing tissue of each
anatomical region; here, anatomy is the context. We introduce a novel approach with two levels of self-supervised representation learning objectives: one on the regional anatomical level and another on the patient-level. We use graph neural networks to incorporate the relationship between different
anatomical regions. The structure of the graph is informed
by anatomical correspondences between each patient and an
anatomical atlas. In addition, the graph representation has the
advantage of handling any arbitrarily sized image in full resolution. Experiments on large-scale Computer Tomography
(CT) datasets of lung images show that our approach compares favorably to baseline methods that do not account for
the context. We use the learnt embedding to quantify the clinical progression of COVID-19 and show that our method generalizes well to COVID-19 patients from different hospitals.
Qualitative results suggest that our model can identify clinically relevant regions in the images.

Introduction
While deep neural network trained by the supervised approach has made breakthroughs in many areas, its performance relies heavily on large-scale annotated datasets.
Learning informative representation without human-crafted
labels has achieved great success in the computer vision
domain (Wu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020a; He et al.
2020). Importantly, the unsupervised approach has the capability of learning robust representation since the features
are not optimized towards solving a single supervised task.
Self-supervised learning has emerged as a powerful way
of unsupervised learning. It derives input and label from
an unlabeled dataset and formulates heuristics-based pretext tasks to train a model. Contrastive learning, a more
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4874

