The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Non-Monotone DR-Submodular Maximization
Nguyễn Kim Thắng, Abhinav Srivastav
IBISC, Univ. Evry, University Paris-Saclay, France
kimthang.nguyen@univ-evry.fr, abhinavsriva@gmail.com

Abstract

(Kulesza, Taskar et al. 2012), log-submodular models (Djolonga and Krause 2014), to name a few, have been modelled
using the notion of continuous DR-submodular functions.
In the past decade, online computational framework has
been quite successful for tackling a wide variety of challenging problems and capturing many real-world problems with
uncertainty. In this computational framework, we focus on
the model of online learning. In online learning, at any time
step, given a history of actions and a set of associated reward
functions, online algorithm first chooses an action from a set
of feasible actions; then, an adversary subsequently selects
a reward function. The objective is to perform as good as
the best fixed action in hindsight. This setting have been extensively explored in the literature, especially in context of
convex functions (Hazan 2016).
In fact, several algorithms with theoretical approximation
guarantees are known for maximizing (offline and online)
DR-submodular functions. However, these guarantees hold
under the assumptions that are based on the monotonicity
of functions coupled with the structure of convex sets such
as unconstrained hypercube and down-closed. Though, a
majority of real-world problems can be formulated as nonmonotone DR-submodular functions over convex sets that
might not be necessarily down-closed. For example, the problems of Determinantal Point Processes, log-submodular models, etc can be viewed as non-monotone DR-submodular maximization problems. Although several algorithms for nonmonotone (set) submodular maximization are known and they
are built on maximizing the corresponding multilinear extensions (a particular class of DR-submodular functions), they
do not extend to general DR-submodular functions since the
optimal solutions of the former are integer points while the
ones of the latter are not. Besides, general convex sets include
conic convex sets, up-closed convex sets, mixture of covering
and packing linear constraints, etc. which appear in many
applications. Among others, conic convex sets play a crucial role in convex optimization. Conic programming (Boyd
and Vandenberghe 2004) — an important subfield of convex
optimization — consists of optimizing an objective function over a conic convex set. Conic programming reduces to
linear programming and semi-definite programming when
the objective function is linear and the convex cones are
the positive orthant Rn+ and positive semidefinite matrices
Sn+ , respectively. Optimizing non-monotone DR-submodular

In this paper, we study fundamental problems of maximizing DR-submodular continuous functions that have real-world
applications in the domain of machine learning, economics,
operations research and communication systems. It captures a
subclass of non-convex optimization that provides both theoretical and practical guarantees. Here, we focus on minimizing
regret for online arriving non-monotone DR-submodular functions over down-closed and general convex sets.
First, we present an online algorithm that achieves a 1/eapproximation ratio with the regret of O(T 3/4 ) for maximizing DR-submodular functions over any down-closed convex
set. Note that, the approximation ratio of 1/e matches the bestknown guarantee for the offline version of the problem. Next,
we give an online algorithm that achieves an approximation
guarantee (depending on the search space) for the problem of
maximizing non-monotone continuous DR-submodular functions over a general convex set (not necessarily down-closed).
To best of our knowledge, no prior algorithm with approximation guarantee was known for non-monotone DR-submodular
maximization in the online setting. Finally we run experiments
to verify the performance of our algorithms on problems arising in machine learning domain with the real-world datasets.

Introduction
Continuous DR-submodular optimization is a subclass of
non-convex optimization that is an upcoming frontier in
machine learning. Roughly speaking, a differentiable nonnegative bounded function F : [0, 1]n → [0, 1] is DRsubmodular if ∇F (x) ≥ ∇F (y) for all x, y ∈ [0, 1]n where
xi ≤ yi for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n. (Note that, w.l.o.g. after normalization, assume that F has values in [0, 1].) Intuitively,
continuous DR-submodular functions represent the diminishing returns property or the economy of scale in continuous
domains. DR-submodularity has been of great interest (Bian,
Buhmann, and Krause 2019; Bian et al. 2017a; Chen, Hassani, and Karbasi 2018; Hassani, Soltanolkotabi, and Karbasi
2017; Niazadeh, Roughgarden, and Wang 2018; Staib and
Jegelka 2017). Many problems arising in machine learning and statistics, such as Non-definite Quadratic Programming (Ito and Fujimaki 2016), Determinantal Point Processes
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9868

