The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RSGNet: Relation based Skeleton Graph Network for Crowded Scenes Pose
Estimation
Yan Dai,1 * Xuanhan Wang,1 Lianli Gao,1 Jingkuan Song,1 2 Heng Tao Shen1
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, Chengdu, 611731
2
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 200240
yandai1019@gmail.com, wxuanhan@hotmail.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn,
jingkuan.song@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract

Benefiting from the success of deep convolution neural
networks (CNNs) and released large-scale datasets such as
MSCOCO (Lin et al. 2014), recent proposed pose estimation
methods have achieved great progress. They can be roughly
divided into bottom-up methods and top-down methods.
Bottom-up Methods. In general, bottom-up methods firstly
detect all human joints, and then group them into different
person instances. Although these different methods vary in
network topology, most of them (Newell, Huang, and Deng
2017; Cao et al. 2018; Papandreou et al. 2018; Jin et al.
2020; Nie et al. 2019) focus on one problem: how to group
candidate joints into individual person instance. For example, (Cao et al. 2018) propose the Part Affinity Field (PAF) to
associate joints through their affinity scores, while (Newell,
Huang, and Deng 2017) introduce the Associative Embedding that assigns different person tags to joints for grouping. Different from these methods, (Cheng et al. 2020) focus
on the quality of candidate joints generation, and propose
a scale-aware representation learning method that generates
candidate joints from high resolution pose embedding.
Top-down Methods. Unlike bottom-up methods, top-down
methods firstly detect out different person instances, and
then solve the single person pose estimation problem among
regions. Most current state-of-the-art top-down methods
(Sun et al. 2019; Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018; He et al. 2017;
Chen et al. 2018; Fang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019; Qiu et al.
2020; Golda et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020b)
focus on the second step, that is, how to design a robust
neural network for single pose estimation among cropped
region images. For example, (Chen et al. 2018) propose to
estimate person joints in an easy-to-hard order. Moreover,
(Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018) demonstrate that a simple convolution neural network (e.g., ResNet-50) with a couple of
deconvolutions can achieve encouraging pose estimation results. Recently, HRNet is proposed to estimate pose from
rich object details by preserving high feature resolution (Sun
et al. 2019). In addition, some works (Zhang et al. 2020;
Huang et al. 2020) focus on the heatmap-to-coordinate transformation. For example, DARK improves traditional decoding by a Taylor-expansion based refinement (Zhang et al.
2020), while (Huang et al. 2020) introduce a principled unbiased data processing strategy. In a different line of these

Despite of the recent great progress on multi-person pose
estimation, existing solutions still remain challenging under
the condition of “crowded scenes”, where RGB images capture complex real-world scenes with highly-overlapped people, severe occlusions and diverse postures. In this work, we
focus on two main problems: 1) how to design an effective
pipeline for crowded scenes pose estimation; and 2) how to
equip this pipeline with the ability of relation modeling for
interference resolving. To tackle these problems, we propose
a new pipeline named Relation based Skeleton Graph Network (RSGNet). Unlike existing works that directly predict
joints-of-target by labeling joints-of-interference as false positive, we first encourage all joints to be predicted. And then, a
Target-aware Relation Parser (TRP) is designed to model
the relation over all predicted joints, resulting in a targetaware encoding. This new pipeline will largely relieve the
confusion of the joints estimation model when seeing identical joints with totally distinct labels (e.g., the identical hand
exists in two bounding boxes). Furthermore, we introduce
a Skeleton Graph Machine (SGM) to model the skeletonbased commonsense knowledge, aiming to estimate the target pose with the constraint of human body structure. Such
skeleton-based constraint can help to deal with the challenges
in crowded scenes from a reasoning perspective. Solid experiments on pose estimation benchmarks demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. The
code and pre-trained models are publicly available online1 .

Introduction
2D multi-person pose estimation has been a fundamental
problem in computer vision, which aims to detect human
anatomical joints (e.g., neck, wrist) from a given image. It
has attracted huge interest, since it supports wide applications, such as human parsing (Fang et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2018), human-computer interaction (Shotton et al. 2013;
Gao et al. 2020), and tracking (Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018;
Song et al. 2018).
* Yan Dai and Xuanhan Wang contribute equally to this work.
Lianli Gao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/vikki-dai/RSGNet

1193

