The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Span-Based Event Coreference Resolution
Jing Lu and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
{ljwinnie,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the recent successful application of span-based
models to entity-based information extraction tasks, we investigate span-based models for event coreference resolution,
focusing on determining (1) whether the successes of spanbased models of entity coreference can be extended to event
coreference; (2) whether exploiting the dependency between
event coreference and the related subtask of trigger detection;
and (3) whether automatically computed entity coreference
information can benefit span-based event coreference resolution. Empirical results on the standard evaluation dataset
provide affirmative answers to all three questions.

1

Figure 1: The standard information extraction pipeline.
their arguments/participants (the event extraction component); and (3) determining which event mentions are coreferent using information from both the entity pipeline and the
event pipeline. As we can see, while an entity coreference
resolver has to assume as inputs the noisy outputs of an entity extraction component, an event coreference resolver has
to assume as inputs the noisy outputs of a larger set of upstream components in both the entity pipeline and the event
pipeline, each of which involves challenging tasks.
Despite these challenges, a relatively new type of neural
models known as span-based models has recently been successfully applied to entity-based IE tasks, including entity
extraction and entity coreference resolution (Lee et al. 2017;
Luan et al. 2019; Wadden et al. 2019). Span-based models,
unlike many other neural models, focus on learning taskspecific span rather than word representations. For instance,
when applied to entity coreference, span-based models seek
to learn representations of text spans that correspond to entity mentions so that two coreferent entity mentions have
similar span representations. Span-based models have revolutionized the way entity coreference research is conducted:
while traditional entity coreference research has focused on
designing complex coreference models, span-based models
focus on learning span representations that can be used in
conjunction with relatively simple coreference models. In
addition, while traditionally entity mention extraction is performed prior to entity coreference resolution (see Figure 1),
span-based models learn entity mention boundaries as part
of the entity coreference resolution process. This mitigates
the propagation of errors from the entity extraction component to the entity coreference resolution component.
Our work is motivated by our belief that the successful
application of span-based models to entity-based IE tasks
creates new opportunities for event coreference research. In
particular, our work is driven by three research questions.
First, how well would span-based models work for event

Introduction

Within-document event coreference resolution is the task of
determining which event mentions in a document refer to the
same real-world event. Consider the following example:
Yesterday the Delhi Police {slapped}ev1 a protester
while she was {demonstrating}ev2 outside a hospital.
At almost the same time, a woman in her 60s was
{beaten up}ev3 by policemen in another {protest}ev4
in the northern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. As of
now, the Delhi Police has suspended the cop who
{assaulted}ev5 the woman protester.
In this example, there are five event mentions (ev1−ev5),
which are triggered by the words/phrases slapped, demonstrating, beaten up, protest, and assaulted, respectively.
While ev1, ev3, and ev5 are of subtype ATTACK, only ev1
and ev5 are coreferent, as ev3 took place during a different
protest. In addition, ev2 and ev4 are not coreferent because
they refer to different P ROTEST events.
Event coreference resolution is arguably more challenging than its entity counterpart, entity coreference resolution. To understand the reason, consider the standard information extraction (IE) pipeline (Figure 1), which involves (1) extracting entity mentions from a given document
(the entity extraction component) and determining which
of them are coreferent (the entity coreference component);
(2) extracting event mentions by identifying their trigger
words/phrases and determining which entity mentions are
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13489

