The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MAMBA: Multi-level Aggregation via Memory Bank for Video Object Detection
Guanxiong Sun1, 2 , Yang Hua1 , Guosheng Hu2, 1 , Neil Robertson1
1

EEECS/ECIT, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
2
Anyvision, Belfast, UK
{gsun02, y.hua, n.robertson}@qub.ac.uk, huguosheng100@gmail.com

(a)

Abstract
State-of-the-art video object detection methods maintain a
memory structure, either a sliding window or a memory
queue, to enhance the current frame using attention mechanisms. However, we argue that these memory structures are
not efficient or sufficient because of two implied operations:
(1) concatenating all features in memory for enhancement,
leading to a heavy computational cost; (2) frame-wise memory updating, preventing the memory from capturing more
temporal information. In this paper, we propose a multi-level
aggregation architecture via memory bank called MAMBA.
Specifically, our memory bank employs two novel operations
to eliminate disadvantages of existing methods: (1) lightweight key-set construction which can significantly reduce
the computational cost; (2) fine-grained feature-wise updating strategy which enables our method to utilize knowledge
from the whole video. To better enhance features from complementary levels, i.e., feature maps and proposals, we further propose a generalized enhancement operation (GEO) to
aggregate multi-level features in a unified manner. We conduct extensive evaluations on the challenging ImageNetVID
dataset. Compared with existing state-of-the-art methods, our
method achieves superior performance in terms of both speed
and accuracy. More remarkably, MAMBA achieves mAP of
83.7%/84.6% at 12.6/9.1 FPS with ResNet-101.

Concat

...

Frame-wise Update
(b)

Concat
...

...

...

Frame-wise Update

Sampling

(c)
...

Feature-wise Update
Sliding window

Memory queue

Memory bank

Other frame

Current frame

Visible frame

Aggregation

Concat Concatenation

Frame-wise
update

Temporal
connection

Key set
Sampling construction
Feature-wise
update

Figure 1: Comparisons of the memory construction process
in three memory structures. (a) Sliding window stores raw
features of neighbour frames. (b) Memory queue stores features of the enhanced frames. One enhanced frame contains
the temporal information of its previous frames. As a result, the number of visible frames is enlarged by temporal
connections. (c) The proposed memory bank contains two
novel operations: light-weight key-set construction and finegrained feature-wise updating, which help enlarge the number of visible frames to the length of the whole video. Best
viewed in color.

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision
and plays a critical role in many real-world applications. Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based
object detectors (Girshick et al. 2015; Girshick 2015; Ren
et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016; Tian
et al. 2019) have achieved excellent performance on still images. However, the success of still-image detectors is hard
to transfer to video data directly, because of the quality deterioration of video frames, caused by severe motion blur,
rare poses, defocus, occlusions, etc.. To solve these issues,
recent methods (Zhu et al. 2017b, 2018, 2017a; Deng et al.
2019a; Wu et al. 2019; Deng et al. 2019b; Chen et al. 2020;
Shvets, Liu, and Berg 2019) utilize temporal information
to enhance video frames, a.k.a., feature-level enhancement
methods. Specifically, feature-level enhancement methods
construct a memory structure that contains the features of

other frames. Then, either alignment modules, e.g., FlowNet
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Ilg et al. 2017) or relation modules,
e.g., attention mechanisms (Hu et al. 2018; Vaswani et al.
2017), are employed to enhance the current frame using features stored in the memory structure. Depending on how the
memory structure is constructed and what features are stored
in the memory, existing feature-level enhancement methods
can be categorized into two groups: sliding window methods

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2620

