The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Domain Adaptation In Reinforcement Learning Via Latent Unified State
Representation
Jinwei Xing1 , Takashi Nagata2 , Kexin Chen1 , Xinyun Zou2 , Emre Neftci 1, 2 , Jeffrey L. Krichmar1, 2
1

Department of Cognitive Sciences
Department of Computer Science
University of California,Irvine, USA
{jinweix1,takashin,kexinc3,xinyunz5,eneftci,jkrichma}@uci.edu
2

Abstract

(Tobin et al. 2017; Andrychowicz et al. 2020; Slaoui et al.
2020) relies on the availability of multiple source domains
for training and cannot be applied in one-to-many generalization scenarios. Image-to-image translation approaches
(Pan et al. 2017; Tzeng et al. 2020; Gamrian and Goldberg
2019) need a computationally expensive generator model for
image translation. The extra burden on computation brought
by the generator model is impractical for real-time applications such as autonomous driving. Other approaches utilize
the latent embedding of encoder-decoder models to extract
internal state representation for better generalization (Higgins et al. 2017). However, domain-specific variations are
also compressed into the latent embedding which could be
problematic for zero-shot policy transfer.
To solve the problem of domain adaptation across related
RL tasks and avoid limitations of prior methods, we propose to learn a latent unified state representation (LUSR)
for different domains and then train RL agents in the source
domain based on that. After the RL training, zero-shot policy transfer is evaluated in target domains. To learn LUSR,
we split the latent state representation into domain-general
embedding which contains information existing in all domains and domain-specific embedding that compress domain specific information. LUSR is composed of domaingeneral embedding only and thus is able to ignore domainspecific variations and generalize across domains.
To empirically justify our approach, we conducted experiments in two car driving tasks with different visual complexity. We first applied our approach in CarRacing games with
analysis of final domain adaptation performance, domain
adaptation performance across the training period, generalization to totally unseen domains and policy explanation
with saliency maps. Then we evaluated our approach in autonomous driving tasks in CARLA simulator (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2017) with more challenging and realistic visual observations.
In comparison with other approaches, LUSR does not
need RL training in multiple source domains like domain
randomization and thus is applicable to a wider range of
tasks. In addition, LUSR does not need computationally
expensive generator models and can achieve better training efficiency compared with image-to-image translation approaches that operate in pixel-space. Finally, in contrast with

Despite the recent success of deep reinforcement learning
(RL), domain adaptation remains an open problem. Although
the generalization ability of RL agents is critical for the realworld applicability of Deep RL, zero-shot policy transfer is
still a challenging problem since even minor visual changes
could make the trained agent completely fail in the new task.
To address this issue, we propose a two-stage RL agent that
first learns a latent unified state representation (LUSR) which
is consistent across multiple domains in the first stage, and
then do RL training in one source domain based on LUSR
in the second stage. The cross-domain consistency of LUSR
allows the policy acquired from the source domain to generalize to other target domains without extra training. We first
demonstrate our approach in variants of CarRacing games
with customized manipulations, and then verify it in CARLA,
an autonomous driving simulator with more complex and
realistic visual observations. Our results show that this approach can achieve state-of-the-art domain adaptation performance in related RL tasks and outperforms prior approaches
based on latent-representation based RL and image-to-image
translation.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has been successful in a series
of control problems, such as Atari 2600 video games (Mnih
et al. 2013) and MuJoCo environments (Lillicrap et al.
2015). However, the advances of deep RL relies on a large
amount of interactions with the environment. In addition, the
policy tends to specialize to the training domain and fails to
generalize to new domains even when these two domains
are similar. It has been shown that slight visual changes on
pixel-based observations from Atari games could cause the
well trained policy totally break down (Gamrian and Goldberg 2019). These two limitations make deep reinforcement
learning algorithms inefficient when applied to sets of tasks.
As a result, efficient domain adaptation approaches are important for the applicability of Deep RL.
Although state-of-the-art methods have demonstrated
compelling performance in domain adaptation in RL, these
approaches all have their limitations. Domain randomization
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10452

