The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Train a One-Million-Way Instance Classifier for Unsupervised Visual
Representation Learning
Yu Liu, Lianghua Huang, Pan Pan, Bin Wang, Yinghui Xu, Rong Jin
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{ly103369, xuangen.hlh, panpan.pp, ganfu.wb, renji.xyh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper presents a simple unsupervised visual representation learning method with a pretext task of discriminating all images in a dataset using a parametric, instance-level
classifier. The overall framework is a replica of a supervised
classification model, where semantic classes (e.g., dog, bird,
and ship) are replaced by instance IDs. However, scaling up
the classification task from thousands of semantic labels to
millions of instance labels brings specific challenges including 1) the large-scale softmax computation; 2) the slow convergence due to the infrequent visiting of instance samples;
and 3) the massive number of negative classes that can be
noisy. This work presents several novel techniques to handle
these difficulties. First, we introduce a hybrid parallel training
framework to make large-scale training feasible. Second, we
present a raw-feature initialization mechanism for classification weights, which we assume offers a contrastive prior for
instance discrimination and can clearly speed up converge in
our experiments. Finally, we propose to smooth the labels of a
few hardest classes to avoid optimizing over very similar negative pairs. While being conceptually simple, our framework
achieves competitive or superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches, i.e., SimCLR, MoCoV2, and PIC under ImageNet linear evaluation protocol
and on several downstream visual tasks, verifying that full
instance classification is a strong pretraining technique for
many semantic visual tasks.

Figure 1: (a) An overview of our unsupervised visual representation learning framework. Without manual labels, we
simply train an instance-level classifier that tries to distinguish all images in a dataset to learn discriminative representations that can be well transferred to supervised tasks.
(b) The relationship between instance (unsupervised) and semantic (supervised) classification accuracies. We observe a
strong positive correlation between them in our experiments.

Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning has recently
shown encouraging progress (He et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020a). Methods using instance discrimination as a pretext
task (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019; He et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020a) have demonstrated competitive or even superior performance compared to supervised counterparts under
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) linear evaluation protocol and
on many downstream visual tasks. This shows the potential
of unsupervised representation learning methods since they
can utilize almost unlimited data without manual labels.
To solve the instance discrimination task, usually a dualbranch structure is used, where two transformed views of a
same image are encouraged to get close, while transformed
views from different images are expected to get far apart (He

et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a,c). These methods often rely
on specialized designs such as memory bank (Wu et al.
2018a), momentum encoder (He et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020c), large batch size (Chen et al. 2020a,b), or shuffled
batch normalization (BN) (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020c)
to compensate for the lack of negative samples or handle the
information leakage issue (i.e., samples on a same GPU tend
to get closer due to shared BN statistics).
Unlike dual-branch approaches, one-branch scheme (e.g.,
parametric instance-level classification) usually avoids the
information leakage issue, and can potentially explore a
larger set of negative samples. ExemplarCNN (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2014) and PIC (Cao et al. 2020) are of this category.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8706

