The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpreting Multivariate Shapley Interactions in DNNs
Hao Zhang,∗ Yichen Xie,∗ Longjie Zheng, Die Zhang, Quanshi Zhang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{1603023-zh,xieyichen,bugatti,zizhan52,zqs1022}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims to explain deep neural networks (DNNs) from
the perspective of multivariate interactions. In this paper, we
define and quantify the significance of interactions among
multiple input variables of the DNN. Input variables with
strong interactions usually form a coalition and reflect prototype features, which are memorized and used by the DNN for
inference. We define the significance of interactions based on
the Shapley value, which is designed to assign the attribution
value of each input variable to the inference. We have conducted experiments with various DNNs. Experimental results
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited significant success in many tasks, and the interpretability of DNNs has
received increasing attention in recent years. Most previous studies of post-hoc explanation of DNNs either explain
DNN semantically/visually (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016), or analyze the representation capacity of DNNs (Higgins et al. 2017; Achille and Soatto
2018; Fort et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2020).
In this paper, we propose a new perspective to explain a
trained DNN, i.e. quantifying interactions among input variables that are used by the DNN during the inference process.
Each input variable of a DNN usually does not work individually. Instead, input variables may cooperate with other
variables to make inferences. We can consider the strongly
interacted input variables to form a prototype feature (or a
coalition), which is memorized by the DNN. For example,
the face is a prototype feature for person detection, which
is comprised of the eyes, nose, and mouth. Each compositional part inside a face does not contribute to the inference
individually, but they collaborate with each other to make
the combination of all parts a meaningful feature for person
detection.
∗

Contribute equally to this paper.
Corresponding author. This work was done under the supervision of Dr. Quanshi Zhang. Quanshi Zhang is with the John Hopcroft
Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10877

In fact, our research group led by Dr. Quanshi Zhang has
used game-theoretic interactions as new metrics to explain
signal-processing behaviors in trained DNNs from different perspectives. Specifically, we have further developed
the multi-order interactions between two input variables, in
which the order indicates the complexity of interactive contexts (Zhang et al. 2020a), and we have used interactions
to explain adversarial samples (Wang et al. 2020) and the
generalization power of DNNs (Zhang et al. 2020b).
Previous studies mainly focused on the interaction between
two variables (Lundberg, Erion, and Lee 2018; Singh, Murdoch, and Yu 2018; Murdoch, Liu, and Yu 2018; Janizek,
Sturmfels, and Lee 2020). Grabisch and Roubens (1999)
measured 2n different interaction values for all the 2n combinations of n variables, and the cost of computing each interaction value is NP-hard. In comparison to the unaffordable
computational cost, our research summarizes all 2n interactions into a single metric, which provides a global view to
explain potential prototype features encoded by DNNs.
In this study, we define the significance of interactions
among multiple input variables based on game theory. In the
game theory, each input variable can be viewed as a player.
All players (variables) are supposed to obtain a high reward
in a game. Let us consider interactions w.r.t. the scalar output
y = f (I) of the DNN (or interactions w.r.t. one dimension
of the vectorized network output), given the input I with
overall n players. The absolute change of y w.r.t. an empty
input 0, i.e. |f (I) − f (0)|, can be used as the total reward
of all players (input variables). The reward can be allocated
to each player, which indicates the contribution made by the
player (input variable),
Pn denoted by φ1 , φ2 , · · · , φn , satisfies
|f (I) − f (0)| = i=1 φi .
A simple definition of the interaction is given as follows.
If a set of m players S always participates in the game together, these players can be regarded to form a coalition.
The coalition can obtain a reward, denoted by φS . φS is usually different from the sum of rewards when players in the
set S participate
P in the game individually. The additional
reward φS − i∈S φi obtained by the
P coalition can be quantified as the interaction. If φS − i∈S φi > 0, we consider P
players in the coalition have a positive effect. Whereas,
φS − i∈S φi < 0 indicates an negative/adversarial effect
among the set of variables
in S.
P
However, φS − i∈S φi mainly measures the interaction

