The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mars Image Content Classification:
Three Years of NASA Deployment and Recent Advances
Kiri Wagstaff1 , Steven Lu1 , Emily Dunkel1 , Kevin Grimes1 , Brandon Zhao2 , Jesse Cai3 ,
Shoshanna B. Cole4 , Gary Doran1 , Raymond Francis1 , Jake Lee1 , and Lukas Mandrake1
1

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA, 91109-8099, USA
2
Duke University, 2138 Campus Drive, Durham, NC 27708, USA
3
California Institute of Technology, 1200 E California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4
Space Science Institute, 4765 Walnut St, Suite B, Boulder, CO 80301, USA
{kiri.l.wagstaff,you.lu,emily.dunkel,kevin.m.grimes}@jpl.nasa.gov, brandon.zhao@duke.edu, jycai@caltech.edu,
scole@spacescience.org, {gary.b.doran.jr,raymond.francis,jake.h.lee,lukas.mandrake}@jpl.nasa.gov
Abstract
produce more reliable posterior probabilities, which is vital since only classifications with a posterior probability of
The NASA Planetary Data System hosts millions of images
at least 0.9 are displayed to users. Finally, we now report on
acquired from the planet Mars. To help users quickly find imthree years of deployment including usage statistics, lessons
ages of interest, we have developed and deployed contentlearned, and plans for the future.
based classification and search capabilities for Mars orbital
and surface images. The deployed systems are publicly accessible using the PDS Image Atlas. We describe the process
of training, evaluating, calibrating, and deploying updates to
two CNN classifiers for images collected by Mars missions.
We also report on three years of deployment including usage
statistics, lessons learned, and plans for the future.

Related Work
Machine learning image classification has achieved high
levels of performance since the adoption of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on millions of images (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). In addition to demonstrated improvements in accuracy, the use of
a CNN removes the need for manual feature engineering.
The ability to adapt or “fine-tune” large networks enables
the re-use of learned lower levels of the network on new image collections while customizing the output nodes to the
classes of interest. Palafox et al. (2017) showed that a CNN
out-performed a support vector machine classifier on finding
Mars landforms of interest. In previous work, we demonstrated the ability to fine-tune the AlexNet classifier for application to images collected by instruments in Mars orbit
and on the Mars surface (Wagstaff et al. 2018). Other approaches with relevance for planetary exploration are terrain
classification of regions within an image to inform navigation (Rothrock et al. 2016) and generating text captions for
planetary images and enable a larger search vocabulary (Qiu
et al. 2020), as opposed to a fixed set of image classes.

Introduction
The NASA Planetary Data System (PDS) maintains archives
of data collected by NASA missions that explore our solar system. The PDS Cartography and Imaging Sciences
Node (Imaging Node) provides access to millions of images
of planets, moons, comets, and other bodies. Given the large
and continually growing volume of data, there is a need for
tools that enable users to quickly search for images of interest. Each image product is described by a rich set of searchable metadata properties such as the time it was collected,
the instrument used, the image target, local season, etc.
However, users often wish to search on the content of the
image to zero in on those images most relevant to a scientific investigation or individual curiosity. Manually searching through millions of images is infeasible. In previous
work, we trained image classifiers to detect classes of interest in Mars orbital and surface images (Wagstaff et al.
2018). Using the predictions made by these classifiers, users
can interactively search for classes of interest using the PDS
Image Atlas1 . Since the deployment of these classifiers in
late 2016 and through August 2020, their predictions have
been used to satisfy 62,613 searches on the Atlas website.
In this paper, we report on several new advances within
this domain. First, we expanded the set of classes known to
each classifier to broaden their coverage of different content types. Second, we employed classifier calibration to

New Mars Classifier Data Sets
We created two new labeled data sets to train and evaluate the latest versions of our Mars image classifiers.
The HiRISE images were collected by the High Resolution Imaging Experiment (HiRISE) instrument onboard the
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) (McEwen et al. 2007),
while the MSL images were collected by the Mast Camera (Mastcam) and Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) instruments mounted on Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Curiosity rover (Grotzinger et al. 2012). To ensure high quality,
the labels for both data sets were acquired using crowdsourcing with local volunteers who received specific training for
each data set.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://pds-imaging.jpl.nasa.gov/search/

15204

