The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tackling Instance-Dependent Label Noise via a Universal Probabilistic Model
Qizhou Wang1,2 , Bo Han2, * , Tongliang Liu3 , Gang Niu4 , Jian Yang1 , Chen Gong1,5, *
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of MoE,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
4
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)
5
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract

rules without explicitly modeling the process of label corruption. For example, data cleansing techniques remove potential mislabeled instances before training (Angelova, AbuMostafam, and Perona 2005; Sun et al. 2007); risk reweighting strategies demote the adverse impact of un-trustworthy
labels (Guo et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018b; Jiang et al. 2017;
Lee et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018; Han et al. 2020); label correction methods revise noisy labels based on model prediction (Reed et al. 2015; Tanaka et al. 2018; Yi and Wu 2019)
or prior information (Gao et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017b; Veit
et al. 2017). These methods have gained extensive popularity
in the literature. However, without specifying the generation
of label noise, these methods may lead to inferior or biased
results (Xia et al. 2019; Berthon et al. 2020).

The drastic increase of data quantity often brings the severe
decrease of data quality, such as incorrect label annotations,
which poses a great challenge for robustly training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Existing learning methods with label
noise either employ ad-hoc heuristics or restrict to specific
noise assumptions. However, more general situations, such as
instance-dependent label noise, have not been fully explored,
as scarce studies focus on their label corruption process. By
categorizing instances into confusing and unconfusing instances, this paper proposes a simple yet universal probabilistic model, which explicitly relates noisy labels to their instances. The resultant model can be realized by DNNs, where
the training procedure is accomplished by employing an alternating optimization algorithm. Experiments on datasets with
both synthetic and real-world label noise verify that the proposed method yields significant improvements on robustness
over state-of-the-art counterparts.

The above issue motivates us to explore the second category, which makes various assumptions on the process of
label-noise generation. For example, the random classification noise (RCN) model assumes that labels are randomly
corrupted without any relationship with their real classes
and instance features. To handle this simple situation, various noise-tolerant loss functions (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry
2017; Manwani and Sastry 2013; Van Rooyen, Menon, and
Williamson 2015) have been explored in the literature. Subsequently, the class-conditional noise (CCN) model is proposed to relate noisy labels to true labels, i.e., some pairs of
classes are more prone to be mislabeled. To depict such phenomenon, the noise transition matrix is introduced, which
represents the probability of true labels flipping into noisy
ones (Patrini et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2020). This matrix plays
a significant role in attacking CCN, and its elements can be
either tuned by cross validation (Natarajan et al. 2013) or
estimated by various algorithms (Liu and Tao 2016; Goldberger and Ben-Reuven 2017; Han et al. 2018a; Xia et al.
2019; Yao et al. 2020).

Introduction
DNNs have gained much popularity in the literature of machine learning (He et al. 2017; Jaderberg et al. 2015). However, one of the prominent factors for their success is the
availability of large-scale training sample with clean annotations (Deng et al. 2009), where the acquisition process
might be prohibitively expensive in practice. Hence, various
low-cost surrogate strategies are provided to automatically
collect labels (Li et al. 2017a; Xiao et al. 2015). These approaches make the acquisition of large-scale annotated data
possible, but will also inevitably lead to noisy labels due
to the imperfect results of search engines and crawling algorithms. Previous studies have suggested that noisy labels
will hurt the test accuracy of DNNs (Arpit et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2017). Thus, it would be desirable to develop robust
methods for training DNNs with label noise.
In learning with noisy labels, existing robust learning
methods consist of two general categories, according to
whether the generation process for noisy labels is specified. The first category usually employs heuristic and ad-hoc

However, (Xiao et al. 2015) suggest that mis-annotation
is highly related to instance features in reality. In other
words, some instances may be confusing subjectively, and
thus suffer from mislabeling. This brings us the instancedependent noise (IDN) model recently. To tackle this challenging problem, (Du and Cai 2015) consider the predetermined noise function that assumes mislabeled instances are
close to the decision boundary; (Menon, Van Rooyen, and

* Corresponding authors. Emails: bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk,
chen.gong@njust.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10183

