The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Hybrid Relation Network for
Cross-Domain Context-Dependent Semantic Parsing
Binyuan Hui,1,2 Ruiying Geng,2 Qiyu Ren,3 Binhua Li,2 Yongbin Li,2*
Jian Sun,2 Fei Huang,2 Luo Si,2 Pengfei Zhu,1* Xiaodan Zhu4
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Ingenuity Labs Research Institute & ECE, Queen’s University
{huibinyuan,zhupengfei}@tju.edu.cn, zhu2048@gmail.com
{ruiying.gry,binhua.lbh,shuide.lyb,jian.sun,f.huang,luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Semantic parsing has long been a fundamental problem in
natural language processing. Recently, cross-domain contextdependent semantic parsing has become a new focus of research. Central to the problem is the challenge of leveraging contextual information of both natural language utterance
and database schemas in the interaction history. In this paper, we present a dynamic graph framework that is capable of
effectively modelling contextual utterances, tokens, database
schemas, and their complicated interaction as the conversation proceeds. The framework employs a dynamic memory
decay mechanism that incorporates inductive bias to integrate
enriched contextual relation representation, which is further
enhanced with a powerful reranking model. At the time of
writing, we demonstrate that the proposed framework outperforms all existing models by large margins, achieving new
state-of-the-art performance on two large-scale benchmarks,
the SParC and CoSQL datasets. Specifically, the model attains a 55.8% question-match and 30.8% interaction-match
accuracy on SParC, and a 46.8% question-match and 17.0%
interaction-match accuracy on CoSQL.

👨

Database
How many museum id in the list ?
SELECT count ( Museum_ID ) FROM museum

👨

🤖

Museum
MUSEUM

ID
Name
…

List the names of all visitors who visited
some museums more than once , please .

VISITOR

SELECT t1.name FROM visitor AS t1
JOIN visit AS t2 ON t1.id = t2.visitor_id
GROUP BY t1.id HAVING count ( * ) > 1

…

…
…
…
…

👨 Can you list their IDs and ages too ?
SELECT t1.name, t1.id, t1.age FROM
visitor AS t1 JOIN visit AS t2 ON t1.id
= t2.visitor_id GROUP BY t1.id
HAVING count ( * ) > 1

ID
Age

🤖

🤖

…

…
…
…
…

do
s-

m

ai

n

os

Cr

Figure 1: An example of cross-domain context-dependent
Text-to-SQL interaction in the CoSQL dataset (Yu et al.
2019a).

Introduction

Most existing work has focused on precisely converting individual utterances to SQL queries, with a strong assumption on context independence among queries. However, in real applications as shown in Figure 1, users interact
with cross-domain databases through consecutively communication to exchange information with the databases. Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art approaches do not perform
well on the newly released, cross-domain context-dependent
Text-to-SQL benchmarks, SparC and CoSQL.
Central to the problem of context-dependent semantic
parsing is leveraging interactive contextual information of
both natural language utterance and database schemas available in the interaction history. Existing work (Suhr, Iyer, and
Artzi 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) has mainly
focused on integrating context information into the utterance
encoding phase.
In this paper, we present a dynamic graph framework that
is capable of effectively modelling contextual utterances,

Mapping a nature language sentence into a logical form,
known as semantic parsing, is a fundamental problem in natural language processing (Zelle and Mooney 1996; Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005; Wong and Mooney 2007; Zettlemoyer and Collins 2007; Li and Jagadish 2014; Yaghmazadeh et al. 2017; Iyer et al. 2017). Notably, the recent Text-to-SQL tasks have attracted considerable attention, which aims to convert nature language sentences into
SQL queries. Large-scale datasets such as SParC (Yu et al.
2019b) and CoSQL (Yu et al. 2019a) have been made
available to train more powerful models. Since relational
databases store a great amount of structured data, improving the performance of Text-to-SQL conversion is important
for many real-life applications.
* Corresponding authors: Yongbin Li and Pengfei Zhu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13116

