The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mind-the-Gap! Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Text-Video Retrieval
∗

Qingchao Chen1,4* , Yang Liu 2,3 and Samuel Albanie 3
1

National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
4
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
qingchao.chen@eng.ox.ac.uk, yangl@robots.ox.ac.uk, albanie@robots.ox.ac.uk

2

Abstract

Activities

When can we expect a text-video retrieval system to work
effectively on datasets that differ from its training domain?
In this work, we investigate this question through the lens
of unsupervised domain adaptation in which the objective is
to match natural language queries and video content in the
presence of domain shift at query-time. Such systems have
significant practical applications since they are capable generalising to new data sources without requiring corresponding text annotations. We make the following contributions:
(1) We propose the UDAVR (Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Video Retrieval) benchmark and employ it to study
the performance of text-video retrieval in the presence of
domain shift. (2) We propose Concept-Aware-Pseudo-Query
(CAPQ), a method for learning discriminative and transferable features that bridge these cross-domain discrepancies to
enable effective target domain retrieval using source domain
supervision. (3) We show that CAPQ outperforms alternative
domain adaptation strategies on UDAVR.

Two men play table tennis while several other
individuals watch in the background.

MovieClips

Her movement is followed by three men—one wearing
black tie, a handsome actor in grey flannel suit–and a
bright, pleasant man wearing a blue-pin-striped suit.

AudioVisualEvents

There is a dog sharing food with a cat

VisualEvents

The lady cut up the seaweed into pieces.

Figure 1: The Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Video
Retrieval (UDAVR) benchmark. In this work, we repurpose
existing datasets from across four domains to study the task
of text-video retrieval without target domain supervision.
The videos from these four domains differ not only in visual
composition and duration, but also in the focus and style of
their text descriptions.
et al. 2019, 2020) have shown promising early results pursuing such an approach. It is reasonable to believe, however, that for many problems of interest, the zero-shot assumption is overly constraining. In this work, we therefore
consider instead the less restrictive formulation in which a
model has access to labelled data on a source domain and
only unlabelled data on the target domain of interest, a setting commonly referred to as Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA).
Motivated by the considerable importance of video data
in both academic and commercial settings, recent works
have explored video-based UDA scenarios for action recognition (Jamal et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019b; Munro and
Damen 2020). To date, however, unsupervised domain adaptation for text-video retrieval has received limited attention
in the literature.
In this work we propose a new benchmark to enable investigation of the text-video retrieval task under this regime.
To this end we draw on existing datasets from four domains
highlighted in Fig. 1: these domains are Activities (sourced
from ActivityNet-Captions (Krishna et al. 2017)), AudioVisualEvents (sourced from MSR-VTT (Xu et al. 2016)),
MovieClips (sourced from LSMDC (Rohrbach et al. 2017a))
and VisualEvents (sourced from MSVD (Chen and Dolan
2011)).

Introduction
Given a natural language query and a pool of videos, the
goal of text-video retrieval is to rank the videos according
to how well their content fits the query. Recent years have
seen substantial progress on popular benchmarks for assessing text-video retrieval (Chen and Dolan 2011; Rohrbach
et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2016) through effective use of multimodal cues (Mithun et al. 2018) and powerful pretrained
models (Miech, Laptev, and Sivic 2018; Liu et al. 2019).
These impressive gains have been driven by access to large
quantities of labeled data for supervised learning. To date,
much of the work in this area has relied on the assumption that the training data and test data arise from the same
domain. As a consequence, the use of text-video retrieval
methods in novel domains mandates the gathering of corresponding annotation such that models can be retrained or
fine-tuned on the target data.
One possible solution to this challenge can be found in
zero-shot text-video retrieval, in which one assumes no access to any training content from the target domain. Indeed,
recent methods employing large-scale pretraining (Miech
* indicates equally contributed first and corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1072

