The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from Noisy Labels with Complementary Loss Functions
Deng-Bao Wang,1,2 Yong Wen,3 Lujia Pan,3,4 Min-Ling Zhang1,2,5∗
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
NSKEYLAB, Xi’an Jiaotong University
5
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
wangdb@seu.edu.cn, {wenyong4, panlujia}@huawei.com, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

proposed. They can be grouped into four main categories.
The first one is based on estimating the label transition
matrix, which reflects the probabilities that most probable
true labels flip into other noise ones (Patrini et al. 2017;
Hendrycks et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018a). The second type
is based on importance reweighting which tries to assign
small weights to the possibly mislabeled samples and large
weights to the potentially clean samples (Jiang et al. 2018;
Ren et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019). The third one is based on
self/co-training strategy which tries to learn a classifier from
the supervision generated by the classifier itself or its peer
classifier (Han et al. 2018b; Yu et al. 2019; Li, Socher, and
Hoi 2020; Li, Huang, and Chen 2021).

Recent researches reveal that deep neural networks are
sensitive to label noises hence leading to poor generalization
performance in some tasks. Although different robust loss
functions have been proposed to remedy this issue, they suffer
from an underfitting problem, thus are not sufficient to learn
accurate models. On the other hand, the commonly used
Cross Entropy (CE) loss, which shows high performance in
standard supervised learning (with clean supervision), is nonrobust to label noise. In this paper, we propose a general
framework to learn robust deep neural networks with complementary loss functions. In our framework, CE and robust
loss play complementary roles in a joint learning objective
as per their learning sufficiency and robustness properties
respectively. Specifically, we find that by exploiting the
memorization effect of neural networks, we can easily filter
out a proportion of hard samples and generate reliable pseudo
labels for easy samples, and thus reduce the label noise to a
quite low level. Then, we simply learn with CE on pseudo
supervision and robust loss on original noisy supervision. In
this procedure, CE can guarantee the sufficiency of optimization while the robust loss can be regarded as the supplement.
Experimental results on benchmark classification datasets
indicate that the proposed method helps achieve robust and
sufficient deep neural network training simultaneously.

The fourth type of approaches is based on the robust
loss functions. In the last several years, different researches
have been studied to leverage proper loss function for
robust DNN learning. Compared to the other three types
of methods, using robust loss functions is a simpler and
arguably more generic solution. Mean Absolute Error
(MAE), as a symmetric loss function, has been theoretically
proved robust to label noise (Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry
2017). In (Ma et al. 2020), the authors provide theoretical
insights that a simple normalization can make any loss
function robust to noisy labels. However, it has been found
empirically that the robust losses usually lead to underfitting
problem and hence are not able to achieve good performance
(Zhang and Sabuncu 2018; Ma et al. 2020). On the other
hand, the commonly used Cross Entropy (CE) has the
superiority of learning sufficiency while it is not noisetolerant. Motivated by this, several researches have been
studied for seeking a generalized mixture of MAE and CE to
balance their weakness and superiority (Zhang and Sabuncu
2018; Feng et al. 2020). Whilst these loss functions have
demonstrated improved robustness and learning sufficiency
at same time, they are only partially robust to noisy labels
and unsatisfactory when dealing with complex datasets.

Introduction
With highly efficient stochastic optimization methods and
loss functions, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
shown to be very powerful modeling tools for many realworld learning tasks involving complex input patterns.
However, current deep neural networks have been shown to
be sensitive to label noises and can easily overfit noisy labels
in training, leading to poor performance in generalization
(Zhang et al. 2017). Moreover, labeling large-scale datasets
is costly in terms of expense and time, and stands as a critical
bottleneck in many tasks. For this reason, learning from less
expensive labeled data has been extensively studied in the
last decades (Zhou 2017).
In recent years, learning from noisy labels has been
extensively studied and a number of methods have been

In this paper, we show that the dilemma between
overfitting and underfitting in learning from noisy labels
can be addressed with complementary loss functions. Our
main idea is to learn DNNs with both CE and a noisetolerant loss (like MAE) from mixed supervision. The mixed
supervision consists of two part: one is the original noisy

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10111

