The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ranking Sets of Defeasible Elements in Preferential Approaches to Structured
Argumentation: Postulates, Relations, and Characterizations
Jan Maly1 , Johannes P. Wallner2
1

2

Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
Institute of Software Technology, Graz University of Technology, Austria
jmaly@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, wallner@ist.tugraz.at

Abstract

mantics (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011) then state
which sets of arguments can be deemed jointly acceptable
together, e.g., because they form a non-conflicting viewpoint
that defends itself against all counter-arguments.
Key to argumentative reasoning are preferential approaches (Beirlaen et al. 2018), which can reflect a wide
variety of notions of argument strength, e.g., subjective and
relative trust of arguments or societal values (Bench-Capon
2003). In major structured argumentation formalisms, preferences are applied to argumentative reasoning by considering preference relations on the components that constitute arguments. Arguments, e.g., in the structured formalisms of assumption-based argumentation (ABA) (Bondarenko et al. 1997) and ASPIC+ (Modgil and Prakken
2013), are based on derivations (via rules) starting off from
assumptions (premises). Importantly, some parts of arguments are deemed defeasible, e.g., assumptions or defeasible rules, while others are considered strict, i.e., logically
sound deductions that cannot be attacked or countered. In
this sense, defeasible elements of an argument present potential points of attacks or counters.
As illustrated in Figure 1, preferences are applied by considering a preference ordering over the defeasible elements,
which are then lifted to comparisons of sets of defeasible
elements. Using such a lifting, one inspects then certain defeasible elements of two arguments and ranks the arguments
based on the ranking of their respective sets of defeasible
elements. In ASPIC+ , e.g., one can define to consider the
structure of arguments, and compare all or only some of the
defeasible elements (e.g., only top-most defeasible rules).
In this way, structured argumentation formalisms are general frameworks that allow for a wide array of possible ways
of inclusion of preferences. In particular, ASPIC+ allows
for a large family of such lifting operators that lift a ranking of the basic defeasible elements that can form arguments
to rankings on sets of defeasible elements. While in recent
years we have seen an increasing attention on research of
preferential approaches to (structured) argumentation (Beirlaen et al. 2018), foundational and general research on preferences in argumentation is still lacking. We take up this opportunity and provide a foundational study of the key component of preferential reasoning in structured argumenta-

Preferences play a key role in computational argumentation
in AI, as they reflect various notions of argument strength
vital for the representation of argumentation. Within central
formal approaches to structured argumentation, preferential
approaches are applied by lifting preferences over defeasible
elements to rankings over sets of defeasible elements, in order
to be able to compare the relative strength of two arguments
and their respective defeasible constituents. To overcome the
current gap in the scientific landscape, we give in this paper
a general study of the critical component of lifting operators
in structured argumentation. We survey existing lifting operators scattered in the literature of argumentation theory, social
choice, and utility theory, and show fundamental relations and
properties of these operators. Extending existing works from
argumentation and social choice, we propose a list of postulates for lifting operations, and give a complete picture of
(non-)satisfaction for the considered operators. Based on our
postulates, we present impossibility results, stating for which
sets of postulates there is no hope of satisfaction, and for
two main lifting operators presented in structured argumentation, Elitist and Democratic, we give a full characterization
in terms of our postulates.

1

Introduction

Computational argumentation has established itself as a distinguished and vital research area within Artificial Intelligence (AI) that provides foundational approaches to nonmonotonic reasoning (Baroni et al. 2018; Bench-Capon and
Dunne 2007), with heterogeneous applications, e.g., in legal reasoning, medical sciences, and e-government (Atkinson et al. 2017). In approaches to what is known as structured argumentation (Bondarenko et al. 1997; Modgil and
Prakken 2013; Garcı́a and Simari 2004; Besnard and Hunter
2008), formal reasoning processes are specified that give
provably rational accounts (Caminada 2018) of what can
be argued for, when faced with knowledge or beliefs that
are possibly conflicting or inconsistent. Reasoning is carried
out by formally defining how arguments can be constructed,
and how arguments are conflicting, e.g., whether one argument is a counter-argument for another. Argumentation seCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6435

