The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Randomized Generation of Adversary-Aware Fake Knowledge Graphs
to Combat Intellectual Property Theft
Snow Kang,1 Cristian Molinaro,2 Andrea Pugliese,2 V.S. Subrahmanian1
1

Dartmouth College, USA
University of Calabria, Italy
Snow.Kang.21@dartmouth.edu, cristian.molinaro@unical.it, andrea.pugliese@unical.it, vs@dartmouth.edu
2

that component segregation was greatly reduced”2 , the word
“iron” might be replaced by “zinc” which has similar malleability properties but is more reactive). However, these
past proposals have several limitations: (i) they do not consider the knowledge encoded within a document, and (ii)
they do not account for the adversary who might both know
the algorithm for generating fakes and analyze relationships
between the resulting set (original + fakes) and thus discern
the original one.
In this paper, we consider an “original” knowledge graph
K0 that captures some intellectual property. For instance,
KGs can be used to capture information about software designs and flows via UML (Berardi, Calvanese, and De Giacomo 2005), biomedical designs (Alshahrani et al. 2017;
Alshahrani 2019), financial information (Pujara 2017), corporate structure (Atzeni et al. 2020), and much more. Such
KGs may capture not only intellectual property, but also
valuable proprietary or secret corporate information. In addition, there are numerous methods to represent the knowledge within a document as a knowledge graph (Ji et al. 2020;
Hogan et al. 2020). Such knowledge graphs can be readily
extracted using standard methods in NLP (Luan et al. 2018).
In the case of KGs representing text, we assume assume that
given a knowledge graph, we can generate text from it—
either via strategic replacements as in (Chakraborty et al.
2019) or via a generative model as in (Koncel-Kedziorski
et al. 2019).3
Thus, this paper focuses on the central problem of generating fake versions of a given KG K0 . We show how to automatically generate a set K = {K0 , K1 , . . . , Kn } having n
fake documents (plus the original) so as to make it very hard
for an adversary to guess which document in K is correct. In
particular, the fakes are constrained to be “similar enough”
(according to a distance metric) to the original (to be believable), but sufficiently dissimilar to be likely wrong. We make
the following contributions: (i) We formally define the Fake
Knowledge Graph problem FAKE KG and show that solving
it is NP-hard. (ii) We show that even solutions to FAKE KG
can be “cracked” by an intelligent adversary. (iii) In order to

Abstract
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) can be used to store information about software design, biomedical designs, and financial
information—all domains where intellectual property and/or
specialized knowledge must be kept confidential. Moreover,
KGs can also be used to represent the content of technical
documents. In order to deter theft of intellectual property via
cyber-attacks, we consider the following problem: given a
KG K0 (e.g., representing a software or biomedical device
design or the content of a technical document), can we automatically generate a set of KGs that are similar enough
to K0 (so they are hard to discern as synthetic) but sufficiently different (so as to be wrong)? If this is possible, then
we will be one step closer to automatically generating fake
KGs that an adversary has difficulty distinguishing from the
original. We will also be closer to automatically generating
documents corresponding to fake KGs so that an adversary
who steals such documents has difficulty distinguishing the
real from the fakes. We formally define this problem and
prove that it is NP-hard. We show that obvious approaches
to solving this problem do not satisfy a novel concept of
“adversary-awareness” that we define. We provide a graphtheoretic characterization of the problem and leverage it to
devise an “adversary-aware” algorithm. We validate the efficacy of our algorithm on 3 diverse real-world datasets, showing that it achieves high levels of deception.

Introduction
Theft of intellectual property (IP) is a growing problem. According to a 2017 report by the US Intellectual Property
Commission, theft of US IP alone is estimated to range from
0.87 to 2.61 percent of annual US GDP: a huge loss exceeding that of the 1991 Gulf War.1 While one may dispute the
precise numbers claimed in various news and other reports,
the fact is that most IP producing companies have grave concerns about IP theft.
Recent efforts (Chakraborty et al. 2019; Abdibayev et al.
2021) have proposed generating fake versions of technical documents by replacing concepts in an original document with different concepts (e.g., in a sentence such as
“In the iron-based powder mixture for use, it was confirmed

2
Japanese patent JP5112828B2, https://patents.google.com/
patent/JP5112828B2/en?q=metallurgy&oq=metallurgy
3
Due to space reasons, we do not show how to generate KGs
from documents or how to generate fake versions of an original
document from fake KGs.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.nationalreview.com/2020/07/china-intellectualproperty-theft-counting-costs-united-states/

4155

