The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SDGNN: Learning Node Representation for Signed Directed Networks
Junjie Huang, Huawei Shen∗ , Liang Hou, Xueqi Cheng
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{huangjunjie17s, shenhuawei, houliang17z, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

on social theories and achieve good performances. Link sign
prediction is the main downstream machine learning task for
evaluating signed network embedding. Signed network embedding learning, which aims to map nodes in signed network to low-dimensional vector representations, also relies
on these sociological theories (Wang et al. 2017; Kim et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2018a; Islam, Prakash, and Ramakrishnan
2018; Chen et al. 2018b). For example, Chen et al. mathematically model “bridge” edges based on balance and status
theory and achieve state-of-the-art performances.
Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been receiving more and more attention. Modern GNNs mostly follow Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer
et al. 2017) manner, which consist of message aggregators and update functions. The common aggregators include
mean aggregator (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017),
attention aggregator (Veličković et al. 2018), and maxpooling aggregator (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017).
GNNs have achieved good results in many machine learning tasks (e.g., semi-supervised node classification, learning
low-dimensional representations, and link prediction) (Kipf
and Welling 2019, 2016; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016). A
number of recent researches have pivoted to learn the node
embeddings using GNNs, which aim to aggregate information from neighbors for node embeddings (Kipf and Welling
2016; Duran and Niepert 2017; Pan et al. 2018). These
GNN-based network embedding methods have revolutionized the field of network embedding and achieved stateof-the-art performances. Specifically, Graph Auto-Encoder
(GAE) uses GCNs to process node features jointly with the
graph structure to produce a set of hidden representations
(Kipf and Welling 2016). It uses a scoring function to reconstruct the adjacency matrix of the graph from hidden representations. GAE is designed for the unsigned networks and
can’t directly be applied in the signed networks.
For signed network, SGCN generalizes GCN to signed
networks and designs a new information aggregator based
on balance theory (Derr, Ma, and Tang 2018). SNEA leverages the self-attention mechanism to enhance the performance of signed network embeddings (Li et al. 2020). Although signed GNNs discussed above are proposed to model
signed networks with balance theory, they don’t take direction (i.e., status theory) into consideration, which is important for signed graph modeling (Cui et al. 2020). In this pa-

Network embedding is aimed at mapping nodes in a network
into low-dimensional vector representations. Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have received widespread attention and
lead to state-of-the-art performance in learning node representations. However, most GNNs only work in unsigned networks, where only positive links exist. It is not trivial to
transfer these models to signed directed networks, which are
widely observed in the real world yet less studied. In this
paper, we first review two fundamental sociological theories
(i.e., status theory and balance theory) and conduct empirical
studies on real-world datasets to analyze the social mechanism in signed directed networks. Guided by related sociological theories, we propose a novel Signed Directed Graph
Neural Networks model named SDGNN to learn node embeddings for signed directed networks. The proposed model
simultaneously reconstructs link signs, link directions, and
signed directed triangles. We validate our model’s effectiveness on five real-world datasets, which are commonly used
as the benchmark for signed network embeddings. Experiments demonstrate the proposed model outperforms existing
models, including feature-based methods, network embedding methods, and several GNN methods.

Introduction
With the growing popularity of online social media, many
interactions between people are generated and recorded on
the web. Modeling and understanding these interactions is
a useful perspective on a range of social computing studies.
Most of these interactions are positive relationships, such
as friend, trust, like, support, and approval. Meanwhile, the
conflicts on the web (Kumar et al. 2018) are everywhere,
forming negative links that indicate hostility, distrust, hate,
disagree, and disapproval. Since the interactions are generated by people and reflect people’s attitude and psychology, related researches on social psychology (e.g., status
theory and balance theory) shed light on the social mechanism of signed networks. These two theories are widely
used in signed network analysis (Leskovec, Huttenlocher,
and Kleinberg 2010a). In signed network analysis, link sign
prediction is to predict the sign of a given link. Leskovec,
Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg carefully extract features based
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding Author

196

