The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ShapeNet: A Shapelet-Neural Network Approach for
Multivariate Time Series Classification
Guozhong Li1 , Byron Choi1 , Jianliang Xu1 , Sourav S Bhowmick2 ,
Kwok-Pan Chun3 , Grace Lai-Hung Wong4
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
School of Computing Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Geography, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
4
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{csgzli, bchoi, xujl}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, assourav@ntu.edu.sg, kpchun@hkbu.edu.hk, wonglaihung@cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

Introduction

such as 1 Nearest Neighbor (1-NN) with Euclidean distance
(ED) or Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) (Berndt and Clifford 1994).
Some related studies on improving MTSC accuracy are
presented in Section . In particular, shapelets (Ye and Keogh
2009) are short discriminative time series subsequences.
The effectiveness of shapelet-based classifiers of UTSC has
been proven by many related studies in the last decade,
e.g., logical shapelets (Mueen, Keogh, and Young 2011),
fast shapelets (Rakthanmanon and Keogh 2013), learning
shapelets (Grabocka et al. 2014) and dynamic shapelets (Ma
et al. 2020). Their efficiency has improved significantly recently (Li et al. 2020; Hou, Kwok, and Zurada 2016). Importantly, shapelets themselves are intuitive, and the distances
between shapelets and time series from different classes
indicate significant differences in the classes. To integrate
shapelets with standard classifiers, such as SVM and the
Naive Bayes classifier, shapelet transformation (Lines et al.
2012) has been proposed.
Challenges. A shapelet-based approach for MTSC is
in its infancy, however. Few shapelet-based methods
for MTSC have been introduced (Bostrom and Bagnall
2017)(Grabocka, Wistuba, and Schmidt-Thieme 2016). The
challenges of a shapelet approach for MTSC can be listed as
follows.

Multivariate time series (MTS), containing multiple observations at each timestamp, are ubiquitous in many applications, ranging from astronomy, biology, geoscience, and
smart cities, to health care, human action recognition, marketing, and other scientific and social domains. For example, data from electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) are standard multivariate data
that have a wide range of applications in medicine, neurology, and psychology. Multivariate time series classification (MTSC) has been one of the most fundamental tasks of
MTS. However, MTSC has received much less research attention than the specific case of univariate time series classification (UTSC). Various methods (Bagnall et al. 2017) have
been proposed for UTSC, and its accuracy has increased
significantly when compared to some benchmark methods,

• First, multivariate time series, of course, have multiple
variables. Shapelet candidates can be voluminous and heterogeneous. Exhaustive searches of shapelets (Bostrom
and Bagnall 2017)(Grabocka, Wistuba, and SchmidtThieme 2016) can be inaccurate.
• Second, shapelet candidates of different variables can be
of different lengths, and such shapelets are hard to compare. With excessive candidates, it is not clear how to select the discriminative ones for classification.
• Third, most existing studies take a black-box approach.
Few methods provide interpretable results for understanding and explaining the classification. It is crucial
that the MTSC approach maintains the interpretability of
shapelets.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions. In this paper, we propose a new shapeletneural network approach for the MTSC problem, called

Time series shapelets are short discriminative subsequences
that recently have been found not only to be accurate but
also interpretable for the classification problem of univariate time series (UTS). However, existing work on shapelets
selection cannot be applied to multivariate time series classification (MTSC) since the candidate shapelets of MTSC may
come from different variables of different lengths and thus
cannot be directly compared. To address this challenge, in
this paper, we propose a novel model called ShapeNet, which
embeds shapelet candidates of different lengths into a unified space for shapelet selection. The network is trained using cluster-wise triplet loss, which considers the distance between anchor and multiple positive (negative) samples and
the distance between positive (negative) samples, which are
important for convergence. We compute representative and
diversified final shapelets rather than directly using all the
embeddings for model building to avoid a large fraction of
non-discriminative shapelet candidates. We have conducted
experiments on ShapeNet with competitive state-of-the-art
and benchmark methods using UEA MTS datasets. The results show that the accuracy of ShapeNet is the best of all the
methods compared. Furthermore, we illustrate the shapelets’
interpretability with two case studies.

8375

