The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computational Analyses of the Electoral College:
Campaigning Is Hard But Approximately Manageable
Sina Dehghani,1 Hamed Saleh,2 Saeed Seddighin,3 Shang-Hua Teng4
1

Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences
2
University of Maryland
3
TTIC
4
University of Southern California
sina.dehghani@gmail.com, hameelas@gmail.com, saeedreza.seddighin@gmail.com, shanghua@usc.edu
Abstract

Electoral College, Political Campaigns, and
Multi-Battleground Resource Allocation

In the classical discrete Colonel Blotto game—introduced
by Borel in 1921—two colonels simultaneously distribute
their troops across multiple battlefields. The winner of each
battlefield is determined by a winner-take-all rule, independently of other battlefields. In the original formulation, each
colonel’s goal is to win as many battlefields as possible. The
Blotto game and its extensions have been used in a wide
range of applications from political campaign—exemplified
by the U.S presidential election—to marketing campaign,
from (innovative) technology competition to sports competition. Despite persistent efforts, efficient methods for finding the optimal strategies in Blotto games have been elusive for almost a century—due to exponential explosion in
the organic solution space—until Ahmadinejad, Dehghani,
Hajiaghayi, Lucier, Mahini, and Seddighin developed the
first polynomial-time algorithm for this fundamental gametheoretical problem in 2016. However, that breakthrough
polynomial-time solution has some structural limitation. It
applies only to the case where troops are homogeneous with
respect to battlegruounds, as in Borel’s original formulation:
For each battleground, the only factor that matters to the winner’s payoff is how many troops as opposed to which sets of
troops are opposing one another in that battleground.

The president of the United States is elected by the Electoral
College, which consists of electors selected based on 51 concurrent elections. The number of electors each of the 50
states and D. C. can select is determined every 10 years by
the United States Census. All but two states1 use a winnertake-all system, and in typical election without any thirdparty candidate, the ticket that wins the majority votes in the
state earns the right to have their slate of electors from that
state chosen to vote in the Electoral College. Thus, in principle, the team that receives the majority of electoral votes
wins the race and its main candidate is elected as president.
A presidential campaign is a competition across multiple
political battlegrounds, one in each state. During this process, the team for each candidate must strategically allocate
their resources—campaign budgets, candidate’s time, onthe-ground staff, policy decisions to name a few—to achieve
the ultimate goal, that is, to maximize the total number of
the electoral votes—their total payoff—on the election day.
Because the president is not directly elected by national
popular vote, any investment in the states highly biased toward a party could be unwise and wasted. Candidates can
count on their stronghold states and focus their resources
on swing states to improve their chances of winning in the
Electoral College. The varying political landscapes highlight the underlying fact that different battleground states
likely have different payoff functions—in response to campaign’s resource allocation—in this (zero sum) two-playermulti-battleground strategical game.
If the 2016 US Election is any guide,2 election prediction is challenging, let alone political campaigns. Of course,
developing a comprehensive mathematical theory for political campaigns or analyzing the pros and cons of Electoral College vs popular vote is beyond the scope of this
paper. Here, we will focus on game-theoretical strategies
for resource allocation motivated by political campaign as
a generalized framework for two-player-multi-battleground
games. We study the computational problems motivated

In this paper, we consider a more general setting of the
two-player-multi-battleground game, in which multifaceted
resources (troops) may have different contributions to different battlegrounds. In the case of U.S presidential campaign, for example, one may interpret this as different types
of resources—human, financial, political—that teams can invest in each state. We provide a complexity-theoretical evidence that, in contrast to Borel’s homogeneous setting, finding optimal strategies in multifaceted Colonel Blotto games
is intractable. We complement this complexity result with
a polynomial-time algorithm that finds approximately optimal strategies with provable guarantees. We also study a further generalization when two competitors do not have zerosum/constant-sum payoffs. We show that optimal strategies
in these two-player-multi-battleground games are as hard to
compute and approximate as Nash equilibria in general noncooperative games and economic equilibria in exchange markets.

1

Maine and Nebraska are the exceptions.
Since the September 2020 submission of this paper, for which
the research started in the summer of 2018, another hotly contested
US Presidential Election was held.
2

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5294

