The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

One for More: Selecting Generalizable Samples for Generalizable ReID Model
Enwei Zhang1 , Xinyang Jiang1† * , Hao Cheng1 , Ancong Wu2 , Fufu Yu 1 , Ke Li 1 ,
Xiaowei Guo 1 , Feng Zheng 3 , Weishi Zheng 2 , Xing Sun1†
1
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
3
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2

Abstract
Current training objectives of existing person ReIDentification (ReID) models only ensure that the loss
of the model decreases on selected training batch, with no
regards to the performance on samples outside the batch.
It will inevitably cause the model to over-fit the data in
the dominant position (e.g., head data in imbalanced class,
easy samples or noisy samples). The latest resampling
methods address the issue by designing specific criterion
to select specific samples that trains the model generalize
more on certain type of data (e.g., hard samples, tail data),
which is not adaptive to the inconsistent real world ReID
data distributions. Therefore, instead of simply presuming
on what samples are generalizable, this paper proposes
a one-for-more training objective that directly takes the
generalization ability of selected samples as a loss function
and learn a sampler to automatically select generalizable
samples. More importantly, our proposed one-for-more
based sampler can be seamlessly integrated into the ReID
training framework which is able to simultaneously train
ReID models and the sampler in an end-to-end fashion. The
experimental results show that our method can effectively
improve the ReID model training and boost the performance
of ReID models.

Figure 1: Comparison between one-for-one objective and
one-for-more objective.

In standard ReID training task, at each iteration, after updating the model with a batch of selected samples, a normal
training objective only makes sure the loss of these sample
decreases, but has no guarantee that the loss of the samples
outside the batch will also decreases, as shown in Figure 1
a). We call this type of objectives one-for-one objectives because the samples are selected for improving model performance on themselves, with no regards to performance on the
samples outside the batch. As shown in 1 b), after updating
model with the selected sample, if the loss of more samples
decreases other than the sample itself, we call this sample
a more generalizable sample. Intuitively, training with generalizable samples gives a model with more generalization
ability.
Real world ReID data distribution is usually highly imbalanced with notable amount of hard samples (e.g., view/pose
change, occlusion, camera resolution etc) and noisy data,
and one-for-one objective could potentially cause models
over-fitting on a dominate part of the data. To avoid overfitting, methods including re-sampling and re-weighting
propose different criteria to select samples to train the model
to generalize more on certain type of data. For example, following are some typical selection criteria for state-of-the-art
ReID methods:

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at recognizing pedestrians across non-overlapping camera views, which increasingly draws attention due to its wide applications in surveillance, tracking, smart retail, etc (Zheng et al. 2015; Zhao
et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018). As deep learning prevails,
the CNN based ReID methods progress rapidly and achieve
impressive performance on benchmark datasets. However,
ReID remains a challenging problem due to the view variance, domain changes, partial occlusion and many other factors. Most of the existing ReID methods solve the these issues by designing new network structures or innovative loss
functions (Sun et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b), but very few
pay attention to the nature of training data distribution.
* Enwei Zhang and Xinyang Jiang contribute equally
†
Corresponding Author (winfredsun@tencent.com, xinyangj@
zju.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3324

