The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Dimensional Explanation of Target Variables from Documents
Diego Antognini,1 Claudiu Musat,2 Boi Faltings 1
1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Swisscom, Switzerland
{diego.antognini,claudiu.musat,boi.faltings}@{epfl.ch, swisscom.com}

Abstract
Automated predictions require explanations to be interpretable
by humans. Past work used attention and rationale mechanisms
to find words that predict the target variable of a document.
Often though, they result in a tradeoff between noisy explanations or a drop in accuracy. Furthermore, rationale methods
cannot capture the multi-faceted nature of justifications for
multiple targets, because of the non-probabilistic nature of
the mask. In this paper, we propose the Multi-Target Masker
(MTM) to address these shortcomings. The novelty lies in the
soft multi-dimensional mask that models a relevance probability distribution over the set of target variables to handle
ambiguities. Additionally, two regularizers guide MTM to induce long, meaningful explanations. We evaluate MTM on
two datasets and show, using standard metrics and human
annotations, that the resulting masks are more accurate and
coherent than those generated by the state-of-the-art methods.
Moreover, MTM is the first to also achieve the highest F1
scores for all the target variables simultaneously.

Introduction
Neural models have become the standard for natural language processing tasks. Despite the large performance gains
achieved by these complex models, they offer little transparency about their inner workings. Thus, their performance
comes at the cost of interpretability, limiting their practical
utility. Integrating interpretability into a model would supply
reasoning for the prediction, increasing its utility.
Perhaps the simplest means of explaining predictions of
complex models is by selecting relevant input features. Prior
work includes various methods to find relevant words in
the text input to predict the target variable of a document.
Attention mechanisms (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) model the word selection by a conditional importance distribution over the inputs,
used as explanations to produce a weighted context vector
for downstream modules. However, their reliability has been
questioned (Jain and Wallace 2019; Pruthi et al. 2020). Another line of research includes rationale generation methods
(Lundberg and Lee 2017; Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016;
Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016). If the selected text input
features are short and concise – called a rationale or mask –
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12507

Attention Model
Trained on `pred
and no constraint

Multi-Target Masker (Ours)
Trained on `pred
with λp , `sel , and `cont

attending an all ! - ! day b ! - day party at
! 3 ! p.m. ! , ! i thought i ’d take it easy !
at ! first ! , and i was ! thirsty and ! craving
some ! fruit ! , ! so ! ... ! the beer pours !
a slightly ! cloudy pale straw colour , with
a few fingers of soapy white head . it smells
quite strongly of sweet apricot and peach !
. ! the ! taste is very fruity - ! lychee ! , !
peach ! , ! passionfruit ! , a bit of ! candied
! sugar ! . the ! faint wheat ! grain base is
pretty ! much masked by all of this fruitiness
! . the ! carbonation is on the low side ! ,
the body kind of ! sticky , and it ! finishes !
sweet and clean ! . ! very refreshing ! , more
like juice ! than beer ! , as the ! low ! abv
does n’t really render any alcohol ! warming
! . ! a tasty example of ! the ! fringe ! of !
what can be ! considered beer ! .

attending an all - day b - day party at 3 p.m.
, i thought i ’d take it easy at first , and i
was thirsty and craving some fruit , so ... the
beer pours a slightly cloudy pale straw colour ,
a few fingers of soapy white head ! . it smells
quite strongly of sweet apricot and peach !
. the taste is very fruity - lychee , peach ,
passionfruit , a bit of candied sugar . the faint
wheat grain base is pretty ! much masked by
all of this fruitiness . the carbonation is on
the low side , the body kind of sticky , and
it finishes sweet and clean . very refreshing
, more like juice than beer , as the low abv
does n’t really render any alcohol warming .
a tasty example of the fringe of what can be
considered beer .

Aspect Changes ?: 56

Aspect Changes ?: 3

Figure 1: A beer review with explanations produced by an
attention model and our Multi-Target Masker model. The
colors depict produced rationales (i.e., justifications) of the
rated aspects: Appearance (red), Smell (blue), Taste (purple),
and Palate (green). The induced rationales mostly lead to long
sequences that clearly describe each aspect (one switch ? per
aspect), while the attention model has many short, noisy
interleaving sequences.
and suffice on their own to yield the prediction, it can potentially be understood and verified against domain knowledge
(Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016; Chang et al. 2019). Specifically, these rationale generation methods have been recently
proposed to provide such explanations alongside the prediction. Ideally, a good rationale should yield the same or higher
performance as using the full input.
The key motivation of our work arises from the limitations of the existing methods. First, the attention mechanisms
induce an importance distribution over the inputs, but the
resulting explanation consists of many short and noisy word
sequences (Figure 1). In addition, the rationale generation
methods produce coherent explanations, but the rationales are
based on a binary selection of words, leading to the following
shortcomings: 1. they explain only one target variable, 2. they
make a priori assumptions about the data, and 3. they make it
difficult to capture ambiguities in the text. Regarding the first

