The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Provably Good Solutions to the Knapsack Problem
via Neural Networks of Bounded Size ∗
Christoph Hertrich† and Martin Skutella
Institute of Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin
hertrich@math.tu-berlin.de, martin.skutella@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

cally solving combinatorial optimization (CO) problems or
empirically improving classical solution methods (Bengio,
Lodi, and Prouvost 2018). For example, Yang et al. (2018)
and Xu et al. (2020) utilize NNs in order to empirically enhance dynamic programming, a very classical CO method.
While the methods used in these papers indeed provide fast
and empirically near-optimal solutions, their use of NNs
makes it virtually impossible to give theoretical optimality
or worst-case approximation guarantees. Motivated by this
imbalance, and focusing on the Knapsack Problem, which is
a prime example of CO problems that can be solved via dynamic programming, we investigate the following question:

The development of a satisfying and rigorous mathematical
understanding of the performance of neural networks is a
major challenge in artificial intelligence. Against this background, we study the expressive power of neural networks
through the example of the classical NP-hard Knapsack Problem. Our main contribution is a class of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with rectified linear units that are iteratively
applied to each item of a Knapsack instance and thereby compute optimal or provably good solution values. We show that
an RNN of depth four and width depending quadratically on
the profit of an optimum Knapsack solution is sufficient to
find optimum Knapsack solutions. We also prove the following tradeoff between the size of an RNN and the quality of the
computed Knapsack solution: for Knapsack instances consisting of n items, an RNN of depth five and√width w computes a solution of value at least 1 − O(n2 / w) times the
optimum solution value. Our results build upon a classical dynamic programming formulation of the Knapsack Problem as
well as a careful rounding of profit values that are also at the
core of the well-known fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme for the Knapsack Problem. Finally, we point out that
our results can be generalized to many other combinatorial
optimization problems that admit dynamic programming solution methods, such as various Shortest Path Problems, the
Longest Common Subsequence Problem, and the Traveling
Salesperson Problem.

1

Which neural network size is theoretically sufficient to find
solutions of provable quality for the Knapsack Problem?
We give an answer to this question by presenting a class of
carefully constructed NNs with provable quality guarantees.
In addition, we argue that our approach is not at all specific
for the Knapsack Problem, but can be generalized to many
other CO problems, e.g., various Shortest Path Problems, the
Longest Common Subsequence Problem, and the Traveling
Salesperson Problem.
The Knapsack Problem. The Knapsack Problem constitutes one of the oldest and most studied problems in Combinatorial Optimization (CO). Given a set of items with certain profit and size values, as well as a Knapsack capacity,
the Knapsack Problem asks for a subset of items with maximum total profit such that the total size of the subset does
not exceed the capacity.
The Knapsack Problem is one of Karp’s 21 original NPcomplete problems (Karp 1972) and has numerous applications in a wide variety of fields, ranging from production and
transportation, over finance and investment, to network security and cryptography. It often appears as a subproblem at
the core of more complex problems; see, e.g., Martello and
Toth (1990); Kellerer, Pferschy, and Pisinger (2004). This
fact substantiates the Knapsack Problem’s prominent importance as one of the key problems in CO. In particular, the
Knapsack Problem is frequently being used as a testbed for
measuring the progress of various exact and heuristic solution approaches and computational methods such as, e.g., integer programming, constraint programming, or evolutionary algorithms. In integer programming, for example, the

Introduction

Deep learning and neural networks (NNs) are at the heart
of some of the greatest advances in modern computer science. They enable huge breakthroughs in applications like
computer vision, translation, speech recognition, and autonomous driving, to name just a few; see, e.g., LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton (2015). While numerous computational
studies present impressive empirical proof of neural networks’ computational power, we are still far away from a
more rigorous theoretical explanation of these observations.
Apart from the popular applications named above, it
has been shown that NNs have high potential for practi∗
The full version of this article is available on arXiv (Hertrich
and Skutella 2020).
†
Supported by DFG-GRK 2434 Facets of Complexity.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7685

