The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Category Dictionary Guided Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Object
Detection
Shuai Li,1,2 Jianqiang Huang,2 Xian-Sheng Hua,2 Lei Zhang1,2
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{csshuaili,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, {jianqiang.hjq, xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

adaptation (DA), which aims to minimize the gap between
the two domains and learn a shared discriminative model for
both domains (Ganin and Lempitsky 2014; Long et al. 2016;
Tzeng et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2019). In this paper, we focus on the challenging unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem, where no labels
are available for target domain.
Many previous UDA methods minimize the domain shift
by performing feature alignment to learn domain-invariant
features. Following this line of research, most cross-domain
object detection methods attempt to address domain adaptation by minimizing the domain discrepancy at different levels, such as appearance level (Inoue et al. 2018) and feature level (Cai et al. 2019; Khodabandeh et al. 2019; Saito
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2019). Compared with classification
and segmentation, feature alignment for detection is much
harder given the complex combinations of various objects
and different scene layouts between the two domains. Brutally enforcing global feature alignment may cause negative
transfer and hurt the discrimination ability of the final detector. In addition, learning domain-invariant features ignores
the domain-specific knowledge of target data, which is of
particular importance for detection as the target domain has
its special characteristics that cannot be well encoded in the
aligned feature space.
Another line of research focuses on learning domain specific knowledge by fully exploiting the target data. The domain specific knowledge has been explored in classification (Zou et al. 2019) and segmentation (Zou et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2019) by utilizing a self-training paradigm on
the pseudo-labeled target data annotated by the knowledge
from source domain (e.g., the model trained on source data).
Self-training is one of the powerful ways for domain adaptation since it can achieve class-wise adaptation. In this line
of research, how to generate high quality pseudo labels is
critical to the final performance as error-prone labels may
mislead the detector training. It is required that the assigned
pseudo boxes should be reliable and informative. The classifier used in the detector, e.g., softmax classifier, is not effective to assign labels for detection because there exists an
inconsistency between the classification score and the IoU
of a candidate target box when the classifier is trained on
source data. More specifically, it is hard to distinguish high
quality boxes from low quality ones as a high score does not

Unsupervised domain adaption (UDA) is a promising solution to enhance the generalization ability of a model from a
source domain to a target domain without manually annotating labels for the target data. Recent works in cross-domain
object detection mostly resort to adversarial feature adaptation to match the marginal distributions of two domains.
However, perfect feature alignment is hard to achieve and
what’s more is likely to cause negative transfer due to the
high complexity of object detection. In this paper, we take
a different approach to reduce the domain gap by a selftraining paradigm, which regards the pseudo-labels as ground
truth to fully exploit the unlabeled target data. In order to
generate more informative pseudo labels, we further propose
a category dictionary guided (CDG) UDA model for crossdomain object detection, which learns category-specific dictionaries from the source domain to represent the candidate
boxes in target domain. The representation residual can be
used for not only pseudo label assignment but also quality
(e.g., IoU) estimation of the candidate box. Compared with
decision boundary based classifiers such as softmax, the proposed CDG scheme can select more informative and reliable
pseudo-boxes. Experimental results on benchmark datasets
show that the proposed CDG significantly exceeds the stateof-the-arts in cross-domain object detection.

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task,
aiming to detect object labels and locations in an image.
The detection performance has gone through a continuous
growth due to the rapid development of deep learning techniques (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016) and
large scale datasets (Lin et al. 2014; Deng et al. 2009) in
recent years. It is often assumed that training data and test
data follow the same distribution, which however may not
be true in real world environments. Factors such as illumination, viewpoints, weather condition and cameras can cause
domain shifts between the source data and target data. A
state-of-the-art detector trained on the source data may degrade drastically when applied to the target data. One possible solution is to annotate new data and retrain the model.
Unfortunately, annotating labels at the box level is expensive
and time-consuming. Another promising solution is domain
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1949

