The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Faithfulness in Open Domain Table-to-text Generation
from an Entity-centric View
Tianyu Liu 1 ∗ , Xin Zheng 2 3 ∗ , Baobao Chang 1 4 , Zhifang Sui 1 4
1
2

Ministry of Education (MOE) Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
tianyu0421@pku.edu.cn, zheng xin@bupt.edu.cn, chbb@pku.edu.cn, szf@pku.edu.cn
records in source table would increase generation coverage1 ,
and truncating the sentences prone to hallucination in reference text would accordingly reduce generation hallucination. However, we also observe a trade-off between generation faithfulness and coverage, e.g. truncating reference text
would possibly lower the generation coverage to source table. We thus seek for an alternative method to reduce the
hallucinations in the training stage while maintaining high
coverage.
To this end, we firstly propose plan-based generation
with pseudo parallel training corpus, which we call the
augmented plan-based method (Sec 3.1). Some prior work
(Moryossef, Goldberg, and Dagan 2019; Ferreira et al. 2019)
have shown that the two-stage plan-based generation could
lead to a more accuracy and controllable generation in datato-text generation. However, most previous work focus on
high quality datasets without much content mismatch between the input table and the reference text (e.g. W EB NLG
and E2E (Dušek, Novikova, and Rieser 2019)). However,
in the open domain setting, we have to face noisy training
data 2 , i.e. hallucinations in reference text. Thus we exploit
serialized plans which are formulated as text sequences, in
this way, we can easily use any established sequence-tosequence model as neural planner rather than a dedicated
planning module (Moryossef, Goldberg, and Dagan 2019;
Moryossef, Dagan, and Goldberg 2019). Our plans model
the number of sentences to be generated and the order of
given table records in each sentence. In the plan-to-text
phase, we create a pseudo parallel training corpus which incorporates the auxiliary uncovered entities in the reference
text into an augmented plan, and then the model generates
text according to the augmented plan. The augmented plans
effectively reduce the hallucinations in the pseudo training
corpus and correspondingly encourage the generator to stick
to the designated plans. The experiments show that the proposed augmented plan based methods not only reduce about

Abstract
In open domain table-to-text generation, we notice that the
unfaithful generation usually contains hallucinated content
which can not be aligned to any input table record. We thus try
to evaluate the generation faithfulness with two entity-centric
metrics: table record coverage and the ratio of hallucinated
entities in text, both of which are shown to have strong agreement with human judgements. Then based on these metrics,
we quantitatively analyze the correlation between training
data quality and generation fidelity which indicates the potential usage of entity information in faithful generation. Motivated by these findings, we propose two methods for faithful
generation: 1) augmented training by incorporating the auxiliary entity information, including both an augmented planbased model and an unsupervised model and 2) training instance selection based on faithfulness ranking. We show these
approaches improve generation fidelity in both full dataset
setting and few shot learning settings by both automatic and
human evaluations.

1

Introduction

The difficulty of faithful table-to-text generation originates
from the divergence of source tables and reference text
(Perez-Beltrachini and Lapata 2018) in the training stage, especially for open domain datasets without human curation,
e.g. W IKIPERSON (Wang et al. 2018). In W IKIPERSON, we
observe that the unfaithful generation, as well as some reference text in the training data, often contains hallucinated
entities which can not be aligned with any input table record.
This motivates us to evaluate the faithfulness of a text to a
given table by two entity-centric metrics: the statistics of table record coverage and hallucinated entities in both training and evaluation stages. The metrics are computed based
on the name entities recognition (NER) in text with offthe-shelf tools, and their alignment with table records. We
find the proposed metrics have high correlation with human
judgements (Sec 2.1).
Then we quantitatively study how training data quality
affects the generation fidelity (Sec 2.2) based on the proposed metrics. Specifically we show that filtering uncovered

1
Measuring generation coverage can be useful in some specific
scenarios. The generator would be expected to cover all records
(e.g. W EB NLG (Colin et al. 2016)) or only summarize salient
records (e.g. W IKI B IO (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016)).
2
The main reason for data noise is the lack of human intervention in data collection. It could be of high cost to monitor the faithfulness of multi-sentence reference in the open domain.

∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13415

