The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CNN Profiler on Polar Coordinate Images for Tropical Cyclone Structure Analysis
Boyo Chen, Buo-Fu Chen∗ , Chun-Min Hsiao
National Taiwan University
boyochen722@gmail.com, bfchen777@gmail.com, a0979155270@gmail.com

Abstract

winds, and the magnitude of storm surges (Powell and Reinhold 2007). Therefore, a better TC structure analysis serving
as the initial data of numerical weather prediction models is
critical to improving the prediction accuracy regarding TCs
(Tallapragada 2015; Bender et al. 2016).
It is not easy to accurately analyze the structure of a TC,
noting that TCs spend most of their lifetime on the open
ocean, where meteorological observation is severely limited.
Therefore, meteorologists strongly rely on satellite remote
sensing to estimate TC surface wind field, TC radial wind
profile, and structural parameters (e.g., intensity, the radius
of maximum wind, size; please refer to section 2).
The most straightforward way to analyze TC structure is
using space-borne radar surface wind observation (fig. 1),
such as Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT, (Figa-Saldaña
et al. 2002; Knaff et al. 2011)). Although ASCAT provides
high-quality surface wind observation outside of the TC
inner-core (i.e., larger than approximately 80-150 km radius), ASCAT only provides two scans of a TC per day.
Sometimes, only a portion of the TC is observed due to ASCAT’s limited swath width.
To estimate TC structure at a higher frequency, other
kinds of satellite observations have to be used, such as microwave sounders on low-Earth-orbit satellites (Knaff et al.
2011; Demuth et al. 2004; Wimmers, Velden, and Cossuth
2019) and images from geostationary satellites (Velden et al.
2006; Knaff, Longmore, and Molenar 2014; Chen et al.
2019). Infrared images that observe cloud features associated with a TC can be used to estimate several important
TC structural parameters, including intensity and size. For
instance, Knaff et al. (2014) developed a TC size estimation
technique based on feature engineering. Their model utilized
principal component analysis of the azimuthally-averaged
radial profile of the infrared brightness temperature and linear regression to estimate TC size. With the structural parameters retrieved from satellite images, the TC radial wind
profile can be constructed by a physically-based parametric
wind model (Knaff et al. 2016; Morris and Ruf 2017).
However, there is some difficulty in using such a sample parametric model to analyze the TC structure. For example, although satellite remote sensing provides various
observational data for TC structure analysis, the conventional statistical methods face limitations in analyzing multichannel, high-dimensional, and temporal-spatially heteroge-

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved great
success in analyzing tropical cyclones (TC) with satellite images in several tasks, such as TC intensity estimation. In contrast, TC structure, which is conventionally described by a
few parameters estimated subjectively by meteorology specialists, is still hard to be profiled objectively and routinely.
This study applies CNN on satellite images to create the entire TC structure profiles, covering all the structural parameters. By utilizing the meteorological domain knowledge to
construct TC wind profiles based on historical structure parameters, we provide valuable labels for training in our newly
released benchmark dataset. With such a dataset, we hope to
attract more attention to this crucial issue among data scientists. Meanwhile, a baseline is established based on a specialized convolutional model operating on polar-coordinates.
We discovered that it is more feasible and physically reasonable to extract structural information on polar-coordinates,
instead of Cartesian coordinates, according to a TC’s rotational and spiral natures. Experimental results on the released benchmark dataset verified the robustness of the proposed model and demonstrated the potential for applying
deep learning techniques for this barely developed yet important topic. For codes and implementation details, please visit
https://github.com/BoyoChen/TCSA-CNN-profiler .

1

Introduction

A tropical cyclone (TC), also called hurricane or typhoon,
is a kind of rotating storm formed on tropical oceans; it
is characterized by a low-pressure center (i.e., the “eye”),
eyewall associated with deep convective clouds and strong
winds, and spiral rainbands outside of the eyewall. This severe weather system often causes serious damage to human
society due to gusty winds, torrential rainfall, high waves,
and storm surges.
Although the improvement of TC forecasting in recent
years ensures fairly good prediction of the track and primary rainfall distribution of a TC, there is still room for improvement in the ability to predict TC structure Knaff et al.;
Sampson and Knaff; Sampson et al.. Moreover, the TC structure, in terms of its 2-D surface wind fields, is closely related
to the potential TC damage, the area affected by gale-force
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

991

