The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

VRU Pose-SSD: Multiperson Pose Estimation For Automated Driving
Chandan Kumar, 1 Jayanth Ramesh,1 Bodhisattwa Chakraborty,1 Renjith Raman,1
Christoph Weinrich,2 Anurag Mundhada,3 Arjun Jain,3,4 Fabian B. Flohr 5
1
Mercedes-Benz R&D, India,
Robert Bosch GmbH, Germany,
3
Axogyan AI, India,
4
Indian Institute of Science, India.
5
Mercedes-Benz AG, Germany
{chandan.kumar, jayanth.ramesh, bodhisattwa.chakraborty, renjith.raman, fabian.flohr}@daimler.com,
christoph.weinrich@bosch.com, anurag@axogyan.com, arjunjain@iisc.ac.in
Abstract
2

We present a fast and efficient approach for joint person detection and pose estimation optimized for automated driving
(AD) in urban scenarios. We use a multitask weight sharing architecture to jointly train detection and pose estimation.
This modular architecture allows us to accommodate different downstream tasks in the future. By systematic large-scale
experiments on the Tsinghua-Daimler Urban Pose Dataset
(TDUP), we obtain multiple models with varying accuracyspeed trade-offs. We then quantize and optimize our network
for deployment and present a detailed analysis of the efficacy of the algorithm. We introduce a two-stage evaluation
strategy, which is more suitable for AD and achieves a significant performance improvement in comparison to state-ofthe-art approaches. Our optimized model runs at 52 fps on
full HD images and still reaches a competitive performance
of 32.25 LAMR. We are confident that our work serves as
an enabler to tackle higher-level tasks like VRU intention estimation and gesture recognition, which rely on stable pose
estimates and will play a crucial role in future AD systems.

Figure 1: An estimated articulated pose can serve as an effective intermediate representation for inferring the direction of
motion, intention or gesture of a VRU.

Introduction
Significant progress has been made over the last decade on
video-based Vulnerable Road Users (VRU) detection. In the
area of driver assistance, this has led to the first commercial
active VRU systems reaching the market. In the context of
automated driving (AD) or future driver assistance systems,
it might be desired to infer a more detailed model of the
VRU behavior to cope also with more complex scenarios in
urban environments. While a human driver makes constant
judgments and driving decisions based on perceived VRU
context cues, such as intention (e.g. inferred by head and body
orientation, gait cycle) or explicit gestures (e.g. cyclist hand
gestures), this also motivates the estimation and use of such
cues for future driver assistance or AD systems (Aparicio
et al. 2017) (Kooij et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, the diversity of VRU appearance, owing to
clothing, pose, size, ethnicity, gender etc. presents a challenge
at perceiving and modeling VRU context cues accurately using image features. One way to solve this is an appearance
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15331

invariant representation, which is discriminative for downstream tasks such as intention and gesture estimation. As
shown in Fig. 1, articulated pose can be utilized to generate an appearance-invariant intermediate representation and
is widely supported in literature for modeling VRU behavior like action recognition (Hariyono and Jo 2015), crossing intention estimation (Fang and López 2019), trajectory
prediction (Rasouli et al. 2019) and gesture recognition (Tripathi et al. 2019). Even though there have been great strides
in human pose estimation, there has been less focus from
the perspective of real-time applications such as AD usecases (Kothari et al. 2017) (Kress et al. 2018). Most renowned
approaches are either computation-intensive (He et al. 2017)
or memory-intensive (Huang, Zhu, and Huang 2019), making them today not optimal for real-time AD applications
which demands inference on high resolution images with
high frame rates. Another challenge in tackling this problem is the lack of AD domain-specific pose datasets. While
there exist datasets (Lin et al. 2014) (Jhuang et al. 2013),
(Andriluka et al. 2014) for human action and pose estimation,
they are not of automotive-grade.
This paper proposes VRU Pose-SSD, an extensible VRU
detection and 2-D pose estimation model, optimized for deployment on an AD platform. We explain the design choices
of our architecture along with adopted changes to attain a
faster model inference with minimum trade-off in accuracy.

