The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Kernel-convoluted Deep Neural Networks with Data Augmentation
Minjin Kim, 1 Young-geun Kim, 1 Dongha Kim, 1 Yongdai Kim, 2 Myunghee Cho Paik 1
1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University
School of Data Science, Seoul National University
kmj1404@snu.ac.kr, cib009@snu.ac.kr, dongha0718@hanmail.net, ydkim0903@gmail.com, myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

been commonly applied (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simard et al. 1998). Recently, sample-mixed augmentation, called Mixup, has emerged as an effective tool
(Zhang et al. 2018). The Mixup method generates virtual
samples based on linear interpolations between random pairs
of inputs and their corresponding labels. Trained deep models using the Mixup-generated samples have demonstrated
superb performances in supervised learning (Zhang et al.
2018; Liang et al. 2018), unsupervised learning (Beckham
et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2019), and semi-supervised learning
(Berthelot et al. 2019; Verma et al. 2019b). The authors of
the Mixup method (Zhang et al. 2018) conjecture a poor generalization and lack of the robustness to adversarial examples may be due to unnecessary oscillations at in-between
observed data points. The method is designed to encourage
the model to behave linearly between training samples to
curtail undesirable oscillations when predicting outside the
training examples. This motivational claim is cogent, but has
not been scrutinized.
In this paper, we formally investigate this premise, propose a way to explicitly impose constraints, and extend it
to incorporate with implicit constraints. First, we propose a
function class where constraints are explicitly imposed and
provide a formal risk analysis. Second, we propose to incorporate the Mixup method in the proposed function class and
provide corresponding risk analysis.
In the first part, our strategy starts by paying attention to
the role of data augmentation in placing model constraints.
For example, data augmentation techniques such as horizontal reflections and rotations encourage training to find
invariant functions to corresponding transformations. Recent works have attempted to explicitly impose these constraints through careful construction of models (Cohen and
Welling 2016; Tai, Bailis, and Valiant 2019; van der Wilk
et al. 2018). Using interpolated data instead of original samples, the Mixup method encourages the models to implicitly
satisfy the linearity constraint and promote smoothness. In
contrast to data augmentation for rotations or flipping, there
has not been an effort to explicitly impose constraints by
constructing models. We fill this gap and build models that
explicitly bring desirable constraints of smoothness. We introduce a new function class composed of kernel-convoluted
models (KCM), a derived function class given original functions. In the KCM, the smoothness constraint is directly im-

The Mixup method, which uses linearly interpolated data, has
emerged as an effective data augmentation tool to improve
generalization performance and the robustness to adversarial examples. The motivation is to curtail undesirable oscillations by its implicit model constraint to behave linearly at
in-between observed data points and promote smoothness. In
this work, we formally investigate this premise, propose a
way to impose smoothness constraints explicitly, and extend
it to incorporate implicit model constraints. First, we derive
a new function class composed of kernel-convoluted models
(KCM) where the smoothness constraint is directly imposed
by locally averaging the original functions with a kernel function. Second, we propose to incorporate the Mixup method
into KCM to expand the domains of smoothness. In both
cases of the KCM and the KCM adapted with the Mixup, we
provide risk analysis, respectively, under mild conditions on
kernel functions. As a result, we show that the upper bound
of the excess risk over a new function class is not slower than
that of the excess risk over the original function class. Using
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, our experiments demonstrate that the KCM with the Mixup outperforms the Mixup
method in terms of generalization and robustness to adversarial examples.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have brought an outstanding performance in various fields such as computer vision
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), and reinforcement learning (Silver et al. 2016). To train deep neural networks, we solve the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problem given data, but this solution could lead to a small
training error, but a large test error, known as overfitting.
This means that the deep neural networks could memorize
a training sample, have poor generalization ability, and lack
robustness against adversarial attacks.
Among the many techniques for regularization to reduce
overfitting, data augmentation has been widely used to improve generalization performance in machine learning. In
particular, in image classification, various data augmentation
methods such as horizontal reflections and rotations have
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8155

