The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Generative Adversarial Framework for Bounding Confounded Causal Effects
Yaowei Hu,1 Yongkai Wu, 2 Lu Zhang, 1 Xintao Wu 1
1

University of Arkansas
Clemson University
yaoweihu@uark.edu, yongkaw@clemson.edu, lz006@uark.edu, xintaowu@uark.edu
2

Abstract

ACE may not be uniquely calculated from the observational
data without further assumptions, known as the unidentifiable situation (Shpitser and Pearl 2008). In an unidentifiable
situation, any estimation of ACEs only based on the observational distribution is not guaranteed to be correct, since there
can be other underlying causal models that also agree with
the observational distribution but result in different ACEs
(Avin, Shpitser, and Pearl 2005).
In order to estimate the ACE in unidentifiable situations,
researchers seek for bounding approaches. In (Balke and
Pearl 1997), the authors develop a constrained optimization
problem for discovering bounds from the observational data
which are guaranteed to be tightest. The general idea is to
shift the randomness of the causal model from the distributions of U to the distributions of mappings so that it covers
all possible domains of U , either categorical, continuous, or
mixed. Then, the optimization is to search mapping distributions with the maximum/minimum ACEs subject to the
constraint that the joint distribution must be consistent with
the data. In a recent work (Wu et al. 2019), the authors extend this idea to bound unidentifiable path-specific effects
and counterfactual effects in addition to the ACE. However,
these methods are limited to categorical observed variables
since the number of distinct functional mappings between
continuous variables are infinite, leading to an infinite number of variables in the optimization problem.
In this paper, we extend the method in (Balke and Pearl
1997) for bounding ACEs to continuous and possibly highdimensional variables, thanks to the significant progress of
generative models made by the machine learning community in past years. Following the spirit of (Balke and Pearl
1997), we also shift the randomness of the causal model
from the distribution of U to the distribution of all possible mappings from A to B. We define a distribution over
the space of all mappings from A to B, which summarizes
all possible equations from (U, A) to B for all possible U .
Since the mapping from A to B can be in arbitrary forms,
we use the neural network as a universal estimator of mappings so that the space of all possible mappings is estimated
by the parameter space Θ of the neural network. Then, given
any distribution over Θ, i.e., P (θ), both the joint distribution
and the ACE can be expressed as functions of P (θ). In order for the induced joint distribution to fit the observational
data, we adopt the generative adversarial learning frame-

Causal inference from observational data is receiving wide
applications in many fields. However, unidentifiable situations, where causal effects cannot be uniquely computed from
observational data, pose critical barriers to applying causal inference to complicated real applications. In this paper, we develop a bounding method for estimating the average causal effect (ACE) under unidentifiable situations due to hidden confounding based on Pearl’s structural causal model. We propose to parameterize the unknown exogenous random variables and structural equations of a causal model using neural
networks and implicit generative models. Then, using an adversarial learning framework, we search the parameter space
to explicitly traverse causal models that agree with the given
observational distribution, and find those that minimize or
maximize the ACE to obtain its lower and upper bounds. The
proposed method does not make assumption about the type
of structural equations and variables. Experiments using both
synthetic and real-world datasets are conducted.

Introduction
Inferring causal effects from observational data is an important task in many fields, including economics (Zhao, Runfola, and Kemper 2017), healthcare (Hu and Kerschberg
2018; Wang and Wu 2019), fair machine learning (Zhang
and Bareinboim 2018; Zhang, Wu, and Wu 2018; Kusner
et al. 2017), etc. Pearl’s structural causal model (Pearl 2009)
is a decent and widely adopted mathematical framework for
conducting causal inference. In the structural causal model,
intervention is a technique that fixes some variable to certain
constant without changing other parts of the model. Facilitated by intervention, the average causal effect (ACE) of one
variable A on another variable B can be formulated as the
average change in B due to interventions on A. The calculation of the ACE from the observational data depends on a
causal graph that specifies the parental relationship among
variables. Under the assumption of no hidden confounding
(i.e., no unobserved common causes of A and B), the ACE
can be calculated using the well-known truncated factorization formula (Pearl 2009). However, the no-hidden confounding assumption is usually over-simplified and needs to
be relaxed in practice. When hidden confounders exist, the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12104

