The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Anomaly Attribution with Likelihood Compensation
Tsuyoshi Idé, Amit Dhurandhar, Jiřı́ Navrátil, Moninder Singh, Naoki Abe
IBM Research, T. J. Watson Research Center
{tide, adhuran, jiri, moninder, nabe}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

input. We aver to this task as anomaly attribution. Specifically, we are concerned with model-agnostic anomaly attribution for black-box regression models, where we want
to explain the deviation between the models prediction and
the true/expected output in as concise a manner as possible.
As a concrete example, consider the scenario of monitoring
building energy consumption as the target variable y (see
Section 5 for the detail). The input to the model is a multivariate sensor measurement x that is typically real-valued
and noisy. Under the assumption that the model is blackbox and the training data are not available, our goal is to
compute a numerical score for each of the input variables,
quantifying the extent to which they are responsible for the
judgment that a given test sample is anomalous.
Anomaly attribution has been studied typically as a subtask of anomaly detection to date. For instance, in subspacebased anomaly detection, computing each variable’s responsibility has been part of the standard procedure for
years (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009). However,
there is little work on how anomaly attribution can be done
when the model is black-box and the training data set is not
available. In the XAI (explainable AI) community, on the
other hand, growing attention has been paid to “post-hoc”
explanations of black-box prediction models. Examples of
the techniques include feature subset selection, feature importance scoring, and sample importance scoring (Costabello et al. 2019; Molnar 2019; Samek et al. 2019). For
anomaly attribution, there are at least two post-hoc explanation approaches that are potentially applicable: (1) those
based on the expected conditional deviation, best known as
the Shapley value, which was first introduced to the machine
learning community by Štrumbelj and Kononenko (2010),
and (2) those based on local linear models, best known under the name of LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations) (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016). In spite
of their popularity, these two approaches may not be directly
useful for anomaly attribution: Given a test sample (xt , y t ),
these methods may explain what the value of f (xt ) itself
can be attributed to. However, what is more relevant is explaining the deviation of f (xt ) from the actual y t .
To address this limitation, we propose likelihood compensation (LC), a new local anomaly attribution approach
for black-box regression models. We formalize the task of
anomaly attribution as a statistical inverse problem that in-

This paper addresses the task of explaining anomalous predictions of a black-box regression model. When using a
black-box model, such as one to predict building energy consumption from many sensor measurements, we often have a
situation where some observed samples may significantly deviate from their prediction. It may be due to a sub-optimal
black-box model, or simply because those samples are outliers. In either case, one would ideally want to compute a
“responsibility score” indicative of the extent to which an input variable is responsible for the anomalous output. In this
work, we formalize this task as a statistical inverse problem:
Given model deviation from the expected value, infer the responsibility score of each of the input variables. We propose
a new method called likelihood compensation (LC), which is
founded on the likelihood principle and computes a correction to each input variable. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first principled framework that computes a responsibility score for real valued anomalous model deviations. We
apply our approach to a real-world building energy prediction
task and confirm its utility based on expert feedback.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of Internet-of-Things technologies, anomaly detection has played a critical role in modern
industrial applications of artificial intelligence (AI). One of
the recent technology trends is to create a “digital twin” using a highly flexible machine learning model, typically deep
neural networks, for monitoring the health of the production
system (Tao et al. 2018). However, the more representational
power the model has, the more difficult it is to understand its
behavior. In particular, explaining deviations between predictions and true/expected measurements is one of the main
pain points. A large deviation from the truth may be due to
sub-optimal model training, or simply because the observed
samples are outliers. If the model is black-box and the training dataset is not available, it is hard to determine which of
these two situations have occurred. Nonetheless, we would
still want to provide information to help end-users’ in their
decision making.
As such, in this paper we propose a method that can compute a “responsibility score” for each variable of a given
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4131

