The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

High Dimensional Level Set Estimation with Bayesian Neural Network
Huong Ha* , Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia

Abstract

truth is lower than a user-specified threshold. A traditional
approach is to label the data in the applied domain and estimate the region of interest. As the data labelling process
is costly, it is desired to accurately identify this region with
a minimal number of sampled data. Other applications of
the level set estimation problem can be found in the field
of environmental monitoring, manufacturing quality control
process, biotechnology, etc (Bryan et al. 2005; Gotovos et al.
2013; Bogunovic et al. 2016; Zanette, Zhang, and Kochenderfer 2019; Iwazaki, Inatsu, and Takeuchi 2019).
In the statistics and machine learning literature, this problem is called the Level Set Estimation (LSE) problem. To
solve an LSE problem, the general idea is to formulate it as
an active learning problem. First, a small number of measurements of the black-box function are taken to construct a
training dataset, and a surrogate model is learned from this
training dataset to predict the measurements of all the unmeasured points in the domain. Second, an acquisition function is constructed based on the surrogate model to decide
which data point in the domain should be next measured.
The black-box function is then evaluated at the chosen data
point, and the training dataset is updated with the new measurement. This iterative process continues until the measuring budget is depleted. The regions of interest are then estimated using the learned surrogate model.
There have been a number of research works proposing
new methods to tackle the LSE problem, however, all of
these approaches are limited due to the use of Gaussian
process (Rasmussen and Williams 2006) as the surrogate
model. In particular, it is widely known that standard Gaussian process (GP) (i) does not scale well with high dimensional inputs due to its cubic time complexity, and, (ii) has
low representational power because of the limited choices
of kernels (Krauth and E. Bonilla 2017). In this work, we
address this issue by suggesting the use of Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) as the surrogate model. Bayesian neural
network is a special type of neural network that can produce a probability distribution over the weight parameters
(MacKay 1992; Neal 1995), thus, it can provide both the
prediction and prediction uncertainty for any new data point.
We first consider the explicit LSE problem where the
threshold level is a fixed user-specified value. Using the uncertainty estimates from the BNN, we derive a theoretic information based acquisition function which can sample the

Level Set Estimation (LSE) is an important problem with applications in various fields such as material design, biotechnology, machine operational testing, etc. Existing techniques
suffer from the scalability issue, that is, these methods do not
work well with high dimensional inputs. This paper proposes
novel methods to solve the high dimensional LSE problems
using Bayesian Neural Networks. In particular, we consider
two types of LSE problems: (1) explicit LSE problem where
the threshold level is a fixed user-specified value, and, (2)
implicit LSE problem where the threshold level is defined
as a percentage of the (unknown) maximum of the objective function. For each problem, we derive the corresponding theoretic information based acquisition function to sample the data points so as to maximally increase the level set
accuracy. Furthermore, we also analyse the theoretical time
complexity of our proposed acquisition functions, and suggest a practical methodology to efficiently tune the network
hyper-parameters to achieve high model accuracy. Numerical
experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets show
that our proposed method can achieve better results compared
to existing state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
In engineering practice, there are numerous problems which
require accurately identifying the regions where the value
of a black-box expensive function is higher or lower than
a given threshold level. A specific example is alloy design
where the task is to determine the regions of alloy compositions that have a desired property (e.g. tensile strength)
above a certain level. To solve this, the desired property
of a number of alloy compositions are measured and the
compositions of interest can be estimated from these measurements. As the measurement process is expensive, thus it
is required to minimize the total number of measurements
while still maintaining accurate identification for the region
of interest. Another example is the algorithmic assurance
problem, with the goal being to identify the range of inputs where a machine learning model performs as expected.
Specifically, before deploying a machine learning model, it
is of interest to identify the range of inputs where the deviation between the machine learning model and the ground
* Correspondence to: huong.ha@rmit.edu.au
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12095

