The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tightening Robustness Verification of Convolutional Neural Networks with
Fine-Grained Linear Approximation
Yiting Wu,1 Min Zhang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory for Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Science and Technology, Tongji University
51205902026@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zhangmin@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

compute a lower bound for a neural network and an input.
All the perturbed inputs around the original input within the
computed lower bound have the same classification result
as the original input. A certified lower bound quantitatively
describes the robustness of a neural network.
Computing a certified lower bound for neural networks
is a computationally expensive task, e.g., NP-complete even
for ReLU-based networks (Katz et al. 2017). Thus, acceleration techniques based on approximation or abstraction are
necessary to achieve scalability (Singh et al. 2019b; Wan
et al. 2020). There is a trade-off between the precise of computed lower bound and the scalability (Wong et al. 2018).
In general, the tighter an approximation is, the more precise lower bound it can compute while consuming more resources, i.e., time and memory (Lyu et al. 2020). Therefore,
besides efficiency, certified lower bound is also a criterion to
evaluate robustness verification approaches’ performances.
This paper proposes a fine-grained linear approximation
approach to the robustness verification of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). The essence of linear approximation is to determine an upper-bound linear constraint and a
lower-bound linear constraint to approximate a non-linear
function f (x) between an interval [l, u]. In our approach, to
achieve a tighter approximation, we calculate the slopes of
the two linear constraints according to the value of l, u, and
the property of f (x) between [l, u], such as convexity and
monotonicity of derivatives. Another advantage of our approach is that its computational complexity is constant time,
and consequently the scalability of overall verification only
depends on LP solving. By the tighter approximation, we
can tighten the robustness verification of CNNs by proving neural networks are robust within a greater lower bound
of perturbation. Furthermore, the approximation approach is
general and applicable to sigmoid-like activation functions.
We implement the fine-grained approximation approach
atop the state-of-the-art robustness verification framework
CNN-Cert (Boopathy et al. 2019). We call this extended version DeepCert. We evaluate it with open-source benchmarks
including LeNet models (LeCun et al. 1998) and neural networks trained on MNIST and CIFAR datasets. Experimental
results show that DeepCert outperforms relevant tools such
as CNN-Cert, CROWN (Zhang et al. 2018) and its extended
version FROWN (Lyu et al. 2020) with 76.6%, 286.3%,
252.8% improvement to the certified lower bound, respec-

The robustness of neural networks can be quantitatively indicated by a lower bound within which any perturbation does
not alter the original input’s classification result. A certified
lower bound is also a criterion to evaluate the performance of
robustness verification approaches. In this paper, we present a
tighter linear approximation approach for the robustness verification of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). By the
tighter approximation, we can tighten the robustness verification of CNNs, i.e., proving they are robust within a larger
perturbation distance. Furthermore, our approach is applicable to general sigmoid-like activation functions. We implement DeepCert, the resulting verification toolkit. We evaluate it with open-source benchmarks, including LeNet and the
models trained on MNIST and CIFAR. Experimental results
show that DeepCert outperforms other state-of-the-art robustness verification tools with at most 286.3% improvement to
the certified lower bound and 1566.8 times speedup for the
same neural networks.

Introduction
Robustness is becoming crucial to neural networks with the
successful application of deep learning to safety-critical domains such as self-driving (Gopinath et al. 2018) and access
control by face and voiceprint recognition (Goswami et al.
2018; Shen et al. 2018). AI systems powered by non-robust
neural networks are vulnerable and fragile to the perturbation from the environment and adversarial attack (MoosaviDezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Fawzi et al. 2017).
Therefore, the robustness must be certified before a neural
network is deployed (Balunovic et al. 2019).
Formal methods, which have been proved successful
in verifying traditional software and hardware (Woodcock
et al. 2009), also show its capability to verify the robustness of neural networks (Huang et al. 2017; Katz et al.
2017). A comprehensive survey on robustness verification
using formal methods can be referred to (Huang et al. 2020).
Most existing robustness verification approaches fall into
two classes. One is to check whether a given neural network
is robust or not with respect to a concrete input and a perturbation distance. An adversarial example is usually generated as a witness in the non-robustness case. The other is to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11674

