The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Continuous Self-Attention Models with Neural ODE Networks
Jing Zhang1 , Peng Zhang1 * , Baiwen Kong1 , Junqiu Wei2 , Xin Jiang2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
{zhang jing, pzhang, bwkong}@tju.edu.cn
{weijunqiu, Jiang.Xin}@huawei.com

Abstract

(Chen et al. 2018) are a novel family of deep neural network (NN) models, in which the continuous hidden states
can be learned using only one layer of parameters. In supervised learning tasks (e.g., image classification), Neural
ODEs (e.g., RKNet and RKFNet) (Chen et al. 2018), with
a small number of parameters, can obtain similar accuracy
scores as the six-layer stacked ResNet (He et al. 2015).
This inspires us to solve the parameter deficiency problem
of the stacked self-attention models, by proposing a Continuous Self-Attention models with neural ODE networks
(CSAODE). In our proposed CSAODE, we first design a
self-attention block which includes a Self-Attention Layer
and a Encoding with Position component, which can effectively learn global features with position information. Then,
we represent such a self-attention block by a continuous selfattention system, in which continuous hidden states are calculated by the self-attention ODE solver.
CSAODE is capable of learning the continuous hidden
states of the representation matrix with only one layer of parameters, for performing multiple calculations and optimizations, and finally obtaining the global representation matrix.
Moreover, the self-attention ODE solver calculates the gradients of parameters by the adjoint ODE back-propagation
approach (Chen et al. 2018), which can be integrated into
the end-to-end CSAODE model.
In addition, to reduce the computational costs in existing
continuous dynamical models RKNet and RKFNet (Chen
et al. 2018), we design a novel continuous dynamical model
named as ARKNet, by proposing an accelerated RungeKutta method (Udwadia and Farahani 2008), which improves the training speed compared to RKNet. Then we couple such an ARKNet and our proposed self-attention block
to construct a self-attention ARK solver in CSAODE.
In addition to the global dependencies modeled in the
original self-attention network, the local dependencies are
also important for the sequence modeling. Therefore, in
CSAODE, we introduce a local representation matrix calculated by N-Gram convolution, which will be inputted to
the self-attention ODE solver. Furthermore, we develop a fusion layer consisting of Euclidean-Attention and Gate. The
Euclidean-Attention computes the absolute difference between the local representation and the global representation,
and such a Gate can fuse all features by two trainable scalars.
To sum up, the contributions of our work are:

Stacked self-attention models receive widespread attention,
due to its ability of capturing global dependency among
words. However, the stacking of many layers and components generates huge parameters, leading to low parameter
efficiency. In response to this issue, we propose a lightweight
architecture named Continuous Self-Attention models with
neural ODE networks (CSAODE). In CSAODE, continuous
dynamical models (i.e., neural ODEs) are coupled with our
proposed self-attention block to form a self-attention ODE
solver. This solver continuously calculates and optimizes the
hidden states via only one layer of parameters to improve
the parameter efficiency. In addition, we design a novel accelerated continuous dynamical model to reduce computing
costs, and integrate it in CSAODE. Moreover, since the original self-attention ignores local information, CSAODE makes
use of N-gram convolution to encode local representations,
and a fusion layer with only two trainable scalars are designed for generating sentence vectors. We perform a series
of experiments on text classification, natural language inference (NLI) and text matching tasks. With fewer parameters,
CSAODE outperforms state-of-the-art models on text classification tasks (e.g., 1.3% accuracy improved on SUBJ task),
and has competitive performances for NLI and text matching
tasks as well.

Introduction
Transformer has achieved successful performances in many
natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Vaswani et al.
2017; Shen et al. 2018b,c; Dai, Li, and Xu 2020), since its
self-attention mechanism can effectively model the global
dependencies among words (Shen et al. 2017; Vaswani et al.
2017). However, self-attention networks have a limitation
in its stacked structures. A single-layer self-attention component cannot fully learn the information in the text representations. To capture more abstract features, positional information and so on, the self-attention components are usually stacked, leading to the parameter redundancy (Dehghani
et al. 2018).
On the other hand, based on continuous dynamical systems, neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs)
* Corresponding Author: Peng Zhang
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14393

