The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

IsoBN: Fine-Tuning BERT with Isotropic Batch Normalization
Wenxuan Zhou, Bill Yuchen Lin, Xiang Ren
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
{zhouwenx, yuchen.lin, xiangren}@usc.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained language models (PTLMs), such as
BERT and its better variant RoBERTa, has been a common
practice for advancing performance in natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Recent advance in representation
learning shows that isotropic (i.e., unit-variance and uncorrelated) embeddings can significantly improve performance
on downstream tasks with faster convergence and better generalization. The isotropy of the pre-trained embeddings in
PTLMs, however, is relatively under-explored. In this paper,
we analyze the isotropy of the pre-trained [CLS] embeddings
of PTLMs with straightforward visualization, and point out
two major issues: high variance in their standard deviation,
and high correlation between different dimensions. We also
propose a new network regularization method, isotropic batch
normalization (IsoBN) to address the issues, towards learning
more isotropic representations in fine-tuning by dynamically
penalizing dominating principal components. This simple yet
effective fine-tuning method yields about 1.0 absolute increment on the average of seven NLU tasks.

PTLM

Classifier

Figure 1: Illustration of the isotropic batch normalization
(IsoBN). The [CLS] embedding is normalized by standard
deviation and pairwise correlation coefficient to get a more
isotropic representation.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models (PTLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b), have
revolutionized the area of natural language understanding
(NLU). Fine-tuning PTLMs has advanced performance on
many benchmark NLU datasets such as GLUE (Wang et al.
2019a). The most common fine-tuning method is to continue
training pre-trained model parameters together with a few
additional task-specific layers. The PTLMs and task-specific
layers are usually connected by the embeddings of [CLS]
tokens, which are regarded as sentence representations.
Recent works on text representation (Arora, Liang, and
Ma 2017; Mu and Viswanath 2018; Gao et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2020) have shown that regularizing word embeddings to
be more isotropic (i.e., rotational invariant) can significantly
improve their performance on downstream tasks. An ideally
isotropic embedding space has two major merits: a) all dimensions have the same variance and b) all dimensions are
uncorrelated with each other. These findings align with conventional feature normalization techniques (Cogswell et al.
2016; Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Huang et al. 2018), which aim
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

to transform input features into normalized1 , uncorrelated
representations for faster convergence and better generalization ability.
It, however, remains an open question that how isotropic
the representations of PTLMs are. Particularly, we want to
understand the isotropy of pre-trained [CLS] embeddings in
PTLMs, and how we can improve it towards better fine-tuning
for downstream tasks. In this paper, we first argue the reason why we want more isotropic embeddings for the [CLS]
tokens (Section ). Our analysis revels that the dominating
principle components largely hinder the fine-tuning process
to use knowledge in other components, due to the lack of
isotropy. Then, we analyze the isotropy of the pre-trained
[CLS] embeddings. There are two essential aspects of an
isotropic embedding space: unit-variance and uncorrelatedness. Thus, we start our analysis by visualizing the standard
deviation and Pearson correlation coefficient of pre-trained
[CLS] embeddings in BERT and RoBERTa on several NLU
datasets.
Our visualization and quantitative analysis in Section finds
that: 1) the [CLS] embeddings have very different variance
(Sec. ); 2) the [CLS] embeddings construct a few large clusters of dimensions that are highly correlated with each other
(Sec. ). Both findings indicate that pre-trained contextualized
word embeddings are far from being isotropic, i.e., normalized and uncorrelated. Therefore, these undesired prior bias
from PTLMs may result in sub-optimal performance in finetuning for target tasks.
1

14621

We use ‘normalized’ to refer unit-variance in this paper.

