The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning a Gradient-free Riemannian Optimizer on Tangent Spaces
Xiaomeng Fan,1 * Zhi Gao,1∗ Yuwei Wu,1† Yunde Jia,1 Mehrtash Harandi2
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{fanxiaomeng,gaozhi 2017,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract

2019), and similarity learning is solved by searching solutions on symmetric positive definite (SPD) manifolds (Gao
et al. 2020a; Karlinsky et al. 2019). Due to the nonlinear
search spaces of Riemannian manifolds, solving the Riemannian optimization problems is challenging, and the optimizer should preserve the enforced manifold constraints.
Conventional optimization algorithms designed in Euclidean spaces (e.g., stochastic gradient descent) cannot be
directly applied to the Riemannian setting, as their updating schemes will not preserve the manifold constraints. The
gradient-based Riemannian optimization algorithms make
use of Riemannian operations, such as retraction and orthogonal projection, to ensure that the algorithms remain
faithful to the geometry of manifolds. State-of-the-art algorithms in this regard include Riemannian stochastic gradient descent (Bonnabel 2013), Riemannian variance reduction algorithms (Kasai, Sato, and Mishra 2018; Sato, Kasai, and Mishra 2019; Zhang, Reddi, and Sra 2016; Zhang,
Zhang, and Sra 2018), and Riemannian adaptive optimization algorithms (Kumar, Mhammedi, and Harandi 2018; Kasai, Jawanpuria, and Mishra 2019) to name a few.
Recently, Riemannian meta-optimization provides a
promising way to solve the Riemannian optimization problems (Gao et al. 2020b). Riemannian meta-optimization
leverages the meta-learning technique to learn to optimize
on manifolds in a data-driven fashion. Therein, learnable
Riemannian optimizers that preserve the manifold constraints are built, and the method trains the optimizer to perform gradient-based Riemannian optimization on the manifolds. This method not only reduces human involvements
of designing optimizers by hand but also achieves promising performances across various tasks. Despite the success
and as will be shown shortly, the process of training the optimizer on manifolds is complex and computationally expensive, as it requires to differentiate through the complex
gradient-based Riemannian optimization.
Similar to many meta-learning algorithms (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017; Andrychowicz et al. 2016; Baik, Hong,
and Lee 2020; Li, Wang, and Yu 2020), Riemannian metaoptimization is modeled as a bi-level optimization process
(i.e., using an inner and an outer loop). In the inner loop,
the optimizer is utilized to iteratively update Riemannian
parameters of the model. In the outer loop, the optimizer
is trained by minimizing the loss of the model, where we

A principal way of addressing constrained optimization problems is to model them as problems on Riemannian manifolds. Recently, Riemannian meta-optimization provides a
promising way for solving constrained optimization problems
by learning optimizers on Riemannian manifolds in a datadriven fashion, making it possible to design task-specific constrained optimizers. A close look at the Riemannian metaoptimization reveals that learning optimizers on Riemannian
manifolds needs to differentiate through the nonlinear Riemannian optimization, which is complex and computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient Riemannian meta-optimization method that learns to
optimize on tangent spaces of manifolds. In doing so, we
present a gradient-free optimizer on tangent spaces, which
takes parameters of the model along with the training data
as inputs, and generates the updated parameters directly. As a
result, the constrained optimization is transformed from Riemannian manifolds to tangent spaces where complex Riemannian operations (e.g., retraction operations) are removed
from the optimizer, and learning the optimizer does not need
to differentiate through the Riemannian optimization. We empirically show that our method brings efficient learning of the
optimizer, while enjoying a good optimization trajectory in a
data-driven manner.

Introduction
We study the problem of Riemannian optimization (also
known as optimization with manifold constraints), where the
goal is to minimize an objective function in the form:
n

min L(X) ,

X∈M

1X
f (X, y i ) .
n i=1

(1)

Here, X is the parameter of the interest that should comply with the geometry of the Riemannian manifold M, and
y i denotes the training data. Such Riemannian optimization problems are pervasive in the machine learning community with a variety of applications. For example, principal component analysis (PCA) is modeled as an optimization problem on Grassmann manifolds (Yuan and Lamperski
* Xiaomeng Fan and Zhi Gao are co-first authors.
†

Corresponding author:Yuwei Wu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7377

