The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Searching for Alignment in Face Recognition
Xiaqing Xu1 , Qiang Meng1 , Yunxiao Qin2 , Jianzhu Guo3,4 ,
Chenxu Zhao5 * , Feng Zhou1 , Zhen Lei3,4
1
AIBEE, Beijing, China, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Academy of Sciences, Mininglamp Technology, Beijing, China
{xqxu; qmeng; fzhou}@aibee.com, qyxqyx@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {jianzhu.guo; zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
zhaochenxu@mininglamp.com
3

Abstract

T1

T2

T3

T4

0.79 M1

0.72 M2

0.68 M3

0.67 M4

T2

T3

T4

 

 

Align

A standard pipeline of current face recognition frameworks
consists of four individual steps: locating a face with a rough
bounding box and several fiducial landmarks, aligning the
face image using a pre-defined template, extracting representations and comparing. Among them, face detection, landmark detection and representation learning have long been
studied and a lot of works have been proposed. As an essential
step with a significant impact on recognition performance,
the alignment step has attracted little attention. In this paper,
we first explore and highlight the effects of different alignment templates on face recognition. Then, for the first time,
we try to search for the optimal template automatically. We
construct a well-defined searching space by decomposing the
template searching into the crop size and vertical shift, and
propose an efficient method Face Alignment Policy Search
(FAPS). Besides, a well-designed benchmark is proposed to
evaluate the searched policy. Experiments on our proposed
benchmark validate the effectiveness of our method to improve face recognition performance.

Align

T1






Figure 1: Verification results based on different face templates. Models Mi , i = 1, 2, 3, 4 are trained with samples
aligned by templates Ti , i = 1, 2, 3, 4 respectively. Significant differences between cosine similarities are observed.

et al. 2020b) on face recognition performance. Face features
can be divided into two sets depending on the zone where
they are located: internal features, including eyes, nose and
mouth, and external features, composed by the hair, chin and
face outline. The benefits of external information have been
observed in some early works (Lapedriza, Masip, and Vitria 2005; Andrews et al. 2010), but they are rarely discussed
in the modern face recognition framework (Taigman et al.
2014a; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Liu et al.
2017; Deng et al. 2019). Significant differences in the 1v1
results are observed by using templates with different degrees of external features involved, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
An open problem arises: is there an optimal template such
that the produced face region gives the best recognition performance? Specifically, it remains unknown whether fewer
backgrounds or irrelevant textures to face (e.g., hair, forehead) benefit face recognition. Besides, it is unclear whether
the optimal template generalizes well across various conditions including the pose, age and illumination.
Instead of manually designing templates, we propose to
automate the process of finding the optimal template for
recognition. To this end, we decompose differences of templates into vertical shift and crop size, and construct a welldefined discrete searching space. We call the vertical shift
and crop size pair an alignment policy. The equivalence relation of the alignment policy and the template is described
and proved in Section Face Alignment, and illustrated in Fig.

Introduction
Face recognition is a long-standing topic in the research
community of computer vision. A standard pipeline of the
recognition framework consists of four individual steps: locating faces with bounding boxes and fiducial points, aligning face images using a pre-defined template, extracting face
representations and representation comparing. The second
step, also named as face alignment (in Fig. 2), serves as deforming face images such that fiducial points are spatially
aligned and simplifies the recognition task by normalizing
the in-plane rotation, scale and translation variations. However, most recent works (Taigman et al. 2014a; Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2014a; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015;
Liu et al. 2017; Deng et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019) on face
recognition focus on designing loss functions and exploring
network structures. In contrast, the alignment procedure before model training is less studied.
In this paper, we first explore the effects of the alignment templates(Deng et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2019; Guo
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3065

