The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph-to-Graph: Towards Accurate and Interpretable Online Handwritten
Mathematical Expression Recognition
Jin-Wen Wu1,2∗ , Fei Yin1 , Yan-Ming Zhang1 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{jinwen.wu, fyin, ymzhang, xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Formula

Recent handwritten mathematical expression recognition (HMER) approaches treat the problem as an imageto-markup generation task where the handwritten formula is translated into a sequence (e.g. LATEX). The
encoder-decoder framework is widely used to solve this
image-to-sequence problem. However, (i) for structured
mathematical formula, the hierarchical structure neither in the formula nor in the markup has been explored adequately. In addition, (ii) existing image-tomarkup methods could not explicitly segment mathematical symbols in the formula corresponding to each
target markup token. In this paper, we address the
above issues by formulating the HMER as a graph-tograph (G2G) learning problem. Graph is more flexible and general for structure representation and learning
compared with image or sequence. At the core of our
method lies the embedding of input formula and output
markup into graphs on primitives, with Graph Neural
Networks (GNN) to explore the structural information,
and a novel sub-graph attention mechanism to match
primitives in the input and output graphs. We conduct
extensive experiments on CROHME datasets to demonstrate the benefits of the proposed G2G model. Our
method yields significant improvements over previous
SOTA image-to-markup systems. Moreover, it explicitly resolves the symbol segmentation problem while
still being trained end-to-end, making the whole system
much more accurate and interpretable.

6

1
2

7

3

9

4 5

8

10
11

12

b

x

SLT

\frac

+

2
a

y

\sqrt
z

LaTeX
x ^ { \frac { b } { 2 a } y } + \sqrt { z }

Figure 1: Handwritten formula with its SLT and LATEX format markups. Primitives in the formula and markup have
hierarchical relations. Besides, each primitive in the formula
has specific representation in the markup. For example, the
8th and 9th strokes in the input formula correspond to the
node “+” in SLT and the token “+” in LATEX.

Recently, inspired by the success of sequence-to-sequence
learning in different applications such as speech recognition
(Chorowski et al. 2015), machine translation (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014), and image captioning (Xu et al.
2015; Li et al. 2017), the encoder-decoder framework has also been proposed for HMER. Essentially, these approaches
treat HMER as a special case of general image-to-sequence
problem, that is, image-to-markup generation (Deng et al.
2017). Given a source formula input x (e.g. image or handwriting trajectory) and its target representation y, the imageto-markup system models x → y from the training data.
Generally, y = (y1 , · · · , yT ) is a LATEX string with T tokens.
In fact, the LATEX string is a tree with additional formatting
annotations and can be obtained by depth-first traversal of
the SLT. However, this kind of information is actually ignored in image-to-sequence approaches.
Despite recent progress in image-to-markup based HMER, these approaches could not achieve accurate and satisfactory results. The defects of these methods are mainly in the following aspects: (i) the input representation of
image or handwriting trajectory makes the encoder unable
to effectively explore the spatial and temporal structures among input primitives. (ii) Although formulas have linear
forms markup, i.e. LATEX string, the underlying structure of

Introduction
Mathematical notation has essential applications in many
fields, such as education, office automation, and conference
systems. Recognizing mathematical formulas requires the
ability to analyze both their mathematical semantics and
complex hierarchical structures. As early as 1960s, there
has been research interest (Anderson 1967) in converting
mathematical images into structured language or markup
(e.g. LATEX, MathML and Symbol Layout Tree (SLT, Zanibbi
and Blostein 2012)) that identifies symbol descriptions and
associated structures. See an example in Fig. 1.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2925

