The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepDT: Learning Geometry From Delaunay Triangulation
for Surface Reconstruction
Yiming Luo † , Zhenxing Mi † , Wenbing Tao *
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing
School of Artifical Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
yiming luo@163.com, mizhenxing.henan@gmail.com, wenbingtao@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

in

In this paper, a novel learning-based network, named
DeepDT, is proposed to reconstruct the surface from Delaunay triangulation of point cloud. DeepDT learns to predict
inside/outside labels of Delaunay tetrahedrons directly from
a point cloud and corresponding Delaunay triangulation. The
local geometry features are first extracted from the input point
cloud and aggregated into a graph deriving from the Delaunay triangulation. Then a graph filtering is applied on the aggregated features in order to add structural regularization to
the label prediction of tetrahedrons. Due to the complicated
spatial relations between tetrahedrons and the triangles, it is
impossible to directly generate ground truth labels of tetrahedrons from ground truth surface. Therefore, we propose a
multi-label supervision strategy which votes for the label of
a tetrahedron with labels of sampling locations inside it. The
proposed DeepDT can maintain abundant geometry details
without generating overly complex surfaces , especially for
inner surfaces of open scenes. Meanwhile, the generalization
ability and time consumption of the proposed method is acceptable and competitive compared with the state-of-the-art
methods. Experiments demonstrate the superior performance
of the proposed DeepDT.

Ray
Camera
Center

Point

(a)

(b)

out

Figure 1: A 2D example of reconstructing surface by in/out
labeling of tetrahedrons. The visibility information is integrated into each tetrahedron by intersections between viewing rays and tetrahedrons. A graph cuts optimization is applied to classify tetrahedrons as inside or outside the surface. Result surface is reconstructed by extracting triangular
facets between tetrahedrons of different labels.

sometimes (trimming), which are sensitive to corresponding
parameters and make batch processing of point clouds impractical. This family of implicit approaches is sometimes
limited by their sensitivity to noise, outliers, non-uniform
sampling or even simply by the lack of reliable and consistent normal estimates and orientation (Labatut, Pons, and
Keriven 2009). Another common method uses a Delaunay
triangulation of a point cloud to subdivide the space into uneven tetrahedrons. As analyzed in (Amenta and Bern 1999),
under the assumption of sufficiently dense point clouds, a
good approximation of the surface is contained in the Delaunay triangulation. Therefore, opposed to the approaches that
try to fit a surface in a continuous space, surface reconstruction based on Delaunay triangulation can now be reduced
to selecting an adequate subset of the triangular facets in
the Delaunay triangulation. Researchers have spent a lot of
efforts in finding the object surface in a Delaunay triangulation. A commonly used strategy is to classify the tetrahedrons as inside/outside the surface using graph cuts. Visibility information is required in such a process. A 2D example
is shown in Figure 1. Such method builds a directed graph
based on the neighborhood of adjacent tetrahedrons in the
Delaunay triangulation. Visibility terms make this kind of
approaches more accurate and robust to outliers.
However, such method still faces problems. Some tetrahedrons lying behind points risk being mislabeled because

Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds is a longstanding problem in computer vision and graphics (Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013). A lot of previous methods use an implicit function framework (Curless and Levoy 1996; Kazhdan, Bolitho, and Hoppe 2006; Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013).
They typically discretize space in the bounding box of the
input point cloud with a voxel grid or an adaptive octree.
Then they compute an implicit function from input points.
The result surface is extracted from the grids as an isosurface of the implicit function by Marching Cubes (MC)
(Lorensen and Cline 1987). However, solving equations of
large scale in implicit methods can be time-consuming. The
maximum resolution of the octree depth also influences the
efficiency. There is a quadratic relation between resolution
and run time as well as memory usage. Post-processing steps
are also needed to clean up the excess part in result surfaces
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

2277

