The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Robustness through Disentangled Representations
Shuo Yang, 1 Tianyu Guo, 2 Yunhe Wang, 3 Chang Xu 1
1

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS, Peking University, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
syan9630@uni.sydney.edu.au, tianyuguo@pku.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract

In response to adversarial examples, tremendous effort has
been made towards the robustness of deep learning models
against adversarial attacks. Common defense strategies include adversarial examples detecting and filtering methods
(Metzen et al. 2017; Grosse et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2019),
pre-processing and dimension reduction methods (Bhagoji,
Cullina, and Mittal 2017; Buckman et al. 2018; Prakash et al.
2018). These methods may improve the robustness of DNN
models to some extent, however, they are only applicable to
a narrow range of attacks or model architectures (Athalye,
Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Xie et al. 2019).
Recently, a novel defense framework call adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017) has drawn significant attention. Adversarial training takes the adversarial defense as a mini-max
game between the attacker and the classifier, and reinforces
the model’s robustness by alternatively generating adversarial
examples and training the models with both adversarial and
natural examples. Adversarial training has shown to be one
of the most effective defense strategies according to (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). Based on the adversarial
training framework, some more advanced works like (Zhang
et al. 2019) have been proposed and achieved state-of-theart performance. However, (Zhang et al. 2019) also reveals
an intrinsic negative impact, i.e., the trade-off between the
accuracy and robustness.
More recently, the seminal work (Ilyas et al. 2019) suggests that the existence of adversarial examples is a natural
consequence of the non-robust (predictive, yet brittle) representation set, which exists in the natural representation
distribution independently along with the robust representation set. The model’s robustness can be improved by separating the robust representation set from the non-robust one.
However, the hypothesis of independence between robust
and non-robust representation seems to be questionable, because it is possible to generate adversarial examples for any
instance including the robust set. Thus, in this paper, we
postulate that the robust and non-robust representations are
two basic ingredients entangled in the integral representation.
The robust representation is specified to the classification task
(i.e., class-specific), in contrast, the non-robust representation is not capable of classification (i.e., class-irrelevant), but
contains the information about whether the natural domain
or the adversarial domain the examples is sampled from. No
matter whether the example is natural or adversarial example,

Despite the remarkable empirical performance of deep learning models, their vulnerability to adversarial examples has
been revealed in many studies. They are prone to make a
susceptible prediction to the input with imperceptible adversarial perturbation. Although recent works have remarkably
improved the model’s robustness under the adversarial training strategy, an evident gap between the natural accuracy and
adversarial robustness inevitably exists. In order to mitigate
this problem, in this paper, we assume that the robust and
non-robust representations are two basic ingredients entangled
in the integral representation. For achieving adversarial robustness, the robust representations of natural and adversarial
examples should be disentangled from the non-robust part and
the alignment of the robust representations can bridge the gap
between accuracy and robustness. Inspired by this motivation,
we propose a novel defence method called Deep Robust Representation Disentanglement Network (DRRDN). Specifically,
DRRDN employs a disentangler to extract and align the robust
representations from both adversarial and natural examples.
Theoretical analysis guarantees the mitigation of the trade-off
between robustness and accuracy with good disentanglement
and alignment performance. Experimental results on benchmark datasets finally demonstrate the empirical superiority of
our method.

Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning, revolutionary
breakthroughs have been made in various fields during the
past few years, such as computer vision (He et al. 2016; Guo
et al. 2019b; Wang et al. 2018), natural language processing
(Collobert and Weston 2008), transfer learning (Yang et al.
2020; Guo et al. 2019a) and so on. However, in parallel with
remarkable achievements, DNNs were revealed to be brittle
to certain maliciously manipulated inputs named adversarial
examples (Biggio et al. 2013; Szegedy et al. 2013). Compared
with the natural ones, only imperceptible perturbations are
introduced to adversarial examples, yet entirely different
predictions can be induced even for the well-trained deep
learning models. It poses threats to the real-world, especially
the security-critical (e.g., autonomous driving (Tian et al.
2018; Bojarski et al. 2016)) deployments of deep learning
models due to the existence of adversarial examples.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3145

