The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Near-Optimal Regret Bounds for Contextual Combinatorial Semi-Bandits with
Linear Payoff Functions∗
Kei Takemura,1 Shinji Ito,1 Daisuke Hatano,2 Hanna Sumita,3 Takuro Fukunaga,4,2,5
Naonori Kakimura,6 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi7
1

NEC Corporation
2
RIKEN AIP
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology
4
Chuo University
5
JST PRESTO
6
Keio University
7
National Institute of Informatics
{kei takemura, i-shinji}@nec.com, daisuke.hatano@riken.jp, sumita@c.titech.ac.jp, fukunaga.07s@chuo-u.ac.jp,
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp, k keniti@nii.ac.jp
combination is k. Each arm offers a reward defined by a
common linear function over the arms, but the reward is not
revealed to the learner at this point. Next, the learner chooses
a feasible combination of arms. At the end, the learner observes the rewards of the chosen arms. The objective of the
learner is to maximize the sum of rewards.
The CCS problem includes the linear bandit (LB) problem (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Agrawal
and Goyal 2013; Auer 2002; Chu et al. 2011; Dani, Hayes,
and Kakade 2008) and the combinatorial semi-bandit (CS)
problem1 (Chen et al. 2016a,b; Combes et al. 2015; Gai, Krishnamachari, and Jain 2012; Kveton et al. 2015; Wang et al.
2017; Wen, Kveton, and Ashkan 2015) as special cases. The
difference from the LB problem is that, in the CCS problem,
the learner chooses multiple arms at once. Moreover, while
the given arms are fixed over the rounds and orthogonal to
each other in the CS problem, they may be changed in each
round and correlated in the CCS problem.
These differences enable the CCS problem to model more
realistic situations of applications such as routing networks
(Kveton et al. 2014), shortest paths (Gai, Krishnamachari,
and Jain 2012; Wen, Kveton, and Ashkan 2015), and recommender systems (Li et al. 2010; Qin, Chen, and Zhu 2014;
Wang et al. 2017). For example, when a recommender system is modeled with the LB problem, it is assumed that once
a recommendation result is obtained, the internal predictive
model is updated before the next recommendation. However,
in a real recommender system, it is more common to update
the predictive model after multiple recommendations, e.g.,
periodic updates (Chapelle and Li 2011). Such a situation
can be modeled with the CCS problem, where the number
of recommendations between the updates is k and the number of the updates is T (Takemura and Ito 2019)2 .

Abstract
The contextual combinatorial semi-bandit problem with linear payoff functions is a decision-making problem in which
a learner chooses a set of arms with the feature vectors in
each round under given constraints so as to maximize the sum
of rewards of arms. Several existing algorithms have regret
bounds that are optimal with respect to√the √
number of rounds
T . However, there is a gap of Õ(max( d, k)) between the
current best upper and lower bounds, where d is the dimension of the feature vectors, k is the number of the chosen arms
in a round, and Õ(·) ignores the logarithmic factors. The dependence of k and d is of practical importance because k may
be larger than T in real-world applications such as recommender systems. In this paper, we fill the gap by improving
the upper and lower bounds. More precisely, we show that the
C2 UCB algorithm proposed by Qin,
√ Chen, and Zhu (2014)
has the optimal regret bound Õ(d kT + dk) for the partition matroid constraints. For general constraints, we propose
an algorithm that modifies the reward estimates of arms in the
C2 UCB algorithm and demonstrate that it enjoys the optimal
regret bound for a more general problem that can take into
account other objectives simultaneously. We also show that
our technique would be applicable to related problems. Numerical experiments support our theoretical results and considerations.

Introduction
This paper investigates the contextual combinatorial semibandit problem with linear payoff functions, which we call
CCS problem (Qin, Chen, and Zhu 2014; Takemura and Ito
2019; Wen, Kveton, and Ashkan 2015). In this problem,
a learner iterates the following process T times. First, the
learner observes d-dimensional vectors, called arms, and a
set of feasible combinations of arms, where the size of each

1

∗

Here, the CS problem denotes the problem of maximizing the
sum of rewards (Combes et al. 2015; Kveton et al. 2014, 2015),
while Chen et al. (2016a,b) deal with a more general objective.
2
Strictly speaking, the LB problem with periodic updates is a

We omit most of our proofs due to the page limit. The full
version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07957.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9791

