The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Finding Needles in Heterogeneous Haystacks
Bijaya Adhikari1 , Liangyue Li2 , Nikhil Rao2 , Karthik Subbian2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa
2
Amazon
bijaya-adhikari@uiowa.edu, [liliangy, nikhilsr, ksubbian]@amazon.com

Abstract
Due to intense competition and lack of real estate on the
front page of large e-commerce platforms, sellers are sometimes motivated to garner non-genuine signals (clicks, addto-carts, purchases) on their products, to make them appear
more appealing to customers. This hurts customers’ trust on
the platform, and also hurts genuine sellers who sell their
items without looking to game the system. While it is important to find the sellers and the buyers who are colluding
to garner these non-genuine signals, doing so is highly nontrivial. Firstly, the set of bad actors in the system is a very
small fraction of all the buyers/sellers on the platform. Secondly, bad actors “hide” with the good ones, making them
hard to detect. In this paper, we develop C ON GCN, a context
aware heterogeneous graph convolutional network to detect
bad actors on a large heterogeneous graph. While our method
is motivated by abuse detection in e-commerce, the method is
applicable to other areas such as computational biology and
finance, where large heterogeneous graphs are pervasive, and
the amount of labeled data is very limited. We train C ON GCN via novel sampling methods, and context aware message passing in a semi-supervised fashion to predict dishonest buyers and sellers in e-commerce. Extensive experiments
show that our method is effective, beating several baselines;
generalizable to an inductive setting and highly scalable.

Figure 1: An example collusion occurring in e-commerce
stores. Dishonest sellers (in brown) sell their products to a
non-genuine buyer (in red), who in turn leaves fake 5-star
rating for the product and great reviews for the sellers. The
dashed edges represent purchase/sale relationship and the
solid line represents buyers’ feedback on sellers.

buyers to provide fake reviews and/or ratings and by generating non-genuine behavioral signals such as clicks, addto-carts and purchases on their products. These fake signals
get propagated to the search engine, which subsequently upranks items that are of poorer quality. Meanwhile, genuine
products get demoted and honest sellers suffer. Moreover,
this behavior also means that honest buyers are exposed
to poor quality and sometimes irrelevant items in response
to their queries. Products promoted via unfair means could
erode customers’ trust in the search system. Hence, it is critical to identify dishonest sellers, buyers (who collude with
these sellers), and their activities in a timely manner. Failure
to do so will result in a loss for honest merchants and promotion of irrelevant and low quality products. This ultimately
leads to a bad customer experience for the e-commerce store.
An example collusion between dishonest sellers and buyers
is depicted in Figure 1. The e-commerce store should identify such accounts with alacrity, and furthermore be robust
to potential actors looking to game the search engine.
There are several challenges that arise in detecting bad
actors. Since dishonest buyers/sellers look to “blend in”
with honest ones, simple features that can be gleaned from
anonymized logs cannot be used to detect them. Specifically,
standard outlier detection methods (Chandola, Banerjee, and
Kumar 2009), be it classification based, nearest neighbor

Introduction
Large e-commerce stores such as Alibaba and Amazon allow merchants (sellers) to sell their products to a large numbers of customers (buyers). Buyers discover items to purchase via a search functionality on these platforms. These
stores run large scale machine learning methods to rank
items according to some notion item relevance for a customer query. A seller can maximize the sale of a product by
ensuring the product ranks high in search results and garnering good reviews and ratings from the buyers. Higher
search ranking adds product visibility, while good reviews
and ratings help win customer trust, and eventually helps
boost sales.
In rare cases, intense competition for real estate in the
front page of e-commerce platforms motivates sellers to promote their products using unfair means. Some of these sellers try to promote their products by colluding with dishonest
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15232

