The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Complexity of Object Association in Multiple Object Tracking
Robert Ganian1 , Thekla Hamm1 , Sebastian Ordyniak2
1

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
2
University of Leeds, School of Computing, Leeds, UK
{rganian,thekla.hamm,sordyniak}@gmail.com

Abstract

are equipped with weights that represent the likelihood that
two detections are of the same object, and the aim is to
partition G into connected components while minimizing
the sum of the weights of removed edges; the intuition is
that each connected component corresponds to one object.
This multicut model was subsequently extended with special
“lifted” edges in order to encode long-range interactions,
i.e., auxiliary information about the (dis-)similarity of nonconsecutive detections (Tang et al. 2017; Babaee, Li, and
Rigoll 2019; Horňáková, Lange, and Andres 2017); the distinction between normal and lifted edges is that connected
components are defined only using the former1 .
A closely related approach to object association models
the problem not via multicut, but via disjoint paths (often
considered in the context of network flows) (Zhang, Li, and
Nevatia 2008; Berclaz et al. 2011; Chari et al. 2015; Hofmann, Wolf, and Rigoll 2013). In particular, the representation used here is a directed graph G0 obtained in a very similar manner as the graph model for multicut, with the main
difference being the use of arcs which are directed from earlier to later frames and the addition of two special vertices:
a universal source s and a universal sink t. The problem one
needs to solve on G0 is to find a maximum-weight set of
internally vertex-disjoint s-t paths, where each such path
will correspond to the track of one object. Very recently,
Horňáková et al. (2020) extended the disjoint paths model
via lifted arcs which—as in the multicut model—encode
auxiliary information about detections that are not consecutive. There, the authors also argued that the lifted disjoint
paths model had advantages over the lifted multicut model;
for instance, the lifted multicut model does not encode information about individual frames, and hence the fact that
an object only appears once per frame needs to be enforced
separately (Horňáková et al. 2020).

Object association, i.e., the identification of which observations correspond to the same object, is a central task for
the area of multiple object tracking. Two prominent models capturing this task have been introduced in the literature:
the Lifted Multicut model and the more recent Lifted Paths
model. Here, we carry out a detailed complexity-theoretic
study of the problems arising from these two models that is
aimed at complementing previous empirical work on object
association. We obtain a comprehensive complexity map for
both models that takes into account natural restrictions to instances such as possible bounds on the number of frames,
number of tracked objects and branching degree, as well as
less explicit structural restrictions such as having bounded
treewidth. Our results include new fixed-parameter and XP
algorithms for the problems as well as hardness proofs which
altogether indicate that the Lifted Paths problem exhibits a
more favorable complexity behavior than Lifted Multicut.

Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is an important area of research in computer vision and artificial intelligence (Milan
et al. 2017; Chu et al. 2020; Huang and Zhou 2019) dating back to 1988 (Pylyshyn and Storm 1988). The trackingbydetection paradigm allows us to decompose MOT into
two tasks. First, an object detector is used on each frame
of a video sequence in order to find the putative locations of
all objects appearing in the video. Then, in the object association task, we remove false positive detections and associate
correct detections to the corresponding identities, resulting
in trajectories for individual objects. The focus of this paper
lies on the latter of the two tasks.
A popular approach for the object association task in
MOT (also called the image decomposition problem (Keuper et al. 2015; Arbelaez et al. 2011)) is to model it as a multicut problem on a graph representation of the instance (Tang
et al. 2015, 2016; Keuper et al. 2020; Kumar, Charpiat, and
Thonnat 2014). There, one builds a graph G which contains a vertex for each detection in each time frame, and
whenever two detections (in different time frames) could
represent consecutive appearances of the same object, an
edge is added connecting these two detections. The edges

Aim. Unlike in previous works, here we initiate a deeper
study of L IFTED M ULTICUT and L IFTED PATHS from a
complexity-theoretic point of view. It is known that both
problems are NP-complete in their full generality, but what
if we are dealing with instances where, e.g., the number of
objects we are interested in is small? Or, does the problem
become tractable when the number of frames is significantly
smaller than the number of detections? Do the answers to

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1388

Formal definitions are provided in the Preliminaries.

