The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-Supervised Learning for Multi-Task Scene Understanding by
Neural Graph Consensus
Marius Leordeanu1,2 , Mihai Cristian Pı̂rvu1,2 , Dragos Costea1,2 ,
Alina E Marcu1,2 , Emil Slusanschi1 and Rahul Sukthankar3
1
University Politehnica of Bucharest
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
3
Google Research
{marius.leordeanu,emil.slusanschi}@cs.pub.ro
{mihai cristian.pirvu,dragos.costea,alina.marcu}@upb.ro
sukthankar@google.com
Abstract
structure. We have ample evidence for the power of deep
nets (Ciresan et al. 2011; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and HinWe address the challenging problem of semi-supervised
ton 2012; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015); given enough
learning in the context of multiple visual interpretations of
data and sufficient supervision they can master almost any
the world by finding consensus in a graph of neural networks.
task. On the other hand, graphs are able to transcend to
Each graph node is a scene interpretation layer, while each
global solutions: starting from local knowledge they reach
edge is a deep net that transforms one layer at one node into
the global level through iterative message passing (Pearl
another from a different node. During the supervised phase
edge networks are trained independently. During the next un2014; Yedidia, Freeman, and Weiss 2005; Boykov, Veksler,
supervised stage edge nets are trained on the pseudo-ground
and Zabih 2001; Besag 1986). Thus, iterative graph methtruth provided by consensus among multiple paths that reach
ods tend to converge to stable solutions, where consensus
the nets’ start and end nodes. These paths act as ensemble
between the local and the global is reached and a higher
teachers for any given edge and strong consensus is used for
“truth” emerges gradually. We take advantage of this prophigh-confidence supervisory signal. The unsupervised learnerty of classical graphical models and boost it by replacing
ing process is repeated over several generations, in which
the simple functions on nodes and edges, with powerful deep
each edge becomes a ”student” and also part of different ennets that will transform an entire scene representation into
semble ”teachers” for training other students. By optimizing
another. The idea also differs from current work in graph
such consensus between different paths, the graph reaches
neural nets, which is mainly supervised and still uses relaconsistency and robustness over multiple interpretations and
generations, in the face of unknown labels. We give theoretitively simple functions on edges (e.g., MLPs) and local recal justifications of the proposed idea and validate it on a large
ceptive fields (Nicolicioiu, Duta, and Leordeanu 2019; Duta,
dataset. We show how prediction of different representations
Nicolicioiu, and Leordeanu 2020; Battaglia et al. 2016; Xu
such as depth, semantic segmentation, surface normals and
et al. 2019).
pose from RGB input could be effectively learned through
We create a graph (or more generally, a hypergraph) of
self-supervised consensus in our graph. We also compare to
deep networks, such that each node in the graph represents
state-of-the-art methods for multi-task and semi-supervised
learning and show superior performance.
a different interpretation layer of the world (e.g. semantic
segmentation layer, depth layer, motion layer). The edges
(or hyperedges) have dedicated deep networks, which preIntroduction
dict the layer at one node from the layer, or layers, at one or
We propose the Neural Graph Consensus (NGC) model,
several other nodes. The deep nets are trained in turn, using
a multi-class graph of deep neural networks, which apas supervision the consensual output of all paths reaching
proaches one of the most difficult problems in AI, that of unthe same output node (when such consensus takes place).
supervised learning of multiple scene interpretations. SpaceSince we do not have strict, well defined “worlds” as in
time data is so inexpensive to record, yet so expensive to anreinforcement learning (RL), we let the natural structure
notate. While classic deep learning is powerful, it is almost
in the data emerge, as in graph clustering. Similar to RL,
hopeless when no ground truth is available. A popular alterin which agents, in heavily constrained environments with
native is reinforcement learning (Sutton, Barto et al. 1998;
well defined goals, evolve by playing against each other, we
Silver et al. 2016), which is computationally very demandput pressure on the deep nets by training them one versus
ing when applied to real-world tasks. We show that NGC,
the others, in complementarity. Thus, each net brings somebased on a set of sound principles, overcomes many of the
thing new, while also learning to agree with the other paths
current limitations in unsupervised learning, by bringing tothat reach the same output. During such consensus training,
gether graphs and neural nets, within a single multi-task
the NGC graph will approach a state of equilibrium. This
idea is related to early work on grouping from the Gestalt
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
school of psychology (Koffka 2013) and Grossberg’s clas2

1882

