The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual Compositional Learning in Interactive Image Retrieval
Jongseok Kim1 , Youngjae Yu1,2 , Hoeseong Kim1 , and Gunhee Kim1,2
Seoul National University1
RippleAI2 , Seoul, Korea
{js.kim, yj.yu}@vision.snu.ac.kr, {hsgkim, gunhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Composition Network

We present an approach named Dual Composition Network
(DCNet) for interactive image retrieval that searches for the
best target image for a natural language query and a reference image. To accomplish this task, existing methods have
focused on learning a composite representation of the reference image and the text query to be as close to the embedding of the target image as possible. We refer this approach as
Composition Network. In this work, we propose to close the
loop with Correction Network that models the difference between the reference and target image in the embedding space
and matches it with the embedding of the text query. That
is, we consider two cyclic directional mappings for triplets
of (reference image, text query, target image) by using both
Composition Network and Correction Network. We also propose a joint training loss that can further improve the robustness of multimodal representation learning. We evaluate the
proposed model on three benchmark datasets for multimodal
retrieval: Fashion-IQ, Shoes, and Fashion200K. Our experiments show that our DCNet achieves new state-of-the-art performance on all three datasets, and the addition of Correction Network consistently improves multiple existing methods that are solely based on Composition Network. Moreover,
an ensemble of our model won the first place in Fashion-IQ
2020 challenge held in a CVPR 2020 workshop.

1

Reference
Image

User

Target Images

I want yellow
and one
shouldered
floral print

DB

…

Correction Network

Figure 1: The key intuition of DCNet. Given a previously retrieved image (reference image), a user inputs how to update
the search results in natural language (text query), and our
goal is to search for the best matching image for them (target
image). Our model considers both the forward (Composition
Network) and inverse (Correction Network) pathways.

can produce a composite feature combining the reference
image and the text query and make it closer to the embedding of the corresponding target image. We call this model
Composition Network. Going one step further, our key idea
is to incorporate another network, which we call Correction Network, that models the difference feature between
the target and reference image and pushes it closer to the
embedding of the corresponding text query. In other words,
as shown in Figure 1, our model can learn a more robust
representation by considering cyclic directional mappings
with no additional label, i.e. using both Ir + Tq → It and
It − Ir → Tq , where Ir/t is the reference/target image and
Tq is the text query.
We summarize the contribution of this work as follows:

Introduction

Interactive conversational image search has risen as one of
the next key technologies for search engines as it allows
users to provide their search intent in a more efficient, intuitive, and engaging way. To implement such systems, it
is a prerequisite to develop an algorithm that retrieves images based on previous search results and additional user
feedback in a form of natural language queries, as shown in
Figure 1. Not only does it have huge potential commercial
values by enhancing the users’ shopping experience, for example, but it is also an intriguing research problem to study
multimodal embeddings and cross-modal retrieval.
In this work, we propose an approach named Dual Composition Network (DCNet) that can retrieve the best matching target image for a given reference image and a text query.
Existing methods (Vo et al. 2019; Chen, Gong, and Bazzani
2020) have tackled this problem by training a network that

1. We propose Correction Network that drives the difference feature between the target and reference image to
be similar to the corresponding text query embedding.
Compared to existing models such as TIRG (Vo et al.
2019) and VAL (Chen, Gong, and Bazzani 2020) that rely
only on Composition Network, our model complementarily models another directional mapping by Correction
Network to learn more robust multimodal representations.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1771

