The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Keyword-Guided Neural Conversational Model
Peixiang Zhong,1,2 Yong Liu, 1,2 Hao Wang, 3 * Chunyan Miao 1,2 *
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, NTU, Singapore
3
Alibaba Group, China
{peixiang001, stephenliu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, cashenry@126.com

Abstract

Hi, I like drinking dr. pepper and comics drawings and you?
Wow nice combination, I am eating pasta, italian is my favorite kind of food.

We study the problem of imposing conversational
goals/keywords on open-domain conversational agents,
where the agent is required to lead the conversation to a
target keyword smoothly and fast. Solving this problem
enables the application of conversational agents in many
real-world scenarios, e.g., recommendation and psychotherapy. The dominant paradigm for tackling this problem is
to 1) train a next-turn keyword classifier, and 2) train a
keyword-augmented response retrieval model. However,
existing approaches in this paradigm have two limitations:
1) the training and evaluation datasets for next-turn keyword
classification are directly extracted from conversations
without human annotations, thus, they are noisy and have
low correlation with human judgements, and 2) during
keyword transition, the agents solely rely on the similarities
between word embeddings to move closer to the target
keyword, which may not reflect how humans converse.
In this paper, we assume that human conversations are
grounded on commonsense and propose a keyword-guided
neural conversational model that can leverage external
commonsense knowledge graphs (CKG) for both keyword
transition and response retrieval. Automatic evaluations
suggest that commonsense improves the performance of
both next-turn keyword prediction and keyword-augmented
response retrieval. In addition, both self-play and human
evaluations show that our model produces responses with
smoother keyword transition and reaches the target keyword
faster than competitive baselines.

I do love pasta but not egg noodles, since I eat only vegan.
That is a good one are you a vegan? I prefer meat hamburger is amazing.
I really love jelly sandwiches, but hold the pb because i'm allergic.
Me too, I enjoy ham and cheese sandwiches with orange juice.

Figure 1: Illustration of keyword-guided conversations from
self-play simulations. Keywords are highlighted in bold.
Given a random starting keyword “comics”, the agent
(red) leads the conversation to the target keyword “juice”
smoothly and fast.

Recent efforts in open-domain neural conversational
models are primarily aiming to improve the response diversity (Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016; Zhang et al. 2018b)
and endowing responses with knowledge (Zhou et al. 2018b;
Dinan et al. 2019b), personality (Li et al. 2016a; Zhang
et al. 2018a), emotion (Zhou et al. 2018a; Zhong, Wang,
and Miao 2019) and empathy (Rashkin et al. 2019; Zhong
et al. 2020). All the efforts mentioned above are focusing on
models that passively respond to user messages. However, in
many real-world scenarios, e.g., conversational recommendation, psychotherapy and education, conversational agents
are required to actively lead the conversation by smoothly
changing the conversation topic to a designated one. For example, during a casual conversation, the agent may actively
lead the user to a specific product or service that the agent
wants to introduce and recommend.
In this paper, we follow the line of research in (Tang et al.
2019; Qin et al. 2020) and study the problem of imposing
conversational goals/keywords on open-domain conversational agents, where the agent is required to lead the conversation to a target keyword smoothly and fast. As illustrated
in Figure 1, given a target keyword “juice” and a random
starting keyword “comics”, the agent is required to converse
with the user in multiple exchanges and lead the conversation to “juice”. The challenge of this problem lies in how
to balance the tradeoff between maximizing keyword transition smoothness and minimizing the number of turns taken
to reach the target. On the one hand, passively responding
to the user solely based on the conversation context would

Introduction
Building a human-like open-domain conversational agent
(CA) has been one of the milestones in artificial intelligence (AI). Early conversational agents are primarily based
on rules (Weizenbaum 1966; Colby, Weber, and Hilf 1971),
e.g., Eliza (Weizenbaum 1966), the first CA developed
in 60’s, simulates a Rogerian psychotherapist based on
hand-crafted pattern matching rules. In recent years, with
the advancement of data-driven neural networks, neural
open-domain conversational models are becoming dominant
(Vinyals and Le 2015; Lowe et al. 2015; Gao, Galley, and Li
2018).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14568

