The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RainBench: Towards Global Precipitation Forecasting from Satellite Imagery
Christian Schroeder de Witt*1 , Catherine Tong*1 ,
Valentina Zantedeschi23 , Daniele De Martini1 ,
Alfredo Kalaitzis1 , Matthew Chantry1 , Duncan Watson-Parris1 , Piotr Bilinski41
1

University of Oxford, 2 INRIA, 3 UCL, 4 University of Warsaw,
{cs@robots, eu.tong@cs}.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

learning models deployed on dedicated high-throughput
hardware can produce inferences in a matter of seconds.
However, while there have been attempts in forecasting precipitation with neural networks, they have mostly been fragmented across different local regions, which hinders a systematic comparison into their performance.
In this work, we introduce RainBench, a multi-modal
dataset to support data-driven forecasting of global precipitation from satellite imagery. We curate three types of
datasets: simulated satellite data (SimSat), numerical reanalysis data (ERA5), and global precipitation estimates
(IMERG). The use of satellite images to forecast precipitation globally would circumvent the need to collect ground
station data, and hence they are key to our vision for widening the access to multi-day precipitation forecasts. Reanalysis data provide estimates of complete atmospheric state,
and IMERG provides rigorous estimates of global precipitation. Access to these data opens up opportunities to develop
more timely and potentially physics-informed forecast models, which so far could not have been studied systematically.
Most related to our work, Rasp et al. (2020) have developed WeatherBench, a benchmark environment for global
data-driven medium-range weather forecasting. This dataset
forms an excellent first step in weather forecasting. However, some important features of WeatherBench limit its use
for end-to-end precipitation forecasts. WeatherBench does
not include any observational raw data (e.g. satellite data)
and only contains ERA5 reanalysis data, which have limited
resolution of extreme precipitation events. Further, WeatherBench does not include a fast dataloading pipeline to train
ML models, which we found to be a significant bottleneck in our model development and testing process. This
gap prompted us to also release PyRain, a data processing
and experimentation framework with fast and configurable
multi-modal dataloaders.
To summarise our contributions: (a) We introduce the
multi-modal RainBench dataset which supports data-driven
investigations for global precipitation forecasting from satellite imagery; (b) we release PyRain, which allows researchers to run Deep Learning (DL) experiments on RainBench efficiently, reducing time and hardware costs and thus
lowering the barrier to entry into this field; (c) we introduce two benchmark precipitation forecasting tasks on RainBench and their baseline results, and present experiments

Extreme precipitation events, such as violent rainfall and hail
storms, routinely ravage economies and livelihoods around
the developing world. Climate change further aggravates this
issue (Gupta et al. 2020). Data-driven deep learning approaches could widen the access to accurate multi-day forecasts, to mitigate against such events. However, there is
currently no benchmark dataset dedicated to the study of
global precipitation forecasts. In this paper, we introduce
RainBench, a new multi-modal benchmark dataset for datadriven precipitation forecasting. It includes simulated satellite data, a selection of relevant meteorological data from the
ERA5 reanalysis product, and IMERG precipitation data. We
also release PyRain, a library to process large precipitation
datasets efficiently. We present an extensive analysis of our
novel dataset and establish baseline results for two benchmark medium-range precipitation forecasting tasks. Finally,
we discuss existing data-driven weather forecasting methodologies and suggest future research avenues.

Introduction
Extreme precipitation events, such as violent rain and hail
storms, can devastate crop fields and disrupt harvests (Vogel et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019). These events can be locally
forecasted with sophisticated numerical weather models that
rely on extensive ground and satellite observations. However, such approaches require access to compute and data
resources that developing countries in need - particularly in
South America and West Africa - cannot afford (Le Coz and
van de Giesen 2020; Gubler et al. 2020). The lack of advance planning for precipitation events impedes socioeconomic development and ultimately affects the livelihoods of
millions around the world. Given the increase in global precipitation and extreme precipitation events driven by climate
change (Gupta et al. 2020), the need for accurate precipitation forecasts is ever more pressing.
Data-driven machine learning approaches circumvent
the dependence on traditional resource-intensive numerical
models, which typically take several hours to run (Sønderby
et al. 2020), incurring a significant time lag. In contrast, deep
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*: Equal contribution

14902

