The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Communication-Efficient Frank-Wolfe Algorithm for Nonconvex Decentralized
Distributed Learning
Wenhan Xian 1 , Feihu Huang 1 , Heng Huang 1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
2
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
wex37@pitt.edu, huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

machine learning due to its communication efficiency compared with the centralized fashion. Specifically, decentralized optimization adopts a pattern that each node maintains
its own local data and model and only communicates with its
neighbors. In fact, the communication complexity of decentralized system at each iteration is dependent on the degree
of graph topology (usually not dependent on the number of
nodes) and data locality is allowed.
Recently, the decentralized learning becomes a popular
research topic in machine learning and has been widely
studied. For example, it was first studied to solve problems
of computing aggregates among clients or be used for the
sake of data locality and privacy (Ram, Nedić, and Veeravalli 2010; Yan et al. 2012), where centralized structure
is not allowed. A general decentralized algorithm can be
traced back to (Nedić and Ozdaglar 2009) that combines
gradient descent method and Gossip-type consensus step.
Subsequently, a degenerated case of decentralization that
achieves huge success is federated optimization (Konečný
et al. 2016), which adopts star topology but enables data to
be drawn from non-iid distribution. Besides, many other previous fully decentralized works such as (Lian et al. 2017;
Tang et al. 2018) that based on general network topology
have shown that decentralized method is able to achieve
more efficient communication without sacrificing the training result, indicating that decentralization is becoming competitive and advantageous in distributed learning rather than
just an alternate of centralization when centralization is not
allowed. Lian et al. (2017) presented an important decentralized optimization work to verify that the decentralized
method can outperform its centralized counterpart. Lian
et al. (2017) proposed an algorithm named Decentralized
Parallel Stochastic Gradient Descent (D-PSGD) to directly
compute the averaging value among each node with exact communication, which has the same convergence rate
as centralized SGD in nonconvex optimization with nonidentical data distribution.
To reduce the communication cost in distributed system,
gradient quantization (Seide et al. 2014) is another effective method. Recently, many quantized gradient algorithms,
such as QSGD (Alistarh et al. 2017), signSGD (Bernstein
et al. 2018a) and its variant (Bernstein et al. 2018b), were
developed and showed excellent performance. In these algorithms, the number of bits transmitted in each communica-

Recently decentralized optimization attracts much attention
in machine learning because it is more communicationefficient than the centralized fashion. Quantization is a
promising method to reduce the communication cost via cutting down the budget of each single communication using
the gradient compression. To further improve the communication efficiency, more recently, some quantized decentralized algorithms have been studied. However, the quantized
decentralized algorithm for nonconvex constrained machine
learning problems is still limited. Frank-Wolfe (a.k.a., conditional gradient or projection-free) method is very efficient
to solve many constrained optimization tasks, such as lowrank or sparsity-constrained models training. In this paper, to
fill the gap of decentralized quantized constrained optimization, we propose a novel communication-efficient Decentralized Quantized Stochastic Frank-Wolfe (DQSFW) algorithm
for non-convex constrained learning models. We first design
a new counterexample to show that the vanilla decentralized
quantized stochastic Frank-Wolfe algorithm usually diverges.
Thus, we propose DQSFW algorithm with the gradient tracking technique to guarantee the method will converge to the
stationary point of non-convex optimization safely. In our theoretical analysis, we prove that to achieve the stationary point
our DQSFW algorithm achieves the same gradient complexity as the standard stochastic Frank-Wolfe and centralized
Frank-Wolfe algorithms, but has much less communication
cost. Experiments on matrix completion and model compression applications demonstrate the efficiency of our new algorithm.

Introduction
Nowadays, many machine learning tasks have been deployed on distributed systems that enable computations in
parallel, especially for large-scale models such as deep neural networks (DNNs). Recently, the centralized distribution structure has been used often. However, the centralized learning scheme has a key bottleneck of communication, where the communication burden of the central server
becomes larger as the number of nodes grows. For example,
when the system has M workers, it will suffer from the communication complexity of O(M ). Thus, the decentralized
distribution structure recently has attracts much attention in
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10405

