The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Causal Discovery By Optimal Bayesian Network Learning
Ni Y Lu,1 Kun Zhang, 2 Changhe Yuan 3
1

Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
3
Department of Computer Science, Queens College, Queens, NY
nlu@gradcenter.cuny.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu, changhe.yuan@qc.cuny.edu
2

Abstract

tionally independent given any subset of the remaining variables. PC starts with a complete graph where an undirected
edge exists between each pair of variables. Then it removes
an edge X − Y where X ⊥ Y |S for some S ⊆ V \ {X, Y },
and keeps removing the edges until no such edge exists. PC
assumes causal sufficiency, that is, there are no unobserved
common causal variables (known as latent confounders).
FCI also makes use of conditional independence relations
to recover causal information and can handle latent confounders.
GES (Chickering 2002) is a greedy two-phase search algorithm in the space of MECs that optimizes a model fitting score, such as Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)
(Schwarz 1978). It first starts with a graph with no edge,
and keeps adding one edge at a time if it improves score the
most, until no edge can be added to further improve score.
Then it checks all edges to eliminate some if removal further
improves score.
Recently, the SAT-based method (SAT) has gained much
attention for its superb performance in causal discovery
(Hyttinen et al. 2013; Hyttinen, Eberhardt, and Järvisalo
2014). It treats causal discovery as a constraint optimization problem, encodes conditional independence and dependence as Boolean variables and formula, and tackles causal
discovery with the Boolean satisfiablity solver. In fact, this
constraint optimization can also be seen as a score-based
method, where the score is a particular combination of all
the constraints to be satisfied. This way, SAT is a special
case of score-based exhaustive search. It works very well on
small-scale problems (less than 8 variables).
The sparsest permutation (SP) method tries to solve the
same constraint optimization problem by enumerating all
permutations of variables (Raskutti and Uhler 2018). It considers each permutation as a topological causal ordering
where one variable can only use as parents the variables proceeding it in the ordering, not any variables that follow it. SP
finds the DAG satisfying the largest number of conditional
independence (CI) relations allowed by each ordering. The
DAG with the least number of edges is the optimal solution.
SP is also a special case of score-based exhaustive search
with the number of edges as score, given that the structure
explains data well. Greedy SP (GSP) is a greedy version of
SP.
NOTEARS (Zheng et al. 2018) formulates structure learn-

Many widely-used causal discovery methods such as Greedy
Equivalent Search (GES), although with asymptotic correctness guarantees, have been reported to produce sub-optimal
solutions on finite data, or when the causal faithfulness condition is violated. The constraint-based procedure with Boolean
satisfiability (SAT) solver, and the recently proposed Sparsest
Permutation (SP) algorithm have shown superb performance,
but currently they do not scale well. In this work, we demonstrate that optimal score-based exhaustive search is remarkably useful for causal discovery: it requires weaker conditions
to guarantee asymptotic correctness, and outperforms wellknown methods including PC, GES, GSP, and NOTEARS. In
order to achieve scalability, we also develop an approximation algorithm for larger systems based on the A* method,
which scales up to 60+ variables and obtains better results
than existing greedy algorithms such as GES, MMHC, and
GSP. Our results illustrate the risk of assuming the faithfulness assumption, the advantages of exhaustive search methods, and the limitations of greedy search methods, and shed
light on the computational challenges and techniques in scaling up to larger networks and handling unfaithful data.

Introduction
The goal of causal discovery is to find the underlying causal
relations among different variables by analyzing observed
data. Causal discovery has been an important research area
in artificial intelligence, because interventions or controlled
experiments are often impossible or unethical or simply too
expensive. In many cases, a directed acyclic graph (DAG) is
used to represent the underlying causal structure. Constraintbased methods for causal discovery(Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000), which make use of conditional independence relations among the variables, can recover a Markov
equivalent class (MEC) of DAGs from the observed data.
The PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 1993)
and FCI (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000) are traditional causal discovery algorithms, and their results are
asymptotically correct under the causal Markov condition
and the causal faithfulness assumption. The condition and
the assumption, put together, imply that two variables are
directly causally related if and only if they are not condiCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8741

