The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

It Takes Two to Empathize: One to Seek and One to Provide
Mahshid Hosseini and Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science Department
University of Illinois at Chicago
mhosse4@uic.edu, cornelia@uic.edu

Abstract

cial support, of which empathy is a major component. The
online communication enables users to feel empathetically
supported by interacting with other people that possibly had
similar experiences and can understand their feelings.
Traditional means of conveying empathy is through touch,
gesture, gaze, and voice (Preece 1999). However, social networks and online communities have opened a new paradigm
for expressing empathy through natural language and textbased communication. Yet with a concept as critical to augmenting patients’ positive feelings as empathy (Goubert
et al. 2005), to our knowledge, there has been no single
computational study to detect empathetic support at a finegrained level (i.e., seeking or providing empathy) from text.
It is, therefore, important to instrument models for detecting
the direction of empathy expressed in natural language.
Detecting the direction of empathy from text in the absence of visual and acoustic information is a challenging
task due to: 1) the lack of annotated data; 2) the difficulty of
annotating empathy from textual data due to the subjective
nature of the author’s intent; and 3) the empathy’s sensitivity
to multiple contextual circumstances. Precisely, previously
studied datasets only focus on the presence of empathy at a
high-level and do not make the very fine distinction between
the direction of empathy that is expressed in text. However,
from a psychological perspective, it is important to understand if the mood of a person seeking empathy changes after
empathetic support is provided. Our models will enable such
an analysis at scale. Simply detecting that a message contains empathy (without detecting the direction) is not enough
to understand the impacts of empathy on people’s behavior.
Moreover, studying the direction of empathy is important for
tasks such as empathetic response generation and can enable
machines to obtain the capacity to perceive the complex affects like humans do. To our knowledge, there is no dataset
available that is annotated with fine-grained empathy. In addition, in the absence of the author’s intent, the perceived
empathy (from the reader’s perspective) may differ from the
intended empathy. Furthermore, the contextual complexities
such as the implicit expression of empathy and the use of
metaphors need implicit reasoning, which is not accessible
as surface-level lexical information. For example, the following messages “I have been in your shoes” and “I am
getting scared and depression is trying to sneak up on me”
lack direct surface patterns as indications of empathy, but

Empathy describes the capacity to feel, understand, and emotionally engage with what other people are experiencing. People have recently started to turn to online health communities
to seek empathetic support when they undergo difficult situations such as suffering from a life-threatening disease, while
others are there to provide empathetic support to those who
need it. It is, therefore, important to detect the direction of
empathy expressed in natural language. Previous studies only
focus on the presence of empathy at a high-level and do not
distinguish the direction of empathy that is expressed in textual messages. In this paper, we take one step further in the
identification of perceived empathy from text by introducing
I E MPATHIZE, a dataset of messages annotated with the direction of empathy exchanged in an online cancer network.
We analyze user messages to identify the direction of empathy at a fine-grained level: seeking or providing empathy. Our
dataset I E MPATHIZE serves as a challenging benchmark for
studying empathy at a fine-grained level.

Introduction
Empathy refers to the individuals’ ability to correlate with
and understand others’ emotional behavior and experiences
(Decety and Jackson 2004). Empathy requires one to adopt
the subjective viewpoint of the other (Decety and Jackson 2004) and describes the capacity to feel, understand,
and emotionally engage with what other people are experiencing. Detecting and understanding empathy have applications in many domains including human-computer interaction (Buechel et al. 2018; Virvou and Katsionis 2003;
De Vicente and Pain 2002), education (Virvou and Katsionis
2003), medical and healthcare (Raab 2014; Williams et al.
2015), and psychology (Yan and Tan 2014; Davis 1983; Batson 2009).
Empathy is shown to have a positive impact on creating
emotional ties between people (Davis 2004). Its importance
in moving patients toward a healthier state is widely discussed in the previous literature (Medeiros and Bosse 2016;
Nambisan 2011; Goubert et al. 2005; LaCoursiere 2001).
For example, LaCoursiere (2001) showed that when people
undergo hard situations such as suffering from a severe disease, they often turn to online health communities to seek soCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13018

