The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generative Partial Visual-Tactile Fused Object Clustering
Tao Zhang1,2,3 , Yang Cong1∗ , Gan Sun1 , Jiahua Dong1,2,3 , Yuyang Liu1,2,3 , Zhenming Ding4
1

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
zhangtaosia@gmail.com, yangcong81@gmail.com, sungan1412@gmail.com, dongjiahua1995@gmail.com,
liuyuyang@sia.cn, zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
Visual-tactile fused sensing for object clustering has achieved
significant progresses recently, since the involvement of tactile modality can effectively improve clustering performance.
However, the missing data (i.e., partial data) issues always
happen due to occlusion and noises during the data collecting process. This issue is not well solved by most existing
partial multi-view clustering methods for the heterogeneous
modality challenge. Naively employing these methods would
inevitably induce a negative effect and further hurt the performance. To solve the mentioned challenges, we propose a
Generative Partial Visual-Tactile Fused (i.e., GPVTF) framework for object clustering. More specifically, we first do partial visual and tactile features extraction from the partial visual and tactile data, respectively, and encode the extracted
features in modality-specific feature subspaces. A conditional cross-modal clustering generative adversarial network is
then developed to synthesize one modality conditioning on
the other modality, which can compensate missing samples
and align the visual and tactile modalities naturally by adversarial learning. To the end, two pseudo-label based KLdivergence losses are employed to update the corresponding modality-specific encoders. Extensive comparative experiments on three public visual-tactile datasets prove the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Diagram of our proposed method, which first encodes original partial visual and tactile data in modalityspecific subspaces. Then, we do visual-tactile fused clustering after completing the missing data.

(e.g., many objects cluttered in an unstructured scene), recognizing the objects in this scene by collecting and annotating a lot of samples is time-consuming and expensive (Zhao,
Wang, and Huang 2021; Wei et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2020;
Wei, Deng, and Yang 2020; Sun et al. 2020b). An alternative solution is to use unsupervised manner to group these
objects. In this setting, previous VTFC methods provide a
feasible solution by employing fused visual-tactile information in an unsupervised manner to group the objects with
same identity into a same group (i.e., object clustering). Fusion visual-tactile information could improve the clustering
performance effectively, since they can provide complementary information. Generally, most existing VTFC methods
mainly utilize the idea of multi-view clustering (Dang et al.
2020; Hu, Shi, and Ye 2020; Hu, Yan, and Ye 2020), e.g.,
Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2020) propose a VTFC model
based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) as well
as consensus clustering and achieve great progresses. As far
as we know, this is the first work about visual-tactile fused
clustering.
However, the task of VTFC has not been well settled due
to the following challenges i.e., partial data and heterogeneous modality. Partial data: Existing visual-tactile fused
object clustering methods (Zhang et al. 2020) make a strong
assumption that all the visual-tactile modalities well aligned
and complete. However, visual-tactile data usually tend to

Introduction
Benefitting from the great progresses in visual-tactile fused
sensing (Liu and Sun 2018; Luo et al. 2018; Lee, Bollegala,
and Luo 2019), researchers (Zhang et al. 2020) attempt to
focus on visual-tactile fused clustering (VTFC), which aims
to group similar objects together in an unsupervised manner. An interesting example is that when robots employ visual and tactile information to explore unknown environment
∗

The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong and this work
is supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFB1310300) and National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant (61722311, U1613214,
61821005).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6156

