The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural-Symbolic Integration: A Compositional Perspective
Efthymia Tsamoura1 , Timothy Hospedales1 , Loizos Michael2,3
1

Samsung AI Research
Open University of Cyprus
3
CYENS Center of Excellence
efi.tsamoura@samsung.com, t.hospedales@samsung.com, loizos@ouc.ac.cy
2

Abstract

constraints or other constructs), which is far from straightforward since logical inference cannot be, in general, captured via a differentiable function.
To accommodate the integration of neural modules with
logical theories, the majority of neural-symbolic frameworks restrict the type of the theories (e.g., to non-recursive
or acyclic propositional ones), and they either translate them
into neural networks (d’Avila Garcez, Broda, and Gabbay
2002; Hölldobler, Störr, and Kalinke 1999; Towell and Shavlik 1994), or they replace logical computations by differentiable functions (Bošnjak et al. 2017; Gaunt et al. 2017). A
second line of work abandons the use of classical logic altogether and adopts theories whose interpretations take continuous values, such as fuzzy logic (Donadello, Serafini, and
d’Avila Garcez 2017; Marra et al. 2019; Serafini and d’Avila
Garcez 2016; Sourek et al. 2015; van Krieken, Acar, and
van Harmelen 2019), or probabilistic logic (Manhaeve et al.
2018), which can support the uniform application of backpropagation on both the symbolic and the neural module.
We consider the problem of integrating a symbolic module that computes a function s(·) on top of a neural module
that computes a function n(·), so that together the two modules implement the composition s ◦ n. We argue that this
integration can be done fully compositionally, without the
need to revamp the syntax or semantics of either module.
We borrow two well-known notions from mathematical
logic to establish the interface that should be provided by the
symbolic module to reach a transparent and “non-intrusive”
integration: deduction, or forward inference, and abduction,
through which one computes (i.e., abduces) the inputs to the
symbolic module that would deduce a given output.
While abduction has been used in the past as the means
to train a neural module feeding into a symbolic module
(Dai et al. 2019), there are two key differences between our
framework and prior art, over and above our high-level contribution in setting the basis for compositionality. The first
difference is on the abduced inputs that are used to train the
neural module. Our basic framework makes use of all such
abduced inputs, while prior art restricts its attention on one
of them. As also supported by the empirical evidence that we
offer in this work, this restriction causes the learning process
to suffer: learning is led to fall into local minima since the
single abduced input offers lopsided feedback to the learning process, training faces weaker supervision signals due to

Despite significant progress in the development of neuralsymbolic frameworks, the question of how to integrate a neural and a symbolic system in a compositional manner remains
open. Our work seeks to fill this gap by treating these two
systems as black boxes to be integrated as modules into a single architecture, without making assumptions on their internal structure and semantics. Instead, we expect only that each
module exposes certain methods for accessing the functions
that the module implements: the symbolic module exposes
a deduction method for computing the function’s output on a
given input, and an abduction method for computing the function’s inputs for a given output; the neural module exposes a
deduction method for computing the function’s output on a
given input, and an induction method for updating the function given input-output training instances. We are, then, able
to show that a symbolic module — with any choice for syntax
and semantics, as long as the deduction and abduction methods are exposed — can be cleanly integrated with a neural
module, and facilitate the latter’s efficient training, achieving
empirical performance that exceeds that of previous work1 .

Introduction
Neural-symbolic frameworks (d’Avila Garcez, Broda, and
Gabbay 2002; Rocktäschel and Riedel 2017; Wang et al.
2019) vow to bring a new computational paradigm in which
symbolic systems can tolerate noisy or unstructured data,
and neural systems can learn with fewer data and offer interpretable outcomes. The potential of integrating a symbolic,
typically logic-based, module on top of a neural one has
been well-demonstrated in semi-supervised learning (Donadello, Serafini, and d’Avila Garcez 2017; Marra et al. 2019;
Serafini and d’Avila Garcez 2016; van Krieken, Acar, and
van Harmelen 2019), program induction (Kalyan et al. 2018;
Parisotto et al. 2017), and open question answering (Sun
et al. 2018) settings. In these cases, the training of the neural module is regulated by the logic theory (and its integrity
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Efthymia Tsamoura and Loizos Michael contributed to the
conception and design of the framework, to the implementation of
the architecture, to the analysis and interpretation of the results, and
to the writing of the paper. Timothy Hospedales contributed to early
discussions in the general area of neural-symbolic integration, and
proposed some existing benchmarks for the empirical evaluation.

5051

