The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Where there’s Smoke, there’s Fire: Wildfire Risk Predictive Modeling via
Historical Climate Data
Shahrzad Gholami 1 , Narendran Kodandapani 2 , Jane Wang 1 , Juan Lavista Ferres 1
2

1
AI for Good Research Lab, Microsoft, Redmond, USA
Center for Advanced Spatial and Environmental Research, Bengaluru, India
jlavista@microsoft.com

Abstract
Wildfire is a growing global crisis with devastating
consequences. Uncontrolled wildfires take away human lives,
destroy millions of animals and trees, degrade the air quality,
impact the biodiversity of the planet and cause substantial
economic costs. It is incredibly challenging to predict the
spatio-temporal likelihood of wildfires based on historical
data, due to their stochastic nature. Crucially though, the
accurate and reliable prediction of wildfires can help the
stakeholders and decision-makers take timely, strategic and
effective actions to prevent, detect and suppress the wildfires
before they become unmanageable. Unfortunately, most
previous studies developed predictive models that suffer
from some shortcomings: (i) in the evaluation phase, they
do not take the temporal aspects into account precisely
and they assume the independent and identically distributed
random variables; (ii) they do not evaluate their approaches
comprehensively, thus it is not clear if their proposed
predictions and selected models remain reliable across
different locations and years for practical deployment; and
(iii) for the supervised learning models, they use predictor
features and fire observations from the same time step in the
training phase, which makes the inference task infeasible for
future fire prediction. In this paper, we revisit the wildfire
predictive modeling, explore the inherent challenges from
a practical perspective and evaluate our modeling approach
comprehensively via historical burned area, climate and
geospatial data from three vast landscapes in India.

Figure 1: Southern Western Ghats is shown in green and
three landscapes studied in this paper are shown in yellow.
In total these landscapes cover 5306 sq. km.

September 2020, over 3.1 million acres in California has
burned3 . Although the major causes of wildfire ignitions
are dry climate, lightning, and volcanic eruptions (Bowman
et al. 2009), human mistakes also play an important role
in such incidents (Balch et al. 2017). Besides arson and
accidental ignitions, the uncontrolled use of fire for landclearing and agricultural purposes by local communities
(e.g., slash-and-burn farming in Southeast Asia) is also a
major source of human-caused fires.
Forest areas are vast and fire management resources are
extremely scarce; thus managing resources strategically is a
challenging task for stakeholders and decision-makers (i.e.,
forest and fire departments) in the field. In this paper, we
study wildfire spatio-temporal risk prediction by exploiting
the power of the artificial intelligence framework along
with historical burned areas, climate, and geospatial data to
assist decision-makers with identifying high-risk regions in
protected areas. Such risk estimations are helpful to plan
regarding where preventative actions and resources should
be applied during high-risk seasons of wildfires.
Although wildfire risk predictive models based on
historical data has been studied extensively in the past
(Zhang, Lim, and Sharples 2016; Coffield et al. 2019;
Catry et al. 2010), we believe it has to be revisited in
terms of modeling details and extensive evaluation to assess
accuracy, reliability, and practicality for actual deployment
and decision-making in the field. The previous studies suffer

Introduction
A wildfire is an uncontrolled fire affecting areas that
consist of combustible vegetation. Such fires threaten
environmental resources and human lives significantly at
a global scale. They also cause a substantial economic
burden for governments and individuals (Thomas et al.
2017). For instance, the Australian bushfire and the Amazon
rainforest wildfires in 2019 and 2020 affected nearly 44.5
million (18 million hectares)1 and 2.3 million acres of
area2 , respectively. Also, in recent decades, there has been
an increased forest fire activity across the western United
States (Abatzoglou and Williams 2016). For instance as of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://bitly.ws/9JYE
2
https://cbsn.ws/2UPSvjd

3

15309

https://www.fire.ca.gov/daily-wildfire-report/

