The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Augmented Experiment in Material Engineering Using Machine Learning
Aomar Osmani1 , Massinissa Hamidi1 , Salah Bouhouche2
1

Laboratoire LIPN-UMR CNRS 7030, Univ. Sorbonne Paris Nord
2
Industrial Technologies Research Center, CRTI-DTSI
{ao, hamidi}@lipn.univ-paris13.fr

Abstract

The synthesis of an anticorrosive paint can be achieved by
using red pigments from iron ore deposits and the calamine,
a recycling of steel by-products. Calamine is formed by
high-temperature oxidation during the cooling of products
in continuous casting of steels and during heat treatment and
hot forming. It is a by-product in different mills (AbedGhars
2018). On the other hand, iron pigments are available in the
form of fine dry particles and are soluble in most solvents.
Their color is due to their absorption of a part of the wavelengths of the visible spectrum. Online analysis of material
properties in metals is a costly and time-consuming problem
in industry. Reducing the number of physical experiments
is critical. According to some physical characteristics like
so-called thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (see Figure 1a)
used as a basic experiment to provide data, we propose a
data-driven approach guided by analytical models to predict
properties of a mixture of calamine/pigment while reducing
the number of needed costly real experiments. First, the signatures of pigment and calamine are established separately.
Then, by varying the mixture proportions between calamine
and pigment, i.e. the quotient between the weight of pigment
and the total charge (weight of calamine plus the weight of
pigment), we establish the signature of the new material (See
Figure 1b and 1c). Our goal is to provide a model able to
predict the material signature for a mixture of pigment and
calamine using a minimal number of real experiments. To
guide the transformations between physical experiments, we
leverage known analytical models such as Arrhenius (Laidler 1984) and Eyring (Eyring 1935) kinetic models which
describe the degradation kinetics of chemical reactants.

The synthesis of materials using the principle of thermogravimetric analysis to discover new anticorrosive paints requires
several costly experiments. This paper presents an approach
combining empirical data and domain analytical models to
reduce the number of real experiments required to obtain the
desired synthesis. The main idea is to predict the behavior
of the synthesis of two materials with well-defined mass proportions as a function of temperature. As no exact equational
model exists to predict the new material, we integrate a machine learning approach circumscribed by existing domain
analytical models such as heating equation in order to derive a generative model of augmented experiments. Extensive empirical evaluation shows that using machine learning
approach guided by analytic models, it is possible to substantially reduce the number of needed physical experiments
without losing the approximation quality. 1

Introduction
Many important engineering processes do not have an explicit and complete analytic description of the objective
function and consider the transformation processes as blackbox functions which result, for example, from experiments
or non-linear systems (Biegler, Lang, and Lin 2014). It is
particularly the case for material design industry, where the
core function is to accelerate the synthesis of new materials with good properties (Aykol et al. 2019; Severson et al.
2019; Tabor et al. 2018). To this end, kinetics and thermodynamics measurements of the thermal degradation for noncharring polymers are performed (Li and Stoliarov 2013).
Despite the existence of several theoretical simulation models, it remains difficult to design rigorous physical models
including the information on the mechanisms of reactions
in all the cases with expensive and time-consuming experiments (Zander, Dittmeyer, and Wagenhuber 1999).
This paper deals with combining known theoretical models on the pigments and dyes industry, particularly in the
synthesis of an anticorrosive paint, and machine learning
techniques in order to reduce the number of needed real experiments and improve the quality of approximation models.

Combining the aforementioned approved a priori knowledge leads to a hybrid model with fewer degrees of freedom and an improved extrapolation range. This approach
forces the model to realize certain conditions/equations that
are part of the prior knowledge. For example, a neural network model without modification would have to approximate the mass conservation laws that apply to any chemical conversion. If mass conservation is enforced, the errors associated with this approximation are avoided (Zander, Dittmeyer, and Wagenhuber 1999). Similarly, authors
in (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019) draw inspiration from Hamiltonian mechanics to train models that learn
exact conservation laws in an unsupervised manner by endowing the models with better inductive biases.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code and dataset to reproduce experiments are available at
https://github.com/nx-project/augmentedExperiments

9251

