The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revisiting Co-Occurring Directions: Sharper Analysis and Efficient Algorithm for
Sparse Matrices
Luo Luo1 , Cheng Chen2 * , Guangzeng Xie3 , Haishan Ye4
1

Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
4
School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University
luoluo@ust.hk, jack chen1990@sjtu.edu.cn, smsxgz@pku.edu.cn, hsye cs@outlook.com
2

Abstract

with limited memory. The key challenge for this problem is
to reduce the space/time complexity while maintaining the
approximation error.
Inspired by the idea of finding frequent items (Misra and
Gries 1982), Liberty (2013) proposed frequent directions algorithm (FD), which considers the symmetric case of AMM
such that X = Y (a.k.a., the covariance sketching). FD
achieves optimal tradeoffs between space cost and approximation error (Woodruff 2014a; Ghashami et al. 2016; Ghashami
and Phillips 2014). Moreover, we can combine FD with subspace power iteration (Woodruff 2014b; Musco and Musco
2015) to design an algorithm which is efficient for sparse
matrix multiplication (Ghashami, Liberty, and Phillips 2016),
called sparse frequent directions (SFD). Recently, Huang
(2019) integrated random sampling (Drineas, Kannan, and
Mahoney 2006) into FD to reduce its time complexity. Luo
et al. (2019) introduced a regularization term for FD, which
makes the estimator is more friendly to inverse operation.
FD technique can also be used to accelerate many popular
machine learning models, such as convex online optimization (Luo et al. 2016, 2019), factorization machine (Luo et al.
2018), linear contextual bandits (Kuzborskij, Cella, and CesaBianchi 2019; Chen et al. 2020) and ridge regression (Shi
and Phillips 2020; Dickens 2020).
Mroueh, Marcheret, and Goel (2017) proposed a variant
of FD called co-occurring directions (COD) for streaming
AMM. COD shrinks the singular values of input matrices X
and Y simultaneously at each iteration. It is shown that COD
has significantly better performance than other sketching
algorithms (Ye, Luo, and Zhang 2016; Drineas, Kannan, and
Mahoney 2006; Clarkson and Woodruff 2017; Sarlos 2006)
on AMM problem empirically. However, the existing spectral
error bound of COD can not completely explain its high
performance. It depends on the Frobenius norm of X and
Y, which ignores the potential low-rank structure of the data
matrix. Specifically, in the case of X = Y, the procedure of
COD degrades to FD, but its error bound is worse than that
of FD. Another deterministic sketching method for AMM,
which we call FD-AMM (Ye, Luo, and Zhang 2016), directly
adopts FD to sketch the concatenated matrix Z = [X, Y].
The output of the algorithm is an approximation of Z> Z,
whose sub-matrix corresponds to an estimator of X> Y.
In this paper, we provide a sharper analysis for co-

We study the streaming model for approximate matrix multiplication (AMM). We are interested in the scenario that the algorithm can only take one pass over the data with limited memory. The state-of-the-art deterministic sketching algorithm for
streaming AMM is the co-occurring directions (COD), which
has much smaller approximation errors than randomized algorithms and outperforms other deterministic sketching methods
empirically. In this paper, we provide a tighter error bound for
COD whose leading term considers the potential approximate
low-rank structure and the correlation of input matrices. We
prove COD is space optimal with respect to our improved
error bound. We also propose a variant of COD for sparse
matrices with theoretical guarantees. The experiments on realworld sparse datasets show that the proposed algorithm is
more efficient than baseline methods.

1

Introduction

A large scale machine learning system usually receives data
sequentially and it is often impossible to exactly store the
entire data set. Thus, the approximate matrix multiplication
(AMM) in the streaming fashion is an important and fundamental task for scientific computation and big data analysis. For example, the product of matrices from multi-modal
datasets captures the correlation between different modalities. In addition, many classical algorithms including canonical correlation analysis (Hotelling 1992), generalized eigenvector decomposition (Golub and Loan 1996), partial least
squares (Wegelin 2000), spectral co-clustering (Dhillon 2001)
require to perform approximate matrix multiplication when
the data set is very large. On the other hand, data matrices
from real-world are usually low-rank and sparse, which motivated us to design efficient and effective sparse algorithms.
This paper considers streaming AMM problem as follows.
Give two large matrices X ∈ Rn×dx and Y ∈ Rn×dy , we
are interested in finding a low-rank estimator A> B to approximate X> Y, where A ∈ Rm×dx , B ∈ Rm×dy and m
is much smaller than n, dx and dy . We focus on the row
update model, that is, the algorithm receives rows of X and
Y sequentially and it only takes one pass over input matrices
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8793

