The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Fairness under Covariate Shift
Ashkan Rezaei1 , Anqi Liu2 , Omid Memarrast1 , Brian D. Ziebart1
1

University of Illinois at Chicago
California Institute of Technology
arezae4@uic.edu, anqiliu@caltech.edu, omemar2@uic.edu, bziebart@uic.edu
2

Abstract

Price, and Srebro 2016; Zafar et al. 2017a; Zemel et al. 2013;
Jabbari et al. 2016; Chierichetti et al. 2017).
Though many definitions and measures of (un)fairness
have been proposed (See Verma and Rubin (2018); Mehrabi
et al. (2019)), the most widely adopted are group fairness measures of demographic parity (Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009), equalized opportunity, and equalized odds
(Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016). Techniques have been developed as either post-processing steps (Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016) or in-processing learning methods (Agarwal
et al. 2018; Zafar et al. 2017a; Rezaei et al. 2020) seeking to
achieve fairness according to these group fairness definitions.
These methods attempt to make fair predictions at testing
time by strongly assuming that training and testing data are
independently and identically drawn (iid) from the same distribution, so that providing fairness on the training dataset
provides approximate fairness on the testing dataset.
In practice, it is common for data distributions to shift
between the training data set (source distribution) and the
testing data set (target distribution). For example, the characteristics of loan applicants may differ significantly over
time due to macroeconomic trends or changes in the selfselection criteria that potential applicants employ. Fairness
methods that ignore such shifts may satisfy definitions for
fairness on training samples, while violating those definitions severely on testing data. Indeed, disparate performance
for underrepresented groups in computer vision tasks has
been attributed to manually labeled data that is highly biased
compared to testing data (Yang et al. 2020). Explicitly incorporating these shifts into the design of predictors is crucial
for realizing fairer applications of machine learning in practice. However, the resulting problem setting is particularly
challenging; access to labels is only available for the training
distribution. Fair prediction methods could fail by using only
source labels, especially for fairness definitions that condition
on ground-truth labels, like equal opportunity.
Figure 1 illustrates the declining performance of a postprocessing method (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) and an
in-processing method (Rezaei et al. 2020) that do not consider distribution shift and instead only depend on source
fairness measurements. Therefore, relying on the iid assumption, which is often violated in practice, introduces significant
limitations for realizing desired fairness in critical applications.

Making predictions that are fair with regard to protected attributes (race, gender, age, etc.) has become an important
requirement for classification algorithms. Existing techniques
derive a fair model from sampled labeled data relying on the
assumption that training and testing data are identically and
independently drawn (iid) from the same distribution. In practice, distribution shift can and does occur between training and
testing datasets as the characteristics of individuals interacting
with the machine learning system change. We investigate fairness under covariate shift, a relaxation of the iid assumption
in which the inputs or covariates change while the conditional
label distribution remains the same. We seek fair decisions under these assumptions on target data with unknown labels. We
propose an approach that obtains the predictor that is robust
to the worst-case testing performance while satisfying target
fairness requirements and matching statistical properties of
the source data. We demonstrate the benefits of our approach
on benchmark prediction tasks.

Introduction
Supervised learning algorithms typically focus on optimizing
one singular objective: predictive performance on unseen
data. However, the social impact of unwanted bias in these algorithms has become increasingly important. Machine learning systems that disadvantage specific groups are less likely
to be accepted and may violate disparate impact law (Chang
2006; Kabakchieva 2013; Lohr 2013; Shipp et al. 2002; Obermeyer and Emanuel 2016; Moses and Chan 2014; Shaw and
Gentry 1988; Carter and Catlett 1987; O’Neil 2016). Fairness
through unawareness, which simply denies knowledge of
protected group membership to the predictor, is insufficient
to effectively guarantee fairness because other characteristics
or covariates may correlate with protected group membership
(Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008). Thus, there has been
a surge of interest in the machine learning community to
define fairness requirements reflecting desired behavior and
to construct learning algorithms that more effectively seek to
satisfy those requirements in various settings (Mehrabi et al.
2019; Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017; Calmon et al.
2017; Donini et al. 2018; Dwork et al. 2012, 2017; Hardt,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9419

