The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MIEHDR CNN: Main Image Enhancement based Ghost-Free High Dynamic
Range Imaging using Dual-Lens Systems
Xuan Dong1 , Xiaoyan Hu1 , Weixin Li2∗ , Xiaojie Wang1 , Yunhong Wang2
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191

Abstract
We study the High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging problem
using two Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images that are shot
from dual-lens systems in a single shot time with different
exposures. In most of the related HDR imaging methods, the
problem is usually solved by Multiple Images Merging, i.e.
the final HDR image is fused from pixels of all the input LDR
images. However, ghost artifacts can be hardly avoided using
this strategy. Instead of directly merging the multiple LDR
inputs, we use an indirect way which enhances the main image, i.e. the short exposure image IS , using the long exposure
image IL serving as guidance. In detail, we propose a new
model, named MIEHDR CNN model, which consists of three
subnets, i.e. Soft Warp CNN, 3D Guided Denoising CNN and
Fusion CNN. The Soft Warp CNN aligns IL to get the aligned
result ILA using the soft exposed result of IS as reference.
The 3D Guided Denoising CNN denoises the soft exposed
result of IS using ILA as guidance, whose result are fed into
the Fusion CNN with IS to get the HDR result. The MIEHDR
CNN model is implemented by MindSpore and experimental
results show that we can outperform related methods largely
and avoid ghost artifacts.

(a) Input pair of images IS and IL .

(b) Our HDR result IHDR .

Figure 1: The input pair of short exposure image IS and long
exposure image IL are shot by dual-lens respectively in a
single shot time. We learn to enhance the main image IS
using IL as guidance to generate the HDR result IHDR .

2D movement caused by moving cameras and objects can be
neglected. And the challenge is transferred to solve the relative 1D movement between the corresponding pixels among
the two LDR inputs due to disparities, which is easier and
less computationally costly.
In the literature, starting from (Devevec and Malik 1997),
most of existing methods, including recently proposed CNN
based methods like (Kalantari and Ramomoorthi 2017), take
the Multiple Images Merging strategy, as shown in Fig. 2.
The input multiple LDR images are firstly aligned and the
pixels of the final HDR image are fused from pixels of all
the aligned LDR images. Under this strategy, the requirement for the accuracy of the alignment is very high. A small
number of mis-aligned pixels between the aligned images
may lead to obvious ghost artifacts into the merged HDR
result.
Our insight is shown in Fig. 2. Instead of directly merging the multiple input images, we use an indirect way which
enhances the main image, i.e. the short exposure image IS ,
using the long exposure image IL serving as guidance. We
perform soft exposure for IS to simulate the camera exposure to get its long exposure version, which is then denoised
using the aligned result of IL as guidance. The denoising result and IS are fused to obtain the final HDR result IHDR .
With the Main Image Enhancement strategy, mis-alignment

Introduction
Generating High Dynamic Range (HDR) images by merging multiple Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images that are
captured by consumer cameras is a popular approach for
shooting high quality (signal-noise-ratio) images in HDR
scenes. Currently commonly used systems, e.g. (Kalantari
and Ramomoorthi 2017), usually use a single camera with
multiple shots to shoot the series of LDR images with different exposure time. During the shooting, moving cameras
or objects will lead to relative 2D movement between the
corresponding pixels among the multiple LDR inputs. The
chief challenge is to deal with the 2D movement so as to
avoid ghost artifacts in the merged HDR result.
Nowadays, dual-lens systems are widely deployed in popular smart phones, e.g. iPhone, HuaWei, Sumsung, etc. So,
in this paper, as shown in Fig. 1, we study how to generate
the HDR image using two LDR images that are shot from
dual-lens systems in a single shot time with different exposures. Since the imaging is finished within a single shot, the
∗

Corresponding Author. E-mail: weixinli@buaa.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1264

