The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

XL-WSD: An Extra-Large and Cross-Lingual Evaluation Framework
for Word Sense Disambiguation
Tommaso Pasini1∗ , Alessandro Raganato2∗ , Roberto Navigli1
1

Sapienza NLP Group, Computer Science Department, Sapienza University of Rome
2
Department of Digital Humanities, University of Helsinki, Finland
{pasini,navigli}@di.uniroma1.it
alessandro.raganato@helsinki.fi
Abstract

Transformer-based architectures brought a breeze of change
to Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), improving models’
performances by a large margin. The fast development of new
approaches has been further encouraged by a well-framed evaluation suite for English, which has allowed their performances
to be kept track of and compared fairly. However, other languages have remained largely unexplored, as testing data are
available for a few languages only and the evaluation setting
is rather matted. In this paper, we untangle this situation by
proposing XL-WSD, a cross-lingual evaluation benchmark
for the WSD task featuring sense-annotated development and
test sets in 18 languages from six different linguistic families, together with language-specific silver training data. We
leverage XL-WSD datasets to conduct an extensive evaluation of neural and knowledge-based approaches, including
the most recent multilingual language models. Results show
that the zero-shot knowledge transfer across languages is a
promising research direction within the WSD field, especially
when considering low-resourced languages where large pretrained multilingual models still perform poorly. We make the
evaluation suite and the code for performing the experiments
available at https://sapienzanlp.github.io/xl-wsd/.

Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task of associating
words in context with their possible meanings contained in a
pre-defined sense inventory (Navigli 2009). This task is central to the understanding of natural language (Navigli 2018),
and it has received considerable attention over recent years as
it can be beneficial for a variety of downstream tasks and applications, such as machine translation (Raganato, Scherrer,
and Tiedemann 2019), information extraction (Delli Bovi,
Telesca, and Navigli 2015), and text categorization (Shimura,
Li, and Fukumoto 2019). The WSD task has been tackled
with different approaches, which can be broadly divided into
two main categories: knowledge-based (Moro, Raganato, and
Navigli 2014; Agirre, de Lacalle, and Soroa 2014; Chaplot
and Salakhutdinov 2018), which leverage computational lexicons and their structure, and supervised (Bevilacqua and
Navigli 2020; Blevins and Zettlemoyer 2020; Conia and Nav∗

Authors marked with an asterisk (*) contributed equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13648

igli 2021), which train machine learning algorithms on senseannotated data. This latter kind of approach attains state-ofthe-art results in English WSD, constantly outperforming
their knowledge-based counterparts (Raganato, CamachoCollados, and Navigli 2017).
The evaluation in this field is usually carried out with the
framework proposed by Raganato, Camacho-Collados, and
Navigli (2017), which has set a level playing field among
English WSD approaches, and has facilitated the fast development of models for this task (Raganato, Delli Bovi, and
Navigli 2017; Luo et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Bevilacqua and Navigli 2020; Bevilacqua, Maru, and Navigli 2020).
Unfortunately, the same attention has not been devoted to
multilingual WSD, which, in the last few years, has revolved
around 4 European languages only, i.e., French, German, Italian and Spanish. Even though the research community has
created both automatically sense-annotated corpora for different languages (Pasini 2020) and language-specific WordNetlike resources (Bond and Paik 2012; Navigli and Ponzetto
2012), the lack of reliable benchmarks in different languages
remains the main limitation hampering the advancement of
research in this field. Indeed, currently available multilingual gold standards use diverse data formats and outdated,
or even unavailable, inventories of senses, making it hard
to perform a fair comparison among systems and to draw
reliable conclusions.
In this paper, we overcome the above problems and release
what is, to the best of our knowledge, the first large-scale
multilingual evaluation framework for WSD with a unified
multilingual sense inventory covering 18 languages: Basque,
Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese, Croatian, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, French, Galician, German, Hungarian, Italian,
Japanese, Korean, Slovenian, and Spanish from six families.
On the one hand, we provide more than 70K new gold annotations across 13 non-English languages by leveraging
the multilingual versions of WordNet. On the other hand,
we standardise and unify the datasets available in another
4 languages from the past multilingual SemEval competitions, as well as the inventory of senses to be used across
languages. This allows large multilingual models to be investigated through the semantics’ lens, hence providing a new
way of studying pre-trained contextualised word embeddings.
As for the English language, XL-WSD includes the original framework of Raganato, Camacho-Collados, and Navigli

