The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Riemannian Embedding Banks for Common Spatial Patterns
with EEG-based SPD Neural Networks
Yoon-Je Suh1∗ , Byung Hyung Kim2∗†
1

School of Electrical Engineering
2
School of Computing
KAIST, Republic of Korea
{yoonje, bhyung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

et al. 2011; Olias et al. 2019; Rodrigues, Jutten, and Congedo 2018).
However, these successful applications suffer from the
computational efficiency of distance or similarity on a Riemannian manifold (Cherian et al. 2013). Since the data
points on the SPD manifold are geodesics along the manifold’s curvature, computing the geodesics increases computational costs due to the non-existence of closed-form solutions. Besides, applying existing Euclidean-based distance
measure directly to SPD matrices often results in undesirable effects. i.e., swelling of the diffusion tensors (Pennec,
Fillard, and Ayache 2006). Several approaches have been
presented to properly encode the Riemannian geometry of
SPD manifolds by typically flattening the SPD manifolds
through a tangent space approximation with the matrix logarithm computation (Pennec, Sommer, and Fletcher 2019;
Arsigny et al. 2007; Congedo, Barachant, and Bhatia 2017).
Then, Euclidean classifiers such as SVM or kNN have been
used to learn features represented in the space (Barachant
et al. 2011). However, these shallow learning schemes of
the matrix logarithm computation for a flatten vector representation have often led to poor performance, leading to
sub-optimal solutions on the non-linear manifolds.
In light of the recent success in metric learning algorithms with deep neural networks (DML), several methods
have been proposed to interpolate, restore, and classify SPD
matrices on a Riemannian manifold (Sra 2012; Liu et al.
2019b). Existing approaches in DML leans a single distance metric for all samples from the given data distribution. The method usually pulls similar samples closer while
pushing different samples further away to learn the semantic distance. However, this strategy can not be directly applied to learning EEG data because of its non-linear, nonuniformly distributed, and complex data structure (Kim and
Jo 2020; Alarcao and Fonseca 2019). This limitation exhibits inter- and intra-class variability problems for learning high-dimensional neural activities in the brain. In consequence, using DML algorithms to learn a single distance
metric between EEG-based SPD matrices becomes a challenging issue because the level of relative similarity in each
training pairs or triplet determines how fast the network
learns correctly.
To overcome this limitation, we aim to develop a costefficient metric learning algorithm on SPD manifolds mo-

Modeling non-linear data as symmetric positive definite
(SPD) matrices on Riemannian manifolds has attracted much
attention for various classification tasks. In the context of
deep learning, SPD matrix-based Riemannian networks have
been shown to be a promising solution for classifying electroencephalogram (EEG) signals, capturing the Riemannian
geometry within their structured 2D feature representation.
However, existing approaches usually learn spatial-temporal
structures in an embedding space for all available EEG signals, and their optimization procedures rely on computationally expensive iterations. Furthermore, these approaches often struggle to encode all of the various types of relationships into a single distance metric, resulting in a loss of generality. To address the above limitations, we propose a Riemannian Embedding Banks method, which divides the problem of common spatial patterns learning in an entire embedding space into K-subproblems and builds one model
for each subproblem, to be combined with SPD neural networks. By leveraging the concept of the “separate-to-learn”
technology on a Riemannian manifold, REB divides the data
and the embedding space into K non-overlapping subsets
and learns K separate distance metrics in a Riemannian geometric space instead of the vector space. Then, the learned
K non-overlapping subsets are grouped into neurons in the
SPD neural network’s embedding layer. Experimental results
on public EEG datasets demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed approach for learning common spatial patterns of
EEG signals despite their non-stationary nature, increasing
the convergence speed while maintaining generalization.

Introduction
Covariance-based SPD matrices have been widely used to
classify time-series data in various applications (Pennec,
Sommer, and Fletcher 2019; Congedo, Barachant, and Bhatia 2017), exploiting the second-order statistics to capture
and represent the temporal fluctuations of different data
lengths. By taking the advances on the higher-order statistics
in SPD matrices, recent EEG signal processing techniques
have increasingly carried out practical computations on
Riemannian manifolds in feature representation (Barachant
∗

These co-first authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: Byung Hyung Kim.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

854

