The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Defending against Backdoors in Federated Learning
with Robust Learning Rate
Mustafa Safa Ozdayi, Murat Kantarcioglu, Yulia R. Gel
The University of Texas at Dallas
{mustafa.ozdayi, muratk, ygl}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

et al. 2018). In centralized setting, this is typically done by
data poisoning. For example, in a classification task involving cars and planes, the adversary could label all blue cars
in the training data as plane in an attempt to make the model
to classify blue cars as plane at the inference/test phase. In
FL, since the data is decentralized, it is unlikely that an adversary could access all the training data. Thus, backdoor
attacks are typically carried through model poisoning in the
FL context (Bhagoji et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al. 2020;
Sun et al. 2019). That is, the adversary tries to construct a
malicious update that encodes the backdoor in a way such
that, when it is aggregated with other agents’ updates, the
aggregated model exhibits the backdoor.
In this work, we study backdoor attacks against deep neural networks in FL setting, and formulate a defense. Our solution is based on carefully adjusting the learning rate of
the aggregation server during the training. Through experiments, we illustrate that our defense can deter backdoor attacks significantly. Further, this achieved with only minimal
degradation in the trained model’s accuracy in both i.i.d. and
non-i.i.d. settings. We provide empirical evidence justifying
the effectiveness of our defense, and also theoretically analyze its convergence properties. In summary, our work significantly outperforms some of the existing defenses in the
literature, and succeeds in scenarios where they fail.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we provide the necessary background information. In Section 3, we explain our defense, and in Section 4, we illustrate
the performance of our defense under different experimental settings. In Section 5, we discuss and elaborate upon the
results of our experiments, and finally, in Section 6, we provide a few concluding remarks.

Federated learning (FL) allows a set of agents to collaboratively train a model without sharing their potentially sensitive
data. This makes FL suitable for privacy-preserving applications. At the same time, FL is susceptible to adversarial attacks due to decentralized and unvetted data. One important
line of attacks against FL is the backdoor attacks. In a backdoor attack, an adversary tries to embed a backdoor functionality to the model during training that can later be activated
to cause a desired misclassification. To prevent backdoor attacks, we propose a lightweight defense that requires minimal change to the FL protocol. At a high level, our defense
is based on carefully adjusting the aggregation server’s learning rate, per dimension and per round, based on the sign information of agents’ updates. We first conjecture the necessary steps to carry a successful backdoor attack in FL setting,
and then, explicitly formulate the defense based on our conjecture. Through experiments, we provide empirical evidence
that supports our conjecture, and we test our defense against
backdoor attacks under different settings. We observe that either backdoor is completely eliminated, or its accuracy is significantly reduced. Overall, our experiments suggest that our
defense significantly outperforms some of the recently proposed defenses in the literature. We achieve this by having
minimal influence over the accuracy of the trained models. In
addition, we also provide convergence rate analysis for our
proposed scheme.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2016) has been
introduced as a distributed machine learning protocol.
Through FL, a set of agents can collaboratively train a model
without sharing their data with each other, or any other third
party. This makes FL suitable to settings where data privacy
is desired. In this regard, FL differs from the traditional distributed learning setting in which data is first centralized at
a place, and then distributed to the agents (Dean et al. 2012;
Li et al. 2014).
At the same time, FL has been shown to be susceptible
to backdoor attacks (Bhagoji et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al.
2020). In a backdoor attack, an adversary disturbs the training process to make the model learn a targeted misclassification functionality (Chen et al. 2017; Shafahi et al. 2018; Liu

2

Background

Federated Learning (FL) At a high level, FL is multiround protocol between an aggregation server and a set of
agents in which agents jointly train a model. Formally, participating agents try to minimize the average of their loss
functions
K
1 X
arg min f (w) =
fk (w),
K
w∈Rd
k=1

where fk is the loss function of kth agent. For example, for
neural networks, fk is typically empirical risk minimization

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9268

