The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Gaussian Mixture based Deep Generative Model For
Robust Forecasting on Sparse Multivariate Time Series
Yinjun Wu1 * , Jingchao Ni2‡ , Wei Cheng2 , Bo Zong2 , Dongjin Song3 , Zhengzhang Chen2 ,
Yanchi Liu2 , Xuchao Zhang2 , Haifeng Chen2 , Susan B. Davidson1
1

University of Pennsylvania
NEC Laboratories America
3
University of Connecticut
1
{wuyinjun@seas.upenn.edu, susan@cis.upenn.edu}
2
{jni, weicheng, bzong, zchen, yanchi, xuczhang, haifeng}@nec-labs.com, 3 dongjin.song@uconn.edu
state 1
state 1
state 2
state 2
state 3
state 2
Patient 1 state 1
Abstract
2

Patient 2

Forecasting on sparse multivariate time series (MTS) aims to
model the predictors of future values of time series given their
incomplete past, which is important for many emerging applications. However, most existing methods process MTS’s
individually, and do not leverage the dynamic distributions
underlying the MTS’s, leading to sub-optimal results when
the sparsity is high. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel generative model, which tracks the transition of latent
clusters, instead of isolated feature representations, to achieve
robust modeling. It is characterized by a newly designed dynamic Gaussian mixture distribution, which captures the dynamics of clustering structures, and is used for emitting time
series. The generative model is parameterized by neural networks. A structured inference network is also designed for
enabling inductive analysis. A gating mechanism is further
introduced to dynamically tune the Gaussian mixture distributions. Extensive experimental results on a variety of reallife datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

state 1

state 2

state 2

state 2

state 3

state 3

state 3

Filled values
Missing entries
state 2
state 1

state 1

Healthy

state 2

Kidney disorder

state 3

Anemia

Figure 1: An illustration of latent structures underlying the
sparse MTS of two dialysis patients. The vector below each
state is a temporal feature generated from some distribution.
have routines of dialysis, blood tests, chest X-ray, etc., which
record data such as venous pressure, glucose level, and cardiothoracic ratio (CTR). These signal sources may have different frequencies. For instance, blood tests and CTR are often evaluated less frequently than dialysis. Different sources
may not be aligned in time and what makes things worse
is that some sources may be irregularly sampled, and missing entries may present. Despite such discrepancies, different signals give complementary views on a patient’s physical
condition, and therefore are all important to the diagnostic
analysis. However, simply combining the signals will induce
highly sparse MTS data. Similar scenarios are also found in
other domains: In finance, time series from financial news,
stock markets, and investment banks are collected at asynchronous time steps, but are correlated strongly (Binkowski,
Marti, and Donnat 2018). In large-scale complex monitoring systems, sensors of multiple sub-components may have
different running environments, thus continuously emitting
asynchronous time series that may still be related (Safari,
Shabani, and Simon 2014).
The sparsity of MTS signals when integrated from heterogeneous sources presents several challenges. In particular,
it complicates temporal dependencies and prevents popular
models, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), from being directly used. The most common way to handle sparsity
is to first impute missing values, and then make predictions
on the imputed MTS. However, as discussed in (Che et al.
2018a), this two-step approach fails to account for the relationship between missing patterns and predictive tasks, lead-

Introduction
Multivariate time series (MTS) analysis is heavily used in a
variety of applications, such as cyber-physical system monitoring (Zhang et al. 2019), financial forecasting (Binkowski,
Marti, and Donnat 2018), traffic analysis (Li et al. 2018),
and clinical diagnosis (Che et al. 2018a). Recent advances
in deep learning have spurred on many innovative machine
learning models on MTS data, which have shown remarkable results on a number of fundamental tasks, including
forecasting (Qin et al. 2017), event prediction (Choi et al.
2016), and anomaly detection (Zhang et al. 2019). Despite
these successes, most existing models treat the input MTS
as homogeneous and complete sequences. In many emerging applications, however, MTS signals are integrated from
heterogeneous sources and are very sparse.
For example, consider MTS signals collected for dialysis
patients. Dialysis is an important renal replacement therapy
for purifying the blood of patients whose kidneys are not
working normally (Inaguma et al. 2019). Dialysis patients
* This work was done when the first author was an intern at NEC
Laboratories America. ‡ Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

651

