The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CHEF: Cross-Modal Hierarchical Embeddings for Food Domain Retrieval
Hai X. Pham1 , Ricardo Guerrero1 , Vladimir Pavlovic1,2 , Jiatong Li2
1

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
{hai.xuanpham, r.guerrero, v.pavlovic}@samsung.com, jl2312@rutgers.edu
2

Abstract

ingredients such as tomatoes can be green, yellow or red and
can also be presented as a sauce, chunks or whole).
Recent approaches that aim at learning the translation between visual and textual representations of food items do
so by learning the semantics of objects in a shared latent
space (Salvador et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Carvalho et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2019; Marı́n et al. 2019). Here, representations (also called embeddings) derived from multi-modal
evidence sources (e.g., images, text, video, flavours, etc.)
that belong to the same item are matched. In effect, this
type of approach aims to find a common grounding language
that describes items independent of their observed modality, therefore, allowing cross-modal retrieval. Recently, recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures such as Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997) units and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al.
2014) have (re-)emerged as two popular and effective models that are able to capture some long-term dependencies in
sequential data. Previous works on cross-modal image-torecipe (test) retrieval in the food domain treat textual elements (e.g., words) as a linear sequence in a RNN (Salvador
et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Carvalho et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2019; Marı́n et al. 2019). However, natural language
exhibits syntactic properties that would naturally combine
words into phrases in a not necessarily sequential fashion
(Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015). Chain structured RNNs
(such as LSTMs) struggle to capture this type of relationship. Tree-LSTM offers a generalization of LSTMs to treestructured network topologies (Tai, Socher, and Manning
2015; Zhu, Sobihani, and Guo 2015), further to this, recent advancements in Tree-LSTMs allow online learning
of the sequence structure (Choi, Min Yoo, and Lee 2017).
In this work, we argue that these recent advancements in
Tree-LSTM structure learning are specially well suited to
discover the underlying syntactic structure specific to food
cooking recipes, exclusively through the signal provided by
its pairing with its visual representation (food dish image).

Despite the abundance of multi-modal data, such as imagetext pairs, there has been little effort in understanding the
individual entities and their different roles in the construction of these data instances. In this work, we endeavour to
discover the entities and their corresponding importance in
cooking recipes automatically as a visual-linguistic association problem. More specifically, we introduce a novel crossmodal learning framework to jointly model the latent representations of images and text in the food image-recipe association and retrieval tasks. This model allows one to discover complex functional and hierarchical relationships between images and text, and among textual parts of a recipe
including title, ingredients and cooking instructions. Our experiments show that by making use of efficient tree-structured
Long Short-Term Memory as the text encoder in our computational cross-modal retrieval framework, we are not only
able to identify the main ingredients and cooking actions
in the recipe descriptions without explicit supervision, but
we can also learn more meaningful feature representations
of food recipes, appropriate for challenging cross-modal retrieval and recipe adaption tasks.

Introduction
Computer vision and natural language processing have witnessed outstanding improvements in recent years. Computational food analysis (CFA) broadly refers to methods that attempt automating food understanding, and as such, it has recently received increased attention, in part due to its importance in health and general wellbeing (Min et al. 2019). For
instance, CFA can play an important role in assessing and
learning the functional similarity and interaction of ingredients, cooking methods and meal preferences, while aiding
in computational meal preparation and planning (Teng, Lin,
and Adamic 2012; Helmy et al. 2015). However, despite recent efforts CFA still poses specific and difficult challenges
due to the highly heterogeneous and complex nature of the
cooking transformation process. Further to this, a particular modality may offer only a partial “view”of the item, for
example, a cooking recipe often describe elements that can
easily be occluded in the visual depiction of a cooked dish,
and/or come in a variety of colors, forms and textures (e.g.,

Motivation
One of the more general goals of the work proposed here
is to have a system that is able to “understand” food. This
is a very broad and challenging task that requires an understanding of not only the visual aspect of a meal, but also understanding what are its basic constituents and how they are

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2423

