The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Query Training: Learning a Worse Model to Infer Better Marginals
in Undirected Graphical Models with Hidden Variables
Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, 1 Wolfgang Lehrach, 1 Nishad Gothoskar, 2
Guangyao Zhou, 1 Antoine Dedieu, 1 Dileep George1
1

Vicarious AI
2
MIT
{miguel, wolfgang, stannis, antoine, dileep}@vicarious.com, nishadg@mit.edu

Generative vs Discriminative PGMs

Abstract

Generative1 PGMs model the joint PDF of data, whereas discriminative PGMs model the PDF of a subset of “output”
(target) variables given the “input” (evidence) variables.
An advantage of generative PGMs is that we can train
the model once on all the data and then, at test time, decide which variables should act as evidence and which variables should act as targets, obtaining valid answers without
retraining the model. Furthermore, we can also decide at test
time that some variables fall in neither of the previous two
categories (unobserved variables), and the model will use
the rules of probability to marginalize them out.
This is in contrast with discriminative models, such as
multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), in which the set of input and
output variables needs to be specified at training time and
cannot be changed after the fact without retraining. If there
is a need for more than a single evidence/target/unobserved
configuration of the variables at test time (query), then a separate MLP needs to be trained for each configuration. In the
extreme case in which any query is possible, the number of
required MLPs would be exponential in the number of variables of the model, making this approach infeasible. Another
disadvantage of the discriminative setup is that each query is
trained for independently, despite being related tasks. However, in settings where the query is known a priori and fixed,
discriminative models can work well.

Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) provide a compact
representation of knowledge that can be queried in a flexible
way: after learning the parameters of a graphical model once,
new probabilistic queries can be answered at test time without retraining. However, when using undirected PGMS with
hidden variables, two sources of error typically compound
in all but the simplest models (a) learning error (both computing the partition function and integrating out the hidden
variables is intractable); and (b) prediction error (exact inference is also intractable). Here we introduce query training
(QT), a mechanism to learn a PGM that is optimized for the
approximate inference algorithm that will be paired with it.
The resulting PGM is a worse model of the data (as measured
by the likelihood), but it is tuned to produce better marginals
for a given inference algorithm. Unlike prior works, our approach preserves the querying flexibility of the original PGM:
at test time, we can estimate the marginal of any variable
given any partial evidence. We demonstrate experimentally
that QT can be used to learn a challenging 8-connected grid
Markov random field with hidden variables and that it consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art AdVIL when tested on
three undirected models across multiple datasets.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) define probability
density functions (PDFs) over data. Their graph structure
describes the conditional dependencies between the random
variables of the model, and how the joint PDF can be expressed as a product of factors, with each factor involving
only a (typically much smaller) subset of the variables. To
fully specify a PGM, in addition to the graphical structure, it
is necessary to know the value that each factor takes for each
combination of variable assignments. This is typically specified via a set of parameters. Thus, defining a PGM involves
choosing a structure (typically inspired by the underlying
phenomenon being modeled) and estimating its parameters
(typically chosen to produce the best possible fit to a dataset
of interest, according to some fitness criterion, such as maximum likelihood). In this work we assume that the graphical
structure has already been specified and concern ourselves
with the second part, parameter estimation, also known as
learning or training of PGMs.

Directed vs Undirected PGMs
In the fully observed case, the log-likelihood is a concave
function of the natural parameters and its maximum likelihood (ML) estimate should in principle be easy to find. This
is indeed the case for directed models, in which each factor
can be fit to the data independently, and even has a closed
form solution for fully parametric factors. In contrast, undirected PGMs are unnormalized and computing the normalization constant (the partition function) is intractable in general. This partition function depends on the parameters of
the PGM, and thus needs to be taken into account during the
learning process. The presence of hidden variables further
1
Literature is not always consistent about the meaning of “generative” models, we follow Ng and Jordan (2002). In particular,
when we call a model “generative” we do not imply that there is a
simple procedure to sample from it.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8252

