The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sublinear Classical and Quantum Algorithms for General Matrix Games
Tongyang Li,∗1,2 Chunhao Wang,∗3,4 Shouvanik Chakrabarti,1 Xiaodi Wu1
1

Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, Department of Computer Science, and Institute for Advanced
Computer Studies, University of Maryland
2
Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin
tongyang@mit.edu, cwang@psu.edu, {shouv,xwu}@cs.umd.edu
optimum in (1). For some specific choices of X and Y, the
matrix game can even be solved in sublinear time in the size
nd of A. When X and Y are both `1 -norm unit balls, Grigoriadis and Khachiyan (1995) can solve the matrix game in
time O((n + d) log(n + d)/2 ). When X is the `2 -norm unit
ball in Rd and Y is the `1 -norm unit ball in Rn , Clarkson,
Hazan, and Woodruff (2012) can solve the matrix game in
time O((n + d) log n/2 ).
As far as we know, the `1 -`1 and `2 -`1 matrix games are
the only two cases where sublinear algorithms are known.
However, there is general interest of solving matrix games
with general norms. For instance, matrix games are closely related to the Carathéodory problem for finding a sparse linear
combination in the convex hull of given data points, where
all the `p -metrics with p ≥ 2 have been well-studied (Barman 2015; Mirrokni et al. 2017; Combettes and Pokutta
2019). In addition, matrix games are common in machine
learning especially support vector machines (SVMs), and
general `p -margin SVMs have also been considered by previous literature, see e.g. the book by Deng, Tian, and Zhang
(2012). In all, it is a natural question to investigate sublinear
algorithms for general matrix games. In addition, quantum
computing has been rapidly advancing and current technology has reached "quantum supremacy" for some specific
tasks (Arute et al. 2019); since previous works have given
sublinear quantum algorithms for `1 -`1 matrix games (Li,
Chakrabarti, and Wu 2019; Apeldoorn and Gilyén 2019) and
`2 -`1 matrix games
√(Li, Chakrabarti, and Wu 2019) with run√
ning time ( n + d) poly(1/), it is also natural to explore
sublinear quantum algorithms for general matrix games.

Abstract
We investigate sublinear classical and quantum algorithms
for matrix games, a fundamental problem in optimization and
machine learning, with provable guarantees. Given a matrix,
sublinear algorithms for the matrix game were previously
known only for two special cases: (1) the maximizing vectors
live in the L1-norm unit ball, and (2) the minimizing vectors live in either the L1- or the L2-norm unit ball. We give
a sublinear classical algorithm that can interpolate smoothly
between these two cases: for any fixed q between 1 and 2,
we solve, within some additive error, matrix games where
the minimizing vectors are in an Lq-norm unit ball. We also
provide a corresponding sublinear quantum algorithm that
solves the same task with a quadratic improvement in dimensions of the maximizing and minimizing vectors. Both our
classical and quantum algorithms are optimal in the dimension
parameters up to poly-logarithmic factors. Finally, we propose
sublinear classical and quantum algorithms for the approximate Carathéodory problem and the Lq-margin support vector
machines as applications.

Introduction
Motivations. Minimax games between two parties, i.e.,
minx maxy f (x, y), is a basic model in game theory and has
ubiquitous connections and applications to economics, optimization and machine learning, theoretical computer science,
etc. Among minimax games, one of the most fundamental
cases is the bilinear minimax game, also known as the matrix
game, with the following form:
min max y > Ax, where A ∈ Rn×d , X ⊂ Rd , Y ⊂ Rn . (1)

x∈X y∈Y

Matrix games are fundamental in algorithm design due to
their equivalence to linear programs (Dantzig 1998), and
also in machine learning because they contain classification (Novikoff 1963; Minsky and Papert 1988) as a special
case, and many other important problems.
For many common domains X and Y, matrix games can
be solved efficiently within approximation error , i.e., to output x0 ∈ X and y 0 ∈ Y such that (y 0 )> Ax0 is -close to the

Contributions. We conduct a systematic study of `q -`1
matrix games for any q ∈ (1, 2] which corresponds to `q margin SVMs and the `p -Carathéodory problem for any p ≥
2. We use the following entry-wise input model, the standard
assumption in the sublinear algorithms in Grigoriadis and
Khachiyan (1995); Clarkson, Hazan, and Woodruff (2012):
Input model: Given any i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [d], the j th entry
of Ai can be recovered in O(1) time.
Quantumly, we consider an almost same oracle:
Quantum input model: Given any i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [d],
the j th entry of Ai can be recovered in O(1) time coherently.
The only difference is to allow coherent queries, which

∗
Equal contribution. Full version of the paper (including the
supplementary material) is at https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.06519
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8465

