The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Write-a-speaker: Text-based Emotional and Rhythmic Talking-head Generation
Lincheng Li,1∗ Suzhen Wang,1∗ Zhimeng Zhang,1∗ Yu Ding,1∗
Yixing Zheng,1 Xin Yu,2 Changjie Fan1
1
Netease Fuxi AI Lab
University of Technology Sydney
{lilincheng, wangsuzhen, zhangzhimeng, dingyu01, zhengyixing01, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
xin.yu@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract

Input text: “Get out! You shouldn‘t be here!”

In this paper, we propose a novel text-based talking-head
video generation framework that synthesizes high-fidelity facial expressions and head motions in accordance with contextual sentiments as well as speech rhythm and pauses. To
be specific, our framework consists of a speaker-independent
stage and a speaker-specific stage. In the speaker-independent
stage, we design three parallel networks to generate animation parameters of the mouth, upper face, and head from texts,
separately. In the speaker-specific stage, we present a 3D face
model guided attention network to synthesize videos tailored
for different individuals. It takes the animation parameters
as input and exploits an attention mask to manipulate facial
expression changes for the input individuals. Furthermore,
to better establish authentic correspondences between visual motions (i.e., facial expression changes and head movements) and audios, we leverage a high-accuracy motion capture dataset instead of relying on long videos of specific individuals. After attaining the visual and audio correspondences,
we can effectively train our network in an end-to-end fashion.
Extensive experiments on qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate that our algorithm achieves high-quality photorealistic talking-head videos including various facial expressions and head motions according to speech rhythms and outperforms the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: Our method produces emotional, rhythmic and
photo-realistic talking-head videos from input texts.

and Chaudhuri 2003). Thus, generating holistic facial expressions and head motions will lead to more convincing
person-talking videos.
Furthermore, since the timbre gap between different individuals may lead the acoustic features in the testing utterances to lying outside the distribution of the training acoustic
features, prior arts built upon the direct association between
audio and visual modalities may also fail to generalize to
new speakers’ audios (Chou et al. 2018). Consequently, the
acoustic feature-based frameworks do not work well on input speeches from different people with distinct timbres or
synthetic speeches (Sadoughi and Busso 2016).
Unlike previous works, we employ time-aligned texts
(i.e., text with aligned phoneme timestamps) as input features instead of acoustics features to alleviate the timbre gap
issue. In general, time-aligned texts can be extracted from
audios by speech recognition tools or generated by text-tospeech tools. Since the spoken scripts are invariant to different individuals, our text-based framework is able to achieve
robust performance against different speakers.
This paper presents a novel framework to generate holistic facial expressions and corresponding head animations according to spoken scripts. Our framework is composed of
two stages, i.e., a speaker-independent stage and a speaker-

Introduction
Talking-head synthesis technology aims to generate a talking video of a specific speaker with authentic facial animations from an input speech. The output talking-head video
has been employed in many applications, such as intelligent
assistance, human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and
computer games. Due to its wide applications, talking-head
synthesis has attracted a great amount of attention.
Many previous works that take audios as input mainly focus on synchronizing lower facial parts (e.g., mouths), but
often neglect animations of the head and upper facial parts
(e.g., eyes and eyebrows). However, holistic facial expressions and head motions are also viewed as critical channels to deliver communicative information (Ekman 1997).
For example, humans unconsciously use facial expressions
and head movements to express their emotions (Mignault
∗

Equal contribution. Yu Ding is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1911

