The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Value-Improvement Path:
Towards Better Representations for Reinforcement Learning
Will Dabney,1 André Barreto, 1 Mark Rowland, 1
Robert Dadashi, 2 John Quan, 1 Marc G. Bellemare, 2 David Silver 1
1

DeepMind 2 Google Research
wdabney@google.com

Abstract

role in reinforcement learning. We argue that the RL problem should be addressed with this peculiarity in mind.

In value-based reinforcement learning (RL), unlike in supervised learning, the agent faces not a single, stationary,
approximation problem, but a sequence of value prediction
problems. Each time the policy improves, the nature of the
problem changes, shifting both the distribution of states and
their values. In this paper we take a novel perspective, arguing that the value prediction problems faced by an RL agent
should not be addressed in isolation, but rather as a single,
holistic, prediction problem. An RL algorithm generates a sequence of policies that, approximately, improve towards the
optimal policy. We explicitly characterize the associated sequence of value functions and call it the value-improvement
path. Our main idea is to approximate the value-improvement
path holistically, rather than to solely track the value function
of the current policy. Specifically, we discuss the impact that
this holistic view of RL has on representation learning. We
demonstrate that a representation that spans the past valueimprovement path will also provide an accurate value approximation for future policy improvements. We use this insight to
better understand existing approaches to auxiliary tasks and
to propose new ones. To test our hypothesis empirically, we
augmented a standard deep RL agent with an auxiliary task of
learning the value-improvement path. In a study of Atari 2600
games, the augmented agent achieved approximately double
the mean and median performance of the baseline agent.

1

The key problem underlying the ability to approximate
any function is representation learning. Although we are
ultimately interested in the optimal value function, it has
been shown that a representation specialized to this function
may be inadequate for representing the sequence of functions leading to it (McCallum 1996; Li, Walsh, and Littman
2006). We take this argument one step further and note that
we should avoid myopically overfitting the representation to
any value function in this sequence of functions, as each intermediate value function serves as a mere “stepping stone”
along the path towards the optimal value function.
In this paper we explicitly characterize the sequence of
value functions produced by RL’s policy improvement process, which we call the value-improvement path. We prove
that the efficacy of representation learning depends upon its
ability to represent this path. We use this observation both
to construct new algorithms and to understand existing algorithms for representation learning.
One common and successful way to approach the representation learning problem is through the use of auxiliary
tasks: additional prediction problems that shape the representation used by the agent (Jaderberg et al. 2017; Bellemare et al. 2019). We suggest that predictions based upon
the value-improvement path provide a natural basis for representation learning. Furthermore, we analyze how well existing auxiliary tasks actually span the value-improvement
path. We build on this analysis to propose novel auxiliary
tasks designed with the value-improvement path in mind.

Introduction

Whether receiving prescriptive feedback (supervised learning), or delayed evaluative feedback (reinforcement learning), machine learning requires generalization from a finite
collection of examples to an unseen population. In supervised learning, generalization is sometimes framed as avoiding overfitting to a finite data set, and we might use methods
such as regularization or cross-validation to accomplish this.
In reinforcement learning (RL), generalization is no less important, and we have the same risk of overfitting to limited
samples. But, additionally, the agent faces a sequence of
learning problems, as the policy is incrementally improved
towards optimality. Ideally the agent should also generalize
across these problems. Although other types of generalization play a vital role in all areas of machine learning, we focus on this particular form of generalization due to its unique

This paper provides several contributions. First, we characterize the nature of the value-improvement path. Second,
we analyze and discuss both existing and novel auxiliary
tasks in relation to their effect on representation generalization. Third, we provide theoretical insights that begin to
explain the role of the value-improvement path in representation learning for RL. Finally, we present results from
an extensive experimental study of different auxiliary tasks.
This study gives preliminary evidence that representations
which accurately approximate the past value-improvement
path may better approximate future functions on this path.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7160

