The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Power in Liquid Democracy
Yuzhe Zhang1 , Davide Grossi1,2
1

University of Groningen
University of Amsterdam
yoezy.zhang@rug.nl, d.grossi@rug.nl
2

Abstract

at providing such a theory here, and use it to gain insights
into how power may happen to be distributed among agents
involved in decision-making with liquid democracy.
First, we provide a generalization of the power index
known as Banzhaf index to account for delegations in voting with quota rules. This novel index—called delegative
Banzhaf index—measures not only the influence of voters,
but also that of delegators. We characterize this index axiomatically (Theorem 1) and highlight how the index responds intuitively to the way in which delegations may be
structured (Fact 1-3).
Second, we extend the strategic model of liquid democracy developed by Bloembergen, Grossi, and Lackner
(2019) to account for power-seeking behavior by agents. In
our model, agents want to vote truthfully in order to relay
correct information to the mechanism, but they do so by also
considering how much power they retain in the system. We
carry out an equilibrium analysis (pure strategy Nash equilibrium) of the model. We show equilibria may not exist if
delegations are constrained (Theorem 2), but they do when
everybody is allowed to delegate to anybody (Theorem 3).
Finally, we simulate our game theoretic model and study
how two key parameters of the model influence the distribution of power both in equilibrium and after one-shot interaction. Our experiments show that limiting the level of
connectivity of the underlying network has a beneficial effect in limiting the emergence of inequalities in the distribution of power (measured by Gini coefficient). Perhaps less
intuitively, the extent by which agents are motivated by the
accumulation of power has a similar effect: groups where
agents are more power-greedy appear to achieve more equal
distributions of power.
Proofs are sketched or omitted. All details about our
proofs and experiments can be found in the full version2 .

The paper develops a theory of power for delegable proxy
voting systems. We define a power index able to measure
the influence of both voters and delegators. Using this index,
which we characterize axiomatically, we extend an earlier
game-theoretic model by incorporating power-seeking behavior by agents. We analytically study the existence of pure
strategy Nash equilibria in such a model. Finally, by means
of simulations, we study the effect of relevant parameters on
the emergence of power inequalities in the model.

Introduction
Liquid democracy (Blum and Zuber 2016) is a form of proxy
voting (Miller 1969; Tullock 1992; Alger 2006; GreenArmytage 2015; Cohensius et al. 2017) where each proxy
is delegable, thereby giving rise to so-called transitive delegations. In such a system each voter may choose to cast her
vote directly, or to delegate her vote to a proxy, who may in
turn decide whether to vote or delegate, and so pass the votes
she has accrued further to yet another proxy. The voters who
decide to retain their votes—the so-called gurus—cast their
ballots, which now carry the weight given by the number
of delegations they accrued. Liquid democracy has been an
influential proposal in recent public debates on democratic
reform across the world, thanks also to platforms for democratic decision support such as, in particular, LiquidFeedback (Behrens et al. 2014)1 . In the last couple of years it
has enjoyed considerable attention from researchers in political science and eDemocracy, as well as artificial intelligence (see, for an overview, Paulin (2020)).
Contribution The starting point of our paper is a controversial feature of liquid democracy: transitive delegations
may in principle lead to disproportionate accrual of power,
thereby harming the democratic legitimacy of the resulting
vote. To the best of our knowledge, this issue has received
only limited attention. A notable exception is the work of
Kling et al. (2015), which provided an empirical analysis of
power and influence in liquid democracy based on data from
the German Pirate Party. However, a formal theory of power
in voting systems with delegable proxy is lacking. We aim

Related Work The idea of voting with delegable proxy
can be traced back to Dodgson (1884) and has been object
of study in the political sciences (Green-Armytage 2015). In
the last couple of years, several papers in the artificial intelligence community (and in particular the computational
social choice one (Brandt et al. 2016)) have focused on liquid democracy. Two lines of research have broadly been

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://liquidfeedback.org/

2

5822

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.07070.pdf

