The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Arbitrary Video Style Transfer via Multi-Channel Correlation
Yingying Deng1,2,4 , Fan Tang3∗ , Weiming Dong1,2,4 * , Haibin Huang5 , Chongyang Ma5 and
Changsheng Xu1,2,4
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University,
4
CASIA-LLvision Joint Lab, 5 Kuaishou Technology
{dengyingying2017, weiming.dong, changsheng.xu}@ia.ac.cn, tangfan@jlu.edu.cn,
{huanghaibin03, chongyangma}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Video style transfer is attracting increasing attention from the
artificial intelligence community because of its numerous applications, such as augmented reality and animation production. Relative to traditional image style transfer, video style
transfer presents new challenges, including how to effectively
generate satisfactory stylized results for any specified style
while maintaining temporal coherence across frames. Towards this end, we propose a Multi-Channel Correlation network (MCCNet), which can be trained to fuse exemplar style
features and input content features for efficient style transfer
while naturally maintaining the coherence of input videos to
output videos. Specifically, MCCNet works directly on the
feature space of style and content domain where it learns to
rearrange and fuse style features on the basis of their similarity to content features. The outputs generated by MCC are
features containing the desired style patterns that can further
be decoded into images with vivid style textures. Moreover,
MCCNet is also designed to explicitly align the features to input and thereby ensure that the outputs maintain the content
structures and the temporal continuity. To further improve the
performance of MCCNet under complex light conditions, we
also introduce illumination loss during training. Qualitative
and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that MCCNet performs well in arbitrary video and image style transfer tasks.
Code is available at https://github.com/diyiiyiii/MCCNet.

(a) Image style transfer

(b) Video style transfer

Figure 1: The proposed method can be used for stable video
style transfer with high-quality stylization effect: (a) image
style transfer results using images in different domains; (b)
video style transfer results using different frames from Sintel. The stylization results of the same object in different
frames are the same. Hence, the rendered effects for the
same content are stable between different frames.

Although existing methods can generate satisfactory results for still images, they lead to flickering effects between
adjacent frames when applied to videos directly (Ruder,
Dosovitskiy, and Brox 2016; Chen et al. 2017). Video style
transfer is a challenging task that needs to not only generate good stylization effects per frame but also consider
the continuity between adjacent frames of the video. Ruder,
Dosovitskiy, and Brox (2016) added temporal consistency
loss on the basis of the approach proposed in Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge (2016) to maintain a smooth transition between
video frames. Chen et al. (2017) proposed an end-to-end
framework for online video style transfer through a real-time
optical flow and mask estimation network. Gao et al. (2020)
proposed a multistyle video transfer model, which estimates
the light flow and introduces temporal constraint. However,
these methods highly depend on the accuracy of optical flow
calculation, and the introduction of temporal constraint loss
reduces the stylization quality of individual frames. Moreover, adding optical flow to constrain the coherence of stylized videos makes the network difficult to train when applied
to an arbitrary style transfer model.
In the current work, we revisit the basic operations in

Introduction
Style transfer is a significant topic in the industrial community and research area of artificial intelligence. Given a
content image and an art painting, a desired style transfer method can render the content image into the artistic
style referenced by the art painting. Traditional style transfer
methods based on stroke rendering, image analogy, or image filtering (Efros and Freeman 2001; Bruckner and Gröller
2007; Strothotte and Schlechtweg 2002) only use low-level
features for texture transfer (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016;
Doyle et al. 2019). Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely studied for artistic image
generation and translation (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016;
Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Zhu et al. 2017; Huang
and Serge 2017; Huang et al. 2018; Jing et al. 2020).
* Co-corresponding authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1210

