The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

General Policies, Representations, and Planning Width∗
Blai Bonet,1 Hector Geffner1,2
1

2

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA)
bonetblai@gmail.com, hector.geffner@upf.edu

Abstract

and Bonet 2013; Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2016), the notion of novelty is now part of state-of-the-art search algorithms like BFWS (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2017b,a) and
has been applied successfully in purely exploratory settings
where no compact model of the actions or goals is assumed
to be known a priori (Francès et al. 2017; Bandres, Bonet,
and Geffner 2018). A key open question in the area is why
these width-based methods are effective at all, and in particular, why so many domains have a small width when atomic
goals are considered (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012). Is this
a property of the domains? Is it an accident of the manual
representations used? In this work, we address these and
related questions. For this, we bring the notion of general
policies; policies that solve multiple instances of a planning
domain all at once (Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein
2008; Bonet, Palacios, and Geffner 2009; Hu and De Giacomo 2011; Belle and Levesque 2016; Segovia, Jiménez,
and Jonsson 2016), in some cases by appealing to a fixed
set Φ of general state features that we restrict to be linear.
A number of correspondences are then obtained connecting
the notions of width, the size of general policies as measured by the number of features used, and the more general
and useful notion of serialized width. The study also yields a
new meaningful and expressive language for specifying serializations, called policy sketches, which can be used for
encoding domain control knowledge by hand or for learning
it from traces.
The paper is organized as follows. We review first the notions of width, representations, and general policies, and relate width with the size of such policies. Then we introduce
serializations, the more general notion of serialized width,
the relation between general policies and serialized width,
and policy sketches. A longer version of this paper with all
the proofs is available (Bonet and Geffner 2020a).

It has been observed that in many of the benchmark planning
domains, atomic goals can be reached with a simple polynomial exploration procedure, called IW, that runs in time exponential in the problem width. Such problems have indeed
a bounded width: a width that does not grow with the number of problem variables and is often no greater than two.
Yet, while the notion of width has become part of the stateof-the-art planning algorithms like BFWS, there is still no
good explanation for why so many benchmark domains have
bounded width. In this work, we address this question by relating bounded width and serialized width to ideas of generalized planning, where general policies aim to solve multiple
instances of a planning problem all at once. We show that
bounded width is a property of planning domains that admit
optimal general policies in terms of features that are explicitly
or implicitly represented in the domain encoding. The results
are extended to the larger class of domains with bounded serialized width where the general policies do not have to be
optimal. The study leads also to a new simple, meaningful,
and expressive language for specifying domain serializations
in the form of policy sketches which can be used for encoding domain control knowledge by hand or for learning it from
traces. The use of sketches and the meaning of the theoretical
results are all illustrated through a number of examples.

Introduction
Pure width-based search methods exploit the structure of
states to enumerate the state space in ways that are different from standard methods like breadth-first, depth-first,
or random search (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012). For this,
width-based methods appeal to a notion of novelty to establish a preference for first visiting states that are most novel.
Novelty-based methods have also been used in the context of
genetic algorithms where a greedy focus on the function to
optimize (fitness) often leads to bad local optima (Lehman
and Stanley 2011a,b), and in reinforcement learning to guide
exploration in large spaces where reward is sparse (Tang
et al. 2017; Pathak et al. 2017; Ostrovski et al. 2017).
In classical planning, i.e., planning in factored spaces for
achieving a given goal from a known initial state (Geffner

Width
IW(1) is a simple search procedure that operates on a rooted
directed graph where the nodes represent states, and states
assign values v to a given set F of features f (Lipovetzky
and Geffner 2012). IW(1) performs a breadth-first search
starting at the root but pruning the states that do not make
an atom f =v true for the first time in the search. For classical planning problems expressed in languages such as
(grounded) STRIPS, the features f are the problem variables

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
A longer version of this paper with all the proofs is available
(Bonet and Geffner 2020a).

11764

