The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GraphMix: Improved Training of GNNs for Semi-Supervised Learning
Vikas Verma1,2 , Meng Qu1 , Kenji Kawaguchi3 , Alex Lamb1 , Yoshua Bengio1 , Juho Kannala2 , Jian
Tang1
1

Mila - Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal, Canada, 2 Aalto University, Finland, 3 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), USA

Abstract

node classification. Recently, regularization based on dataaugmentation has been shown to be very effective in other
types of neural networks but how to apply these techniques in
GNNs is still under-explored. Our proposed method GraphMix 1 is a unified framework that draws inspiration from interpolation based data augmentation (Zhang et al. 2018; Verma
et al. 2019a) and self-training based data-augmentation
(Laine and Aila 2016; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Verma
et al. 2019b; Berthelot et al. 2019). We show that with our proposed method, we can achieve state-of-the-art performance
even when using simpler GNN architectures such as Graph
Convolutional Networks (Kipf and Welling 2017), with no
additional memory cost and with minimal additional computation cost. Further, we conduct a theoritical analysis to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method over
the underlying GNNs.

We present GraphMix, a regularization method for Graph
Neural Network based semi-supervised object classification,
whereby we propose to train a fully-connected network jointly
with the graph neural network via parameter sharing and
interpolation-based regularization. Further, we provide a theoretical analysis of how GraphMix improves the generalization
bounds of the underlying graph neural network, without making any assumptions about the “aggregation” layer or the depth
of the graph neural networks. We experimentally validate this
analysis by applying GraphMix to various architectures such
as Graph Convolutional Networks, Graph Attention Networks
and Graph-U-Net. Despite its simplicity, we demonstrate that
GraphMix can consistently improve or closely match stateof-the-art performance using even simpler architectures such
as Graph Convolutional Networks, across three established
graph benchmarks: Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed citation network datasets, as well as three newly proposed datasets: CoraFull, Co-author-CS and Co-author-Physics.

1

2

Introduction

Due to the presence of graph-structured data across a wide
variety of domains, such as biological networks, citation
networks and social networks, there have been several attempts to design neural networks, known as graph neural networks (GNN), that can process arbitrarily structured
graphs. Early work includes (Gori, Monfardini, and Scarselli
2005; Scarselli et al. 2009) which propose a neural network that can directly process most types of graphs e.g.,
acyclic, cyclic, directed, and undirected graphs. More recent
approaches include (Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and
LeCun 2015; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2016; Gilmer et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018, 2019; Qu, Bengio,
and Tang 2019; Gao and Ji 2019; Ma et al. 2019), among others. Many of these approaches are designed for addressing the
problem of semi-supervised learning over graph-structured
data (Zhou et al. 2018). Much of these research efforts have
been dedicated to developing novel architectures.
Here we instead propose an architecture-agnostic method
for regularized training of GNNs for semi-supervised

Problem Definition and Preliminaries

Problem Setup: We are interested in the problem of
semi-supervised node and edge classification using graphstructured data. We can formally define such graph-structured
data as an undirected graph G = (V, A, X ), where V =
Vl ∪ Vu is the union of labeled (Vl ) and unlabeled (Vu ) nodes
in the graph with cardinalities nl and nu , and A is the adjacency matrix representing the edges between the nodes of
V, X ∈ R(nl +nu )×d is the input node features. Each node
v belongs to one out of C classes and can be labeled with
a C-dimensional one-hot vector yv ∈ RC . Given the labels
Yl ∈ Rnl ×C of the labeled nodes Vl , the task is to predict the
labels Yu ∈ Rnu ×C of the unlabeled nodes Vu .
Graph Neural Networks: Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
learn the lth layer representations of a sample i by leveraging
the representations of the samples N B(i) in the neighbourhood of i. This is done by using an aggregation function
that takes as an input the representations of all the samples
along with the graph structure and outputs the aggregated
representation. The aggregation function can be defined using the Graph Convolution layer (Kipf and Welling 2017),
1

Code available at https://github.com/vikasverma1077/GraphMix
Appendix available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11715
Correspondence: vikasverma.iitm@gmail.com

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10024

