The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A User-Adaptive Layer Selection Framework for Very Deep Sequential
Recommender Models
Lei Chen1,2 * , Fajie Yuan3 * , Jiaxi Yang4 , Xiang Ao5 , Chengming Li1† , Min Yang1† .
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Tencent
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lei.chen, cm.li, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, fajieyuan@tencent.com, yangjiaxi@hust.edu.cn, aoxiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Sequential recommender systems (SRS) have become a research hotspot in recent studies. Because of the requirement
in capturing user’s dynamic interests, sequential neural network based recommender models often need to be stacked
with more hidden layers (e.g., up to 100 layers) compared
with standard collaborative filtering methods. However, the
high network latency has become the main obstacle when deploying very deep recommender models into a production environment. In this paper, we argue that the typical prediction
framework that treats all users equally during the inference
phase is inefficient in running time, as well as sub-optimal
in accuracy. To resolve such an issue, we present SkipRec,
an adaptive inference framework by learning to skip inactive hidden layers on a per-user basis. Specifically, we devise a policy network to automatically determine which layers should be retained and which layers are allowed to be
skipped, so as to achieve user-specific decisions. To derive the
optimal skipping policy, we propose using gumbel softmax
and reinforcement learning to solve the non-differentiable
problem during backpropagation. We perform extensive experiments on three real-world recommendation datasets, and
demonstrate that SkipRec attains comparable or better accuracy with much less inference time.

1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Recommendation accuracy (MRR@5) w.r.t. the
number of layers of NFM and NextItNet on the Weishi (Sun
et al. 2020) dataset. On (a), the left(right) label of x-axis
represents the number of layers for NFM and NextItNet,
respectively. (a) Compared with NFM, deepening NextItNet results in significantly better accuracy; (b) the 128-layer
NextItNet converges better than other shallower NextItNets.
Experimental settings are given in Section 4.

In fact, compared with standard collaborative filtering
(CF) methods, sequential recommender models enjoy excellent model expressivity by stacking very deep layers. As
shown in Figure 1, we compare two representative recommendation models, namely, neural factorization machines
(NFM) (He and Chua 2017) for standard CF and NextItNet (Yuan et al. 2019) (with a slight change as described
in Section 3.3) for sequential recommendations. As shown,
on (a), we clearly observe that NFM yields no accuracy gain
by deepening the number of network layers, and it performs
largely worse than NextItNet. In contrast, the performance
of NextItNet is gradually improved by stacking more layers.
To our surprise, NextItNet converges the best with up to 128
layer, achieving around 1% improvement on MRR@5 over
the same model with 64 layers, as shown in (b).
However, as the network becomes deeper, a real problem
arises, that is, the inference cost largely increases, leading to
an inevitable time delay for online service. In this paper, we
argue that users in recommender systems are unique (i.e.,
personalized), passing all of them through hidden layers of
the same depth is non-optimal and computationally inefficient. Instead, as shown in Figure 2, we believe that for many
‘easy’ users (or user input sequences), neural network mod-

Introduction

The past decade has seen a remarkable progress in deep
learning and their applications in recommender systems
(RS). A variety of neural network models with larger and
deeper architectures are proposed to model user-item behavior interactions from online systems. Among them, sequential recommendation models (Hidasi et al. 2016; Yuan
et al. 2019; Kang and McAuley 2018) have become especially popular due to their powerful capacity in modeling
user’s dynamic interests. In addition, sequential models are
well-suited to do self-supervised learning by predicting the
next interaction in the sequence (Yuan et al. 2020b,c), and
thereby require less feature engineering and manually labeled data.
* The two authors contributed equally to this paper.
†

Chengming Li and Min Yang are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3984

