The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Disentangled Representation for Fair Facial Attribute Classification via
Fairness-aware Information Alignment
Sungho Park1

Sunhee Hwang1

Dohyung Kim1

Hyeran Byun1,2 *

1

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
2
Graduate School of AI, Yonsei University
{qkrtjdgh18, sunny16, dohkim02, hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

To address this problem, many previous works (Wang et al.
2019b; Kim et al. 2019; Zhang, Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018)
adversarially train models not to discriminate protected attribute labels. These works remove information related to
protected attributes in data representation, thereby outputting
invariant results in terms of the attributes. However, there is a
limitation that they potentially remove some useful information for target tasks due to its correlation with the protected
attributes (cf., Figure 1(a)).
On the other hand, (Creager et al. 2019), the research most
relevant to this work, tries to solve the unfairness problem by
utilizing a disentanglement learning method (Kim and Mnih
2018). They disentangle data representation into subspaces
relevant to protected attributes or not, then exclude the subspaces with protected attribute information for downstream
tasks. However, it is difficult to disentangle protected attribute
information and beneficial information for target tasks explicitly due to their correlation. For this reason, the information
for target tasks is inevitably included in the subspaces for
protected attributes, thus the information is removed in downstream tasks as the adversarial approaches. (cf., Figure 1(b)).
In this paper, we aim to learn representation that is fair in
terms of protected attributes and preserves beneficial information for target tasks. To this end, we propose a Fairness-aware
Disentangling Variational Auto-Encoder (FD-VAE) that disentangles data representation into three subspaces. As shown
in Figure 1(c), Target Attribute Latent (TAL) and Protected
Attribute Latent (PAL) include target attribute information
and protected attribute information, respectively. Mutual Attribute Latent (MAL) includes intersected information between target and protected attributes. This is derived from the
intuition that there are the intersection and complementary
sets of target and protected attribute information. The complementary set is not necessary to be concerned to achieve our
goal, but the intersected information needs to be addressed
carefully. If the intersected information is included in TAL,
it causes unfair results to protected attributes. Conversely,
being it included in PAL, it causes loss of useful information
for target attributes. We solve this dilemma by introducing
an additional subspace (MAL) that includes the intersected
information.
Specifically, each subspace is learned to include its appropriate information by our proposed decorrelation loss. This
loss encourages each subspace to maximize mutual infor-

Although AI systems archive a great success in various societal fields, there still exists a challengeable issue of outputting
discriminatory results with respect to protected attributes (e.g.,
gender and age). The popular approach to solving the issue
is to remove protected attribute information in the decision
process. However, this approach has a limitation that beneficial information for target tasks may also be eliminated. To
overcome the limitation, we propose Fairness-aware Disentangling Variational Auto-Encoder (FD-VAE) that disentangles
data representation into three subspaces: 1) Target Attribute
Latent (TAL), 2) Protected Attribute Latent (PAL), 3) Mutual Attribute Latent (MAL). On top of that, we propose a
decorrelation loss that aligns the overall information into each
subspace, instead of removing the protected attribute information. After learning the representation, we re-encode MAL
to include only target information and combine it with TAL
to perform downstream tasks. In our experiments on CelebA
and UTK Face datasets, we show that the proposed method
mitigates unfairness in facial attribute classification tasks with
respect to gender and age. Ours outperforms previous methods by large margins on two standard fairness metrics, equal
opportunity and equalized odds.

Introduction
Despite tremendous advances in AI systems, there still exists a problem of outputting discriminatory results regarding
different demographic groups (Wang et al. 2019a; Alvi, Zisserman, and Nellåker 2018; Wang et al. 2019b). Particularly,
unfair decisions in terms of protected attributes (e.g., gender,
age, and ethnicity) cause social-ethical problems (Dougherty
2015; Lomas 2018; J. Angwin and Kirchner 2016). For example, Google photos, an image recognition algorithm, recognizes an African-American as being gorillas (Dougherty
2015). Besides, FaceApp, a face editing application, deploys
a racist hot filter that is intended to edit a user’s face more
attractive. When a user with a dark skin tone uses this filter, it
makes the user look like Caucasian by brightening the user’s
skin tone (Lomas 2018). These ethical issues raise the necessity of AI models that make a fair decision in terms of the
protected attributes.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2403

