The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Physics-Informed Deep Learning for Traffic State Estimation: A Hybrid Paradigm
Informed By Second-Order Traffic Models
Rongye Shi, Zhaobin Mo, Xuan Di
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
rongyes@alumni.cmu.edu, zm2302@columbia.edu, sharon.di@columbia.edu

Abstract

Most traditional TSE methods are model-driven, i.e., to
build up a traffic state estimator on top of a priori knowledge of traffic dynamics described by first-order principles.
These models were proposed based on ideal assumptions
and conditions that may fail to fully capture the phenomena of real-world traffic. An alternative is the data-driven
method, which can conduct TSE without any explicit traffic models nor theoretical assumptions. Data-driven methods learn the estimation rule directly from observed data
using statistical or machine learning (ML) methods. However, these methods require a large quantity of high-quality
data to perform a satisfactory estimation, implying high demands on the constructions of data collection infrastructure
and corresponding maintenance costs.
Human drivers exhibit highly unstable and nonlinear driving behaviors, leading to stop-and-go traffic waves and traffic congestions at an aggregate level. Accordingly, neither
model-driven nor data-driven methods alone suffice to estimate such behavioral complexity with an allowable accuracy. Therefore, hybrid methods, which combine both
model-driven and data-driven, are becoming a promising
direction for IoT-related applications, and this paper introduces a hybrid framework, physics-informed deep learning
(PIDL), to the TSE problem. The PIDL framework, which
is originally proposed by Raissi for solving nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) (Raissi 2018; Raissi and
Karniadakis 2018), consists of a model-driven component
(a physics-informed neural network for regularization) and
a data-driven component (a physics-uninformed neural network for estimation), making it a natural fit to the research
goal of TSE.
Traditional methods of TSE highly rely on fixed-location
sensors such as inductive loop detectors and traffic cameras.
With the emergence of advanced sensing and communication technologies, such as connected vehicles equipped with
GPS and vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure
connectivity modules, trajectories of probe vehicles have become important sources for tempo-spatial traffic information. This paper will not only take the advantage of loop
detector data, but also trajectory data of probe vehicles for
improved estimation accuracy.
Specifically, the main contributions of this paper are as
follows:

Traffic state estimation (TSE) reconstructs the traffic variables (e.g., density or average velocity) on road segments
using partially observed data, which is important for traffic
managements. Traditional TSE approaches mainly bifurcate
into two categories: model-driven and data-driven, and each
of them has shortcomings. To mitigate these limitations, hybrid TSE methods, which combine both model-driven and
data-driven, are becoming a promising solution. This paper
introduces a hybrid framework, physics-informed deep learning (PIDL), to combine second-order traffic flow models and
neural networks to solve the TSE problem. PIDL can encode
traffic flow models into deep neural networks to regularize the
learning process to achieve improved data efficiency and estimation accuracy. We focus on highway TSE with observed
data from loop detectors and probe vehicles, using both density and average velocity as the traffic variables. With numerical examples, we show the use of PIDL to solve a popular
second-order traffic flow model, i.e., a Greenshields-based
Aw-Rascle-Zhang (ARZ) model, and discover the model parameters. We then evaluate the PIDL-based TSE method using the Next Generation SIMulation (NGSIM) dataset. Experimental results demonstrate the proposed PIDL-based approach to outperform advanced baseline methods in terms of
data efficiency and estimation accuracy.

Introduction
Efficient traffic control, operation, ramp metering and many
other transportation management strategies are important
building blocks of Internet-of-Things (IoT), which tackle
urban traffic challenges leveraging emerging sensing, communication, and computational technologies, as well as data
science. A prerequisite step is to estimate traffic states (e.g.,
density, velocity, and flow) using observed data from traffic
sensors (e.g., inductive loop detectors and probe vehicles).
However, the estimation is nontrivial in practice because the
information from traffic sensors is limited in most cases,
making the traffic state estimation (TSE) problem a longstanding research topic over decades. Formally, TSE refers
to the data mining problem of reconstructing traffic state
variables, including but not limited to flow (veh/h), density
(veh/km), and velocity (km/h), on road segments using partially observed data from traffic sensors (Seo et al. 2017).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We will leverage tempo-spatial traffic information col540

