The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cross-Domain Grouping and Alignment
for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Minsu Kim1 , Sunghun Joung1 , Seungryong Kim2 , Jungin Park1 , Ig-Jae Kim3 , Kwanghoon Sohn1
1

Yonsei University 2 Korea University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{minsukim320, sunghunjoung, newrun, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr, drjay@kist.re.kr
3

Class I

Abstract

Source data
Target data

Class IV
Clusters
Adversarial loss
Cluster 1

Existing techniques to adapt semantic segmentation networks
across source and target domains within deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) deal with all the samples from the
two domains in a global or category-aware manner. They do
not consider an inter-class variation within the target domain
itself or estimated category, providing the limitation to encode the domains having a multi-modal data distribution. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce a learnable clustering
module, and a novel domain adaptation framework, called
cross-domain grouping and alignment. To cluster the samples across domains with an aim to maximize the domain
alignment without forgetting precise segmentation ability on
the source domain, we present two loss functions, in particular, for encouraging semantic consistency and orthogonality among the clusters. We also present a loss so as to solve
a class imbalance problem, which is the other limitation of
the previous methods. Our experiments show that our method
consistently boosts the adaptation performance in semantic
segmentation, outperforming the state-of-the-arts on various
domain adaptation settings.

Class III

Misclassified data
Classifier boundary

Class II

Cluster 2

Target

Source
(a)

Target

Source
(b)

Target

Source
(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of cross-domain grouping and alignment : Conventional methods aim to reduce the domain discrepancy between source and target domains through (a)
global and (b) category-level domain alignment, without
taking into account the inter-class variation or rely solely
on the category classifier. (c) We propose to replace this category classifier with an intermediate cross-domain grouping
module to align each group separately (best view in color).

Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at densely assigning semantic
category label to each pixel given an image. Though the
remarkable progresses have been dominated by deep neural networks trained on large-scale labeled dataset (Chen
et al. 2017a). The segmentation model trained on the labeled data in source domain usually cannot generalize well
to the unseen data in target domain. For example, the model
trained on the data from one city or computer-generated
scene (Richter et al. 2016; Ros et al. 2016) may fail to yield
accurate pixel-level predictions for the scenes of another city
or real scene. The main reason lies in the different data distribution between such source and target domains, typically
known as domain discrepancy (Shimodaira 2000).
To address this issue, domain adaptive semantic segmentation methods have been proposed in which they align data
distribution between the source and target domains by adopting a domain discriminator (Hoffman et al. 2016; Tsai et al.
2018). Formally, these methods aim to minimize an adversarial loss (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to reduce the domain discrepancy at image-level (Wu et al. 2018; Hoffman

et al. 2018; Chang et al. 2019), feature-level (Hoffman et al.
2016), and category probability-level (Zou et al. 2018; Li,
Yuan, and Vasconcelos 2019; Tsai et al. 2018) distributions without forgetting semantic segmentation ability on the
source domain. However, their accuracy is still limited when
aligning multi-modal data distribution (Arora et al. 2017),
which cannot guarantee that the target samples from different categories are properly separated as in Fig. 1 (a).
To tackle this limitation, category-level domain adaptation methods (Chen et al. 2017b; Du et al. 2019) have been
proposed for semantic segmentation in which they minimize
the class-specific domain discrepancy across the source and
target domains. Together with supervision from the source
domain, this enforces the segmentation network to learn discriminative representation for different classes on both domains. They utilize a category classifier trained on the source
domain to generate pseudo class labels on the target domain.
It results in inaccurate labels for domain adaptation that misleads the domain alignment and accumulates errors as in Fig.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1799

