The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Measuring Dependence with Matrix-based Entropy Functional
Shujian Yu1 , Francesco Alesiani1 , Xi Yu2 , Robert Jenssen3 , Jose Principe2
1

NEC Laboratories Europe
2
University of Florida
3
UiT - The Arctic University of Norway
{Shujian.Yu,Francesco.Alesiani}@neclab.eu, {yuxi,principe}@ufl.edu, robert.jenssen@uit.no

Abstract

Despite that tremendous efforts have been made based on
the seven postulates (on measure of dependence on pair of
variables) proposed by Alfréd Rényi (Rényi 1959), the problem of measuring dependence (especially in a nonparametric
manner) still remains challenging and unsatisfactory (Fernandes and Gloor 2010). This is not hard to understand.
Note that, most of the existing measures are defined as some
functions of a density. Thus, a prerequisite for them is to
estimate the underlying data distributions, a notoriously difficult problem in high-dimensional space.
Moreover, current measures primarily focus on two special scenarios: 1) the dependence associated with each dimension of a random vector (e.g., the multivariate maximal correlation (MAC) (Nguyen et al. 2014)); and 2) the
dependence between two random vectors (e.g., the Hilbert
Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al.
2005)). The former is called multivariate correlation analysis in machine learning, and the latter is commonly referred
to as random vector association in statistics.
Our main contributions are multi-fold:

Measuring the dependence of data plays a central role in
statistics and machine learning. In this work, we summarize
and generalize the main idea of existing information-theoretic
dependence measures into a higher-level perspective by the
Shearer’s inequality. Based on our generalization, we then
propose two measures, namely the matrix-based normalized
total correlation and the matrix-based normalized dual total
correlation, to quantify the dependence of multiple variables
in arbitrary dimensional space, without explicit estimation of
the underlying data distributions. We show that our measures
are differentiable and statistically more powerful than prevalent ones. We also show the impact of our measures in four
different machine learning problems, namely the gene regulatory network inference, the robust machine learning under
covariate shift and non-Gaussian noises, the subspace outlier
detection, and the understanding of the learning dynamics of
convolutional neural networks, to demonstrate their utilities,
advantages, as well as implications to those problems.

Introduction

• We provide a unified view of existing informationtheoretic dependence measures and illustrate their inner
connections. We also generalize the main idea of these
measures into a higher-level perspective by the Shearer’s
inequality (Chung et al. 1986).

Measuring the strength of dependence between random variables plays a central role in statistics and machine learning.
For the linear dependence case, measures such as the Pearson’s ρ, the Spearman’s rank and the Kendall’s τ are computationally efficient and have been widely used. For the more
general case where the two variables share a nonlinear relationship, one of the most well-known dependence measures
is the mutual information and its modifications such as the
maximal information coefficient (Reshef et al. 2011).
However, real-world data often contains three or more
variables which can exhibit higher-order dependencies. If bivariate based measures are used to identify multivariate dependence, wrong conclusions may drawn. For example, in
the XOR gate, we have y = x1 ⊕ x2 with x1 , x2 being binary random processes with equal probability. Although x1 ,
x2 individually are independent to y, the full dependence is
synergistically contained in the union of {x1 , x2 } and y.
On the other hand, in various practical applications, the
observational data or variables of interest lie on a highdimensional space. Thus, it is desirable to extend the theory
of scalar variable dependence to an arbitrary dimension.

• Motivated by our generalization, we suggest two measures, namely the matrix-based normalized total correlation (Tα∗ ) and the matrix-based normalized dual total correlation (Dα∗ ), to quantify the dependence of data by making use of the recently proposed matrix-based Rényi’s αentropy functional estimator (Sanchez Giraldo, Rao, and
Principe 2014; Yu et al. 2019)1 .
• We show that Tα∗ and Dα∗ enjoy several appealing properties. First, they are not constrained by the number of
variables and variable dimension. Second, they are differentiable, which make them suitable to be used as loss
functions to train neural networks.
• We show that our measures offer a remarkable performance gain to benchmark methods in applications like
gene regulatory network (GRN) inference and subspace
1
Code of our measures and supplementary material of this work
are available at: https://bit.ly/AAAI-dependence.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10781

