The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Active Feature Selection for the Mutual Information Criterion
Shachar Schnapp and Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
schnapp@post.bgu.ac.il, sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

the entire data set is large. This is the analog, for the featureselection task, of the active learning setting, first proposed
in Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner (1994); McCallum and Nigam
(1998), which addresses classification tasks.
Feature selection in such an active setting is useful in applications characterized by a preliminary stage of feature selection with expensive labels but readily available features,
followed by a deployment stage in which only a few features
can be collected for each example. For instance, consider
developing a medical protocol which can only use a small
number of features, so that patient intake is resource efficient. The goal during protocol design is to select the most
informative patient attributes with respect to a target label,
such as the existence of a life-threatening condition. In the
preliminary study, it is possible to collect a large number of
features about a cohort of patients, but identifying the condition of the patient (the label) with a high accuracy may
require paying trained specialists. By using an active feature
selection algorithm which requires only a small number of
labels, the labeling cost at the design stage can be controlled.
As a second example, consider a design/deploy scenario
of a computer system which trains classifiers online. The online system handles large volumes, and thus cannot measure
all possible features. Therefore, at the design stage, a small
number of features must be selected, which will be the only
ones collected later by the deployed system. The feature selection process is performed on an offline system, and therefore does not have easy access to labels, but it does allow
collecting all the features for the unlabeled feature selection
data set, since it handles smaller volumes of data. As a concrete example, consider a web-server which needs to quickly
decide where to route client requests, by predicting the resource type that this client session will later use. In the live
system, it is easy to collect the true labels downstream and
feed them to the training algorithm. However, the server is
limited in the number of features it can retrieve for each request, due to bounded communication with the client. On the
other hand, in the design stage, there is no limit to communicating with the client, due to the smaller processing volumes.
However, simulating the live process in order to identify the
label is expensive, since the databases are not local.
Our goal is then to interactively select examples to label
from the feature selection data set, and to then use these labeled examples to select k features which have a high mu-

We study active feature selection, a novel feature selection
setting in which unlabeled data is available, but the budget
for labels is limited, and the examples to label can be actively
selected by the algorithm. We focus on feature selection using the classical mutual information criterion, which selects
the k features with the largest mutual information with the
label. In the active feature selection setting, the goal is to use
significantly fewer labels than the data set size and still find
k features whose mutual information with the label based on
the entire data set is large. We explain and experimentally
study the choices that we make in the algorithm, and show
that they lead to a successful algorithm, compared to other
more naive approaches. Our design draws on insights which
relate the problem of active feature selection to the study of
pure-exploration multi-armed bandits settings. While we focus here on mutual information, our general methodology can
be adapted to other feature-quality measures as well. The extended version of this paper, reporting all experiment results,
is available at Schnapp and Sabato (2020). The code is available at the following url:
https://github.com/ShacharSchnapp/ActiveFeatureSelection

1

Introduction

Feature selection is the task of selecting a small number of
features which are the most predictive with respect to the
label. Filter methods for feature selection (see, e.g., Guyon
et al. 2008) attempt to select the best features without committing to a specific model or task. We focus here on the
classical mutual-information filter method, which selects the
features with the largest mutual information with the label.
In the standard feature selection setting, the mutual information of each feature with the label is estimated based on a
fully-labeled data set. In this work, we study a novel active
setting, in which only the unlabeled data is readily available, and there is a limited budget for labels, which may be
obtained upon request. In this setting, the feature selection
algorithm can iteratively select an example from the data set
and request its label, while taking into account in its decision all the labels obtained so far. The goal is to use significantly fewer labels than the data set size and still find k
features whose mutual information with the label based on
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9497

