The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Illuminating Mario Scenes in the Latent Space
of a Generative Adversarial Network
Matthew C. Fontaine1 , Ruilin Liu1 , Ahmed Khalifa2 , Jignesh Modi1 ,
Julian Togelius2 , Amy K. Hoover3 , Stefanos Nikolaidis1
1

University of Southern California
2
New York University
3
New Jersey Institute of Technology
mfontain@usc.edu, ruilinli@usc.edu, aak538@nyu.edu, jigneshm@usc.edu,
julian@togelius.com, ahoover@njit.edu, nikolaid@usc.edu
Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are quickly becoming a ubiquitous approach to procedurally generating video
game levels. While GAN generated levels are stylistically
similar to human-authored examples, human designers often
want to explore the generative design space of GANs to extract interesting levels. However, human designers find latent
vectors opaque and would rather explore along dimensions
the designer specifies, such as number of enemies or obstacles. We propose using state-of-the-art quality diversity algorithms designed to optimize continuous spaces, i.e. MAPElites with a directional variation operator and Covariance
Matrix Adaptation MAP-Elites, to efficiently explore the latent space of a GAN to extract levels that vary across a set
of specified gameplay measures. In the benchmark domain of
Super Mario Bros, we demonstrate how designers may specify gameplay measures to our system and extract high-quality
(playable) levels with a diverse range of level mechanics,
while still maintaining stylistic similarity to human authored
examples. An online user study shows how the different mechanics of the automatically generated levels affect subjective
ratings of their perceived difficulty and appearance.

Figure 1: Mario scenes returned by the CMA-ME quality diversity algorithm, as they cover the designer-specified space
of two level mechanics: number of enemies and number of
tiles above a given height. The color shows the percentage
of the level completed by an A* agent, with red indicating
full completion.

Introduction
Algorithms that procedurally generate content often need to
adhere to a desired style or aesthetics. For example, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Karras et al. 2018) generate realistic looking images after
training on a large dataset of human specified examples. At
the same time, for these algorithms to be useful in practice,
they need to enable generation of a diverse range of content,
across a range of attributes specified by a human designer.
For a GAN, this requires either sifting through thousands of
randomly generated examples, which is cost-prohibitive, or
controlling the GAN output by “steering” it in latent space
towards a desired distribution, which is a challenging problem (Jahanian, Chai, and Isola 2020).
When desired attributes can be formulated as an objective,
one approach is to explore the latent space using derivativefree optimization algorithms such as CMA-ES (Hansen
2016). Bontrager et al. (2018) named this approach latent

variable evolution (LVE). Later, Volz et al. (2018) proposed using GANs to automatically author Mario levels and
demonstrated how LVE can extract level scenes with specific
attributes from latent space.
The LVE approach is limited to attributes that are easily specifiable as an objective. A human designer may not
know exactly what kind of content they want, but instead
have some intuition on how they would vary content when
exploring GAN generated levels. For example, the designer
may want to have levels that are of varying difficulty; while
it is hard to specify difficulty as an objective, a designer
can choose from automatically generated levels of different
number of enemies or obstacles.
We call the above problem latent space illumination
(LSI). Formally, given an objective function and additional
functions which measure different aspects of gameplay, we
want to extract a collection of game scenes that collectively satisfy all output combinations of the gameplay measures. For each output combination, the representative scene

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5922

