The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Diffusion Network Inference from Partial Observations
Ting Gan1 , Keqi Han1 , Hao Huang1 , Shi Ying1 , Yunjun Gao2 , Zongpeng Li1
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{ganting, hankeqi, haohuang, yingshi, zongpeng}@whu.edu.cn, gaoyj@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

or submodular optimization (Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec,
and Krause 2010; Gomez-Rodriguez and Schölkopf 2012),
they try to find a diffusion network structure that maximizes
the likelihood of given cascades by solving the corresponding optimization problems.
In reality, gathering node infection timestamps as cascades is not always feasible or affordable. In most realworld settings, such as disease propagation, nodes have
a wide spatial distribution, and infection monitoring is
often labor/resource demanding. Given the limitation of the
cascade-based approaches, some infection timestamp-free
methods try to learn diffusion network structures from only
the final infection statuses of the nodes in historical diffusion
processes (Gripon and Rabbat 2013; Amin, Heidari, and
Kearns 2014; Huang et al. 2019a,b; Han et al. 2020), since
observing the final infection statuses is relatively easier and
less expensive than monitoring exact infection timestamps.
Whether the existing approaches use observed cascades
or final infection statuses of nodes, they generally assume
that the observed data are complete, without missing values
on any infection timestamp or status. Unfortunately, this
assumption often fails to hold in real-world applications
(He et al. 2016; Lokhov 2016). For example, it is virtually
impossible to avoid missing readings from non-functioning
sensors, or avoid non-response in a survey. In situations
where missing data are unavoidable, one can make the data
complete via certain ad-hoc strategies, such as filling in the
missing parts with average values in the observed data (Sefer
and Kingsford 2015), although these strategies often have
no guarantee of accuracy and may result in severe biases.
So far, a few studies do deal with missing data, but aim
at predicting diffusion results (He et al. 2016) or learning
only the strengths of influence relationships (Lokhov 2016;
Wilinski and Lokhov 2020), under the assumption that the
diffusion network structures are known in advance.
In this work, we investigate how to infer the structure
of a diffusion network based on only partial observations
of the final node infection statuses in a limited number
of historical diffusion processes. We propose an effective
algorithm called POIND (a re-ordered acronym of Diffusion
Network Inference with Partial Observations) for this problem. POIND consists of two iterative steps, i.e., (1) inferring
the structure of the objective network with observed data and
imputed values for missing data, where the imputed values

To infer the structure of a diffusion network from observed
diffusion results, existing approaches customarily assume
that observed data are complete and contain the final infection
status of each node, as well as precise timestamps of node
infections. Due to high cost and uncertainties in the monitoring of node infections, exact timestamps are often unavailable
in practice, and even the final infection statuses of nodes are
sometimes missing. In this work, we study how to carry out
diffusion network inference without infection timestamps,
using only partial observations of the final infection statuses
of nodes. To this end, we iteratively infer the structure of
the target diffusion network with observed data and imputed
values for missing data, and learn the most likely infection
transmission probabilities between nodes w.r.t. current inferred structure, which then help us update the imputation of
missing data in turn. Extensive experimental results on both
synthetic and real-world networks show that our approach
can properly handle missing data and accurately uncover
diffusion network structures.

Introduction
The structures of diffusion networks delineate the underlying influence relationships between the nodes. An explicit
diffusion network structure is essential for understanding
the mechanisms of historical diffusion processes and for
developing strategies to control future diffusions on the
network. Unfortunately, in most cases, the diffusion network
structures are not naturally accessible and need to be inferred
from diffusion results observed from history.
To infer the structure of a diffusion network, most existing
approaches resort to precise timestamps of historical node
infections, and utilize sequences of timestamps (known
as cascades) to determine potential parent-child influence
relationships between nodes (Mehmood et al. 2013). By
transforming the problem of diffusion network inference
into a problem of convex optimization (Myers and Leskovec
2010; Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2011; Du
et al. 2012; Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec, and Schölkopf
2013a,b; Daneshmand et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2014; PougetAbadie and Horel 2015; Narasimhan, Parkes, and Singer
2015; Rong, Zhu, and Cheng 2016; Kalimeris et al. 2018)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7493

