The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Meta-Learning Effective Exploration Strategies for Contextual Bandits
Amr Sharaf,1 Hal Daumé III1,2
1

University of Maryland
2
Microsoft Research
sharaf@umd.edu, me@hal3.name

Abstract

sets on which we can simulate contextual bandit tasks in
an offline setting. Based on these simulations, our algorithm, M ÊL ÉE (MEta LEarner for Exploration), learns a
good heuristic exploration strategy that generalize to future
contextual bandit problems. M ÊL ÉE contrasts with more
classical approaches to exploration (like -greedy or LinUCB), in which exploration strategies are constructed by
expert algorithm designers. These approaches often achieve
provably good exploration strategies in the worst case, but
are potentially overly pessimistic and are sometimes computationally intractable.
M ÊL ÉE is an example of meta-learning in which we
replace a hand-crafted learning algorithm with a learned
learning algorithm. At training time (§ 3), M ÊL ÉE simulates many contextual bandit problems from fully labeled
synthetic data. Using this data, in each round, M ÊL ÉE is
able to counterfactually simulate what would happen under
all possible action choices. We can then use this information to compute regret estimates for each action, which can
be optimized using the AggreVaTe imitation learning algorithm (Ross and Bagnell 2014).
Our imitation learning strategy mirrors the meta-learning
approach of Bachman, Sordoni, and Trischler (2017) in
the active learning setting. We present a simplified, stylized analysis of the behavior of M ÊL ÉE to ensure that our
cost function encourages good behavior (§4), and show that
M ÊL ÉE enjoys the no-regret guarantees of the AggreVaTe
imitation learning algorithm.
Empirically, we use M ÊL ÉE to train an exploration policy
on only synthetic datasets and evaluate this policy on both
a contextual bandit task based on a natural learning to rank
dataset as well as three hundred simulated contextual bandit
tasks (§5). We compare the trained policy to a number of alternative exploration algorithms, and show that M ÊL ÉE outperforms alternative exploration strategies in most settings.

In contextual bandits, an algorithm must choose actions given
observed contexts, learning from a reward signal that is observed only for the action chosen. This leads to an exploration/exploitation trade-off: the algorithm must balance taking actions it already believes are good with taking new actions to potentially discover better choices. We develop a
meta-learning algorithm, M ÊL ÉE, that learns an exploration
policy based on simulated, synthetic contextual bandit tasks.
M ÊL ÉE uses imitation learning against these simulations to
train an exploration policy that can be applied to true contextual bandit tasks at test time. We evaluate M ÊL ÉE on both a
natural contextual bandit problem derived from a learning to
rank dataset as well as hundreds of simulated contextual bandit problems derived from classification tasks. M ÊL ÉE outperforms seven strong baselines on most of these datasets by
leveraging a rich feature representation for learning an exploration strategy.

1

Introduction

In a contextual bandit problem, an agent attempts to optimize its behavior over a sequence of rounds based on limited
feedback (Kaelbling 1994; Auer 2003; Langford and Zhang
2008). In each round, the agent chooses an action based on
a context (features) for that round, and observes a reward
for that action but no others (§ 2). The feedback is partial:
the agent only observes the reward for the action it selected,
and for no other actions. This is strictly harder than supervised learning in which the agent observes the reward for all
available actions. Contextual bandit problems arise in many
real-world settings like learning to rank for information retrieval, online recommendations and personalized medicine.
As in reinforcement learning, the agent must learn to balance exploitation (taking actions that, based on past experience, it believes will lead to high instantaneous reward) and
exploration (trying new actions). However, contextual bandit learning is easier than reinforcement learning: the agent
needs to only take one action, not a sequence of actions, and
therefore does not face a credit assignment problem.
In this paper, we present a meta-learning approach to
automatically learn a good exploration strategy from data.
To achieve this, we use synthetic supervised learning data

2

Preliminaries: Contextual Bandits and
Policy Optimization

Contextual bandits is a model of interaction in which an
agent chooses actions (based on contexts) and receives immediate rewards for that action alone. For example, in a simplified news personalization setting, at each time step t, a
user arrives and the system must choose a news article to

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9541

