The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Educational Question Mining At Scale: Prediction, Analysis and Personalization
Zichao Wang,1∗ Sebastian Tschiatschek,2† Simon Woodhead,3 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,5†
Simon Peyton Jones,4 Richard G. Baraniuk,1 Cheng Zhang4
1

Rice University 2 University of Vienna 3 Eedi 4 Microsoft Research Cambridge 5 University of Cambridge
{jzwang, richb}@rice.edu
sebastian.tschiatschek@univie.ac.at
jmh233@cam.ac.uk
simon.woodhead@eedi.co.uk
{simonpj, Cheng.Zhang}@microsoft.com
Abstract

rawardina et al. 2020). Questions as assessment and learning
instruments have thus become even more prominent.
A key challenge to best utilize these questions is how to
choose the most suitable ones for students. Only high quality and suitably difficult questions are beneficial for learning (Blanchette 2001); as a result, understanding these two
properties of questions help guide the choice of questions.
While in traditional classroom settings, manually examining and selecting questions to attend to the learning status of
each individual student remains the best practice, this laborand time-intensive procedure clearly does not scale to largescale online education scenarios in which the number of
questions and students can be massive. We thus desire an efficient tool for question analysis at scale and capable of computing question analytics including quality and difficulty and
automatically selecting questions for students. The analytics
will serve as side information that helps teachers and students select appropriate questions for their pedagogical and
educational needs. The automatic question selection process
enables personalized learning and adaptive testing experience when the number of students greatly exceeds teachers’
capacities (Chang, Ying et al. 2009; Yan, Von Davier, and
Lewis 2016). Both analytics and personalization are important to realize the values of massive questions in online education scenarios.
To address the above challenges, we aim to develop an AI
solution for large-scale online educational question mining,
providing both insights for question quality and difficulty
and strategies for choosing questions for each student. This
task involves 3 challenges. First, the number of questions,
students, and answer records is extremely large and processing such data may be computationally expensive. Second,
online educational data is highly incomplete because each
student can only answer a small fraction of all available
questions. Third, we need to design quantitative metrics and
strategies to accurately identify question quality and to adaptively choose questions for each student. Overall, we need a
solution that is efficient, handles highly sparse data, and automatically acquires educationally meaningful and actionable insights about questions.

Online education platforms enable teachers to share a large
number of educational resources such as questions to form
exercises and quizzes for students. With large volumes of
available questions, it is important to have an automated way
to quantify their properties and intelligently select them for
students, enabling effective and personalized learning experiences. In this work, we propose a framework for mining
insights from educational questions at scale. We utilize the
state-of-the-art Bayesian deep learning method, in particular
partial variational auto-encoders (p-VAE), to analyze real students’ answers to a large collection of questions. Based on
p-VAE, we propose two novel metrics that quantify question
quality and difficulty, respectively, and a personalized strategy to adaptively select questions for students. We apply our
proposed framework to a real-world dataset with tens of thousands of questions and tens of millions of answers from an
online education platform. Our framework not only demonstrates promising results in terms of statistical metrics but also
obtains highly consistent results with domain experts’ evaluation.

Introduction
Online education platforms are transforming education by
democratizing access to high-quality educational resources
and personalizing learning experiences. A central instrument
in today’s online education scenarios is assessment questions (referred to as “questions” henceforth), which help
teachers evaluate the students’ abilities and help students
reinforce the knowledge they are learning (Karpicke 2012;
Karpicke and Roediger 2008; Connor-Greene 2000; Kovacs
2016; Koedinger et al. 2015). Questions are particularly important in online education, because teachers have more limited interactions with students; students answer records to
questions serve as one of the few ways for teachers to interact with and understand their students (Twigg 2003). With
the world reeling from the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic,
there has been a rapid and massive increase in the number of
students learning online (Bao 2020; Sandars et al. 2020; Ve∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Cambridge.
†
Work done at Microsoft Research Cambridge.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions
In this work, we collect a large real-world online educational dataset in the form of students’ answers to multiple15669

