The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Joint Semantic-Geometric Learning for Polygonal Building Segmentation
Weijia Li1,2 * , Wenqian Zhao3† , Huaping Zhong4 , Conghui He4,5‡ , Dahua Lin1
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai SenseTime Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
SenseTime Group Limited
5
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wjli,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wqzhao@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {zhonghuaping,heconghui}@senstime.com

Abstract

etc., extracting building footprints from aerial or satellite images has been an important and popular research problem
in both remote sensing and computer vision domains. Deep
convolutional neural networks based segmentation models
have become the state-of-the-art methods for building footprint extraction, which assign a semantic class to each pixel
of an image. However, the output raster building masks generated from these segmentation models are not in the desirable format of realistic building polygons (with linear edges
and specific angles). Complex post-processing procedures
are required for converting the segmentation predictions into
the vector building polygons for practical applications.
Motivated by this issue, many polygonal building segmentation approaches have been proposed to generate
the vectorized outputs. Several studies proposed postprocessing methods for simplifying the building segmentation contours. In (Zhao et al. 2018), a multi-step boundary
regularization method was proposed to simplify the building instances predicted from Mask-RCNN. Li et al. (Li, Lafarge, and Marlet 2020) proposed a polygonal partition refinement method for vectorizing the output probability maps
of a U-Net based model. These methods not only require a
complex processing procedure, but also a perfect segmentation map to ensure the quality of the polygonization results. To solve the above limitations, a generative adversarial
network based method was proposed in (Zorzi, Bittner, and
Fraundorfer 2020) for regularizing the building segmentation maps. Although producing visually pleasing building
polygons, the method consists of three separate networks
and requires heavy training procedures regarding the hybrid
losses of different network components.
The other category of polygonal segmentation methodologies directly predicts the polygon vertices of a building
instance, using deep neural networks with CNN-RNN or
GCN architectures. PolyMapper (Li, Wegner, and Lucchi
2019), a polygonal building segmentation approach, combines CNN with LSTM model to predict a polygon vertex
at each time step. The method was extended from PolygonRNN (Castrejon et al. 2017), a semi-automatic polygonal
segmentation method, and outperformed several instance
segmentation methods (Mask-RCNN (He et al. 2017) and

Building extraction from aerial or satellite images has been
an important research problem in remote sensing and computer vision domains for decades. Compared with pixel-wise
semantic segmentation models that output raster building segmentation map, polygonal building segmentation approaches
produce more realistic building polygons that are in the desirable vector format for practical applications. Despite the
substantial efforts over recent years, state-of-the-art polygonal building segmentation methods still suffer from several limitations, e.g., (1) relying on a perfect segmentation
map to guarantee the vectorization quality; (2) requiring a
complex post-processing procedure; (3) generating inaccurate vertices with a fixed quantity, a wrong sequential order,
self-intersections, etc. To tackle the above issues, in this paper, we propose a polygonal building segmentation approach
and make the following contributions: (1) We design a multitask segmentation network for joint semantic and geometric
learning via three tasks, i.e., pixel-wise building segmentation, multi-class corner prediction, and edge orientation prediction. (2) We propose a simple but effective vertex generation module for transforming the segmentation contour into
high-quality polygon vertices. (3) We further propose a polygon refinement network that automatically moves the polygon vertices into more accurate locations. Results on two popular building segmentation datasets demonstrate that our approach achieves significant improvements for both building
instance segmentation (with 2% F1-score gain) and polygon
vertex prediction (with 6% F1-score gain) compared with current state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
As a fundamental task for urban planning, disaster and environmental management, geographical information updating,
* This work has been financially supported by fund of Shanghai
Municipal Commission of Economy and Informatization (2019RGZN-01015).
†
This work was done during the author’s internship at SenseTime Group Limited.
‡
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1958

