The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How Does Data Augmentation Affect Privacy in Machine Learning?
Da Yu* 1 , Huishuai Zhang2 , Wei Chen2 , Jian Yin1 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University.
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{yuda3@mail2, issjyin@mail}.sysu.edu.cn, {huishuai.zhang, wche, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com
Abstract
It is observed in the literature that data augmentation can
significantly mitigate membership inference (MI) attack. However, in this work, we challenge this observation by proposing
new MI attacks to utilize the information of augmented data.
MI attack is widely used to measure the model’s information
leakage of the training set. We establish the optimal membership inference when the model is trained with augmented data,
which inspires us to formulate the MI attack as a set classification problem, i.e., classifying a set of augmented instances
instead of a single data point, and design input permutation invariant features. Empirically, we demonstrate that the proposed
approach universally outperforms original methods when the
model is trained with data augmentation. Even further, we
show that the proposed approach can achieve higher MI attack
success rates on models trained with some data augmentation
than the existing methods on models trained without data augmentation. Notably, we achieve 70.1% MI attack success rate
on CIFAR10 against a wide residual network while previous
best approach only attains 61.9%. This suggests the privacy
risk of models trained with data augmentation could be largely
underestimated.

1

Figure 1: Overview of black-box membership inference in
machine learning. The adversary has access to target model’s
outputs of given samples. The adversary then infers whether
the sample is in the target model’s training set or not. Higher
inference success rate indicates more severe privacy leakage.

Introduction

The training process of machine learning model often needs
access to private data, e.g., applications in financial and medical fields. Recent works have shown that the trained model
may leak the information of its private training set (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Shokri et al.
2017; Hitaj, Ateniese, and Pérez-Cruz 2017). As the machine
learning models are ubiquitously deployed in real-world applications, it is important to quantitatively analyze the information leakage of their training sets. One fundamental
approach reflecting the privacy leakage of a model about
its training set is the membership inference (Shokri et al.
2017; Yeom et al. 2018; Salem et al. 2019; Nasr, Shokri, and
Houmansadr 2018; Long et al. 2018; Jia et al. 2019; Song,
Shokri, and Mittal 2019; Chen et al. 2020), i.e., an adversary,
who has access to a target model, determines whether a data
point is used to train the target model (being a member) or not
(not being a member). Membership inference (MI) attack is
* The work was done when this author was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10746

formulated as a binary classification task. A widely adopted
measure for the performance of an MI attack algorithm in
literature is the MI success rate over a balanced set that contains half training samples and half test samples. A randomly
guessing attack will have success rate of 50% and hence a
good MI algorithm should have success rate above 50%.
It is widely believed that the capability of membership inference is largely attributed to the generalization gap (Shokri
et al. 2017; Yeom et al. 2018; Li, Li, and Ribeiro 2020).
The larger performance difference of the target model on the
training set and on the test set, the easier to determine the
membership of a sample with respect to the target model.
Data augmentation is known to be an effective approach to
produce well-generalized models. Indeed, existing MI algorithms obtain significantly lower MI success rate against models trained with data augmentation than those trained without
data augmentation (Sablayrolles et al. 2019). It seems that
the privacy risk is largely relieved when data augmentation is
used.
We challenge this belief by elaborately showing how data
augmentation affects the MI attack. We first establish the
optimal membership inference when the model is trained
with data augmentation from the Bayesian perspective. The
optimal membership inference indicates that we should use
the set of augmented instances of a given sample rather than
a single sample to decide the membership. This matches the
intuition because the model is trained to fit the augmented
data points instead of a single data point. We also explore
the connection between optimal membership inference and
group differential privacy, and obtain an upper bound of the
success rate of MI attack.
In this paper, we focus on the black-box membership infer-

