The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Certifying Top-Down Decision-DNNF Compilers
Florent Capelli,1 Jean-Marie Lagniez,2 Pierre Marquis2, 3
1

Université de Lille & CNRS & Inria & UMR 9189 - CRIStAL
2
CRIL, Université d’Artois & CNRS
3
Institut Universitaire de France
florent.capelli@univ-lille.fr, lagniez@cril.fr, marquis@cril.fr

Abstract

designing and understanding efficient and usable proof systems for QBF-solvers (Heule, Seidl, and Biere 2014; Beyersdorff, Chew, and Janota 2015; Beyersdorff et al. 2018)
and max SAT-solvers (Bonet, Levy, and Manyà 2007; Bonet
et al. 2018), there is no consensus on the format to be
adopted for certifying the outputs generated by such solvers.
Furthermore, from the practical side, there have been only
few tries to adding a certification functionality to max SATsolvers (Morgado and Marques-Silva 2011). To the best of
our knowledge, today, no #SAT-solver is able to output a
certificate that can be used to check in polynomial time that
the result returned by the #SAT-solver is the correct one.
In order to achieve this goal, an approach consists in
compiling the input CNF formula into a specific Boolean
circuit. Indeed, it has been observed by Huang and Darwiche (Huang and Darwiche 2005) that the traces of DPLLbased #SAT-solvers on CNF formulae can be viewed as
restricted forms of Boolean circuits known as DecisionDNNF circuits (Darwiche 2001; Oztok and Darwiche 2014)
in the knowledge compilation community. The main advantage of such circuits is that they can later be used to analyze efficiently the Boolean function represented by the input CNF formula. Indeed, Decision-DNNF circuits support
many tractable queries, such as model counting.
More sophisticated AI tasks leveraging propositional reasoning can also be targeted. Thus, in the growing body of
work about explainable and robust AI (XAI) (see among
others (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018; Leofante et al.
2018; Molnar, Casalicchio, and Bischl 2018; Shih, Darwiche, and Choi 2019; Guidotti et al. 2019; Miller 2019;
Molnar 2019), recent works have shown how ML classifiers
of various types can be mapped to CNF formulae encoding
them in terms of input-output behaviours (see e.g., (Narodytska et al. 2018; Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2019; Shi et al.
2020). Thanks to such mappings, XAI queries about classifiers (especially, verification queries) can be delegated to the
corresponding propositional representations. Though those
queries are typically NP-hard when the inputs are CNF formulae, many of them become tractable once compiled into
Decision-DNNF circuits (Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis
2020). Obviously enough, within such an approach to XAI,
the certification of the results furnished by the XAI system
goes through the certification of the Decision-DNNF circuit
that has been computed.

Certifying the output of tools solving complex problems so
as to ensure the correctness of the results they provide is of
tremendous importance. Despite being widespread for SATsolvers, this level of exigence has not yet percolated for
tools solving more complex tasks, such as model counting
or knowledge compilation. In this paper, the focus is laid on
a general family of top-down Decision-DNNF compilers. We
explain how those compilers can be tweaked so as to output
certifiable Decision-DNNF circuits, which are mainly standard Decision-DNNF circuits decorated by annotations serving as certificates. We describe a polynomial-time checker for
testing whether a given CNF formula is equivalent or not to a
given certifiable Decision-DNNF circuit. Finally, leveraging
a modified version of the compiler D 4 for generating certifiable Decision-DNNF circuits and an implementation of the
checker, we present the results of an empirical evaluation that
has been conducted for assessing how large are the certifiable Decision-DNNF circuits that can be generated in practice, and how much time is needed to compute and to check
such circuits.

Introduction
Certifying the output of tools solving hard problems is necessary to ensure the correctness of the results they provide.
Certification has proven to be fruitful to detect bugs in SATsolvers. In SAT competitions, since 2013, it is mandatory
that solvers output unsatisfiability certificates whenever the
instance under consideration is classified as unsatisfiable.
The widespread and quick adoption of certification techniques in the SAT-solving community has been facilitated
by the fact that most SAT-solvers rely on the same architecture, namely CDCL, for which the underlying proof system
is well-understood (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2011) and
for which a description such as DRAT (Wetzler, Heule, and
Hunt 2014) – whose implementation follows closely the way
the software works – is available.
The picture is quite different for tools tackling instances
of more complex problems based on (possibly extended)
CNF formulae such as QBF-solving, max SAT-solving or
#SAT-solving. While many efforts have been invested into
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6244

