The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Symmetry Breaking for k-Robust Multi-Agent Path Finding
Zhe Chen,1 Daniel Harabor,1 Jiaoyang Li,2∗ Peter J. Stuckey1
1

Monash University, Australia
University of Southern California, USA
{zhe.chen,daniel.harabor,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, jiaoyanl@usc.edu
2

Abstract

scheduling, quay crane scheduling, planning for warehouse
robots and others. In these settings a k-robust plan naturally
provides k timesteps of distance between agents that are are
moving, while also allowing agents to stay close if they are
not moving. Furthermore, k-robust plans can be used in conjunction with robust execution policies to benefit from both
methods (Atzmon et al. 2020).
To compute k-robust plans, Atzmon et al. (2018) propose
k-robust Conflict-Based Search (k-CBS), a robust variant of
the popular and well known branch-and-replan strategy used
for MAPF (where k = 0) (Sharon et al. 2015), and a SATbased solution, which cannot solve problems on large grids
like brc202d DAO map(Stern et al. 2019). A main problem
with CBS is that the algorithm is extremely inefficient when
reasoning equivalent permutations of conflicts that can occur between pairs of agents, such as rectangle symmetry (Li
et al. 2019), corridor symmetry, and target symmetry (Li
et al. 2020). Further complicating the situation is that the
reasoning techniques proposed to handle these situations, do
not always extend straightforwardly to the k-robust case.
To address this gap in the literature we introduce a variety
of specialised k-robust symmetry breaking constraints that
dramatically improve performance for the k-CBS algorithm.
Experimental results show very large gains in success rate
for k-CBS; not only on classic MAPF benchmarks but also
in two application specific domains: in warehouse logistics,
where k-robust plans are desirable and in railway scheduling
where k-robust plans are mandatory.

During Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problems, agents
can be delayed by unexpected events. To address such situations recent work describes k-Robust Conflict-Based Search
(k-CBS): an algorithm that produces a coordinated and
collision-free plan that is robust for up to k delays for any
agent. In this work we introduce a variety of pairwise symmetry breaking constraints, specific to k-robust planning, that
can efficiently find compatible and optimal paths for pairs of
colliding agents. We give a thorough description of the new
constraints and report large improvements to success rate in
a range of domains including: (i) classic MAPF benchmarks,
(ii) automated warehouse domains, and (iii) on maps from
the 2019 Flatland Challenge, a recently introduced railway
domain where k-robust planning can be fruitfully applied to
schedule trains.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a coordination problem where we need to find collision-free paths for a team
of cooperating agents and is known to be NP-hard on
graphs and grids (Yu and LaValle 2013; Banfi, Basilico, and
Amigoni 2017). When MAPF problems are solved in practice, agents can sometimes be unexpectedly delayed during
plan execution; e.g. due to exogenous events or mechanical
problems. Currently, there exist two principal approaches to
handle such delays. The first approach involves robust execution policies (Ma, Kumar, and Koenig 2017; Hönig et al.
2019). Here dependencies are introduced to guarantee that
agents execute their plans in a specific and compatible order. Another approach is to reason about potential delays at
the planning stage which involves computing robust plans.
Following (Atzmon et al. 2018) we say that a plan is krobust if the individual path of each agent remains valid for
up to k unexpected delays of that agent. In other words, provided each agent waits for no more than k timesteps on the
way to its target, its plan is guaranteed to be collision-free.
In addition to their execution benefits, k-robust plans are
valuable in application areas where agents must maintain
minimum safety distances. Such constraints appear in rail

Problem Definition
We consider a multi-agent coordination problem where the
operating environment is an undirected (e.g. gridmap) or directed (e.g. rail network) graph G = (V, E). We restrict
graph G to be a 4-neighbour grid and we place upon it m
agents {a1 ...am }. Every agent ai is assigned an initial vertex si and a goal vertex gi . Time is discretised into unit-size
steps. In each timestep, agents can move to an adjacent vertex or wait at the current location. Each move or wait action
has an associated unit cost.
We say that a path is k-robust if for each location v visited at time t by agent a no other agent visits the location in
the time interval [t, t + k]. We call a k-delay vertex conflict
the situation where agent ai at timestep t and aj at timestep
t0 = t + ∆, ∆ ∈ [0, k], visit the same location v. We de-

∗
Jiaoyang Li performed the research during her visit to Monash
University.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12267

