The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhancing E-commerce Recommender System Adaptability with Online Deep
Controllable Learning-To-Rank
Anxiang Zeng 1,2 *, Han Yu 1 , Hualin He 3 *, Yabo Ni 3 , Yongliang Li 3 ,
Jingren Zhou 3 and Chunyan Miao 1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
* zeng0118@ntu.edu.sg, hualin.hhl@alibaba-inc.com, ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg
ommendation (Kunaver and Pozrl 2017). Firstly, RecomAbstract
mendation scenarios can be divided into different type (e.g.,
In the past decade, recommender systems for e-commerce
pre-, during-, post-purchase, campaign, promotion, bundle)
have witnessed significant advancement. Recently, the fowith different objectives for different user groups or differcus of research has shifted from single objective optimizaent businesses. Secondly, product recommendation during
tion to multi-objective optimization in the face of changing
online promotional campaigns with high traffic volumes ofbusiness requirements. For instance, the add-to-cart rate is
ten faces frequently changing business objectives. Moreover,
the target of optimization prior to a promotional campaign,
while conversion rates should be kept from declining. Durthe log data and feature distributions of the recommendation
ing the campaign, this changes to maximize transactions onsystem are very different from these generated under normal
ly. Immediately after the campaign, click through rates maxusage. Adapting to such changes quickly is key to the sucimization is required and transactions should be kept as daicess of promotional campaigns. Existing heavy models, such
ly level. Dynamically adapting among these short-term and
as Click through rates (CTRs) and Conversion rates (CVRs)
rapidly changing objectives is an important but difficult probpredicting models (e.g., (Cheng et al. 2016)) in rough ranklem for optimization objectives are potentially conflicted with
ing and full ranking phases, with single objective optimizaeach other. In this paper, we report our experience designtion and daily building deployment, could not address this
ing and deploying the online Deep Controllable Learning-Tobusiness challenge.
Rank (DC-LTR) recommender system to address this challenge. It enhances the feedback controller in LTR with multiAttempts were made to dynamically adapt among these
objective optimization so as to maximize different objectives
potentially conflicting optimization objectives. The entire sunder constraints. Its ability to dynamically adapt to changpace multi-task models, ESSM and ESSM2, are optimized
ing business objectives has resulted in significant business
for both click-loss and pay-loss in the entire space by means
advantages. Since September 2019, DC-LTR has become a
of multi-task learning (Ma et al. 2018; Wen et al. 2020). But
core service enabling adaptive online training and real-time
sub-models of ESSM were optimized separately with their
deployment ranking models for changing business objectives
own losses, meaning that the optimization process was still a
in AliExpress and Lazada. Under both everyday use scenarios
and peak load scenarios during large promotional campaigns,
collection of single objective optimizations. A gradient norDC-LTR has achieved significant improvements in adaptively
malization algorithm (GradNorm) for adaptive loss balancsatisfying real-world business objectives.
ing was proposed in 2018 to model the uncertainty in deep
multi-task networks (Chen et al. 2018). Though optimization process was improved for un-constraint multi-objective
Introduction
problem, it lacked the ability to handle multi-objective probAs e-commerce platforms grew larger in scale, artificial inlem with constraints. Reinforcement Learning was also tried
telligence (AI) techniques (e.g., agent and reputation modto tradeoff the CTR and CVR targets with online feedback
elling (Pan et al. 2009; Yu et al. 2010; Shen et al. 2011)) are
as the reward (Hu et al. 2018). But plenty of online exploincreasingly being applied. Personalized recommendation is
ration may cause too much uncertainty and consumption of
playing an important role. On the one hand, improving the
online resources. Recently in 2019, A multi-gradient descenrecommendation accuracy and personalization was an active
t algorithm for multi-objective recommender systems (MGarea of research, among which the wide and deep model proDRec) was proposed to achieve Pareto optimization into recposed by Google (Cheng et al. 2016), the deep interested
ommendations (Milojkovic et al. 2019; Ning and Karypis
network (Zhou et al. 2018) and the entire space multi-task
2010). Another multi-objective model-free Pareto-Efficient
models (ESSM and ESSM2) (Ma et al. 2018) proposed by
framework for Learning to Rank (PE-LTR) (Lin et al. 2019;
Alibaba have been widely adopted.
Ribeiro et al. 2014) has also achieved remarkable online perOn the other hand, recommender systems face different
formance. Unfortunately, these Pareto-based algorithms rebusiness objectives in different scenarios and stages of recquired strictly Pareto conditions or Pareto efficient conditions during optimization, making the optimized final state
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
uncontrollable. Thus, they were not suitable for applications
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
15214

