The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Sentence Simplification with Semantic Dependency Information
Zhe Lin, Xiaojun Wan
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{linzhe, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

source sentence and cannot catch the theme of the original
sentence.
Many researches in other tasks have got positive effect
by introducing semantic information into neural models. For
instance, Song et al. (Song, Zhao, and Liu 2018) combined
source syntactic structures into neural sentence summarization to help the model identify summary-worthy content and
avoid content deviation. Song et al. (2019) incorporated abstract meaning representation into machine translation models. But few attempts have been made for the task of sentence simplification yet.
In this study, we aim to investigate the use of semantic information in neural text simplification systems and we focus
on the semantic dependency graph of the source sentence.
Semantic dependency graph contains predicate-argument relations between content words in a sentence. There are various semantic dependency representation schemes based on
different annotation systems (Oepen et al. 2016). We leverage DM (DELPH-IN MRS Bi-Lexical Dependencies) graph
as an additional input to TS system because of its high consistency and accuracys. In DM graph, nodes represent words
in the sentence and edges represent semantic relationships
between words. Non-content words, such as punctuation, are
left out of the analysis.
Our model consists of three parts: sentence encoder, graph
encoder and sentence decoder. We leverage Transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) encoder as sentence encoder. We propose a new graph encoder by leveraging graph attention
(Velickovic et al. 2018), which encodes bi-directional graphs
separately. sentence decoder is based on Transformer decoder to aggregate sentence information and graph information. We evaluate our model on three benchmark datasets
and it has made a significant improvement over the SARI
and FKGL metrics on all the datasets. The results of human
evaluation also show our model can produce simplified sentences with better quality. We empirically show that semantic information can significantly improve the performance
of TS systems. As shown in Table 1, our proposed model
(i.e., SDISS) can produce a simplified sentence with better
fluency and semantic relevance.
The contributions of our work are summarized as below:
1) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore
semantic dependency information for neural sentence simplification and introduce semantic dependency graph into

Most previous works on neural sentence simplification exploit seq2seq model to rewrite a sentence without explicitly
considering the semantic information of the sentence. This
may lead to the semantic deviation of the simplified sentence. In this paper, we leverage semantic dependency graph
to aid neural sentence simplification system. We propose
a new sentence simplification model with semantic dependency information, called SDISS (as shorthand for Semantic
Dependency Information guided Sentence Simplification),
which incorporates semantic dependency graph to guide sentence simplification. We evaluate SDISS on three benchmark
datasets and it outperforms a number of strong baseline models on the SARI and FKGL metrics. Human evaluation also
shows SDISS can produce simplified sentences with better
quality.

Introduction
Sentence simplification aims to reduce the linguistic complexity of a sentence, while still preserving its salient information and meaning. Sentence simplification has many
practical applications. For instance, it can provide assistance for low-literacy reader (Watanabe et al. 2009) or for
patients with linguistic and cognitive disabilities (Carroll
et al. 1999). In addition, a simplification component could
be used to improve the performance of tasks such as parsing(Chandrasekar, Doran, and Srinivas 1996), summarization(Klebanov, Knight, and Marcu 2004) and so on.
Inspired by the success of machine translation (MT),
many text simplification (TS) systems treat sentence simplification as a monolingual translation task. Most current
TS systems based on neural machine translation employ
seq2seq models to transform a source sentence to a simplified target sentence. The common practice for Seq2seq models is to use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with Long
Short-Term Memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
or Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). However, there still
exists the problem of semantic irrelevance and deviation
from the source sentence in many case, which will reduce
the quality of simplified sentences. An example of sentence
simplification is shown in Table 1. The Transformer model
without using semantic information tends to copy the whole
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13371

