The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Purify Noisy Labels via Meta Soft Label Corrector
Yichen Wu1 , Jun Shu1 , Qi Xie1 , Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,2,3∗
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi, China
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
wuyichen.am97@gmail.com, xjtushujun@gmail.com, xq.liwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{timmy.zhaoqian,dymeng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Huang et al. 2019; Yi and Wu 2019; Sukhbaatar et al. 2014;
Vahdat 2017; Han et al. 2018), which can be coarsely categorized as sample selection and label correction approaches.
The sample selection approach tackles this challenge mainly
via adopting sample re-weighting schemes by imposing importance weights sample-wisely according to their loss values, which typically include boosting and self-paced learning methods (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010; Meng, Zhao,
and Jiang 2017; Jiang et al. 2014). Recently, some pioneering works (Ren et al. 2018; Shu et al. 2019) further make
such weighting schemes more adaptive through employing a
small set of validation data to guide the network training process. All these weighting methods aim to throw off the suspected noisy samples in the training process. However, these
discarded samples, even most are noisy ones, usually contain beneficial information that could improve the accuracy
and robustness of the network, especially in large noise-ratio
scenarios (Chang, Learned-Miller, and McCallum 2017).
The label correction approach alleviates this issue through
attempting to find and correct noisy labels to their underlying true ones. Some works (Hendrycks et al. 2018; Patrini
et al. 2017; Shu et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2019) tried to estimate
the noise transition matrix, i.e., the probabilistic mapping
from true labels to noisy ones. Then, the estimated matrix is
used to correct the corrupted samples. However, matrix size
increases at a geometric rate with an increasing number of
classes, which makes it intractable to correct noisy labels for
large scale datasets. Besides, these methods assume that the
noise is class-dependent, which is not a valid assumption for
more complex noises such as feature-related noise.
Some other works attempt to rectify the noisy labels by
exploiting the prediction of network. E.g., (Reed et al. 2015)
adopted the bootstrapping loss, which assigns a weight to
the current network prediction in the learning objective, to
compensate for the wrong guiding of corrupted samples.
Similarly, SELFIE (Song, Kim, and Lee 2019) used the coteaching strategy to select clean samples and progressively refurbish noisy labels that most frequently predicted by
previous learned models. Another typical work, Joint Optimization (Tanaka et al. 2018) used two progressive steps to
update the labels and classifier weights separately. Besides,
U-correction (Arazo et al. 2019) built a two-component Beta
Mixture Model (BMM) to estimate the probability of a sample being mislabeled and correct noisy labels by bootstrap-

Recent deep neural networks (DNNs) can easily overfit to biased training data with noisy labels. Label correction strategy is commonly used to alleviate this issue by identifying
suspected noisy labels and then correcting them. Current approaches to correcting corrupted labels usually need manually pre-defined label correction rules, which makes it hard
to apply in practice due to the large variations of such manual strategies with respect to different problems. To address
this issue, we propose a meta-learning model, aiming at attaining an automatic scheme which can estimate soft labels through meta-gradient descent step under the guidance of
a small amount of noise-free meta data. By viewing the label correction procedure as a meta-process and using a metalearner to automatically correct labels, our method can adaptively obtain rectified soft labels gradually in iteration according to current training problems. Besides, our method is
model-agnostic and can be combined with any other existing
classification models with ease to make it available to noisy
label cases. Comprehensive experiments substantiate the superiority of our method in both synthetic and real-world problems with noisy labels compared with current state-of-the-art
label correction strategies.

Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs)
on various tasks heavily relies on pre-collected largescale dataset with high-quality annotations (He et al. 2016;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). However, practical annotated training dataset always contains certain
amount of noisy (incorrect) labels, easily conducting overfitting issue and leading to the poor performance of the
trained DNNs in generalization (Zhang et al. 2016; Arpit
et al. 2017). In fact, such biased training data are commonly
encountered in practice, due to the coarse annotation sources
for collecting them, like web searches (Liu et al. 2011) and
crowd-sourcing (Welinder et al. 2010). Therefore, how to
train DNNs robustly with such biased training data is a critical issue in current machine learning field.
To address this problem, various methods have been proposed (Arazo et al. 2019; Shu et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2018;
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10388

