The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Rethinking Bi-Level Optimization in Neural Architecture Search:
A Gibbs Sampling Perspective
∗

Chao Xue1 , Xiaoxing Wang2 , Junchi Yan2 , Yonggang Hu3 , Xiaokang Yang2 , Kewei Sun1
1

IBM Research – China 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 IBM System
{xuechao,sunkewei}@cn.ibm.com, {figure1 wxx,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yhu@ca.ibm.com

Abstract
One-Shot architecture search, aiming to explore all possible
operations jointly based on a single model, has been an active
direction of Neural Architecture Search (NAS). As a wellknown one-shot solution, Differentiable Architecture Search
(DARTS) performs continuous relaxation on the architecture’s
importance and results in a bi-level optimization problem. As
many recent studies have shown, DARTS cannot always work
robustly for new tasks, which is mainly due to the approximate
solution of the bi-level optimization. In this paper, one-shot
neural architecture search is addressed by adopting a directed
probabilistic graphical model to represent the joint probability
distribution over data and model. Then, neural architectures
are searched for and optimized by Gibbs sampling. We rethink the bi-level optimization problem as the task of Gibbs
sampling from the posterior distribution, which expresses the
preferences for different models given the observed dataset.
We evaluate our proposed NAS method – GibbsNAS on the
search space used in DARTS/ENAS as well as the search space
of NAS-Bench-201. Experimental results on multiple search
space show the efficacy and stability of our approach.

Introduction
Automated design of a deep neural network for specific tasks
(often referred as NAS – network architecture search) has
attracted wide attention for its state-of-the-art performance
in different learning tasks e.g. computer vision and natural
language. A series of mechanisms are designed for NAS, such
as evolutionary based approaches (Real et al. 2017; Xie and
Yuille 2017), random search based algorithms (Bergstra and
Bengio 2012; Li, Jamieson, and DeSalvo 2017), Bayesian
optimization (Domhan, Springenberg, and Hutter 2015; Zhou
et al. 2019), reinforcement learning based methods (Zoph
and Le 2017; Baker et al. 2017) and differentiable solutions
(Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Zela et al. 2020).
To reduce the cost of the searching phase in NAS, many
works have been devised, including evaluation prediction
(Liu et al. 2018a; Baker et al. 2018), collaborative searching
(Lindauer and Hutter 2018; Xue et al. 2019), weight sharing
(Pham et al. 2018), and one-shot model (Liu, Simonyan, and
Yang 2019; Bender et al. 2018). In (Baker et al. 2018), candidate network architectures and early observed test/validation
∗

The correspondence author is Junchi Yan.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10551

accuracy are taken as inputs of an LSTM model, which
is used to predict the final accuracy of those architectures.
When multiple tasks are involved, collaborative searching by
transferring knowledge across different tasks can be adopted
to improve search efficiency, such as multi-task Bayesian
optimization (Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2013; Bardenet
et al. 2013), warm-start schemes (Lindauer and Hutter 2018;
Feurer et al. 2015), and hard decision solutions (Xue et al.
2019). On the other hand, the widely-used weight sharing
technologies like ENAS (Pham et al. 2018), RSPS (Li and
Talwalkar 2019) share weights among all child architectures
to reduce the computing from thousands of GPU days to a single one. Similarly, one-shot model trains a single model that
contains all possible operations. While differentiable architecture search (DARTS) (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019) makes
a continuous relaxation on the architecture’s importance with
an approximate solution of bi-level optimization.
Recently, evaluation of different search strategies is built
on some benchmarks (Ying et al. 2019a,b; Dong and Yang
2020) with identical search space and same settings such as
learning rate scheme, data augmentation and auxiliary network, etc. In (Yu et al. 2020), the authors evaluate different
search strategies on NAS-Bench-101 (Ying et al. 2019b),
and find that the weight sharing strategy degrades the final
test performance. Furthermore, NAS-Bench-201 (Dong and
Yang 2020) extends NAS-Bench-101 (Ying et al. 2019b),
and provides a unified benchmark for almost any up-to-date
NAS algorithms. Unfortunately, the promising differential
method, DARTS (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019), fails in
NAS-Bench-201 (Dong and Yang 2020). Some works (Zela
et al. 2020) argue that the approximation of the bi-level optimization degrades the final performance.
This paper focuses on one-shot neural architecture search,
and proposes a novel method called GibbsNAS. The contributions of the paper can be summarized as follows:
1) Uncertainty-Aware NAS by Gibbs Sampling. Unlike
previous differentiable NAS methods solving bi-level optimization problem by gradient descent, we provide a method
to calculate the posterior distribution that expresses the preferences for different models given observed dataset, and propose an uncertainty-aware approach by using Gibbs sampling from the posterior distribution, which yields competitive performance compared to existing techniques. To our
best knowledge, this is the first work to develop Gibbs sam-

