The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-driven Data Construction for Zero-shot Evaluation
in Commonsense Question Answering
Kaixin Ma1 , Filip Ilievski2 , Jonathan Francis1,3 ,
Yonatan Bisk1 , Eric Nyberg1 , Alessandro Oltramari3
1
Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
Information Sciences Institute, Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California
3
Human-Machine Collaboration, Bosch Research Pittsburgh
{kaixinm, jmf1, ybisk, ehn}@cs.cmu.edu, ilievski@isi.edu, alessando.oltramari@us.bosch.com

2

Abstract

led to leaps in accuracy—closing the gap between human
and machine performance to single-digit percentage points.1
However, due to increasing concern that large-capacity neural systems are modeling individual datasets, rather than
learning how to perform logical reasoning or to utilize external knowledge effectively (Mitra et al. 2019), focus is shifting to alternative training and evaluation strategies. In particular, zero-shot evaluation shows promise as an efficient measure of model generalisability across tasks (Shwartz et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020). Here, models are trained and validated
on task A, and tested on a different task B, without access to
B’s training data or labels. This leads state-of-the-art models from individual tasks to falter, sometimes by as much as
a 50% decrease in performance (Shwartz et al. 2020).
Repositories of commonsense knowledge, like
ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017) and
ATOMIC (Sap et al. 2019a), can be beneficial for commonsense QA, especially when little or no training data is available. Enriching the training data with ConceptNet and
ATOMIC has been shown (Ma et al. 2019; Mitra et al. 2019)
to improve accuracy on datasets derived from these graphs:
CommonSenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019) and SocialIQA.
Knowledge bases (KBs) can be used to generate questionanswer pairs and distractors automatically, in order to test a
model’s reasoning ability (Petroni et al. 2019; Richardson
and Sabharwal 2019) or provide additional supervision (Ye
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020). While KBs have been shown
to help in a zero-shot transfer setting recently (Banerjee and
Baral 2020), no comprehensive study exists on the relation
between various knowledge, its usage method, and neural
models for zero-shot transfer across commonsense tasks.
Moreover, while adversarial filtering techniques (Bras et al.
2020) improve the quality of a manually created question
set, their impact on automatically generated questions from
a variety of KBs has not been investigated yet.
In this paper, (1) we compile a set of hypotheses and design a novel neuro-symbolic framework that investigates the
dependency between knowledge sources, question generation techniques, language model (LM) variants, and tasks.
Our framework leverages a wide range of KBs, covering
visual, social, and concept-based knowledge, to pre-train

Recent developments in pre-trained neural language
modeling have led to leaps in accuracy on commonsense question-answering benchmarks. However, there
is increasing concern that models overfit to specific
tasks, without learning to utilize external knowledge or
perform general semantic reasoning. In contrast, zeroshot evaluations have shown promise as a more robust
measure of a model’s general reasoning abilities. In this
paper, we propose a novel neuro-symbolic framework
for zero-shot question answering across commonsense
tasks. Guided by a set of hypotheses, the framework
studies how to transform various pre-existing knowledge resources into a form that is most effective for pretraining models. We vary the set of language models,
training regimes, knowledge sources, and data generation strategies, and measure their impact across tasks.
Extending on prior work, we devise and compare four
constrained distractor-sampling strategies. We provide
empirical results across five commonsense questionanswering tasks with data generated from five external
knowledge resources. We show that, while an individual knowledge graph is better suited for specific tasks, a
global knowledge graph brings consistent gains across
different tasks. In addition, both preserving the structure
of the task as well as generating fair and informative
questions help language models learn more effectively.

Introduction
Common sense is key to efficient communication in everyday situations, as it enables natural language understanding through contextual reasoning. Machine question answering (QA) benchmarks, like SocialIQA (Sap et al. 2019b)
and PhysicalIQA (Bisk et al. 2020), are effective behavioral tests of commonsense reasoning in machines, each
focusing on different capabilities. Answering a question in
SocialIQA might require the knowledge that readers typically prefer heroes over villains in fantasy novels; whereas,
in PhysicalIQA, the knowledge that metal stools can
break windows, because windows are made of glass and
metal is a more enduring material than glass. Although such
tasks had been traditionally difficult for machines, recent developments in pre-trained neural language modeling have

1
For example (accessed 4 August, 2020): https://leaderboard.
allenai.org/socialiqa/submissions/public

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13507

