The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Motion-blurred Video Interpolation and Extrapolation
Dawit Mureja Argaw, Junsik Kim, Francois Rameau, In So Kweon
KAIST Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., Daejeon, Korea
dawitmureja@kaist.ac.kr, {mibastro, rameau.fr}@gmail.com, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

to the task at hand would be to cascade deblurring and interpolation methods interchangeably. With the recent progress
in motion deblurring, several deep network based single image (Nah, Kim, and Lee 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Tao et al.
2018) and video (Hyun Kim and Mu Lee 2015; Su et al.
2017; Nah, Son, and Lee 2019) deblurring approaches have
been proposed. Given a blurry video, deploying deblurring
frameworks followed by interpolation methods to predict
sharp intermediate frames is not optimal since deblurring artifacts would propagate across the interpolated frames. Similarly, interpolation followed by deblurring would result in
the propagation of interpolation artifacts caused by imprecise optical flow (motion kernel) predictions.
Recent video restoration works (Jin, Meishvili, and
Favaro 2018; Purohit, Shah, and Rajagopalan 2019) attempted to extract multiple clean frames from a single
motion-blurred image. Applying these works for blurry
video interpolation (and extrapolation) by successively feeding blurry inputs, however, is problematic due to temporal
ambiguity. A closely related work by Jin et al. (Jin, Hu, and
Favaro 2019) jointly optimized deblurring and interpolation
networks to predict clean frames from four blurry inputs. A
concurrent work by Shen et al. (Shen et al. 2020) proposed
an interpolation module that outputs a single sharp frame
from two blurry inputs. More frames are generated by applying the interpolation module on the predicted sharp frames
in a recurrent manner.
In this work, we propose a novel framework to interpolate and extrapolate multiple sharp frames from two blurry
inputs. Inspired by the fact that motion-blurred image is a
temporal aggregation of several latent frames during the exposure time of a camera, we exploit the input blurs as motion cues that can be leveraged to better infer and account
for inter-frame motion. This is achieved by decoding latent
frame features via optical flow estimation. We also design a
flow-based rule to address temporal ambiguity and predict
frames by warping the decoded features with the estimated
flows. Unlike previous works (Jin, Hu, and Favaro 2019;
Shen et al. 2020) that implicitly follow a deblurring → interpolation pipeline to predict intermediate frames between the
deblurred middle latent frames, we adopt a motion-based approach to interpolate and extrapolate the entire latent frame
sequence directly from given inputs in a temporally coherent
manner.

Abrupt motion of camera or objects in a scene result in a
blurry video, and therefore recovering high quality video requires two types of enhancements: visual enhancement and
temporal upsampling. A broad range of research attempted to
recover clean frames from blurred image sequences or temporally upsample frames by interpolation, yet there are very
limited studies handling both problems jointly. In this work,
we present a novel framework for deblurring, interpolating
and extrapolating sharp frames from a motion-blurred video
in an end-to-end manner. We design our framework by first
learning the pixel-level motion that caused the blur from the
given inputs via optical flow estimation and then predict multiple clean frames by warping the decoded features with the
estimated flows. To ensure temporal coherence across predicted frames and address potential temporal ambiguity, we
propose a simple, yet effective flow-based rule. The effectiveness and favorability of our approach are highlighted through
extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations on motionblurred datasets from high speed videos.

Introduction
Video frame interpolation aims at predicting one or more intermediate frames from given input frames for high framerate conversion. Existing frame interpolation approaches can
be broadly categorized into flow-based (Mahajan et al. 2009;
Zitnick et al. 2004; Liu et al. 2017), kernel-based (Niklaus,
Mai, and Liu 2017b,a; Lee et al. 2020) and a fusion of
the two (Bao et al. 2019b,a). Intermediate frames are interpolated either by directly warping the input frames with
estimated optical flows (motion kernels) or using a trainable frame synthesis network. Extending these approaches
for motion-blurred videos, however, is not a trivial process.
Blurry video is a result of abrupt motions and long exposure time. As a result, contents in the video are degraded by
motion blur and the gap between frames is relatively large
compared to normal videos. This makes the computation of
optical flow or motion kernel very challenging resulting in a
subpar network performance (see Table 1).
There have been limited studies on joint deblurring and
interpolation of a motion-blurred video. A naı̈ve approach
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

901

