The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Localization in the Crowd with Topological Constraints
Shahira Abousamra1 , Minh Hoai1 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Chao Chen2
1

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, USA
{sabousamra, minhhoai, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu, chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu
2

Abstract

These dots only provide limited information. A dot can be
arbitrarily perturbed as long as it is within the target instance, which can be of very different scales. As a consequence, the dot features are not specific. Without sufficient supervision, we cannot decide the boundary between
instances. Thus, it is very hard to prevent spatial semantic
errors, i.e., predicting multiple dots within a same person
(false positives) or collapsing the dots of multiple persons in
a cluttered area (false negatives).

We address the problem of crowd localization, i.e., the prediction of dots corresponding to people in a crowded scene.
Due to various challenges, a localization method is prone to
spatial semantic errors, i.e., predicting multiple dots within a
same person or collapsing multiple dots in a cluttered region.
We propose a topological approach targeting these semantic
errors. We introduce a topological constraint that teaches the
model to reason about the spatial arrangement of dots. To enforce this constraint, we define a persistence loss based on the
theory of persistent homology. The loss compares the topographic landscape of the likelihood map and the topology of
the ground truth. Topological reasoning improves the quality
of the localization algorithm especially near cluttered regions.
On multiple public benchmarks, our method outperforms previous localization methods. Additionally, we demonstrate the
potential of our method in improving the performance in the
crowd counting task.

In this paper, we propose a novel topological approach for
the localization problem. We treat the problem as predicting a binary mask, called the Topological Map (Fig. 1(b)),
whose connected components one-to-one correspond to the
target dots. The number of components in the predicted
mask should be the same as the number of ground truth dots.
This spatial semantic constraint is indeed topological. During training we enforce such a “topological constraint” locally, i.e., the topology should be correct within each randomly sampled patch. The topological constraint teaches
the model to reason about spatial arrangement of dots and
avoids incorrect phantom dots and collapsing dots. This significantly improves the localization method quality, especially near dense regions. See Fig. 1(b), (c) and (d).

Introduction
Localization of people or objects, i.e., identifying the location of each instance, in a crowded scene is an important
problem for many fields. Localization of people, animals,
or biological cells provides detailed spatial information that
can be crucial in journalism (McPhail and McCarthy 2004),
ecology (Elphick 2008) or cancer research (Barua et al.
2018). A high quality localization algorithm naturally solves
the popular crowd counting problem, i.e., counting the number of people in a crowded scene (Idrees et al. 2018). Furthermore, the rich spatial pattern can be used in many other
tasks, e.g., initialization of tracking algorithms (Ren et al.
2018), animal population studies (Elphick 2008), tumor microenvironment analyses (Aukerman et al. 2020), and monitoring of social distancing (Yang et al. 2020).
Despite many proposed methods (Zhao, Nevatia, and Wu
2008; Ge and Collins 2009; Liu, Weng, and Mu 2019; Babu
Sam et al. 2020), localization remains a challenging task.
Aside from fundamental challenges of a crowded scene such
as perspective, occlusion, and cluttering, one key issue is the
limitation of annotation. Due to the large number of target
instances, the ground truth annotation is usually provided
in the form of dots located inside the instances (Fig. 1(a)).

To enforce the topological constraint, we introduce a
novel loss, called persistence loss, based on the theory of
persistent homology (Edelsbrunner and Harer 2010). Instead of directly computing the topology of the predicted
binary mask, we inspect the underlying likelihood map, i.e.,
the sigmoid layer output of the neural network. The persistent homology algorithm captures the topographic landscape features of the likelihood map, namely, modes and
their saliency. Our persistence loss compares these modes
and the true topology. Within a sample patch, if there are k
true dots, the persistence loss promotes the saliency of the
top k modes and penalizes the saliency of the remaining
modes. This way it ensures that there are exactly k modes
in the likelihood landscape, all of which are salient. A 0.5thresholding of such a topologically correct likelihood map
gives a binary mask with exactly k components, as desired.
We evaluate our method on various benchmarks and show
that our proposed method, TopoCount, outperforms previous

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

872

