The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Heterogeneous Multi-Relational Recommendation
Chong Chen 1 , Weizhi Ma 1 , Min Zhang 1 * , Zhaowei Wang 2 , Xiuqiang He 2 , Chenyang Wang 1 ,
Yiqun Liu1 and Shaoping Ma
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
cc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, z-m@tsinghua.edu.cn

𝒊𝟏

𝒊𝟐

𝒊𝟑

𝒊𝟒

Abstract
Traditional studies on recommender systems usually leverage only one type of user behaviors (the optimization target,
such as purchase), despite the fact that users also generate a
large number of various types of interaction data (e.g., view,
click, add-to-cart, etc). Generally, these heterogeneous multirelational data provide well-structured information and can
be used for high-quality recommendation. Early efforts towards leveraging these heterogeneous data fail to capture the
high-hop structure of user-item interactions, which are unable
to make full use of them and may only achieve constrained
recommendation performance. In this work, we propose a
new multi-relational recommendation model named Graph
Heterogeneous Collaborative Filtering (GHCF). To explore
the high-hop heterogeneous user-item interactions, we take
the advantages of Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and
further improve it to jointly embed both representations of
nodes (users and items) and relations for multi-relational prediction. Moreover, to fully utilize the whole heterogeneous
data, we perform the advanced efficient non-sampling optimization under a multi-task learning framework. Experimental results on two public benchmarks show that GHCF significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art recommendation
methods, especially for cold-start users who have few primary
item interactions. Further analysis verifies the importance of
the proposed embedding propagation for modelling high-hop
heterogeneous user-item interactions, showing the rationality
and effectiveness of GHCF. Our implementation has been released (https://github.com/chenchongthu/GHCF).

Purchase
View
View

View

Add-to-cart

View
View

View

Rating
Purchase

𝒖𝟏

𝒖𝟐

𝒖𝟑

Figure 1: An example of multiple types of user feedback.
High-hop connectivity contains rich semantic features that
carry collaborative signals. E.g., the 3-hop heterogeneous
view
view
connections between u1 and i4 contain u1 → i3 ←
purcahse
rating
cart
view
u2 → i4 , u1 → i3 ← u2 → i4 , etc.

Recommender systems have been widely deployed in today’s web platforms and applications, serving as important
tools to alleviate the information overload issue and improve user experience (Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2011;
Chen et al. 2018). To provide more accurate recommendations, it is a trending topic to take more user preference related information into account (Chen et al. 2019a, 2020b).
In real-world information systems, although the systems often choose “click” or “purchase” as the optimization target,
there are also various types of user behaviors, such as view,

add-to-cart, etc. Figure 1 shows an example of heterogeneous user behaviors in E-commerce scenarios. Users can
view an item, add an item to shopping cart, and purchase an
item, etc. These heterogeneous behaviors provide valuable
signals of user preference, which are helpful for building
a fine-grained recommender system (Gao et al. 2019; Pan,
Liu, and Ming 2016; Chen et al. 2020d; Krohn-Grimberghe
et al. 2012).
To leverage these heterogeneous feedback data, several
efforts on multi-relational recommender systems have been
made, showing the superior performance in terms of learning user preference (Ding et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2020d). However, summarizing existing multirelational recommendation methods, a common drawback
can be found: these methods follow the typical Collaborative Filtering (CF) learning scheme, which lacks an explicit
encoding of the high-hop graph structure of user-item heterogeneous interactions. As shown in Figure 1, high-hop
connectivity also contains rich semantics that carry collaborative signals. For example, u1 and i4 have several 3-hop

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding author.

heterogeneous connections (e.g.,u1 → i3 ← u2 →
i4 ). This suggests that u1 is likely to adopt i4 , since his
similar user u2 has viewed, purchased, and rated i4 before.

Introduction

view

3958

view

purcahse

