The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-Party Campaigning
Martin Koutecký,1 Nimrod Talmon2
1

Computer Science Institute, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
2
Ben-Gurion Univesity, Be’er Sheva, Israel
koutecky@iuuk.mff.cuni.cz, talmonn@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

ion diffusion step (Faliszewski et al. 2018)) by evaluating
the resulting election with respect to the agent’s initial goal.
Here we study a very rich and realistic model, in which
several competing agents, each agent with its own objective, alter the election in multiple rounds, responding to each
other’s actions. In particular, our model captures the setting of multi-party campaigning, in which several parties
are campaigning over the same election. In the most basic
model we consider k bribers operating on an election with
m alternatives and n voters. There is a process, running for `
turns, in which, in each turn, each briber can change certain
votes of their choice, respecting some budget limit. At the
end of the process, a winner of the resulting election is chosen according to some voting rule R. Our goal is to compute
optimal bribery strategies for each agent.
To this end, we construct a Presburger arithmetic formula
(for background see a recent guide (Haase 2018)) that is true
if and only if a given agent has a winning strategy which respects the budget; indeed, there is a procedure to recover
this strategy if it exists. Furthermore, by ensuring that this
formula is short and contains only small coefficients, we are
able to compute such optimal strategies efficiently; this follows by combining a careful analysis of the algorithm of
Cooper (1972) for deciding Presburger arithmetic formulas together with algorithms for convex integer optimization
in small dimension (Grötschel, Lovász, and Schrijver 1993;
Dadush, Peikert, and Vempala 2011).
Our contribution here is a complexity analysis of deciding Presburger arithmetic formulas, taking into account multiple parameters, showing that only some of them undergo
a (necessary) combinatorial explosion. In particular, we infer that deciding Presburger arithmetic and even optimizing
a convex function over its satisfying assignments is fixedparameter tractable parameterized the length of the given
formula and its largest coefficient. A problem Π is fixedparameter tractable (FPT) parameterized by k if it has an
algorithm running in time f (k) poly(n) for any instance of
size n. Classifying a problem as FPT gives a formal way
of saying that a special class of instances (those with small
values of the parameter k) are easy to solve for a problem
which is hard in general.
In essence, Presburger arithmetic contains logical formulas over linear constraints (this stands in contrast with Peano
arithmetic, which also permits multiplication of variables).

We study a social choice setting of manipulation in elections and extend the usual model in two major ways: first,
instead of considering a single manipulating agent, in our
setting there are several, possibly competing ones; second,
instead of evaluating an election after the first manipulative
action, we allow several back-and-forth rounds to take place.
We show that in certain situations, such as in elections with
only a few candidates, optimal strategies for each of the manipulating agents can be computed efficiently. Our algorithmic results rely on formulating the problem of finding an optimal strategy as sentences of Presburger arithmetic that are
short and only involve small coefficients, which we show is
fixed-parameter tractable – indeed, one of our contributions
is a general result regarding fixed-parameter tractability of
Presburger arithmetic that might be useful in other settings.
Following our general theorem, we design quite general algorithms; in particular, we describe how to design efficient
algorithms for various settings, including settings in which
we model diffusion of opinions in a social network, complex
budgeting schemes available to the manipulating agents, and
various realistic restrictions on adversary actions.

Introduction
Within computational social choice, the study of external
agents wishing to rig a given election has received extensive study, most notably by studying problems of election control and bribery in elections (Faliszewski and Rothe
2015): In these problems, an external agent aims at altering the result of a given election; in election control, such
an agent can change the structure of the election, usually by
adding/removing voters/candidates, while in bribery problems, such an agent can change the way certain voters vote.
Existing literature concentrates only on cases in which
just one external agent (e.g., one briber) exists (Faliszewski,
Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2009). Some papers take
a more game-theoretic approach, but from a cooperative perspective (Bachrach, Elkind, and Faliszewski 2011), while
we are concerned with a non-cooperative perspective. Furthermore, all existing work (to the best of our knowledge)
only deals with one action of bribery or control which is followed (immediately, or potentially with an additional opinCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5506

