The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Training Binary Neural Network without Batch Normalization for Image
Super-Resolution
Xinrui Jiang1 , Nannan Wang1∗ , Jingwei Xin2 , Keyu Li1 , Xi Yang1 , Xinbo Gao3
1

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
xrjiang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {nnwang,yangx}@xidian.edu.cn, {jwxintt, likeyuchn}@gmail.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract

land. Motivated by this, one major trend of SR research is
increasing convolution layers to improve performance(Lim
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018b,a). Although these models receive excellent performance, they all require large amounts
of computational sources, which severely restrict their applications in the real world. Therefore, there have been imperative demands for light-weight and efficient CNNs for
real-world applications. To achieve this, many researchers
begin to explore the fewer parameters and less computational complexity model architecture to improve the effectiveness of networks, such as recursive learning and parameters sharing (DRRN (Tai, Yang, and Liu 2017) and DRCN
(Kim, Kwon Lee, and Mu Lee 2016b)), squeeze operation
(e.g., IDMN (Hui et al. 2019) and ESRN (Song et al. 2020)),
group convolution (e.g., CARN-M (Ahn, Kang, and Sohn
2018)) and wavelet domain (Xin et al. 2020a). Nevertheless,
these approaches heavily rely on high-performance hardware such as GPU, which are still a huge burden for smaller
devices like cell phones.
As a method to significantly reduce the model size and
inferring time, model quantization recently has been introduced into SR field and has achieved initial success in BNNbased SR field. The binary neural network (BNN), where the
full-precision floating-point weights and activations are replaced with 1-bit representations, enjoys 32× memory compression ratio and 58× speed up on CPUs (Rastegari et al.
2016). Benefiting from it, Xin et al. (Xin et al. 2020c) first
explored a complete binary SR network, which utilizes a bitaccumulation mechanism (BAM) to approximate the fullprecision convolution.
For a binary network, the input activations and weights
can only choose two large-scale values {−1, +1}, exploding
feature map values and making it hard to learn a good feature
distribution. To alleviate this problem, following the BNNbased image classification methods, BAM also adopts batch
normalization (BN) operations to improve the representation
ability of feature maps. By re-centering the input distribution, the network could mitigate the effects of the quantization process and advance performance. However, BN introduces full-precision floating-point calculations and is un-

Recently, binary neural network (BNN) based superresolution (SR) methods have enjoyed initial success in the
SR field. However, there is a noticeable performance gap between the binarized model and the full-precision one. Furthermore, the batch normalization (BN) in binary SR networks
introduces floating-point calculations, which is unfriendly to
low-precision hardwares. Therefore, there is still room for improvement in terms of model performance and efficiency. Focusing on this issue, in this paper, we first explore a novel
binary training mechanism based on the feature distribution,
allowing us to replace all BN layers with a simple training method. Then, we construct a strong baseline by combining the highlights of recent binarization methods, which
already surpasses the state-of-the-arts. Next, to train highly
accurate binarized SR model, we also develop a lightweight
network architecture and a multi-stage knowledge distillation
strategy to enhance the model representation ability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method not
only presents advantages of lower computation as compared
to conventional floating-point networks but outperforms the
state-of-the-art binary methods on the standard SR networks.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR), which aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from its degraded lowresolution (LR) version, has gained increasing research attention for decades. It enjoys various applications ranging
from medical imaging (Greenspan 2008) to security and
surveillance imaging (Rasti et al. 2016; Xin et al. 2020b). In
general, image super-resolution is an ill-posed problem due
to the one-to-many mapping. To address this inverse problem, various deep learning-based methods have been proposed and achieved significant success.
With the development of deep neural networks, ”Bigger is better” becomes the ruling maxim in deep learning
∗
Corresponding
author:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1700

