The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Capturing Uncertainty in Unsupervised GPS Trajectory Segmentation
Using Bayesian Deep Learning
Christos Markos,1,2 James J.Q. Yu,1 Richard Yi Da Xu2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
11760007@mail.sustech.edu.cn, yujq3@sustech.edu.cn, yida.xu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Intelligent transportation management requires not only
statistical information on users’ mobility patterns, but
also knowledge of their corresponding transportation
modes. While GPS trajectories can be readily obtained
from GPS sensors found in modern smartphones and
vehicles, these massive geospatial data are neither automatically annotated nor segmented by transportation
mode, subsequently complicating transportation mode
identification. In addition, predictive uncertainty caused
by the learned model parameters or variable noise in
GPS sensor readings typically remains unaccounted
for. To jointly address the above issues, we propose
a Bayesian deep learning framework for unsupervised
GPS trajectory segmentation. After unlabeled GPS trajectories are preprocessed into sequences of motion
features, they are used in unsupervised training of a
channel-calibrated temporal convolutional neural network for timestep-level transportation mode identification. At test time, we approximate variational inference via Monte Carlo dropout sampling, leveraging the
mean and variance of the predicted distributions to classify each input timestep and estimate its predictive uncertainty, respectively. The proposed approach outperforms both its non-Bayesian variant and established
GPS trajectory segmentation baselines on Microsoft’s
Geolife dataset without using any labels.

Figure 1: GPS trajectory segmentation aims to extract
single-transportation-mode segments from sequences of
GPS points.

mode labels available during data preprocessing. In reality,
however, the tremendous amounts of GPS data that are generated daily are not automatically segmented or even annotated by transportation mode.
Following a naive approach to trajectory segmentation,
one could simply extract consecutive nonoverlapping trajectory segments of uniform length (Dabiri and Heaslip 2018).
In doing so, however, there could be multiple transportation
modes in many of the obtained segments. Even by mapping these segments to their dominant transportation mode,
one would be introducing unnecessary noise to the data, potentially impacting the performance of transportation mode
classifiers. In this direction, the literature has sought to detect transportation mode change points within GPS trajectories by leveraging sliding window approaches (Stenneth
et al. 2011; Bolbol et al. 2012), mobility-based heuristics
(Zheng et al. 2008b; Xiao, Juan, and Zhang 2015), and
more recently, optimization-based algorithms (Dabiri et al.
2020). However, such approaches often exhibit poor scalability, require extensive feature engineering or transportation
domain knowledge, and assume independent and identically
distributed samples, respectively.
In this work, we argue that a truly comprehensive approach to GPS trajectory segmentation would need to address the following issues tied to the transportation domain:

Introduction
Citywide knowledge of users’ mobility patterns and associated transportation modes is crucial for intelligent transportation management and infrastructure design. How to infer transportation modes from segments of Global Positioning System (GPS) trajectories has been studied extensively
in recent years (Zheng et al. 2008b; Stenneth et al. 2011;
Xiao, Juan, and Zhang 2015; Zhang et al. 2019; Dabiri
et al. 2020; Yu 2020). Yet the real-world applicability of
most such methods is limited by their simplifying assumption that single-transportation-mode segments would somehow be available to begin with. The challenging problem
of trajectory segmentation (Fig. 1), or how to split GPS
trajectories into segments involving exactly one transportation mode, is often avoided by leveraging the transportation

1. Semantic trajectory segmentation. Given the limitations of existing methods, as mentioned above, we consider deep semantic segmentation as a promising alternative. Commonly encountered in computer vision appli-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

390

