The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MIMOSA: Multi-constraint Molecule Sampling for Molecule Optimization
Tianfan Fu,1 Cao Xiao,2 Xinhao Li,3 Lucas Glass,2,4 Jimeng Sun4
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Analytics Center of Excellence, IQVIA
3
Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University
4
Department of Statistics, Temple University
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Abstract

Existing works on molecule optimization and molecule
generation tasks can be categorized as generative models (Kusner, Paige, and Hernández-Lobato 2017; Dai et al.
2018; Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018) and reinforcement
learning (RL) methods (You et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019).
Most existing works only optimize a single property, while
multiple properties need to be optimized in order to develop viable drug candidates. Recently, (Jin, Barzilay, and
Jaakkola 2020b) proposed a molecule generation algorithm
that can optimize multiple properties which is a related but
different task than molecule optimization since they do not
take any specific input molecule as the anchor. Nigam et al.
(2020) proposed a genetic algorithm (GA) for molecule generation and optimization. In this work, we propose a sampling based strategy to tackle the molecule optimization for
multi-properties.
To allow for flexible and efficient molecule optimization
on multiple properties, we propose a new sampling based
molecule optimization framework named MultI-constraint
MOlecule SAmpling (MIMOSA). MIMOSA uses the input
molecule as an initial guess and pretrains two graph neural
networks (GNNs) on molecule topology and substructuretype predictions to produce better molecule embedding for
sampling, where substructure can be either an atom or a ring.
In each iteration, MIMOSA uses the prediction and employs
three basic substructure operations (add, replace, delete) to
generate new molecule candidates and associated weights.
The weights thus effectively encode multiple constraints including similarity to the input molecule and various drug
properties, upon which we accept promising molecules for
next iteration sampling. MIMOSA iteratively produces new
molecule candidates and can efficiently draw molecules that
satisfy all constraints. The main contributions of our paper
are listed below.

Molecule optimization is a fundamental task for accelerating drug discovery, with the goal of generating new valid
molecules that maximize multiple drug properties while
maintaining similarity to the input molecule. Existing generative models and reinforcement learning approaches made
initial success, but still face difficulties in simultaneously
optimizing multiple drug properties. To address such challenges, we propose the MultI-constraint MOlecule SAmpling (MIMOSA) approach, a sampling framework to use input molecule as an initial guess and sample molecules from
the target distribution. MIMOSA first pretrains two propertyagnostic graph neural networks (GNNs) for molecule topology and substructure-type prediction, where a substructure
can be either atom or single ring. For each iteration, MIMOSA
uses the GNNs’ prediction and employs three basic substructure operations (add, replace, delete) to generate new
molecules and associated weights. The weights can encode
multiple constraints including similarity and drug property
constraints, upon which we select promising molecules for
next iteration. MIMOSA enables flexible encoding of multiple
property- and similarity-constraints and can efficiently generate new molecules that satisfy various property constraints
and achieved up to 49.1% relative improvement over the best
baseline in terms of success rate.

1

Introduction

Designing molecules with desirable properties is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Traditional methods such
as high throughput screening (HTS) tests large compound
libraries to identify molecules with desirable properties,
which are inefficient and costly (Polishchuk, Madzhidov,
and Varnek 2013; Huang et al. 2020a,b). Two important machine learning tasks have been studied in this context:
• Molecule generation aims at creating new and diverse
molecule graphs with some desirable properties (Jin,
Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018; You et al. 2018);

• A new sampling framework for flexible encoding of multiple constraints. We reformulate molecule optimization
task in a sampling framework to draw molecules from the
target distribution (Eq. (1)). The framework provides flexible and efficient encoding of multi-property and similarity constraints as a target distribution (Section 3.1).

• Molecule optimization takes a more targeted approach
to find molecule Y with improved drug properties such
as drug likeness and biological activity given an input
molecule X (Jin et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2019).

• Efficient sampling augmented by GNN pretraining. With
the help of two pretrained GNN models, we designed
a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based molecule

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

125

