The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Smooth Convex Optimization Using Sub-Zeroth-Order Oracles
Mustafa O. Karabag, Cyrus Neary, Ufuk Topcu
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
{karabag, cneary, utopcu}@utexas.edu

Abstract

We consider the problem of minimizing a smooth, Lipschitz continuous, convex function f on a convex, compact domain C ⊂ Rn using sub-zeroth-order oracles: i) the
directional-preference oracle that outputs the sign of the directional derivative for a given point and direction, ii) the
comparator oracle that compares the function value for two
given points, and iii) the noisy-value oracle that outputs the
function value plus a subgaussian noise.
For the directional-preference and comparator oracles, we
prove an upper bound on the sample complexity that is polynomial in the relevant parameters. Our algorithms take advantage of the convexity and smoothness of the objective
function, and rely on gradient estimation. We show that the
direction of the gradient can be estimated with high accuracy via the sub-zeroth-order oracles. Having estimated the
direction of the gradient, we use a variant of the ellipsoid
method (Shor 1972; Yudin and Nemirovskii 1976). We show
that the sample complexity is Õ(n4 ) for the directionalpreference and comparator oracles. To the best of our knowledge, the optimization algorithm that we provide for the
comparator oracle is the first algorithm with a known polynomial rate of convergence for smooth, convex functions.
We also develop a sublinear regret algorithm for the
noisy-value oracle. The algorithm incurs Õ(n3.75 T 0.75 )
regret (ignoring the other factors) with high probability where T is the number of queries. The best known
high probability
regret bound for the noisy-value oracle is
√
Õ(n9.5 T ) (Bubeck, Lee, and Eldan 2017). While our algorithm requires smoothness, and its regret is not optimal in
terms of the dependency on the number of queries, its lower
order dependency on the number of dimensions makes it appealing compared to this existing regret bound.

We consider the problem of minimizing a smooth, Lipschitz,
convex function over a compact, convex set using sub-zerothorder oracles: an oracle that outputs the sign of the directional
derivative for a given point and a given direction, an oracle
that compares the function values for a given pair of points,
and an oracle that outputs a noisy function value for a given
point. We show that the sample complexity of optimization
using these oracles is polynomial in the relevant parameters.
The optimization algorithm that we provide for the comparator oracle is the first algorithm with a known rate of convergence that is polynomial in the number of dimensions. We
also give an algorithm for the noisy-value oracle that incurs
sublinear regret in the number of queries and polynomial regret in the number of dimensions.

Introduction
Derivative-free optimization methods are necessary when
explicit access to the objective function is not available, or
when the function’s gradient is hard to compute (Conn,
Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009). Utility functions, a concept
from economics, provide an example of a type of objective
function which may be hard to explicitly characterize. However, while a consumer may not be able to quantify their utility for a given prospect, they will likely be able to rank the
available prospects. From a human’s perspective, ranking
the prospects may be simple, even if it is difficult to directly
assign them values (Abbas and Howard 2015). For example,
consider a reinforcement learning scenario in which a robot
learns to perform a task via human feedback. The human
may not be able to assign explicit rewards to the demonstrations performed by the robot, but she can rank them (Akrour,
Schoenauer, and Sebag 2012; Fürnkranz et al. 2012; Wilson, Fern, and Tadepalli 2012). While necessary in a range
of applications (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009; Audet and Hare 2017), derivative-free optimization methods
are usually inferior in theory compared to first-order optimization methods (Conn, Scheinberg, and Vicente 2009).
In this work, we leverage the smoothness and convexity of
the objective function to provide theoretical guarantees for
derivative-free optimization.

Related Work The bisection method (Burden and Faires
1985) uses the directional-preference oracle to optimize a
one-dimensional function. In multiple dimensions, Qian et
al. (2015) used the directional-preference oracle to optimize
a linear function. Their algorithm uses a predefined set of
query directions, whereas we consider a setting where the
algorithm is allowed to query any direction at any point.
SignSGD (Bernstein et al. 2018) requires the sign of directional derivatives only for fixed orthogonal basis vectors
and converges to the optimum for smooth, convex functions.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3815

