The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Iterative Bounding MDPs:
Learning Interpretable Policies via Non-Interpretable Methods
Nicholay Topin, Stephanie Milani, Fei Fang, Manuela Veloso
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{ntopin, smilani, feif, veloso}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Current work in explainable reinforcement learning generally produces policies in the form of a decision tree over the
state space. Such policies can be used for formal safety verification, agent behavior prediction, and manual inspection of
important features. However, existing approaches fit a decision tree after training or use a custom learning procedure
which is not compatible with new learning techniques, such
as those which use neural networks. To address this limitation, we propose a novel Markov Decision Process (MDP)
type for learning decision tree policies: Iterative Bounding
MDPs (IBMDPs). An IBMDP is constructed around a base
MDP so each IBMDP policy is guaranteed to correspond to a
decision tree policy for the base MDP when using a methodagnostic masking procedure. Because of this decision tree
equivalence, any function approximator can be used during
training, including a neural network, while yielding a decision tree policy for the base MDP. We present the required
masking procedure as well as a modified value update step
which allows IBMDPs to be solved using existing algorithms.
We apply this procedure to produce IBMDP variants of recent reinforcement learning methods. We empirically show
the benefits of our approach by solving IBMDPs to produce
decision tree policies for the base MDPs.

1

Figure 1: Method overview: we wrap a base MDP to form
an IBMDP and solve using a modified RL algorithm. The
solution is a decision tree policy for the base environment.

as DTs. In contrast, some traditional RL algorithms, such as
UTree (McCallum 1997), produce DT policies but use specific internal representations that cannot be replaced with a
deep neural network. An alternative approach is to approximate a DRL policy with a DT, but the resulting policy can
be arbitrarily worse than the original one, and the DT can be
large due to unnecessary intricacies in the original policy.
To address the limitations of these techniques, we propose to solve a meta-problem using RL such that the solution corresponds to a DT-format policy for the original problem. We introduce CUSTARD (Constrain Underlying Solution to a Tree; Apply RL to Domain), a process that uses RL
to solve the meta-problem while ensuring that the embedded solution is equivalent to a DT-format policy throughout
training (overview in Figure 1). We propose a novel Markov
Decision Process (MDP) formulation for the meta-problem:
Iterative Bounding MDPs. We present a general procedure
to make RL techniques compatible with CUSTARD. CUSTARD allows modern DRL techniques to be applied to the
meta-problem, since the learned policy weights can be fully
replaced by an equivalent DT. Thus, CUSTARD maintains
the interpretability advantage of a DT policy while using
a non-interpretable function approximator during training.
Additionally, CUSTARD ensures that the DT is an exact representation of the learned behavior, not an approximation.
The main contributions of this work are: (1) we introduce a novel MDP representation (IBMDPs) for learning a
DT policy for a base MDP; (2) beginning with a two-agent
UTree-like algorithm, we present an equivalent single-agent

Introduction

The incorporation of deep neural networks into reinforcement learning (RL) has broadened the set of problems
solvable with RL. Though these techniques yield highperforming agents, the policies are encoded using thousands
to millions of parameters, and the parameters interact in
complex, non-linear ways. As a result, directly inspecting
and verifying the resulting policies is difficult. Without a
mechanism for a human operator to readily inspect the resulting policy, we cannot deploy deep RL (DRL) in environments with strict regulatory or safety constraints.
Decision trees (DTs) (Quinlan 1986) are an interpretable
model family commonly used to represent policies. Some
benefits of DTs include that they allow formal verification of policy behavior (Bastani, Pu, and Solar-Lezama
2018), counterfactual analysis (Sokol and Flach 2019), and
identification of relevant features. However, DRL techniques are not directly compatible with policies expressed
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9923

