The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towered Actor Critic For Handling Multiple Action Types In Reinforcement
Learning For Drug Discovery
Sai Krishna Gottipati1 , Yashaswi Pathak2 , Boris Sattarov1 , Sahir3 , Rohan Nuttall3 , Mohammad
Amini1 , Matthew E. Taylor3,4,6 , Sarath Chandar5,6,7
2

1
99andBeyond
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
3
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
4
Alberta Machine Intelligence institute (Amii)
5
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
6
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
7
Ecole Polytechnique Montréal

saikrishnagv1996@gmail.com
Abstract

space. However, several complex and crucial applications in
the real world, like reaction-based molecule generation (as
part of the drug discovery pipeline) (Gottipati et al. 2020b),
symbolic regression (Udrescu and Tegmark 2020) need to
accommodate multiple action types (uni-molecular templates
and bi-molecular templates in the case of molecule generation). For bi-molecular templates, one needs to further choose
a molecule (i.e, reactant) selection action corresponding to
the template selection action. Existing RL algorithms do
not implicitly exploit such multiple action types and their
hierarchical structure. While hierarchical actor critic (Levy,
Platt, and Saenko 2019; Röder et al. 2020) or option critic
(Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2016) deal with breaking action
sequences over long time horizons into clear spatial or temporal sub-goals, they do not necessarily deal with having
to choose between multiple action types at every time step.
To achieve this, we remodel the critic to process multiple
action types and combine them at an intermediate level to
predict a hypothetical next state. It is then followed by another neural network to compute the value function V (s0 ) of
that hypothetical next state. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed approach of a “towered” actor-critic (TAC) is
the only algorithm that handles multiple action types in this
manner.
Many successful and exciting applications of deep neural
networks and RL have been reported over the last decade in
the field of de novo molecule generation. These generative
systems were found to be extremely efficient in optimizing structures of molecules to fit a desired properties profile
such as drug-likeness, predicted activity against biological
targets, lipophilicity, etc. (Gómez-Bombarelli et al. 2018;
You et al. 2018b; Olivecrona et al. 2017; Segler et al. 2017;
Popova, Isayev, and Tropsha 2018). However, only a few
recent publications have identified and proposed solutions to
the long standing challenge of embedding synthetic accessibility into the molecule generation framework. Some of them
reported use of RL to tackle this problem (Gottipati et al.

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant progress
in both abstract and real-world domains, but the majority of
state-of-the-art algorithms deal only with monotonic actions.
However, some applications require agents to reason over
different types of actions. Our application simulates reactionbased molecule generation, used as part of the drug discovery
pipeline, and includes both uni-molecular and bi-molecular
reactions. This paper introduces a novel framework, towered
actor critic (TAC), to handle multiple action types. The TAC
framework is general in that it is designed to be combined with
any existing RL algorithms for continuous action space. We
combine it with TD3 to empirically obtain significantly better
results than existing methods in the drug discovery setting.
TAC is also applied to RL benchmarks in OpenAI Gym and
results show that our framework can improve, or at least does
not hurt, performance relative to standard TD3.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has pushed the frontiers of
various domains such as robotics (OpenAI et al. 2019; Kahn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2020), game playing agents (Silver et al.
2017; Anthony, Tian, and Barber 2017), and economics
(Zheng et al. 2020). RL is a core problem of artificial intelligence where an agent is situated in an environment and
must learn to adapt its policy to maximize a reward signal. At
each time step t, the agent interacts with an MDP described
by the tuple M = (S, A, P, r), where S is the state space,
A is the action space, P is the state transition function, and
r is the reward function. The agent observes a state s ∈ S,
chooses an action a ∈ A according to its policy π : S →
A, and then receives a reward and next state s0 ∈ S from
the environment. Most of the existing RL algorithms are focused on choosing “monotonic” actions i.e, the action space
is restricted to A ∈ Rm , where m is the dimension of action
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

142

