The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph-Evolving Meta-Learning for Low-Resource Medical Dialogue Generation
Shuai Lin1 , Pan Zhou2 , Xiaodan Liang1,3 * , Jianheng Tang1 , Ruihui Zhao4 ,
Ziliang Chen1 , and Liang Lin1,3
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Salesforce Research, 3 DarkMatter AI Inc., 4 Tencent Jarvis Lab
{shuailin97, xdliang328, sqrt3tjh}@gmail.com, pzhou@salesforce.com,
zacharyzhao@tencent.com, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, linliang@ieee.org
Abstract
Source diseases

Human doctors with well-structured medical knowledge can
diagnose a disease merely via a few conversations with
patients about symptoms. In contrast, existing knowledgegrounded dialogue systems often require a large number of
dialogue instances to learn as they fail to capture the correlations between different diseases and neglect the diagnostic
experience shared among them. To address this issue, we propose a more natural and practical paradigm, i.e., low-resource
medical dialogue generation, which can transfer the diagnostic
experience from source diseases to target ones with a handful
of data for adaptation. It is capitalized on a commonsense
knowledge graph to characterize the prior disease-symptom relations. Besides, we develop a Graph-Evolving Meta-Learning
(GEML) framework that learns to evolve the commonsense
graph for reasoning disease-symptom correlations in a new
disease, which effectively alleviates the needs of a large number of dialogues. More importantly, by dynamically evolving
disease-symptom graphs, GEML also well addresses the realworld challenges that the disease-symptom correlations of
each disease may vary or evolve along with more diagnostic
cases. Extensive experiment results on the CMDD dataset and
our newly-collected Chunyu dataset testify the superiority of
our approach over state-of-the-art approaches. Besides, our
GEML can generate an enriched dialogue-sensitive knowledge
graph in an online manner, which could benefit other tasks
grounded on knowledge graph.

Target diseases

Figure 1: Statistics of 15 diseases in our newly collected
Chunyu dataset from the real world. One can observe the
notable data-imbalance phenomenon of different diseases.

Introduction
Medical dialogue system (MDS) aims to converse with
patients to inquire additional symptoms beyond their selfreports and make a diagnosis automatically, which has gained
increasing attention (Lin et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2018; Xu et al.
2019). It has a significant potential to simplify the diagnostic
process and relieve the cost of collecting information from
patients (Kao, Tang, and Chang 2018). Moreover, preliminary diagnosis reports generated by MDS may assist doctors
to make a diagnosis more efficiently. Because of these considerable benefits, many researchers devote substantial efforts
to address critical sub-problems in MDS, such as natural
language understanding (Shi et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2019),
* Corresponding Author is Xiaodan Liang.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13362

dialogue policy learning (Wei et al. 2018), dialogue management (Xu et al. 2019), and make promising progress to build
a satisfactory MDS.
Medical dialogue generation (MDG), which generates responses in natural language to request additional symptoms
or make a diagnosis, is critical in MDS but rarely studied.
Conventional generative dialogue models often employ neural sequence modeling (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Vaswani et al. 2017) and cannot be applied to the medical
dialogue scenario directly in absence of medical knowledge.
Recently, large-scale pre-training language models (Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019; Song et al. 2019) over unsupervised corpora have achieved significant success. However,
fine-tuning such large language models in the medical domain requires sufficient task-specific data (Bansal, Jha, and
McCallum 2019; Dou, Yu, and Anastasopoulos 2019) so as
to learn the correlations between diseases and symptoms. Unfortunately, as depicted in Fig. 1, there are a large portion
of diseases that only have a few instances in practice, which
means that newly-coming diseases in the realistic diagnosis
scenario are often under low-resource conditions. Therefore,
it is highly desirable to transfer the diagnostic experience
from high-resource diseases to others of data scarcity. Besides, existing knowledge-grounded approaches (Liu et al.
2018; Lian et al. 2019) may fail to perform such transfer
well, as they only learn one unified model for all diseases and
ignore the specificity and relationships of different diseases.
Finally, in practice, the disease-symptom relations of each
disease may vary or evolve along with more cases, which is
also not considered in prior works.

