The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Task Cooperation for Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning∗
Han-Jia Ye, Xin-Chun Li, De-Chuan Zhan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{yehj, lixc, zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Training a model with limited data is an essential task for
machine learning and visual recognition. Few-shot learning
approaches meta-learn a task-level inductive bias from S EEN
class few-shot tasks, and the meta-model is expected to facilitate the few-shot learning with U NSEEN classes. Inspired
by the idea that unlabeled data can be utilized to smooth the
model space in traditional semi-supervised learning, we propose TAsk COoperation (TACO) which takes advantage of
unsupervised tasks to smooth the meta-model space. Specifically, we couple the labeled support set in a few-shot task
with easily-collected unlabeled instances, prediction agreement on which encodes the relationship between tasks. The
learned smooth meta-model promotes the generalization ability on supervised U NSEEN few-shot tasks. The state-ofthe-art few-shot classification results on MiniImageNet and
TieredImageNet verify the superiority of TACO to leverage
unlabeled data and task relationship in meta-learning.

Figure 1: Analogy between semi-supervised learning (top)
and semi-supervised few-shot learning (bottom), where unlabeled instances (resp. unsupervised tasks) assist shaping
a smooth model (resp. meta-model) space. Limited labeled
instances (resp. tasks) make revealing the characteristic of
the data difficult (left). Unsupervised tasks facilitate a metamodel to generalize better and to construct close classifiers
for similar tasks (right).

Introduction
Both instance collection and labeling costs influence the
practical utility of a model in real-world applications, which
requires a classifier to be trained with limited examples. For
example, a robotic agent should be able to imitate behaviors
from one single demonstration (Yu et al. 2018).
One solution to the Few-Shot Learning (FSL) problem
takes advantage of data from related classes. Towards training effective classifiers for few-shot tasks with U NSEEN
classes (a.k.a. the “meta-test” phase), meta-learning mimics
the few-shot task evaluations on the S EEN class set (a.k.a.
the “meta-train” set) and extracts task-level inductive bias in
the “meta-training” phase (Baxter 2000; Vilalta and Drissi
2002; Maurer, Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2016). For example, the instance embedding function (Vinyals et al. 2016;
Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017), model initialization (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman
2018), functional mapping (Qiao et al. 2018), and optimization strategies (Ravi and Larochelle 2017) facilitate FSL.
During meta-training, episodes of few-shot tasks, couples
of few-shot support set and the same-distribution query set,

are sampled from the S EEN class set to update the metamodel (as in Fig. 2 (a)). Specifically, a task-specific classifier
is derived from the meta-model based on the few-shot support set, and the classifier’s performance is measured on the
corresponding query set. The supervision of meta-learning
comes from the labels in the query set, so we define such
tasks as the “supervised” ones. Similarly, we introduce “unsupervised” task as a task with a few-shot labeled support
set and an unlabeled “pool” set. The pool set contains easily
collected instances from any (even distractor) class, but it is
difficult to provide supervision in meta-training directly.
In this paper, we propose the TAsk COoperation (TACO)
approach for few-shot classification, which takes advantage
of the task relationship by incorporating both the supervised
and unsupervised tasks during meta-training (we denote it
as Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning (SS-FSL) in Fig. 2
(c)). As shown in Fig. 1 (bottom), directly learning the metamodel over supervised tasks could lead to a biased metamodel space, which constructs diverse classifiers for similar tasks. TACO makes the meta-model space smooth, so
that similar support sets are mapped to close classifiers and
the meta-model generalizes better. In detail, the similarity
among few-shot tasks is measured by their prediction agree-

∗

De-Chuan Zhan is the corresponding author. This work is supported by NSFC (61773198, 6163000043, 61921006, 62006112),
NSF of Jiangsu Province (BK20200313).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10682

