The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Optimal Control with Affine Constraints
Yingying Li,1 Subhro Das,2 Na Li1
1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
yingyingli@g.harvard.edu, subhro.das@ibm.com, nali@seas.harvard.edu

where disturbance wt is random and satisfies kwt k∞ ≤ w̄.
Consider affine constraints on the state xt and the action ut :

Abstract
This paper considers online optimal control with affine constraints on the states and actions under linear dynamics
with bounded random disturbances. The system dynamics
and constraints are assumed to be known and time invariant
but the convex stage cost functions change adversarially. To
solve this problem, we propose Online Gradient Descent with
Buffer Zones (OGD-BZ). Theoretically, we show that OGDBZ with proper parameters can guarantee the system to satisfy all the constraints despite any admissible disturbances.
Further, we investigate the policy regret of OGD-BZ, which
compares OGD-BZ’s performance with the performance of
the optimal linear policy in hindsight. We show that OGD-BZ
can achieve a policy regret upper bound that is square root of
the horizon length multiplied by some logarithmic terms of
the horizon length under proper algorithm parameters.

D x xt ≤ dx ,

D u ut ≤ du ,

∀ t ≥ 0.

(2)

For simplicity, we assume the system parameters A, B, w̄
and the constraints are known. At stage 0 ≤ t ≤ T , a convex
cost function ct (xt , ut ) is adversarially generated and the
decision maker selects a feasible action ut before ct (xt , ut )
is revealed. We aim to achieve two goals simultaneously: (i)
to minimize the sum of the adversarially varying costs, (ii) to
satisfy the constraints (2) for all t despite the disturbances.
There are many studies to address each goal separately
but lack results on both goals together as discussed below.
Firstly, there is recent progress on online optimal control
to address Goal (i). A commonly adopted performance metric is policy regret, which compares the online cost with
the cost of the optimal linear policy in hindsight (Agarwal
et al. 2019). Sublinear policy regrets have been achieved
for linear systems with either stochastic disturbances (Cohen
et al. 2018; Agarwal, Hazan, and Singh 2019) or adversarial
disturbances (Agarwal et al. 2019; Foster and Simchowitz
2020; Goel and Hassibi 2020a,b). However, most literature
only considers the unconstrained control problem. Recently,
Nonhoff and Müller (2020) studies constrained online optimal control but assumes no disturbances.
Secondly, there are many papers from the control community to address Goal (ii): constraints satisfaction. Perhaps the most famous algorithms are Model Predictive
Control (MPC) (Rawlings and Mayne 2009) and its variants, such as robust MPC which guarantees (hard) constraint satisfaction in the presence of disturbances (Bemporad and Morari 1999; Kouvaritakis, Rossiter, and Schuurmans 2000; Mayne, Seron, and Raković 2005; Limon et al.
2010; Zafiriou 1990) as well as stochastic MPC which considers soft constraints and allows constraints violation (Oldewurtel, Jones, and Morari 2008; Mesbah 2016). However,
there lack algorithms with both regret/optimality guarantees
and constraint satisfaction guarantees.
Therefore, an important question remains to be addressed:
Q: how to design online algorithms to both satisfy the constraints despite disturbances and yield o(T ) policy regrets?

Introduction
Recently, there is a lot of interest in solving control problems by learning-based techniques, e.g. online learning and
reinforcement learning (Agarwal et al. 2019; Li, Chen, and
Li 2019; Ibrahimi, Javanmard, and Roy 2012; Dean et al.
2018; Fazel et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a).
This is motivated by applications such as data centers (Lazic
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b), robotics (Fisac et al. 2018), autonomous vehicles (Sallab et al. 2017), power systems (Chen
et al. 2021), etc. For real-world implementation, it is crucial
to design safe algorithms that ensure the system to satisfy
certain (physical) constraints despite unknown disturbances.
For example, temperatures in data centers should be within
certain ranges to reduce task failures despite disturbances
from unmodeled heat sources, quadrotors should avoid collisions even when perturbed by wind, etc. In addition to safety,
many applications involve time-varying environments, e.g.
varying electricity prices, moving targets, etc. Hence, safe
algorithms should not be over-conservative and should adapt
to varying environments for desirable performance.
In this paper, we design safe algorithms for time-varying
environments by considering the following constrained online optimal control problem. Specifically, we consider a linear system with random disturbances,
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt , t ≥ 0,
(1)

Our Contributions In this paper, we answer the question
above by proposing an online control algorithm: Online Gradient Descent with Buffer Zones (OGD-BZ). To develop

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8527

