The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Theoretical Analysis of the Repetition Problem in Text Generation*
Zihao Fu,1 Wai Lam,1 Anthony Man-Cho So,1 Bei Shi2
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
AI Lab, Tencent
{zhfu, wlam, manchoso}@se.cuhk.edu.hk; beishi@tencent.com

Abstract

Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), summarization (Nallapati et al. 2016), data-to-text generation (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016; Wiseman, Shieber, and Rush 2017; Fu,
Bing, and Lam 2020; Fu et al. 2020c,a), language modeling (Radford et al. 2018, 2019; Brown et al. 2020) and
etc. Despite the remarkable growth, nearly all existing generation systems suffer from the repetition problem (Fan,
Lewis, and Dauphin 2018; Holtzman et al. 2020; Welleck
et al. 2020) which unavoidably undermines the overall performance. The repetition problem refers to an undesirable
effect that the results of the generation system always contain duplicate fragments. For example, a generation system
is likely to generate text like “Tough it is still unfinished, but
I like it but I like it but I like ...”, which contains the useless
repeating text. This problem hurts the quality of generation
systems severely.

Text generation tasks, including translation, summarization,
language models, and etc. see rapid growth during recent
years. Despite the remarkable achievements, the repetition
problem has been observed in nearly all text generation models undermining the generation performance extensively. To
solve the repetition problem, many methods have been proposed, but there is no existing theoretical analysis to show
why this problem happens and how it is resolved. In this paper, we propose a new framework for theoretical analysis for
the repetition problem. We first define the Average Repetition Probability (ARP) to characterize the repetition problem
quantitatively. Then, we conduct an extensive analysis of the
Markov generation model and derive several upper bounds of
the average repetition probability with intuitive understanding. We show that most of the existing methods are essentially minimizing the upper bounds explicitly or implicitly.
Grounded on our theory, we show that the repetition problem is, unfortunately, caused by the traits of our language
itself. One major reason is attributed to the fact that there
exist too many words predicting the same word as the subsequent word with high probability. Consequently, it is easy
to go back to that word and form repetitions and we dub it as
the high inflow problem. Furthermore, we extend our analysis to broader generation models by deriving a concentration
bound of the average repetition probability for a general generation model. Finally, based on the theoretical upper bounds,
we propose a novel rebalanced encoding approach to alleviate
the high inflow problem and thus reducing the upper bound.
The experimental results show that our theoretical framework
is applicable in general generation models and our proposed
rebalanced encoding approach alleviates the repetition problem significantly in both the translation task and the language
modeling task. The source code of this paper can be obtained
from https://github.com/fuzihaofzh/repetition-problem-nlg.

1

There are many conjectures for the reason of the repetition problem, but the real cause is still unknown (Welleck
et al. 2020). Some conjectures think that it is caused by the
model architectures (Holtzman et al. 2020; Vig 2018). Some
of them suggest that it may be caused by the gap between
sampling methods and the real human language (Holtzman
et al. 2020). Choi (2018) argues that reliance on the fixed
corpora cannot fulfill the real goal of using the language.
Moreover, Welleck et al. (2020) attribute the reason to the
likelihood maximizing decoding. However, there is no existing theory to quantitatively explain how and why the repetition occurs. Based on these conjectures, many out-of-thebox methods have been proposed to alleviate the repetition
problem. Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski (1985); Ficler and
Goldberg (2017); Caccia et al. (2019) propose to utilize the
Temperature sampling in the decoding phase. Fan, Lewis,
and Dauphin (2018) propose the Topk sampling method
while Holtzman et al. (2020) propose the Nucleus sampling
method. Though these methods are shown to successfully alleviate the repetition problem, there still needs a convincing
explanation.

Introduction

Text generation tasks aim at generating human-readable text
for specific tasks including machine translation (Sutskever,
* The work described in this paper is substantially supported by
a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14204418).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To determine the root cause of the repetition problem and
give a convincing understanding of why existing methods
work, we propose a novel theoretical analysis framework.
We first define the general generation model and the Markov
12848

