The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Facility’s Perspective to Fair Facility Location Problems
Chenhao Wang,1 Xiaoying Wu,2,3 Minming Li,4 Hau Chan1
1

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
AMSS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
City University of Hong Kong
chenhwang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, xywu@amss.ac.cn, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, hchan3@unl.edu
2

Abstract

facility’s perspective where each facility has a (cardinal, satisfaction) utility function/preference over the possible subsets of agents the facility can serve – the larger value it is for
a subset, the more preferable the subset is to the facility. It
is not hard to see that each facility, e.g., managed by certain
personnel, can form a utility preference over the agents. For
example, a recreation facility management of a recreation
center has an underlying preference with regards to serving
various groups of citizens. A principal or an organization of
a public school has a preference over the types of students
(see e.g., (Abdulkadiroğlu 2005; Ehlers et al. 2014) in school
choice) that can be admitted to the school.
An optimal solution that maximizes the (utilitarian or
egalitarian) social welfare of the facilities may present a very
unbalanced allocation of the items to the facilities and hence
be perceived as unfair, while fair allocations may induce a
bad social welfare. Motivated by this, in this work, we consider the facilities’ utility preferences over the agents and
initiate the study of fair facility location problems from the
facility’s perspective. More specifically, we aim to locate facilities within a set of locations to serve a set of population
such that each facility’s partition of agents (i.e., induced by
the agents selecting the closest facilities) is fair under the
facility’s utility function. We address such a key problem
of locating facilities under fundamental fairness notations to
achieve (approximately) fairness.
Our Results and Organization. We study the fair facility
location problem where there is a set of m facilities with
additive valuations over n agents or items in a bounded interval of [0,1]. We consider the well-studied proportionality
(Prop) and envy-freeness (EF) fairness and their (additive)
relaxations for our setting. Given the fairness concepts, we
study the existence and guarantees of (approximately) fair
contiguous valid allocations, which admit a location profile
of facilities such that the allocation satisfies the closest assignment rule. We note that our problem is related to the fair
division problems with contiguous bundles (FDC) (Bouveret
et al. 2017; Bilò et al. 2018; Suksompong 2019) in which the
goal is to fairly allocate indivisible items to players/facilities
such that each bundle forms a contiguous block; but we additionally require the closest assignment.
In Section 3, we first prove that the problem of deter-

We study the problem faced by a decision maker who wants to
locate a set of facilities on a real line and allocate agents/items
to the facilities. The items have given locations on the line,
and can only be assigned to one of their closest facilities. The
facilities are controlled by managers, who have additive utility over the items. An optimal solution that maximizes the
(utilitarian or egalitarian) social welfare of the facilities may
present a very unbalanced allocation of the items to the facilities and hence be perceived as unfair. In this paper, we are
interested in fair allocation among facility managers and consider the well-studied proportionality and envy-freeness fairness notions and their relaxations. We assess the availability,
existence, approximability, and the quality (price of fairness)
of fair solutions, where the quality measures the system efficiency loss under a fair allocation compared to the one that
maximizes the social welfare. further, we show that one can
find a Pareto-optimal solution in polynomial time.

1

Introduction

Facility location problems and their variants (Stollsteimer
1963; Manne 1964; Shmoys, Tardos, and Aardal 1997; Jain
and Vazirani 2001) have been actively (and most commonly)
studied in the economics, operations research, and computer
science communities since the mid 20th century due to its
applicability in modeling and solving various realistic optimization and resource allocation problems (e.g., transportations and clustering). In the standard facility location problem, we are given a set of m facilities such as libraries,
parks, and schools, a set of locations (e.g., bounded interval of [0,1]), and a set of n agents locating within the set
of locations. The typical goal, from the agent’s perspective,
is to locate the facilities within a set of locations to minimize the total or maximal distance/cost of the agents to their
closest facilities.
Despite the numerous research work of facility location
problems in the mechanism design and algorithmic settings
(see e.g., (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013; Lu et al. 2010;
Fotakis and Tzamos 2014; Cheng and Zhou 2015)), limited
work has explored the facility location problems from the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5734

