The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Simultaneous 2nd Price Item Auctions with No-Underbidding *
Michal Feldman and Galia Shabtai
Tel Aviv University
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, galiashabtai@gmail.com

Abstract

pays her bid, whereas in simultaneous second-price auctions
(S2PA) every item is sold in a 2nd-price auction; i.e., the
highest bidder wins and pays the 2nd highest bid.
Clearly, these auctions are not truthful; bidders don’t even
have the language to express their true valuations. The performance of these auctions is often quantified by the price of
anarchy (PoA), which measures their performance in equilibrium. Specifically, the PoA is defined as the ratio between
the performance of an auction in its worst equilibrium and
the performance of the optimal outcome. The price of anarchy in auctions has been of great interest to the AI community, see the influential survey of Roughgarden, Syrgkanis,
and Tardos (2017), as well as recent work on learning dynamics in multi-unit auctions and games (Foster et al. 2016;
Brânzei and Filos-Ratsikas 2019).

We study the price of anarchy (PoA) of simultaneous 2nd
price auctions (S2PA) under a new natural condition of no underbidding, meaning that agents never bid on items less than
their marginal values. We establish improved (mostly tight)
bounds on the PoA of S2PA under no underbidding for different valuation classes (including unit-demand, submodular,
XOS, subadditive, and general monotone valuations), in both
full-information and incomplete information settings.
To derive our results, we introduce a new parameterized property of auctions, termed (γ, δ)-revenue guaranteed, which implies a PoA of at least γ/(1+ δ). Via extension theorems, this
guarantee extends to coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) in
full information settings, and to Bayesian PoA (BPoA) in settings with incomplete information and arbitrary (correlated)
distributions. We then show that S2PA are (1, 1)-revenue
guaranteed with respect to bids satisfying no underbidding.
This implies a PoA of at least 1/2 for general monotone valuation, which extends to BPOA with arbitrary correlated distributions. Moreover, we show that (λ, µ)-smoothness combined with (γ, δ)-revenue guaranteed guarantees a PoA of at
least (γ + λ)/(1 + δ + µ). This implies a host of results,
such as a tight PoA of 2/3 for S2PA with submodular (or
XOS) valuations, under no overbidding and no underbidding.
Beyond establishing improved bounds for S2PA, the no underbidding assumption sheds new light on the performance of
S2PA relative to simultaneous 1st price auctions.

1

PoA and BPoA of S2PA: Background. The price of anarchy has been studied both in complete and incomplete information settings. In the former case, all valuations are known
by all bidders. In the latter case, every bidder knows her own
value and the probability distribution from which other bidder valuations are drawn. The common equilibrium notion
in this case is Bayes Nash equilibrium, and the performance
is quantified by the Bayesian PoA (BPoA) measure.
There are pathological examples showing that the PoA of
S2PA can be arbitrarily bad, even in the simplest scenario
of a single item auction with two bidders (Christodoulou,
Kovács, and Schapira 2016). A common approach towards
overcoming such pathological examples is the no overbidding (NOB) assumption, stating that the sum of player bids
on the set of items she wins never exceeds its value. Consequently, all PoA results of S2PA use the NOB assumption.
The PoA and BPoA of simultaneous item auctions depend
on the structure of the valuation functions. An important
class is that of subadditive (SA) valuations, also known as
complement-free valuations, where v(S)+v(T ) ≥ v(S ∪T )
for every sets of items S, T . A hierarchy of complementfree valuations is given in (Lehmann, Lehmann, and Nisan
2006), including unit-demand (UD), submodular (SM),
XOS (XOS), and subadditive (SA) valuations, with the following strict containment relation: UD ⊂ SM ⊂ XOS ⊂
SA (see Section 2.2 for formal definitions). Clearly, the
PoA can only degrade as one moves to a larger valuation
class. PoA and BPoA results under the no-overbidding as-

Introduction

Simple auctions are often preferred in practice over complex truthful auctions. Starting with the seminal paper of
Christodoulou, Kovács, and Schapira (2008), a lot of effort
has been given to the study of simultaneous item auctions.
In simultaneous item auctions with n bidders and m
items, every bidder i has a valuation function vi : 2[m] →
R+ , where vi (S) is the value bidder i assigns to set S ⊆ [m].
Despite the combinatorial structure of the valuation, bidders
submit bids on every item separately and simultaneously.
In simultaneous first-price auctions (S1PA) every item is
sold in a 1st-price auction; i.e., the highest bidder wins and
* For the full version, see https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11857
(Feldman and Shabtai 2020). Due to space limitation, all missing
statements and proofs are deferred to the full version.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5391

