The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Projection-free Online Learning over Strongly Convex Sets
Yuanyu Wan1 , Lijun Zhang1,2,∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
{wanyy, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

To ensure the feasibility of each decision, a common way
in these algorithms is to apply a projection operation to
any infeasible decision. However, in many high-dimensional
problems with complicated decision sets, the projection step
becomes a computational bottleneck (Zhang et al. 2013;
Chen et al. 2016; Yang, Lin, and Zhang 2017). For example, in semi-definite programs (Hazan 2008) and multiclass
classification (Hazan and Luo 2016), it amounts to computing the singular value decomposition (SVD) of a matrix,
when the decision set consists of all matrices with bounded trace norm. To tackle the computational bottleneck, Hazan and Kale (2012) proposed a projection-free algorithm
called online Frank-Wolfe (OFW) that replaces the timeconsuming projection step with a more efficient linear optimization step. Taking matrix completion as an example again, the linear optimization step can be carried out by computing the top singular vector pair of a matrix, which is significantly faster than computing the SVD. Although OFW
can efficiently handle complicated decision sets, it only attains a regret bound of O(T 3/4
√) for the general OCO, which
is worse than the optimal O( T ) regret bound achieved by
projection-based algorithms.

To efficiently solve online problems with complicated constraints, projection-free algorithms including online frankwolfe (OFW) and its variants have received significant interest recently. However, in the general case, existing efficient
projection-free algorithms only achieved the regret bound of
O(T 3/4 ), which is worse than the regret of projection-based
algorithms, where T is the number of decision rounds. In
this paper, we study the special case of online learning over
strongly convex sets, for which we first prove that OFW can
enjoy a better regret bound of O(T 2/3 ) for general convex
losses. The key idea is to refine the decaying step-size in the
original OFW by a simple line search rule. Furthermore, for
strongly convex losses, we propose a strongly convex variant
of OFW by redefining the surrogate loss function in OFW. We
show that it achieves a regret bound of O(T√2/3 ) over general
convex sets and a better regret bound of O( T ) over strongly
convex sets.

Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a powerful framework
that has been used to model and solve problems from diverse
domains such as online routing (Awerbuch and Kleinberg
2004, 2008) and online portfolio selection (Blum and Kalai
1999; Agarwal et al. 2006; Luo, Wei, and Zheng 2018). In
OCO, an online player plays a repeated game of T rounds
against an adversary. At each round t, the player chooses a
decision xt from a convex set K. After that, a convex function ft (x) : K → R chosen by the adversary is revealed,
and incurs a loss ft (xt ) to the player. The goal of the player
is to choose decisions so that the regret defined as
R(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈K

T
X

More specifically, OFW is an online extension of an offline algorithm called Frank-Wolfe (FW) (Frank and Wolfe
1956; Jaggi 2013) that iteratively performs linear optimization steps to minimize a convex and smooth function. In
each round, OFW updates the decision by utilizing a single
step of FW to minimize a surrogate loss function, which implies that the approximation error caused by the single step
of FW could be the main reason for the regret gap between
projection-based algorithms and OFW. Recently, Garber and
Hazan (2015) made a quadratic improvement in the convergence rate of FW for strongly convex and smooth offline
optimization over strongly convex sets compared to the general case. They used a simple line search rule to choose the
step-size of FW, which allows FW to converge faster even
if the strong convexity of the decision set is unknown. It is
therefore natural to ask whether the faster convergence of
FW can be utilized to improve the regret of OFW. In this
paper, we give an affirmative answer by improving OFW to
achieve an regret bound of O(T 2/3 ) over strongly convex
sets, which is better than the original O(T 3/4 ) regret bound.
Inspired by Garber and Hazan (2015), the key idea is to re-

ft (x)

t=1

is minimized. Over the past decades, various algorithms
such as online gradient descent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003),
online Newton step (Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale 2007)
and follow-the-regularized-leader (Shalev-Shwartz 2007;
Shalev-Shwartz and Singer 2007) have been proposed to
yield optimal regret bounds under different scenarios.
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10076

