The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Variational Disentanglement for Rare Event Modeling
Zidi Xiu,1 Chenyang Tao, 1
Michael Gao, Connor Davis, 2 Benjamin A. Goldstein, 1 Ricardo Henao 1
1

1
Duke University
Duke Institute for Health Innovation
zidi.xiu@duke.edu, chenyang.tao@duke.edu, ricardo.henao@duke.edu
2

Abstract

In these low-prevalence scenarios, commonly seen in clinical practice, standard classification models such as logistic regression suffer from majority domination, in which
models tend to favor the prediction accuracy of majority
groups. This is clearly undesirable for critical-care applications, given the high false negative rates (Type-II error), in
which patients in urgent need of care could be falsely categorized.
Situations where the distribution of labels is highly
skewed and the accuracy of the minority class bears particular significance (Dal Pozzolo et al. 2017; Lu, Guo, and Li
2020; Machado and Lopes 2020) have been associated with
the name imbalanced dataset (He and Garcia 2009), whereas
the methods dealing with such cases are coined extreme classification (Zong, Huang, and Chen 2013). Under such a setting, the lack of representation of minority cases severely
undermines the ability of a standard learner to discriminate,
relative to balanced datasets (Mitchell 1999). Consequently,
these solutions do not generalize well on minority classes,
where the primary interest is usually focused.
To address such a dilemma, several remedies have been
proposed to account for the imbalance between class representations. One of the most popular strategies is the
sampling-based adjustment, where during training, a model
oversamples the minority classes (or undersamples the majority classes) to create balance artificially (Holte et al.
1989; Drummond, Holte et al. 2003). To overcome the biases and the lack of information that naive sampling adjustments might induce, variants have been proposed to maximally preserve the clustering structure of the original dataset
(Mani and Zhang 2003; Yen and Lee 2009) and to promote
diversity of oversampling schemes (Han, Wang, and Mao
2005). Alternatively, cost-sensitive weighting where minority losses are assigned larger weights provides another popular option via tuning the relative importance of minority
classes (Elkan 2001; Munro et al. 1996; Zhou and Liu 2005).
While the above two strategies introduce heuristics to alleviate the issues caused by class imbalance, importance
sampling (IS) offers a principled treatment that flexibly combines the merits of the two (Hahn and Jeruchim 1987; Heidelberger 1995). Each example is sampled with the probability of a pre-specified importance weight, and with the
weight’s inverse when accounting for the relative contribution in the overall loss. This helps to flexibly tune the

Combining the increasing availability and abundance of
healthcare data and the current advances in machine learning methods have created renewed opportunities to improve
clinical decision support systems. However, in healthcare risk
prediction applications, the proportion of cases with the condition (label) of interest is often very low relative to the available sample size. Though very prevalent in healthcare, such
imbalanced classification settings are also common and challenging in many other scenarios. So motivated, we propose a
variational disentanglement approach to semi-parametrically
learn from rare events in heavily imbalanced classification
problems. Specifically, we leverage the imposed extremedistribution behavior on a latent space to extract information
from low-prevalence events, and develop a robust prediction
arm that joins the merits of the generalized additive model
and isotonic neural nets. Results on synthetic studies and diverse real-world datasets, including mortality prediction on a
COVID-19 cohort, demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms existing alternatives.

Introduction
Early identification of in-hospital patients who are at imminent risk of life-threatening events, e.g., death, ventilation or
intensive care unit (ICU) transfer, is a critical subject in clinical care (Bedoya et al. 2019). Especially during a pandemic
like COVID-19, the needs for healthcare change dramatically. With the ability to accurately predict the risk, an automated triage system will be well-positioned to help clinicians better allocate resources and attention to those patients
whose adverse outcomes can be averted if early intervention
efforts were in place.
Despite the great promise it holds, with the richness of
modern Electronic Health Record (EHR) repositories, the
construction of such a system faces practical challenges.
A major obstacle is the scarcity of patients experiencing
adverse outcomes of interest. In the COVID-19 scenario,
which we consider in our experiments, the mortality of patients tested positive at the Duke University Health System
(DUHS) is slightly lower than 3%. Further, in another typical EHR dataset we consider, less than 5% of patients are
reported to suffer adverse outcomes (ICU transfer or death).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10469

