The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Graph Convolution Networks for Traffic Forecasting
Kan Guo1,4 , Yongli Hu1∗ , Yanfeng Sun1 , Sean Qian2 , Junbin Gao3 , Baocai Yin1,4
1

Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing
Civil and Environmental Engineering and H.John Heinz III College, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh
3
Business School, The University of Sydney, Australia
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
guokan@emails.bjut.edu.cn, {huyongli,yfsun,ybc}@bjut.edu.cn, seanqian@cmu.edu, junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au,
2

Abstract

searches were based on the historical data of the road network and utilized the simple linear regression methods to
predict traffic state in the next few minutes. Then, with the
development of statistical technology and regression methods, in order to construct the Advanced Traveler Information
Systems (ATIS) and Advanced Traffic Management Systems (ATMS), some real-time traffic simulation systems were
proposed, such as DynaMIT (Ben-Akiva et al. 1998, 2012)
and DYNASMART-X (Mahmassani et al. 2005). They integrate the state estimation, traffic assignment and control
strategies functions into one system, in which the state estimation adopts Kalman Filters (KFs) and its variants (Wang
and Papageorgiou 2005; Tampere and Immers 2007; van
Hinsbergen et al. 2012). Different from KFs or its variants, some works focus on the machine learning methods
of data-driven models such as Auto Regressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) (Ahmed and Cook 1979; Smith,
Williams, and Oswald 2002), Support Vector Regression
(SVR) (Wu, Wei, and Su 2004; Cong, Wang, and Li 2016),
Random Forest Regression (Leshem and Ritov 2007; Yang
and Qian 2018), and so on. For these models, their performances are usually limited by the feature representation capacity.
As the most important component of machine learning,
Neural network, especially deep neural network, has powerful representation ability, thus it is widely used in Computer
Vision, Natural Language Processing, and Traffic Forecasting (Yu and Chen 1993; Florio and Mussone 1996; Zhou
and Nelson 2002). When huge volume of traffic data are accumulated, deep neural network has been used to explore
the inner relationship hiding in the traffic data for improving the result of traffic forecasting (Lv et al. 2015). Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) such as LSTM (Cui, Ke, and
Wang 2016) and the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Agarap
2017) were also utilized to explore the temporal feature of
traffic data. Except for RNNs, Deep Spatial Temporal Convolution Network (DSTCN) (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017)
was proposed to learn spatial-temporal features with Convolution Neural Network (CNN). However, it needs to transfer
the traffic data to image-grid data and doing so destroys the
natural connection of road network.
To avoid the disadvantage of CNN, recently, Graph Convolution Network (Bruna et al. 2014; N.Kipf and Welling
2017) was introduced to exploit the non-grid local spatial

Traffic forecasting is attracting considerable interest due to its widespread application in intelligent transportation systems. Given the complex and dynamic traffic data, many methods focus on how to establish a spatial-temporal model to
express the non-stationary traffic patterns. Recently, the latest Graph Convolution Network (GCN) has been introduced
to learn spatial features while the time neural networks are
used to learn temporal features. These GCN based methods obtain state-of-the-art performance. However, the current GCN based methods ignore the natural hierarchical structure of traffic systems which is composed of the micro layers
of road networks and the macro layers of region networks, in which the nodes are obtained through pooling method
and could include some hot traffic regions such as downtown and CBD etc., while the current GCN is only applied on
the micro graph of road networks. In this paper, we propose
a novel Hierarchical Graph Convolution Networks (HGCN) for traffic forecasting by operating on both the micro
and macro traffic graphs. The proposed method is evaluated on two complex city traffic speed datasets. Compared to
the latest GCN based methods like Graph WaveNet, the proposed HGCN gets higher traffic forecasting precision with
lower computational cost.The website of the code is https://github.com/guokan987/HGCN.git.

Introduction
The intelligent transportation system has been a fast growing research field with the development of sensor technology and the diversification of travel modes. One of significant
tasks in such systems is how to predict the future traffic state of road network, which has many applications in daily
travel such as planning travel routes in advance and guiding
the allocation of road usage, etc. Recently, the ride-hailing
and ride-sharing services have emerged and been popular in
cities. This novel travel mode accumulates a huge volume
of traffic data along with the traditional sensor data, which
provides abundant traffic data to analyze traffic patterns and
achieve traffic forecasting in the complex city road environment.
For traffic forecasting (Ahmed and Cook 1979), it has a
long history of development from 1980s. Usually, early re∗

Correspondence Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

151

