The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CardioGAN: Attentive Generative Adversarial Network with Dual Discriminators
for Synthesis of ECG from PPG
Pritam Sarkar, Ali Etemad
Dept. of ECE & Ingenuity Labs Research Institute
Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada
pritam.sarkar@queensu.ca, ali.etemad@queensu.ca

Abstract

to record an ECG segment of limited duration (usually 30
seconds), making these solutions non-continuous and sporadic.

Electrocardiogram (ECG) is the electrical measurement of
cardiac activity, whereas Photoplethysmogram (PPG) is the
optical measurement of volumetric changes in blood circulation. While both signals are used for heart rate monitoring,
from a medical perspective, ECG is more useful as it carries additional cardiac information. Despite many attempts
toward incorporating ECG sensing in smartwatches or similar wearable devices for continuous and reliable cardiac monitoring, PPG sensors are the main feasible sensing solution
available. In order to tackle this problem, we propose CardioGAN, an adversarial model which takes PPG as input and
generates ECG as output. The proposed network utilizes an
attention-based generator to learn local salient features, as
well as dual discriminators to preserve the integrity of generated data in both time and frequency domains. Our experiments show that the ECG generated by CardioGAN provides
more reliable heart rate measurements compared to the original input PPG, reducing the error from 9.74 beats per minute
(measured from the PPG) to 2.89 (measured from the generated ECG).

1

Photoplethysmogram (PPG), an optical method for measuring blood volume changes at the surface of the skin, is
considered as a close alternative to ECG, which contains
valuable cardiovascular information (Gil et al. 2010; Schäfer
and Vagedes 2013). For instance, studies have shown that
a number of features extracted from PPG (e.g., pulse rate
variability) are highly correlated with corresponding metrics
extracted from ECG (e.g., heart rate variability) (Gil et al.
2010), further illustrating the mutual information between
these two modalities. Yet, through recent advancements in
smartwatches, smartphones, and other similar wearable and
mobile devices, PPG has become the industry standard as a
simple, wearable-friendly, and low-cost solution for continuous heart rate (HR) monitoring for everyday use. Nonetheless, PPG suffers from inaccurate HR estimation and several
other limitations in comparison to conventional ECG monitoring devices (Bent et al. 2020) due to factors like skin tone,
diverse skin types, motion artefacts, and signal crossovers
among others. Moreover, the ECG waveform carries important information about cardiac activity. For instance, the Pwave indicates the sinus rhythm, whereas a long PR interval
is generally indicative of a first-degree heart blockage (Ashley and Niebauer 2004). As a result, ECG is consistently
being used by cardiologists for assessing the condition and
performance of the heart.

Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (WHO) in
2017, Cardiovascular Deceases (CVDs) are reported as the
leading causes of death worldwide (WHO 2017). The report indicates that CVDs cause 31% of global deaths, out
of which at least three-quarters of deaths occur in the low
or medium-income countries. One of the primary reasons
behind this is the lack of primary healthcare support and
the inaccessible on-demand health monitoring infrastructure. Electrocardiogram (ECG) is considered as one of the
most important attributes for continuous health monitoring
required for identifying those who are at serious risk of future cardiovascular events or death. Vast amount of research
is being conducted with the goal of developing wearable devices capable of continuous ECG monitoring and feasible
for daily life use, largely to no avail. Currently, very few
wearable devices provide wrist-based ECG monitoring, and
those who do, require the user to stand still and touch the
watch with both hands in order to close the circuit in order

Based on the above, there is a clear discrepancy between
the need for continuous wearable ECG monitoring and the
available solutions in the market. To address this, we propose CardioGAN, a generative adversarial network (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014), which takes PPG as inputs and
generates ECG. Our model is based on the CycleGAN architecture (Zhu et al. 2017) which enables the system to
be trained in an unpaired manner. Unlike CycleGAN, CardioGAN is designed with attention-based generators and
equipped with multiple discriminators. We utilize attention
mechanisms in the generators to better learn to focus on specific local regions such as the QRS complexes of ECG. To
generate high fidelity ECG signals in terms of both time
and frequency information, we utilize a dual discriminator

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

488

