The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Metrics and Continuity in Reinforcement Learning
Charline Le Lan, * 1 Marc G. Bellemare, 2 Pablo Samuel Castro2
1

University of Oxford,
Google Research, Brain Team
charline.lelan@stats.ox.ac.uk, {bellemare,psc}@google.com
2

Abstract
In most practical applications of reinforcement learning, it is
untenable to maintain direct estimates for individual states; in
continuous-state systems, it is impossible. Instead, researchers
often leverage state similarity (whether explicitly or implicitly) to build models that can generalize well from a limited
set of samples. The notion of state similarity used, and the
neighbourhoods and topologies they induce, is thus of crucial importance, as it will directly affect the performance of
the algorithms. Indeed, a number of recent works introduce
algorithms assuming the existence of “well-behaved” neighbourhoods, but leave the full specification of such topologies
for future work. In this paper we introduce a unified formalism for defining these topologies through the lens of metrics.
We establish a hierarchy amongst these metrics and demonstrate their theoretical implications on the Markov Decision
Process specifying the reinforcement learning problem. We
complement our theoretical results with empirical evaluations
showcasing the differences between the metrics considered.

Figure 1: A simple five-state MDP (top) with the neighbourhoods induced by three metrics: an identity metric which
isolates each state (d1 ); a metric which captures behavioral
proximity (d2 ); and a metric which is not able to distinguish
states (d3 ). The yellow circles represent -balls in the corresponding metric spaces. The bottom row indicates the V ∗
values for each state.

Introduction
A simple principle to generalization in reinforcement learning
is to require that similar states be assigned similar predictions.
State aggregation implements a coarse version of this principle, by using a notion of similarity to group states together.
A finer implementation is to use the similarity in an adaptive fashion, for example by means of a nearest neighbour
scheme over representative states. This approach is classically employed in the design of algorithms for continuous
state spaces, where the fundamental assumption is the existence of a metric characterizing the real-valued distance
between states.
To illustrate this idea, consider the three similarity metrics depicted in Figure 1. The metric d1 isolates each state,
the metric d3 groups together all states, while the metric d2
aggregates states based on the similarity in their long-term dynamics. In terms of generalization, d1 would not be expected
to generalize well as new states cannot leverage knowledge
from previous states; d3 can cheaply generalize to new states,
but at the expense of accuracy; on the other hand, d2 seems
to strike a good balance between the two extremes.

In this paper we study the effectiveness of behavioural
metrics at providing a good notion of state similarity. We call
behavioural metrics the class of metrics derived from properties of the environment, typically measuring differences
in reward and transition functions. Since the introduction of
bisimulation metrics (Ferns, Panangaden, and Precup 2004,
2005), a number of behavioural metrics have emerged with
additional desirable properties, including lax bisimulation
(Taylor, Precup, and Panagaden 2009; Castro and Precup
2010) and π-bisimulation metrics (Castro 2020). Behavioural
metrics are of particular interest in the context of understanding generalization, since they directly encode the differences
in action-conditional outcomes between states, and hence allow us to make meaningful statements about the relationship
between these states.
We focus on the interplay between behavioural metrics and
the continuity properties they induce on various functions of
interest in reinforcement learning. Returning to our example,
V ∗ is only continuous with respect to d1 and d2 . The continuity of a set of functions (with respect to a given metric)
is assumed in most theoretical results for continuous state

* Work performed while a Google Student Researcher.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8261

