The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Addressing Class Imbalance in Federated Learning
Lixu Wang, Shichao Xu, Xiao Wang, Qi Zhu
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
{lixuwang2025, shichaoxu2023}@u.northwestern.edu, {wangxiao, qzhu}@northwestern.edu

Abstract

may contain their own preferences, and the resulting diversity may make the convergence of the global model challenging and slow. Moreover, the phenomenon of class imbalance happens frequently in practical scenarios, e.g., the
number of patients diagnosed with different diseases varies
greatly (Rao, Krishnan, and Niculescu 2006; Dong et al.
2019), and people have different preferences when typing
with G-board (Ramaswamy et al. 2019) (a practical FL application proposed by Google). When a model encounters
class imbalance, samples of majority classes account for a
very large proportion of the overall training data, while those
of minority classes account for much less. The direct impact
of class imbalance is the reduction of classification accuracy
on minority classes. In many practical cases, those minority classes play a much more important role beyond their
proportion in data, e.g., wearable devices need to be more
sensitive to abnormal heart rates than normal scenarios, and
it is more important for G-board to predict SOS precisely
than restaurant names.

Federated learning (FL) is a promising approach for training decentralized data located on local client devices while
improving efficiency and privacy. However, the distribution
and quantity of the training data on the clients’ side may lead
to significant challenges such as class imbalance and nonIID (non-independent and identically distributed) data, which
could greatly impact the performance of the common model.
While much effort has been devoted to helping FL models
converge when encountering non-IID data, the imbalance issue has not been sufficiently addressed. In particular, as FL
training is executed by exchanging gradients in an encrypted
form, the training data is not completely observable to either
clients or server, and previous methods for class imbalance do
not perform well for FL. Therefore, it is crucial to design new
methods for detecting class imbalance in FL and mitigating
its impact. In this work, we propose a monitoring scheme that
can infer the composition of training data for each FL round,
and design a new loss function — Ratio Loss to mitigate
the impact of the imbalance. Our experiments demonstrate
the importance of acknowledging class imbalance and taking
measures as early as possible in FL training, and the effectiveness of our method in mitigating the impact. Our method
is shown to significantly outperform previous methods, while
maintaining client privacy.

In the literature, a number of approaches have been proposed to address class imbalance, e.g., applying various data
sampling techniques (Jo and Japkowicz 2004), using generative augmentation to make up for the lack of minority samples (Lee, Park, and Kim 2016; Pouyanfar et al. 2018), and
integrating cost-sensitive thoughts into model training (Sun
et al. 2007). However, during FL, the communication between clients and the server is restricted to the gradients
and the common model. For privacy concern, it is preferable
that the server does not require clients to upload additional
information about their local data (Geyer, Klein, and Nabi
2017; Hamm, Cao, and Belkin 2016). Thus, it is infeasible
to gather the information of all local data and conduct an aggregated analysis globally. This makes the vast majority of
imbalance solutions not applicable to FL. There are several
approaches that may be applied locally, without uploading
data distribution to the server (Huang et al. 2016; Wang, Ramanan, and Hebert 2017; Mikolov et al. 2013). However,
due to the mismatch between local data distributions and the
global one, these approaches are not effective and may even
impose negative side-effect on the global model. The work
in (Duan et al. 2019) directly addresses class imbalance in
FL, but it requires clients to upload their local data distribution, which may expose latent backdoor to attacks and lead
to privacy leakage. Moreover, it requires placing a number

Introduction
The emergence of federated learning (FL) enables multiple devices to collaboratively learn a common model
without the need to collect data directly from local devices. It reduces the resource consumption on the cloud
and also enhances the client privacy. FL has seen promising applications in multiple domains, including mobile
phones (Hard et al. 2018; Ramaswamy et al. 2019), wearable
devices (Nguyen et al. 2018), autonomous vehicles (Samarakoon et al. 2018), etc.
In standard FL, a random subset of clients will be selected in each iteration, who will upload their gradient updates to the central server. The server will then aggregate
those updates and return the updated common model to all
participants. During FL, one major challenge is that data
owned by different clients comes from various sources and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10165

