The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-scale Graph Fusion for Co-saliency Detection
Rongyao Hu1,2 , Zhenyun Deng3 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2,∗
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2
School of Natural and Computational Science, Massey University Auckland Campus, New Zealand
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
hurongyao123, zysjd1991@gmail.com, xfzhu0011@hotmail.com
Abstract

Feature extraction is focused on extracting either handcrafted features or deep features based on image pixel or
superpixel. The popular methods for handcrafted feature extraction include color/texture feature (Fu, Cao, and Tu 2013;
Shen et al. 2018), Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG)
feature (Huang, Feng, and Sun 2015), GIST descriptors (Jerripothula, Cai, and Yuan 2016), etc. Since handcrafted features are usually difficult to capture the appearance changes
of both common objects and complex background information (Wang et al. 2019), deep features have been widely designed to explore the semantic connection of co-saliency objects (Tsai et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). For example, (Ren
et al. 2020) proposed to extract both deep collaborative features and deep high-to-low features to balance the individual intra-image information. (Wang et al. 2019) employed the
VGG-19 framework to extract the high-level group-wise semantic feature and the visual feature for co-saliency detection. Although current feature extraction methods (including handcrafted features and deep features) achieved success
in the application of co-saliency detection, extracting single
feature is still a challenging task to detect complex variations between co-salient objects and backgrounds. To this end,
multi-view feature was extracted to explore both intra-image
and inter-image information for co-saliency detection (Jiang
et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2020a).

The key challenge of co-saliency detection is to extract discriminative features to distinguish the common salient foregrounds from backgrounds in a group of relevant images. In
this paper, we propose a new co-saliency detection framework
which includes two strategies to improve the discriminative ability of the features. Specifically, on one hand, we segment
each image to semantic superpixel clusters as well as generate different scales/sizes of images for each input image by
the VGG-16 model. Different scales capture different patterns of the images. As a result, multi-scale images can capture
various patterns among all images by many kinds of perspectives. Second, we propose a new method of Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to fine-tune the multi-scale features,
aiming at capturing the common information among the features from all scales and the private or complementary information for the feature of each scale. Moreover, the proposed
GCN method jointly conducts multi-scale feature fine-tune,
graph learning, and feature learning in a unified framework.
We evaluated our method on three benchmark data sets, compared to state-of-the-art co-saliency detection methods. Experimental results showed that our method outperformed all
comparison methods in terms of different evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Co-saliency detection focuses on simulating the human visual system to perceive the scene for searching the common
and salient prospects from a group of images (Zhang et al.
2018; Peng et al. 2020), and has been applied to improve the
understanding of the image or video content in various applications such as image retrieval (Papushoy and Bors 2015),
images co-segmentation (Tsai et al. 2018), and objects colocalization (Jerripothula et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017). In
the co-saliency detection task, the semantic category of the
common salient objects should be detected from the specific
content of the input image group, involving two key steps,
i.e., feature extraction extracting discriminative features to
reliably distinguish the foregrounds from the backgrounds of each image, and model construction detecting the cosaliency regions from a group of images based on the extracted features.

Given the image features, both traditional machine learning methods and deep learning methods are designed to detecting the co-saliency across a group of images. For example, (Zhang, Meng, and Han 2016) regarded the co-saliency
detection task as multi-instance learning where each image
and each superpixel region, respectively, are regarded as a
bag and an instance, and thus the multi-instance classifier is
used to predict the locations of the co-salient objects in the
instance level. However, feature extraction and co-saliency
detection are two separated processes in many traditional
machine learning methods. As a result, the feature can not
be adjusted based on the result of co-saliency detection, and
thus leading to suboptimal performance of co-saliency detection. To address this issue, deep learning integrates these
two processes in a unified framework so that each other can
be adaptively adjusted by the other, and thus easily outputting optimal performance of co-saliency detection. For
example, fully convolution neural networks were designed
to automatically learn high-level semantic features by mod-

∗

Corresponding author.
Rongyao Hu and Zhenyun Deng contribute equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7789

