The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

IB-GAN: Disentangled Representation Learning with
Information Bottleneck Generative Adversarial Networks
Insu Jeon, 1 Wonkwang Lee, 2 Myeongjang Pyeon, 1 Gunhee Kim 1
2

1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea (South)
School of Computing, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea (South)
insuj3on@gmail.com, wonkwang.lee@kaist.ac.kr, mjpyeon@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Color

Abstract

Shape

We propose a new GAN-based unsupervised model for disentangled representation learning. The new model is discovered
in an attempt to utilize the Information Bottleneck (IB) framework to the optimization of GAN, thereby named IB-GAN.
The architecture of IB-GAN is partially similar to that of InfoGAN but has a critical difference; an intermediate layer of
the generator is leveraged to constrain the mutual information
between the input and the generated output. The intermediate stochastic layer can serve as a learnable latent distribution that is trained with the generator jointly in an end-to-end
fashion. As a result, the generator of IB-GAN can harness the
latent space in a disentangled and interpretable manner. With
the experiments on dSprites and Color-dSprites dataset, we
demonstrate that IB-GAN achieves competitive disentanglement scores to those of state-of-the-art β-VAEs and outperforms InfoGAN. Moreover, the visual quality and the diversity of samples generated by IB-GAN are often better than
those by β-VAEs and Info-GAN in terms of FID score on
CelebA and 3D Chairs dataset.

Scale
Rotation
Pos X
Pos Y
(a) dSprites

(b) Color-dSprites

Figure 1: Latent generative factors captured by IB-GAN on
(a) dSprites and (b) Color-dSprites dataset. From top to bottom, each row corresponds to the factors of color, shape,
scale, rotation, position Y, and position X.
kar 2017; Jha et al. 2018). Despite their impressive results, they either require knowledge of ground-truth generative factors or weak-supervision (e.g., domain knowledge
or partial labels). In contrast, among many unsupervised approaches (Dumoulin et al. 2017; Donahue, Krähenbühl, and
Darrell 2016; Chen et al. 2016; Higgins et al. 2017a; Burgess
et al. 2018; Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al. 2018), the
two most popular approaches maybe β-VAE (Higgins et al.
2017a) and InfoGAN (Chen et al. 2016).
β-VAE (Higgins et al. 2017a) demonstrates that encouraging the KL-divergence term of the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) objective (Kingma and Welling 2014; Rezende,
Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) by multiplying a constant
β > 1 induces strong statistical independence among the
factors of latent representation. However, a high β value can
strengthen the KL regularization too much, leading to worse
reconstruction fidelity than the standard VAE. On the other
hand, InfoGAN (Chen et al. 2016) is another fully unsupervised approach based on Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). It enforces the generator
to learn disentangled representation by increasing the mutual information (MI) between the generated samples and
the latent code. Although InfoGAN can learn independent
factors well on relatively simple datasets such as MNIST
(LeCun, Cortes, and Burges 2010), it struggles to do so on
more complicated datasets such as CelebA (Liu et al. 2015)
or 3D Chairs (Aubry et al. 2014). Reportedly, the disentangling performance of learned representation by InfoGAN is
not as good as that of β-VAE and its variant models (Higgins
et al. 2017a; Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al. 2018).

Introduction
Learning a good representation of data is one of the essential topics in machine learning research. Although the
goodness of learned representation depends on the task, a
general consensus on the useful properties of representation
has been discussed through many recent studies (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013; Ridgeway 2016; Achille and
Soatto 2018a). A disentanglement, one of such useful properties of representation, is often described as statistical independence of the data generative factors, which is semantically well aligned with human intuition (e.g., chair types or
leg shapes on Chairs dataset (Aubry et al. 2014) and age or
gender on CelebA dataset (Liu et al. 2015)). Distilling each
important factor of data into a single independent direction
of representation is hard to be done but invaluable for many
other downstream tasks (Ridgeway 2016; Achille and Soatto
2018a; Higgins et al. 2017b, 2018).
Recently, various models have been proposed for disentangled representation learning (Hinton, Krizhevsky, and
Wang 2011; Kingma et al. 2014; Reed et al. 2014; Mathieu et al. 2016; N et al. 2017; Denton and vighnesh BirodCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7926

