The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

From Behavioral Theories to Econometrics:
Inferring Preferences of Human Agents from Data on Repeated Interactions
Gali Noti
Harvard University
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
galinoti@gmail.com

Abstract

game results are efficient, whether the game rules can be improved, or in order to test any theoretic behavioral model on
the data.
In order to draw estimates of the values from the data, it
is necessary to make assumptions about the way the players
behave. The classic approach to this econometric estimation
task is to assume that the players are in a Nash equilibrium.
This assumption provides mathematical equations that allow us to extract estimates for the parameters of interest.
However, behavioral studies have demonstrated how Nash
equilibrium does not always describe human play (see, e.g.,
(Kagel and Roth 2016; Goeree and Holt 2001)).
In a recent study, a new estimation method called “quantal
regret” was suggested as more suitable for the case of human
players (Nisan and Noti 2017b). While rational players are
expected to minimize their regret in the repeated game, the
quantal-regret method only assumes that players are more
likely to act in a way that gives them lower regret.1 The
authors demonstrated on data from controlled experiments
with human players—on the 2x2 game dataset of (Selten and
Chmura 2008) and on the auction dataset of (Noti, Nisan,
and Yaniv 2014)—that the quantal-regret method provides
significantly more accurate estimates than both the classic Nash equilibrium-based methods and the method that
assumes perfect regret minimization (Nekipelov, Syrgkanis, and Tardos 2015). The advantage of the quantal-regret
method over the regret-minimization method was further
confirmed on ad auction field data in (Noti and Syrgkanis
2021). See Appendix A for an overview of the Nash equilibrium method and Appendix B for an overview of the
quantal-regret method.
In this work we study the benefits from using models of
behavioral equilibria for the purpose of the estimation task.
Similar to the classic approach of Nash equilibrium, the approach of using the behavioral equilibria assumes that the
players are at a stationary state; however, these stationary
states are defined in terms of behavioral considerations that
have been studied in the behavioral literature and shown
to describe human biases. Thus, these behavioral equilibria
have the potential to be suitable models for deriving esti-

We consider the problem of estimating preferences of human
agents from data of strategic systems where the agents repeatedly interact. Recently, it was demonstrated that a new
estimation method called “quantal regret” produces more accurate estimates for human agents than the classic approach
that assumes that agents are rational and reach a Nash equilibrium; however, this method has not been compared to methods that take into account behavioral aspects of human play.
In this paper we leverage equilibrium concepts from behavioral economics for this purpose and ask how well they perform compared to the quantal regret and Nash equilibrium
methods. We develop four estimation methods based on established behavioral equilibrium models to infer the utilities
of human agents from observed data of normal-form games.
The equilibrium models we study are quantal-response equilibrium, action-sampling equilibrium, payoff-sampling equilibrium, and impulse-balance equilibrium. We show that in
some of these concepts the inference is achieved analytically via closed formulas, while in the others the inference
is achieved only algorithmically. We use experimental data
of 2x2 games to evaluate the estimation success of these behavioral equilibrium methods. The results show that the estimates they produce are more accurate than the estimates
of the Nash equilibrium. The comparison with the quantalregret method shows that the behavioral methods have better hit rates, but the quantal-regret method performs better in
terms of the overall mean squared error, and we discuss the
differences between the methods.

1

Introduction

Suppose that we are looking at data generated by several human agents repeatedly playing a game. In the data we can
observe the actions played by each player in each period of
play. However, the data do not contain the players’ true preferences (“values”), which are the private information of each
player. In many multi-agent strategic applications there are
large amounts of such data (e.g., bidding data from online
auctions), and these private values of the agents, which actually drive the actions they choose to play, are required as a
crucial first step before performing any analysis on the data.
For example, the values are needed to determine whether the

1
The regret is in the usual sense used in the regret-minimization
literature (Blum and Mansour 2007). This notion assumes that
players manage to achieve at least as much utility as they could
have gotten from playing any fixed action repeatedly.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5637

