The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bias and Variance of Post-processing in Differential Privacy
Keyu Zhu1 , Pascal Van Hentenryck1 , Ferdinando Fioretto2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology,
2
Syracuse University
keyu.zhu@gatech.edu, pvh@isye.gatech.edu, ffiorett@syr.edu

Abstract

On data-release tasks, differentially private algorithms,
typically, inject carefully calibrated noise to the data before
release. However, whereas this process guarantees privacy, it
also affects the fidelity of the released data. In particular, the
injected noise often produces data sets that violate consistency constraints of the application domain. For example, in
census statistics, the number of people satisfying a property
must be consistent in a geographical hierarchy, e.g., at the
national, state, and county levels. The injection of independent noise, however, cannot ensure the consistency of these
constraints.
To overcome this limitation, the differentially private outputs can be post-processed via data-independent functions
that transform the noisy data to render it consistent with
the domain constraints. The post-processing step is guaranteed to retain differential privacy. Moreover, when the
feasible region is convex, a largely adopted class of postprocessing functions, called projections, is guaranteed to improve accuracy. Post-processing has been applied successfully in many applications, including census data (Abowd
2018), energy systems (Fioretto, Mak, and Van Hentenryck
2020), and mobility (He et al. 2015). However, the effect
of post-processing on the noise distribution is poorly understood: It is often argued that it may introduce bias and/or
increase variance. Figure 1 illustrates this aspect on a census
data-release problem, described later in the paper. It depicts
the distribution of the Laplacian residual x̃ − x, where x
denotes the true data and x̃ the noisy data, obtained by applying Laplacian noise to x, as well as the post-processed
residual x̂ − x, where x̂ is the projection of x̃ onto the feasible region. The results are shown for two counties, and, as
can be seen, the post-processing introduces significant bias
on their associated privacy-preserving data.
The key contribution of this paper is to take a first step towards understanding the properties of post-processing. Motivated by census applications, it studies the behavior of
two widely adopted classes of post-processing functions,
called projections, for domains where the feasibility space
is specified by linear equations. The two classes differ by
the presence of non-negativity constraints. The paper shows
that, when non-negativity constraints are absent, the projection does not introduce bias. When projections include nonnegativity constraints, the paper presents an upper bound on
the bias, which provides some insights on the type of prob-

Post-processing immunity is a fundamental property of differential privacy: it enables the application of arbitrary dataindependent transformations to the results of differentially
private outputs without affecting their privacy guarantees.
When query outputs must satisfy domain constraints, postprocessing can be used to project the privacy-preserving outputs onto the feasible region. Moreover, when the feasible
region is convex, a widely adopted class of post-processing
steps is also guaranteed to improve accuracy. Post-processing
has been applied successfully in many applications including
census data-release, energy systems, and mobility. However,
its effects on the noise distribution is poorly understood: It
is often argued that post-processing may introduce bias and
increase variance. This paper takes a first step towards understanding the properties of post-processing. It considers the
release of census data and examines, both theoretically and
empirically, the behavior of a widely adopted class of postprocessing functions.

Introduction
Data sets and statistics about groups of individuals are increasingly collected and released, feeding many optimization and learning algorithms. In many cases, the released
data contain sensitive information whose privacy is strictly
regulated. For example, in the U.S., the census data is regulated under Title 13 (U.S. Census Bureau 2020), which requires that no individual be identified from any data release
by the Census Bureau. In Europe, data releases are regulated
according to the General Data Protection Regulation (EU
2016), which addresses the control and transfer of personal
data. Hence statistical agencies release privacy-preserving
data and statistics that conform to these requirements.
Differential Privacy (Dwork et al. 2006) is of particular interest to meet this goal. Differential privacy is a formal privacy definition that bounds the disclosure risk of
any individual participating in a computation. It is considered the de-facto standard for privacy protection and has
been adopted by various corporations (Erlingsson, Pihur,
and Korolova 2014; Team 2017) and governmental agencies
(Abowd 2018).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11177

