The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Graph-based Relevance Matching Model for Ad-hoc Retrieval
Yufeng Zhang1∗ , Jinghao Zhang1,2∗ , Zeyu Cui1,2 , Shu Wu1,2,3† and Liang Wang1,2
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Artificial Intelligence Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yufeng.zhang,jinghao.zhang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn
{zeyu.cui,shu.wu,wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
To retrieve more relevant, appropriate and useful documents
given a query, finding clues about that query through the text
is crucial. Recent deep learning models regard the task as a
term-level matching problem, which seeks exact or similar
query patterns in the document. However, we argue that they
are inherently based on local interactions and do not generalise to ubiquitous, non-consecutive contextual relationships.
In this work, we propose a novel relevance matching model
based on graph neural networks to leverage the documentlevel word relationships for ad-hoc retrieval. In addition to
the local interactions, we explicitly incorporate all contexts
of a term through the graph-of-word text format. Matching
patterns can be revealed accordingly to provide a more accurate relevance score. Our approach significantly outperforms
strong baselines on two ad-hoc benchmarks. We also experimentally compare our model with BERT and show our advantages on long documents.

(a) Query-document pair from Robust04

(b) A local context scheme (c) A graph-based context scheme

Introduction
Deep learning models have proved remarkably successful
for information retrieval (IR) in recent years. The goal herein
is to rank among a collection of documents the top relevant
ones given a query. By utilising deep neural networks, these
models aim to learn a function that can automatically extract
matching patterns from two pieces of text, that is the query
and the document, end-to-end in place of hand-crafted features.
In general, there are two categories of neural matching
architectures. One is called representation-based matching,
which projects the query and document into the same lowdimensional semantic space and scores according to their
similarity. Examples include DSSM (Huang et al. 2013),
ARC-I (Hu et al. 2014), and CDSSM (Shen et al. 2014). Another is called interaction-based matching, which learns relevant patterns directly from the interaction signals between
the query and the document. Examples include DRMM
(Guo et al. 2016), KNRM (Xiong et al. 2017), and PACRR
(Hui et al. 2017, 2018). While the first category primarily
concentrates on the semantics, the second emphasises more

Figure 1: An example of relevant query-document pair
with two sentences far apart in the document (some words
omitted). Local context scheme fails to discover the longdistance matching patterns due to the restriction of context. Graph-based context scheme works since words “Carrillo” and “ocular” play an important bridge role to connect
“melanoma” and “treat” together.

on the relevance. As discussed in (Guo et al. 2016), there
are significant differences between semantic matching and
relevance matching. The latter is naturally more suitable for
ad-hoc retrieval since the term-level query-document interaction provides more specific matching signals than the ensemble of semantic representations.
In addition to the term-level query-document interaction,
the document-level word relationships are also essential for
relevance matching yet less explored so far. Taking Figure 1(a) as an example, when searching with the query
“melanoma treatment”, the retrieved document is expected
to be highly relevant to them as a whole rather than to
any single of “melanoma” or “treatment”. However, query
phrases do not always appear exactly in the document. It
occurs more frequently that they (or their synonyms) dis-

∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4688

