The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Interpretable Algorithmic Hiring Using Evolutionary
Many-Objective Optimization
Michael Geden, Joshua Andrews
Modern Hire, Delafield, Wisconsin
{michael.geden, joshua.andrews}@modernhire.com

Abstract

impact represents decisions that have a disproportionate impact on minority groups, such as unequal hiring rates.
The industry standard method, rational weighting, involves subject-matter experts balancing predictive accuracy
and fairness objectives by manually generating algorithms
using heuristics and data (SIOP 2018). Rational weighting
addresses fairness requirements, but it is resource-intensive,
finds sub-optimal solutions, encodes human biases, and cannot guarantee the legal requirement that a fairer and equally
predictive hiring algorithm does not exist. These limitations
have led to the growing interest in methods that learn hiring
algorithms solely from the data—algorithmic hiring. Algorithmic hiring carries transformative potential for reducing
bias while enhancing reproducibility, predictive accuracy,
and scalability for larger feature sets (Raub 2018; Houser
2019). Despite the significant promise of algorithmic hiring,
and the claims of many organizations, no reported method
currently supports optimizing predictive objectives while
adhering to legal fairness standards. This has led to the continued reliance on rational weighting (Raghavan et al. 2020;
Sánchez-Monedero, Dencik, and Edwards 2020).
Many existing solutions eschew fairness requirements to
solely focus on predictive accuracy, leading to algorithms
that are not legal for practical implementation (Hemamou et
al. 2019; Meijer et al. 2020). Alternatively, methods have
been proposed to reduce relationships between predictors
and minority classes; however, these methods do not account for adverse impact (Calmon et al. 2017; He,
Burghardt, and Lerman 2020). Multi-objective optimization
(MOO) models have demonstrated promising results when
simplifying protected groups into a binary minority variable,
yet performance was not compared to competitive baselines,
such as rational weighting (De Cortes, Sackett, and Lieven
2011; Song, Wee, and Newman 2017). MOO models produce an approximate pareto front—set of non-dominated solutions—which can incorporate client preferences and

Hiring is a high-stakes decision-making process that balances
the joint objectives of being fair and accurately selecting the
top candidates. The industry standard method employs subject-matter experts to manually generate hiring algorithms;
however, this method is resource intensive and finds sub-optimal solutions. Despite the recognized need for algorithmic
hiring solutions to address these limitations, no reported
method currently supports optimizing predictive objectives
while complying to legal fairness standards. We present the
novel application of Evolutionary Many-Objective Optimization (EMOO) methods to create the first fair, interpretable,
and legally compliant algorithmic hiring approach. Using a
proposed novel application of Dirichlet-based genetic operators for improved search, we compare state-of-the-art EMOO
models (NSGA-III, SPEA2-SDE, bi-goal evolution) to expert
solutions, verifying our results across three real world datasets across diverse organizational positions. Experimental
results demonstrate the proposed EMOO models outperform
human experts, consistently generate fairer hiring algorithms,
and can provide additional lift when removing constraints required for human analysis.

Introduction
Hiring is a high-stakes practice that influences people’s livelihoods across the globe. It is an important and challenging
socio-technical problem relevant to industrial, academic,
and governmental organizations (Raghavan, Barocas,
Kleinberg, and Levy 2020; Shute et al. 2016). The hiring
process encompasses the joint objectives of providing a fair,
legally compliant process and selecting candidates that are
best fit for the position. Governments vary in their requirements for fairness in hiring; however, many conceptualize
fairness as the absence of at least two types of discrimination: disparate treatment and adverse impact (e.g., USA, EU,
ILO). Disparate treatment represents differential treatment
of protected groups, such as the use of quotas, while adverse

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14795

