The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bridging Towers of Multi-task Learning with a Gating Mechanism for
Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis and Sequential Metaphor Identification
Rui Mao, Xiao Li
Ruimao Tech, Shenzhen, China
{mao.r, li.x}@ruimao.tech

Abstract

propose a novel information transformation (soft-parameter
sharing) mechanism between MTL towers, namely Gated
Bridging Mechanism (GBM).
The motivation of introducing GBM is that gating mechanism is intuitive for the filtering of information from auxiliary tasks to a main task, because the main task tower can
decide through gating how much information is utilised from
its private tower and its neighbour towers (the auxiliary task
towers). Compared with previous information transformation methods, e.g., cross-stitch (Misra et al. 2016), attention
(Chen and Qian 2020), and vanilla gating (Dankers et al.
2019), whose mechanisms fuse the information from private
and neighbour towers directly, GBM takes an extra gate to
filter out useless information from neighbour towers before
fusion. The output of GBM is given by the trade-off between
the information from a private tower and the filtered information from neighbour towers. Such a method allows an
MTL model to absorb selected information from auxiliary
tasks, hence yielding better performance.
We examine our method with two independent MTL
tasks, namely Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA)
and Sequential Metaphor Identification (SMI). ABSA aims
to identify aspect terms, opinion terms and sentiment polarities of the aspect terms in a sequence. We introduce ABSA
in our tests, because conventionally, ABSA has multiple predefined subtasks which are related to each other (He et al.
2019; Chen and Qian 2020). SMI, on the other hand, aims
to identify the metaphoricity of each token in a sequence.
We introduce SMI because it can use a single-task sequence
labelling model (Wu et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2018) or an MTL
model with an auxiliary task (Dankers et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2020). Thus, we can employ different auxiliary tasks with
different utilities for SMI to examine, if GBM can gain information from a supportive auxiliary task, e.g., Part-of-Speech
tagging, or filter out useless information which is given by
randomly generated hidden states.
By testing with three publicly available datasets developed by Pontiki et al. (2014) and Steen et al. (2010) for
ABSA and SMI, respectively, our method yields an average
gain of 1.11% against the strongest baselines on both tasks.
Furthermore, we compare GBM against cross-stitch, attention and vanilla gating mechanisms. The experiments show
that GBM outperforms these methods based on the same
backbone of BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and Transformer

Multi-task learning (MTL) has been widely applied in Natural Language Processing. A major task and its associated
auxiliary tasks share the same encoder; hence, an MTL encoder can learn the sharing abstract information between the
major and auxiliary tasks. Task-specific towers are then employed upon the sharing encoder to learn task-specific information. Previous works demonstrated that exchanging information between task-specific towers yielded extra gains. This
is known as soft-parameter sharing MTL. In this paper, we
propose a novel gating mechanism for the bridging of MTL
towers. Our method is evaluated based on aspect-based sentiment analysis and sequential metaphor identification tasks.
The experiments demonstrate that our method can yield better
performance than the baselines on both tasks. Based on the
same Transformer backbone, we compare our gating mechanism with other information transformation mechanisms,
e.g., cross-stitch, attention and vanilla gating. The experiments show that our method also surpasses these baselines.

Introduction
Parameter-sharing-based multi-task learning (MTL) has
been widely applied in diverse Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Ruder et al. 2019; Dankers et al. 2019;
Chen and Qian 2020). Given a set of related tasks, MTL
aims to use a unified model to learn their sharing representations (Zhang and Yang 2017). Compared to individual processing of a single task, introducing related auxiliary tasks
can further boost the performance of a Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based MTL model on the major task. This is
because multiple related tasks support the sharing encoder
of the MTL model in acquiring knowledge from each subtask (Zhang and Yang 2017). Thus, the major task is improved by applying the learnt sharing knowledge from different tasks. Besides, introducing multi-tasks can reduce the
risk of overfitting in DNNs (Ruder 2017). Based on the sharing encoder, an MTL model has task-specific towers (a tower
refers to a stack of DNN layers) to learn task-specific knowledge for each subtask. Previous works (Zhang and Yang
2017; Ruder 2017) demonstrated that exchanging information between towers can further improve MTL performance,
which is known as soft-parameter sharing. In this paper, we
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13534

