The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computing the Proportional Veto Core
Egor Ianovski1 and Aleksei Y. Kondratev1,2
1

HSE University, International Laboratory of Game Theory and Decision Making, Russia
2
Institute for Regional Economic Studies RAS, St Petersburg, Russia
george.ianovski@gmail.com, akondratev@hse.ru

Abstract

of nearly half the population. As an arbitrated settlement to
an armed dispute, a is unlikely to stop the violence.
Should we decide that in our context the minority matters,
we need to study the profile from the bottom up. Rather than
asking how many individuals would love to see a elected,
the real issue is to how many such an outcome would be unacceptable. A line of research starting with Mueller (1978)
considered voting rules that endowed groups or individuals
with the power to unilaterally block certain outcomes from
being elected, regardless of how desirable these outcomes
may be to the rest of the population.
Mueller (1978) introduced the procedure of voting by veto
to select a public good, with the explicit aim of protecting
an individual from unfair treatment. The alternatives consist
of one proposal from each voter, as well as the status quo.
An order is formed over the voters and each, in turn, strikes
off the alternative they like the least. Exactly one outcome is
selected by this procedure, and clearly no voter will see their
worst outcome elected. But this procedure is not anonymous,
and requires that the number of alternatives be one greater
than the voters.
Much of the subsequent work focused on the strategic behaviour of voters under this procedure. The sincere outcome
of voting by veto and similar rules has been shown to correspond to a strong equilibrium solution (Peleg 1978; Moulin
1982), dominance solution (Moulin 1980), and maxmin behaviour (Moulin 1981b); truth-telling may not be an equilibrium, but among equally sophisticated voters the same alternative can be expected to be elected. However, these results depended on certain relationships between the number
of candidates and voters, and these procedures all violated
either anonymity or neutrality.
Moulin (1981a) extended the concept of voting by veto
from individuals to coalitions, and studied the core of the resulting cooperative game. The veto core is anonymous, neutral, and is well defined for any number of alternatives and
voters. Moulin showed that endowing each coalition with the
power to veto a number of alternatives proportional to the
coalition’s size guarantees that the veto core is non-empty,
and is the smallest possible core out of all such rules. Moulin
also proposed voting by veto tokens for selecting a specific
outcome from the veto core, however while the veto core as
a concept is anonymous, voting by veto tokens returns to the
problem of different voting orders leading to different out-

In social choice there often arises a conflict between the majority principle (the search for a candidate that is as good as
possible for as many voters as possible), and the protection of
minority rights (choosing a candidate that is not overly bad
for particular individuals or groups). In a context where the
latter is our main concern, veto-based rules – giving individuals or groups the ability to strike off certain candidates from
the list – are a natural and effective way of ensuring that no
minority is left with an outcome they find untenable. However, such rules often fail to be anonymous, or impose specific
restrictions on the number of voters and candidates. These issues can be addressed by considering the proportional veto
core – the solution to a cooperative game where every coalition is given the power to veto a number of candidates proportional to its size. However, the naı̈ve algorithm for the veto
core is exponential, and the only known rules for selecting
from the veto core, with an arbitrary number of voters, violate either anonymity or neutrality. In this paper we present a
polynomial time algorithm for computing the veto core and
present a neutral and anonymous algorithm for selecting a
candidate from it. We also show that a pessimist can manipulate the veto core in polynomial time.

Introduction
Suppose we have a society of 100 individuals who express
the following preferences over alternatives a, b, and c:
• 60 individuals report a  b  c.
• 40 individuals report b  c  a.
Which alternative should the society adopt? It is reasonable
to exclude c from the running, as it is Pareto dominated by b,
but both a and b have good arguments to support them, and it
is difficult to choose one over another without knowing what
this society is and what they are electing. In a political context a lot can be said in favour of a. As a president, b’s initiatives would be constantly challenged by 60% of the public,
and in a parliamentary system prime minister b would find it
very difficult to achieve anything at all. On the other hand, if
a, b, and c are meeting times, then presumably most people
would be able to attend b, while with a the hall will be halfempty. As government budgets, a will write off the interests
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5489

