The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

KAN: Knowledge-aware Attention Network for Fake News Detection
Yaqian Dun1, 2 , Kefei Tu1, 2 , Chen Chen1, 2 * , Chunyan Hou3 , Xiaojie Yuan1, 2
1

College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Network and Data Security Technology, Tianjin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, China
{dunyaqian, tukefei}@dbis.nankai.edu.cn, {nkchenchen, yuanxj}@nankai.edu.cn, chunyanhou@163.com
2

Abstract
The explosive growth of fake news on social media has drawn
great concern both from industrial and academic communities. There has been an increasing demand for fake news detection due to its detrimental effects. Generally, news content
is condensed and full of knowledge entities. However, existing methods usually focus on the textual contents and social
context, and ignore the knowledge-level relationships among
news entities. To address this limitation, in this paper, we
propose a novel Knowledge-aware Attention Network (KAN)
that incorporates external knowledge from knowledge graph
for fake news detection. Firstly, we identify entity mentions
in news contents and align them with the entities in knowledge graph. Then, the entities and their contexts are used
as external knowledge to provide complementary information. Finally, we design News towards Entities (N-E) attention and News towards Entities and Entity Contexts (N-E2 C)
attention to measure the importances of knowledge. Thus,
our proposed model can incorporate both semantic-level and
knowledge-level representations of news to detect fake news.
Experimental results on three public datasets show that our
model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, and also validate the effectiveness of knowledge attention.

Figure 1: A piece of fake news on PolitiFact.

2018b) propose a deep neural network to capture multimodal features for fake news detection. Liu et al. (Liu and
Wu 2018) utilizes CNN and GRU to capture useful patterns
from user profiles.
Although the existing deep learning methods have
achieved great success to detect fake news based on the highlevel feature representations of news contents, they ignore
the external knowledge by which people usually judge the
authenticity of the news. News content is highly condensed
and comprised of a large number of entity mentions. A
named entity could possibly denote different entity mentions
because a named entity may have multiple textual forms,
such as its aliases, abbreviations and alternate spellings. For
example, as shown in Figure 1, a piece of news contains the
following entity mentions: “West Texas”, “33rd District”,
“Barack Obama”, “Gary Jones”, “Mr. Obama”, “Punitive
damages”. People usually read the news content first and
then realize “West Texas” is a location, “Barack Obama”
and “Gary Jones” are politicians, and can judge that “Barack
Obama”, “Mr. Obama” and “Obama” refer to the same person. “Barack Obama”, “Mr. Obama” and “Obama” are entity mentions of entity “Barack Obama”. These knowledgelevel judgments and connections are helpful to evaluate the
credibility of the news. However, these mentions cannot be
understood directly based on the text content of news. Thus,
the introduction of external knowledge is much important
for fake news detection.
To extract deep logical connections among entities, it
is necessary to incorporate the knowledge information in
knowledge graph. Knowledge graph is a multi-relational

Introduction
Social media has become a platform for people to obtain
and exchange information. Due to the increasing usage and
convenience of social media, more and more people publish
and read news online. Meanwhile, it also gradually becomes
an ideal place for the widespread of fake news. Since fake
news distorts and fabricates facts maliciously, its extensive
dissemination has extremely negative impacts on individuals
and society. Therefore, it is desirable and socially beneficial
to detect fake news in social media.
For fake news detection, early studies mainly focus
on machine learning model based on feature engineering
(Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011; Feng, Banerjee, and
Choi 2012). After the emergence of deep learning, various
deep-learning-based approaches are proposed and greatly
improve the detection performances. Ma et al. (Ma et al.
2016) use recurrent neural networks to extract linguistic features within the news contents. Wang et al. (Wang et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

81

