The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Supervised Prototype Representation Learning for
Event-Based Corporate Profiling
Zixuan Yuan1 , Hao Liu2∗ , Renjun Hu3 , Denghui Zhang1 , Hui Xiong1 *
1

Rutgers University
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
3
Alibaba Group
{zy101, denghui.zhang, hxiong}@rutgers.edu, liuhao30@baidu.com, renjun.hrj@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract
Event-based corporate profiling aims to assess the evolving operational status of the corresponding corporate from
its event sequence. Existing studies on corporate profiling
have partially addressed the problem via (i) case-by-case empirical analysis by leveraging traditional financial methods,
or (ii) the automatic profile inference by reformulating the
problem into a supervised learning task. However, both approaches heavily rely on domain knowledge and are laborintensive. More importantly, the task-specific nature of both
approaches prevents the obtained corporate profiles from being applied to diversified downstream applications. To this
end, in this paper, we propose a Self-Supervised Prototype
Representation Learning (SePaL) framework for dynamic
corporate profiling. By exploiting the topological information of an event graph and exploring self-supervised learning
techniques, SePaL can obtain unified corporate representations that are robust to event noises and can be easily finetuned to benefit various down-stream applications with only
a few annotated data. Specifically, we first infer the initial
cluster distribution of noise-resistant event prototypes based
on latent representations of events. Then, we construct four
permutation-invariant self-supervision signals to guide the
representation learning of the event prototype. In terms of
applications, we exploit the learned time-evolving corporate
representations for both stock price spike prediction and corporate default risk evaluation. Experimental results on two
real-world corporate event datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of SePaL for these two applications.

Figure 1: Illustrative example of corporate event sequences.

Prior studies on event-based corporate profiling can be
roughly categorized into two classes: (i) Traditional financial methods, which implement case-by-case empirical analysis on substantial events (Richardson, Taylor, and Wright
2014), and (ii) Learning-based methods, which achieve automatic profile inference by formulating the problem into
various supervised learning tasks such as stock price prediction (Ding et al. 2016) and corporate default risk evaluation (Yeh, Wang, and Tsai 2015). However, both types of
approaches rely to a large extent on domain knowledge and
are inevitably labor-intensive. More particularly, their taskspecific nature prevents the obtained corporate profile from
being applied to various application scenarios.
Indeed, the recent emergence of prototype learning and
self-supervised learning provides great potentials for us to
improve existing literature, in terms of both dependence of
domain knowledge and generalization of profile. We detail
our research insights from the following two perspectives.
First, real-life event sequences are usually characterized
by their high degree of stochasticity and obscurity. Inspired
by event trend analysis (Raj and Musgrave 2009), we find
that the representative event subsequences can explicitly reflect the corporate status, but do not always strictly appear;
instead, they may be delivered in various permutations and
accompanied by noise events. For instance, in Figure 1, an
event set {1, 2, 3} is exactly repeated in different permutations of subsequences to express negative expectations on

Introduction
Event-based corporate profiling aims to assess the evolving operational status of the concerned corporate from its
event sequence. Instead of static corporate overview, it incorporates dynamic event information to capture the evolving business circumstances, which enables investors to exploit the price inefficiencies around events. Thus, eventbased corporate profiling could be beneficial to a wide range
of financial services, such as corporate budget planning, corporate bond credit ratings, and event-driven asset investing.
* Hao Liu and Hui Xiong are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4644

