The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DialogBERT: Discourse-Aware Response Generation via Learning to Recover and
Rank Utterances
Xiaodong Gu1 , Kang Min Yoo2 and Jung-Woo Ha2
1

School of Software, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
NAVER AI Lab, Korea
xiaodong.gu@sjtu.edu.cn, {kangmin.yoo, jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com

Abstract

a sequence-to-sequence model (Cho et al. 2014) with the
Evolved Transformer (So, Liang, and Le 2019) on large-scale
multi-turn conversations. Blender, developed by Facebook,
provides recipes for building open-domain chatbots that
perform well in human evaluations (Roller et al. 2020).

Recent advances in pre-trained language models have significantly improved neural response generation. However, existing methods usually view the dialogue context as a linear
sequence of tokens and learn to generate the next word through
token-level self-attention. Such token-level encoding hinders
the exploration of discourse-level coherence among utterances.
This paper presents DialogBERT, a novel conversational response generation model that enhances previous PLM-based
dialogue models. DialogBERT employs a hierarchical Transformer architecture. To efficiently capture the discourse-level
coherence among utterances, we propose two training objectives, including masked utterance regression and distributed utterance order ranking in analogy to the original BERT training.
Experiments on three multi-turn conversation datasets show
that our approach remarkably outperforms the baselines, such
as BART and DialoGPT, in terms of quantitative evaluation.
The human evaluation suggests that DialogBERT generates
more coherent, informative, and human-like responses than
the baselines with significant margins.

However, existing pre-training conversation models usually view the dialogue context as a linear sequence of tokens
and learns to generate the next word through token-level selfattention. One issue of this approach is that the high-level
relationships between utterances are harder to capture using
word-level semantics. For example, the discourse-level relationship between the utterances “coffee please” and “here
you are” (Figure 1) is apparent, but word-level comparisons,
such as <coffee, you> and <please, are>, obscures the highlevel relationship. Furthermore, this full pairwise attention is
inefficient since it requires each word in the context and the
decoder to interact with all other words regardless of their
distances and semantic units.

Introduction
Multi-turn open-domain dialogue modeling is an active research topic in the field of natural language processing. However, generating a coherent and informative response for a
given dialogue context remains a challenge. A critical challenge is the learning of rich and robust context representations of dialogue utterances (Ortega and Vu 2017; Pragst et al.
2018), namely the challenge of encoding a dialogue context
into a vector that adequately captures the semantics (e.g.,
topic, intention).
Large-scale pre-training language models using
Transformer-based architectures have recently achieved
remarkable successes in a variety of NLP tasks (Devlin
et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019; Zhang, Wei, and Zhou
2019; Zheng et al. 2020). As such, there are increasingly
work that aims to use pre-training language models for
conversation modeling (Mehri et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2019; Rothe, Narayan, and Severyn 2019). For example,
DialoGPT (Zhang et al. 2019) extends the GPT-2 (Radford
et al. 2019) to generate conversation responses on large-scale
dialogue corpus. Meena (Adiwardana et al. 2020) trains
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12911

To alleviate the issues above, we present DialogBERT,
a novel conversational response generation model. DialogBERT employs a hierarchical Transformer architecture to
represent the dialogue context. It first encodes dialogue utterances through a Transformer encoder and then encodes the resulting utterance vectors using a discourse-level Transformer
to obtain a representation of the entire dialogue context. To efficiently capture discourse-level coherence among utterances,
we propose two training objectives in analogy to the original
BERT training: 1) masked context regression, which masks
a randomly-selected utterance and predicts the encoding vector for the masked utterance directly; and 2) distributed
utterance order ranking, which organizes randomly shuffled utterances of a conversation into a coherent dialogue
context through a Learning-to-Rank (Cao et al. 2007) neural
network.
We evaluate DialogBERT on popular multi-turn conversation datasets, namely Weibo, MultiWOZ and DailyDialog. Results show that DialogBERT outperforms baselines
in terms of perplexity, BLEU, and NIST. Human evaluation supports the superiority of our approach in capturing
discourse-level semantics and generating more plausible dialogue responses.

