The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Text-based RL Agents with Commonsense Knowledge:
New Challenges, Environments and Baselines
Keerthiram Murugesan,1, * Mattia Atzeni,1, 2 Pavan Kapanipathi,1 Pushkar Shukla,3 Sadhana
Kumaravel,1 Gerald Tesauro,1 Kartik Talamadupula,1 Mrinmaya Sachan,4 Murray Campbell 1
1 IBM Research 2 EPFL 3 TTI Chicago

4 ETH Zurich

Observation
You've entered a kitchen. You
see a dishwasher and a fridge.
Here's a dining table. You see a
dirty plate and a red apple on the
table.

Abstract
Text-based games have emerged as an important test-bed for
Reinforcement Learning (RL) research, requiring RL agents
to combine grounded language understanding with sequential decision making. In this paper, we examine the problem
of infusing RL agents with commonsense knowledge. Such
knowledge would allow agents to efficiently act in the world
by pruning out implausible actions, and to perform lookahead planning to determine how current actions might affect
future world states. We design a new text-based gaming environment called TextWorld Commonsense (TWC) for
training and evaluating RL agents with a specific kind of
commonsense knowledge about objects, their attributes, and
affordances. We also introduce several baseline RL agents
which track the sequential context and dynamically retrieve
the relevant commonsense knowledge from ConceptNet. We
show that agents which incorporate commonsense knowledge
in TWC perform better, while acting more efficiently. We conduct user-studies to estimate human performance on TWC and
show that there is ample room for future improvement.

Plausible Actions

Agent

Best action trajectory

ConceptNet
AtLocation
Apple

Plate

Fridge
AtLocation

Goal
Dishwasher

1. Open the dishwasher
2. Put the dirty plate in the fridge
3. Put the red apple in the dishwasher
4. ...

Clean up the kitchen

1. Take the red apple from the table
2. Take the dirty plate from the table
3. Open the fridge
4. Put the red apple in the fridge
5. Open the dishwasher
6. Put the dirty plate in the

dishwasher

Figure 1: Illustration of a TWC game. The agent is given
an initial observation (top left) and has to produce the list
of actions (bottom right) that are necessary to achieve the
goal (bottom center) using relevant commonsense knowledge from ConceptNet (bottom left).

expected to use commonsense knowledge stored in knowledge bases such as ConceptNet (Liu and Singh 2004; Speer,
Chin, and Havasi 2017) to act efficiently. TWC is a sandbox environment similar to TextWorld where the agent has
to clean up a house. Achieving goals in this environment requires commonsense knowledge about objects, their properties, locations, and affordances. Efficient use of commonsense knowledge would allow the agent to select correct
and applicable actions at each step: i.e., improve sample efficiency by reducing exploration. Moreover, commonsense
knowledge would help the agent to perform look-ahead
planning and determine how current actions might affect future world states (Juba 2016). Fig 1 presents a running example from TWC that illustrates how the agent can leverage
a commonsense knowledge base (KB).
Validating such environments is challenging, and requires: (1) verifying the information used in the games; (2)
evaluating baseline agents that are capable of utilizing external commonsense knowledge against counterparts that do
not; and (3) providing empirical evidence to show that the
environment can drive future research. In this work, we address each of these by first performing human annotations to
validate the correctness and completeness of the TWC environment. Next, we design a framework of agents that combine text-based agents with commonsense knowledge. The
agents can dynamically retrieve relevant knowledge from a
commonsense KB. Finally, based on human performance on

Introduction
Over the years, simulation environments have been used extensively to drive advances in reinforcement learning (RL).
A recent framework that has received much attention is
TextWorld (TW) (Côté et al. 2018), where an agent must interact with an external environment to achieve a given goal
using only the modality of text. TextWorld and similar textbased environments seek to bring advances in grounded language understanding to a sequential decision making setup.
While existing text-based games are valuable for RL
research, they fail to test a key aspect of human intelligence: common sense. Humans capitalize on commonsense
(background) knowledge about entities – properties, spatial relations, events, causes and effects, and other social
conventions – while interacting with the world (Mccarthy
1960; Winograd 1972; Davis and Marcus 2015). Motivated
by this, we propose a novel text-based environment called
TextWorld Commonsense (or TWC), where the agent is
* Corresponding Author: keerthiram.murugesan@ibm.com. Code

and data can be found at https://github.com/IBM/commonsense-rl.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9018

