The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consistency and Finite Sample Behavior of Binary Class Probability Estimation
Alexander Mey,1 Marco Loog, 1 2
1

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
2
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
a.mey@tudelft.nl, m.loog@tudelft.nl

Abstract

ture on proper scoring rules, is not that broadly known. So
next to our contribution on finite sample behavior for class
probability estimation, we present a condensed introduction
to this, in our opinion, under-appreciated field.
A proper scoring rule is essentially a loss function that
can measure the class probability point-wise. We investigate
in which circumstances those loss functions make use of
this potential and lift this point-wise property to the complete space. Next to proper scoring rules we use excess risk
bounds to come to our results. Excess risk bounds are essentially inequalities that quantify how much an empirical risk
minimizer is off from the true risk. Interestingly, our work
does not need any specific excess risk bound and is thus
very flexible. Any progress in that theory may also translate
to this work. Furthermore, if one is willing to make assumptions on the underlying distributions that lead to stronger excess risk bounds, we immediately also get stronger bounds
for our results under the same assumptions.
Combining those two areas, our main contributions are
the following. Based on the existing literature, we define in
Equation (9) a class probability estimate η̂ derived from an
empirical risk minimizer. Based on this, we analyze to which
extent commonly used loss functions are suitable for the
task of class probability estimation. We then derive conditions that ensure that the estimator η̂ converges in probability, for an increasing sample size, to the true class probabilities and we also analyze the rate at which this convergence
takes place. For ease of exposition all of the previous analysis is done with a well-specification condition that we derive
in Theorem 1. We, however, also discuss how this analysis
is to be interpreted when this well-specification condition
does not hold. As a direct application of our theory we derive error bounds when estimating the class probability with
a classification method trained with the squared or the logistic loss. We note already that the rate for the logistic loss
has, to the best of our knowledge, not been reported in the
literature. Finally we discuss how one can extend this work
to asymmetric loss functions and analyze their convergence
behavior per class label. To start with, however, the following two sections cover related work and some preliminaries.

We investigate to which extent one can recover class probabilities within the empirical risk minimization (ERM) paradigm.
We extend existing results and emphasize the tight relations
between empirical risk minimization and class probability estimation. Following previous literature on excess risk bounds
and proper scoring rules, we derive a class probability estimator based on empirical risk minimization. We then derive
conditions under which this estimator will converge with high
probability to the true class probabilities with respect to the
L1 -norm. One of our core contributions is a novel way to
derive finite sample L1 -convergence rates of this estimator
for different surrogate loss functions. We also study in detail which commonly used loss functions are suitable for this
estimation problem and briefly address the setting of modelmisspecification.

Introduction
In binary classification problems, we try to predict a label y ∈ {−1, 1} = Y based on an input feature vector
x ∈ X . Since optimizing for the classification accuracy is
often computationally too complex, one typically measures
performance through a surrogate loss function. Such methods are designed to achieve good classification performance,
but often we are also interested in the classifier’s confidence
or a class probability estimate as such. For instance, we may
not only want to classify a tumor as benign or malignant, but
also estimate a probability that the predicted label is wrong.
Also various methods in active or semi-supervised learning
rely on such class probability estimates. For example, in active learning, they are used in uncertainty based rules (Lewis
and Catlett 1994; Roy and McCallum 2001), while in semisupervised learning, they are needed in techniques like entropy regularization (Grandvalet and Bengio 2004).
In this paper, we derive necessary and sufficient conditions under which classifiers, obtained through the minimization of an empirical loss function, allow us to estimate
the class probability in a consistent way. More precisely, we
present a general way to derive finite sample bounds based
on those conditions. While the use of class probability estimates, as argued before, finds a broad audience, the necessary tools to understand the behavior, especially the litera-

Related Work
Many results on class probability estimation in the context
of non-parametric regression can be found in Györfi et al.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8967

