The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Making the Relation Matters: Relation of Relation Learning Network for
Sentence Semantic Matching
Kun Zhang1 , Le Wu1,2 , Guangyi Lv3 , Meng Wang1,2 * , Enhong Chen3 , Shulan Ruan3
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
{zhang1028kun, lewu.ustc, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com, {gylv,slruan}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

濖濴瀆濸澳瀂瀁濸澳濹瀅瀂瀀澳濦濡濟濜濍
濴濍澳澵澔濠濕濘濭澔瀆濼瀇瀆澳瀂瀁澳濕澔濖濙濢濗濜澔瀇濻濴瀇澳濼瀆澳濴濺濴濼瀁瀆瀇澳濴澳濧濜濣濤濤濝濢濛澔 濡濕濠濠濁
濵濄濍澳澵澔濤濙濦濧濣濢澔瀆濼瀇瀆 瀂瀁澳瀇濻濸澳瀆濸濴瀇濁澳澻澹濢濨濕濝濠濡濙濢濨澼
濵濅濍澳澵澔濫濣濡濕濢澔濼瀆澳瀆濼瀇瀇濼瀁濺澳濴濺濴濼瀁瀆瀇澳濕澔濖濩濝濠濘濝濢濛濁澳 澻澹濢濨濕濝濠濡濙濢濨澼
濵濆濍澳濂濣濖濣濘濭 濼瀆澳瀆濼瀇瀇濼瀁濺澳瀂瀁澳瀇濻濸澳濵濸瀁濶濻濁澻澷濣濢濨濦濕濘濝濗濨濝濣濢澼
濵濇濍澳濧濻濸瀅濸澳濼瀆澳濢濣澔濖濙濢濗濜澔濴瀅瀂瀈瀁濷澳瀇濻濸澳瀆濻瀂瀃瀃濼瀁濺澳瀀濴濿濿濁澻澷濣濢濨濦濕濘濝濗濨濝濣濢澼

Sentence semantic matching is one of the fundamental tasks
in natural language processing, which requires an agent to
determine the semantic relation among input sentences. Recently, deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance in this area, especially BERT. Despite their effectiveness, most of these models treat output labels as meaningless one-hot vectors, underestimating the semantic information and guidance of relations that these labels reveal, especially for tasks with a small number of labels. To address
this problem, we propose a Relation of Relation Learning
Network (R2 -Net) for sentence semantic matching. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst employ BERT to encode the input sentences
from a global perspective. Then a CNN-based encoder is designed to capture keywords and phrase information from a
local perspective. To fully leverage labels for better relation
information extraction, we introduce a self-supervised relation of relation classiﬁcation task for guiding R2 -Net to consider more about relations. Meanwhile, a triplet loss is employed to distinguish the intra-class and inter-class relations
in a ﬁner granularity. Empirical experiments on two sentence
semantic matching tasks demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed model.

濖濴瀆濸澳濧瀊瀂澳濹瀅瀂瀀澳濦濶濼濧濴濼濿濍
濴濍澳濪濸澳濵瀅濸濴瀇濻濸澳瀇濻濸澳濣濬濭濛濙濢 瀇濻濴瀇澳濤濠濕濢濨濧 濺濼瀉濸澳瀂濹濹濁
濵濄濍澳濄濠濕濢濨濧 濕濖濧濣濦濖澔濗濕濦濖濣濢澔濘濝濣濬濝濘濙澔 瀇瀂澳瀃瀅瀂濷瀈濶濸澳濣濬濭濛濙濢濁澳澻濂濙濩濨濦濕濠澼
濵濅濍澳濄濠濕濢濨濧 瀃瀅瀂濷瀈濶濸澳濣濬濭濛濙濢 濨濜濦濣濩濛濜澔濤濜濣濨濣濧濭濢濨濜濙濧濝濧濁 澻濂濙濩濨濦濕濠澼

Figure 1: Some examples from SNLI and SciTail datasets.
et al. 2017) to tackle this task. They focus on input sentences and design different architectures to explore sentence semantics comprehensively and precisely. Among all
these methods, BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) plays an important role. It adopts multi-layer transformers to make full use
of large corpus (i.e., BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia)
for the powerful pre-trained model. Meanwhile, two selfsupervised learning tasks (i.e., Masked LM and Next Sentence Prediction) are designed to better analyze sentence semantics and capture as much information as possible. Based
on BERT, plenty of work has made a big step in sentence
semantic modeling (Liu et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2018).
In fact, since relations are the predicting targets of sentence semantic matching task, most methods do not pay
enough attention to the relation learning. They just leverage
annotated labels to represent relations, which are formulated
as one-hot vectors. However, these independent and meaningless one-hot vectors cannot reveal the rich semantic information and guidance of relations (Zhang et al. 2018), which
will cause an information loss. Gururangan et al. (2018) has
observed that different relations among sentence pairs imply
speciﬁc semantic expressions. Taking Figure 1 as an example, most sentence pairs with “contradiction” relation contain negation words (e.g., nobody, never). “entailment” relation often leads to exact numbers being replaced with approximates (person, some). “Neutral” relation will import
some correct but irrelevant information (e.g., absorb carbon dioxide). Moreover, the expressions between sentence
pairs with different relations are very different. Therefore,
the comparison and contrastive learning among different relations (e.g., pairwise relation learning) can help models to
learn more about the semantic information implied in the re-

Introduction
Sentence semantic matching is a fundamental Natural Language Processing (NLP) task that tries to infer the most suitable label for a given sentence pair. For example, Natural
Language Inference (NLI) targets at classifying the input
sentence pair into one of the three relations (i.e., Entailment,
Contradiction, Neutral) (Kim et al. 2018). Paraphrase Identiﬁcation (PI) aims at identifying whether the input sentence
pair expresses the same meaning (Dolan and Brockett 2005).
Figure 1 gives some examples with different semantic relations from different datasets.
As a fundamental technology, sentence semantic matching has been applied successfully into many NLP ﬁelds, e.g.,
information retrieval (Clark et al. 2016), question answering (Liu et al. 2018), and dialog system (Serban et al. 2016).
Currently, most work leverages the advancement of representation learning techniques (Devlin et al. 2018; Vaswani
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14411

