The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Recursion in Abstract Argumentation is Hard —
On the Complexity of Semantics Based on Weak Admissibility
Wolfgang Dvořák,1 Markus Ulbricht,2 Stefan Woltran1
1

TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation, Austria
Leipzig University, Department of Computer Science, Germany
{dvorak,woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, mulbricht@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
2

Abstract

inga, Flesca, and Furfaro 2020). However, no semantics for
abstract argumentation among the numerous invented so far
(see e.g. (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011)) has addressed this problem in a commonly agreed way.
In a recent paper, Baumann, Brewka, and Ulbricht
(2020b) propose a mediating position between naivity and
admissibility and introduced the concept of weak admissibility. This new concept aims at limiting the effect of selfdefeating arguments by verifying the credibility of arguments in a recursive fashion: any conflict-free set of arguments is considered acceptable unless attacked by some serious rival. On top of handling self-defeating arguments in
a more reasonable way, the introduced semantics possess
several promising theoretical properties which were already
pointed out in (Baumann, Brewka, and Ulbricht 2020b) by
showing that weak admissibility inherits many of the desirable properties of its classical Dung-style counterpart.
These observations triggered further investigations of these
semantics w.r.t. well-known postulates discussed in the literature (see (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2018; van der
Torre and Vesic 2017)): in particular, Dauphin, Rienstra, and
van der Torre (2020) have studied the aforementioned postulates in a comprehensive fashion while Baumann, Brewka,
and Ulbricht (2020a) address concepts like strong equivalence for semantics based on weak admissibility.
In light of these solid theoretical results an investigation
from a computational point of view stands to reason as well.
In this paper, we take several steps towards this direction by
thoroughly analyzing the computational complexity of weak
admissibility as well as providing a DATALOG encoding.
More specifically, our main contributions are as follows:

We study the computational complexity of abstract argumentation semantics based on weak admissibility, a recently introduced concept to deal with arguments of self-defeating
nature. Our results reveal that semantics based on weak admissibility are of much higher complexity (under typical assumptions) compared to all argumentation semantics which
have been analysed in terms of complexity so far. In fact, we
show PSPACE-completeness of all non-trivial standard decision problems for weak-admissible based semantics. We then
investigate potential tractable fragments and show that restricting the frameworks under consideration to certain graphclasses significantly reduces the complexity. As a strategy for
implementation we also provide a polynomial-time reduction
to DATALOG with stratified negation.

Introduction
Abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) as introduced by
Dung (1995) are nowadays identified as key concept to understand the fundamental mechanisms behind formal argumentation and non-monotonic reasoning. In these frameworks, it is solely the attack relation between (abstract) arguments that is used to determine the semantics of a given AF,
i.e. jointly acceptable sets of arguments called extensions.
Most of the existing argumentation semantics were either
based on the concept of naivety or admissibility (van der
Torre and Vesic 2017). The former is satisfied if the selected
sets are maximal conflict-free. For the latter, it is required
that the sets defend themselves (each attacker of an argument
in the set is counter-attacked by the set).
There is a wide consensus that the absence of defense
in naive extensions potentially leads to undesired results.
However, already Dung noticed that also the concept of
defense can be seen problematic; in particular, when selfdefeating arguments are involved, that is, arguments which
attack themselves directly or indirectly through an odd loop
of arguments. Such “dummy” arguments may block the acceptance state of other reasonable ones, while never standing
a chance of being accepted themselves. This issue has been
known for a long time, and inspired several approaches to
mitigate the effect of self-defeating arguments, see e.g. (Bodanza and Tohmé 2009; Amendola and Ricca 2019; Fazz-

• We show that all standard decision problems for weakadmissible based semantics (with the exception of skeptical w-admissible acceptance) are PSPACE-complete.
• We analyze the effect of restricting the AFs under consideration to certain graph-classes, which in most cases
renders the “weak” semantics computationally comparable to their Dung-style counterparts, which is a significant
drop in their complexity.
• Towards implementation we provide a polynomial-time
reduction to non-recursive DATALOG with stratified
negation which is known to be PSPACE-complete in
terms of program-complexity (cf. (Dantsin et al. 2001)).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6288

