The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Macro Discourse Parsing Based on Topic Segmentation
Feng Jiang, Yaxin Fan, Xiaomin Chu, Peifeng Li, Qiaoming Zhu∗ , Fang Kong
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
{fjiang, yxfansupery}@stu.suda.edu.cn
{xmchu, pfli, qmzhu, kongfang}@suda.edu.cn

Supplement

Abstract

Elaboration

Hierarchically constructing micro (i.e., intra-sentence or
inter-sentence) discourse structure trees using explicit boundaries (e.g., sentence and paragraph boundaries) has been
proved to be an effective strategy. However, it is difficult
to apply this strategy to document-level macro (i.e., interparagraph) discourse parsing, the more challenging task, due
to the lack of explicit boundaries at the higher level. To alleviate this issue, we introduce a topic segmentation mechanism to detect implicit topic boundaries and then help the
document-level macro discourse parser to construct better
discourse trees hierarchically. In particular, our parser first
splits a document into several sections using the topic boundaries that the topic segmentation detects. Then it builds a
smaller and more accurate discourse sub-tree in each section and sequentially forms a whole tree for a document.
The experimental results on both Chinese MCDTB and English RST-DT show that our proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines significantly.

Joint
Background
P1

P2

Purpose-Behavior
P3

P4

P5

P6

Figure 1: An example of the macro discourse tree. The six
leaves (P1-P6) are paragraphs, which are called paragraphlevel elementary discourse units (PDUs) in this paper. The
directed edge indicates that the node is a nucleus, and the
undirected edge indicates that the node is a satellite in nuclearity. The internal node has the relation label that is the
relationship between two discourse units.
paragraphs or chapters (Van Dijk 1976), which focuses on
understanding the full text from the higher-level perspective.
Figure 1 is an example of the macro discourse tree. Macro
discourse parsing plays an important role in document-level
discourse parsing. It reveals the topic and the overall structure of an document from a higher level and is conducive
to clarify its organization. Kobayashi et al. (2020) pointed
out that the accurate macro discourse parsing is important to
obtain a good discourse dependency tree for improving the
performance of the downstream NLP tasks.
However, compared with micro-level success (Lin et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020), the macro discourse parsing (Sporleder and Lascarides 2004; Jiang et al.
2018a) faces more challenges because of the larger size and
number of discourse units and fewer connectives between
them. For example, the average token length of leaf nodes
in Chinese MCDTB and English RST-DT is 22 and 8 at the
micro level, respectively, while at the macro level, these figures increase to 100 and 52. Even one of the state-of-the-art
models (Wang, Li, and Wang 2017) still suffers from significant performance degradation at macro level ( micro-level
vs. macro-level: 85.11% vs. 37.40% 1 ). This result shows
that it is essential to improve macro discourse parsing to

Introduction
In a coherent document, discourse units (e.g., clauses, sentences, or paragraphs) are tightly connected semantically.
Discourse parsing seeks to identify the nuclearity and relationship between discourse units and discover the inner
structure of a whole document the units form. It has been
shown to be beneficial to many NLP applications, such as
question answering (Sadek and Meziane 2016), summarization (Cohan and Goharian 2018) and reading comprehension
(Mihaylov and Frank 2019).
As one of the most influential theories in discourse parsing, Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson 1987) represents a document as a hierarchical structure
known as a Discourse Tree (DT). In the literature, various
RST-style corpora have been built, such as RST Discourse
Treebank (RST-DT) (Carlson, Marcu, and Okurowski 2003)
and Macro Chinese Discourse TreeBank (MCDTB) (Jiang
et al. 2018b). Commonly, RST-style (document-level) discourse parsing can be divided into micro and macro level.
The former studies the intra- or inter-sentence relationship,
while the latter studies the discourse relationship among

1

∗

We used the published source code (https://github.com/
yizhongw/StageDP) to reproduce the experiments and evaluated
the results by the method of Morey, Muller, and Asher (2017).

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13152

