The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Asking the Right Questions:
Learning Interpretable Action Models Through Query Answering
Pulkit Verma, Shashank Rao Marpally, and Siddharth Srivastava
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{verma.pulkit, smarpall, siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a new approach for estimating an interpretable, relational model of a black-box autonomous agent
that can plan and act. Our main contributions are a new
paradigm for estimating such models using a rudimentary
query interface with the agent and a hierarchical querying
algorithm that generates an interrogation policy for estimating the agent’s internal model in a user-interpretable vocabulary. Empirical evaluation of our approach shows that despite the intractable search space of possible agent models,
our approach allows correct and scalable estimation of interpretable agent models for a wide class of black-box autonomous agents. Our results also show that this approach
can use predicate classifiers to learn interpretable models of
planning agents that represent states as images.

1

Figure 1: The agent-assessment module uses its user’s preferred vocabulary, queries the AI system, and delivers a userinterpretable causal model of the AI system’s capabilities.
The AI system does not need to know the user’s vocabulary
or modeling language.
fortable with (e.g., a relational STRIPS-like language (Fikes
and Nilsson 1971; McDermott et al. 1998; Fox and Long
2003)). If H was dealing with a delivery person, s/he might
ask them questions such as “would you pick up orders from
multiple persons?” and “do you think it would be alright to
bring refrigerated items in a regular bag?” If the answers
are “yes” during summer, it would be a cause for concern.
Naı̈ve approaches for generating such questions to ascertain
the limits and capabilities of an agent are infeasible.1
We propose an agent-assessment module (AAM), shown
in Fig. 1, which can be connected with an arbitrary AI agent
that has a rudimentary query-response capability: the assessment module connects A with a simulator and provides a
sequence of instructions, or a plan as a query. A executes
the plan in the simulator and the assessment module uses
the simulated outcome as the response to the query. Thus,
given an agent, the assessment module uses as input: a userdefined vocabulary, the agent’s instruction set, and a compatible simulator. These inputs reflect natural requirements
of the task and are already quite commonly supported: AI
systems are already designed and tested using compatible
simulators, and they need to specify their instruction sets in
order to be usable. The user provides the concepts that they

Introduction

The growing deployment of AI systems ranging from personal digital assistants to self-driving cars leads to a pervasive problem: how would a user ascertain whether an AI
system will be safe, reliable, or useful in a given situation? This problem becomes particularly challenging when
we consider that most autonomous systems are not designed
by their users; their internal software may be unavailable or
difficult to understand, and it may even change from initial
specifications as a result of learning. Such scenarios feature
black-box AI agents whose models may not be available in
terminology that the user understands. They also show that
in addition to developing better AI systems, we need to develop new algorithmic paradigms for assessing arbitrary AI
systems and for determining the minimal requirements for
AI systems in order to ensure interpretability and to support
such assessments (Srivastava 2021).
This paper presents a new approach for addressing these
questions. It develops an algorithm for estimating interpretable, relational models of AI agents by querying them.
In doing so, it requires the AI system to have only a primitive query-response capability to ensure interpretability.
Consider a situation where Hari(ette) (H) wants a grocerydelivery robot (A) to bring some groceries, but s/he is unsure
whether it is up to the task and wishes to estimate A’s internal model in an interpretable representation that s/he is com-

1
Just 2 actions and 5 grounded propositions would yield
72×5 ∼ 108 possible STRIPS-like models – each proposition could
be absent, positive or negative in the precondition and effects of
each action, and cannot be positive (or negative) in both preconditions and effect simultaneously. A query strategy that inquires
about each occurrence of each proposition would be not only unscalable but also inapplicable to simulator-based agents that do not
know their actions’ preconditions and effects.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12024

