The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Progression Heuristics for Planning with Probabilistic LTL Constraints
Ian Mallett, Sylvie Thiébaux, Felipe Trevizan
Research School of Computer Science, The Australian National University
Ian.Mallett@anu.edu.au, Sylvie.Thiebaux@anu.edu.au, Felipe.Trevizan@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Probabilistic planning subject to multi-objective probabilistic temporal logic (PLTL) constraints models the problem of
computing safe and robust behaviours for agents in stochastic
environments. We present novel admissible heuristics to guide
the search for cost-optimal policies for these problems. These
heuristics project and decompose LTL formulae obtained by
progression to estimate the probability that an extension of a
partial policy satisfies the constraints. Their computation with
linear programming is integrated with the recent PLTL-dual
heuristic search algorithm, enabling more aggressive pruning
of regions violating the constraints. Our experiments show that
they further widen the scalability gap between heuristic search
and verification approaches to these planning problems.

1

Introduction

In safety-critical planning applications, optimising performance is not enough, and utility must be traded-off against
the risk of jeopardizing complex mission goals and constraints. For instance, consider a Mars rover that must gather
scientific information and send it to earth (Zilberstein et al.
2001). Safety requirements and constraints include avoiding
collision against obstacles, not traversing into unsafe terrains,
maintaining safe operational temperature and battery levels,
and so on. The rover should seek to optimise expected science returns while remaining safe by proactively keeping the
probability of violating each of the above constraints within
acceptable levels.
Such planning problems can be modelled as stochastic shortest path problems (SSP) subject to multi-objective
probabilistic linear temporal logic (MO-PLTL) constraints
Pr(ψi )∈zi , where the ψi are LTL formulae and zi ⊆ [0, 1]
are intervals bounding their respective probabilities (Baumgartner, Thiébaux, and Trevizan 2018). Optimal solutions to
MO-PLTL SSPs take the form of stochastic finite-memory
policies, where the probability of the next action to perform
depends both on the current state of the environment and on
a mode used to track the truth value of the LTL formulae.
Variants of MO-PLTL SSPs have been extensively studied
by the automated verification community (Baier and Katoen
2008), and their resolution is supported by tools such as the
PRISM model-checker (Kwiatkowska, Norman, and Parker
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11870

2011). However, these approaches build, upfront, the entire
state space of the MO-PLTL SSP, i.e. the synchronous product of the modes and environment states (Etessami et al.
2008; Forejt et al. 2011; Kwiatkowska and Parker 2013). The
prohibitive size of this construction, polynomial in the huge
number of reachable environment states and in the worst case
double exponential in the size of the formulae, precludes applicability to the factored state spaces found in AI planning.
Recently, heuristic search has become the state of the art
approach for solving planning problems modelled as factored
MO-PLTL SSPs. In particular, Baumgartner et al. (2018)
introduced PLTL-dual, an algorithm which builds the state
space of the MO-PLTL SSPs on-the-fly from the factored
representation. PLTL-dual applies linear programming to increasingly larger subsets of the reachable state space, guided
by admissible heuristics to prune regions that cannot satisfy
the constraints or are too costly to form part of an optimal
policy. When guided by informative heuristics, PLTL-dual
only needs to expand a fraction of the reachable state space to
find an optimal policy satisfying the constraints. This yields
significant scalability improvements over the conventional
approach implemented in PRISM.
Unfortunately, effective heuristic guidance can be difficult
to obtain. Classical planning enjoys a multitude of admissible
heuristics (Bonet and Geffner 2001; Helmert, Haslum, and
Hoffmann 2007; Helmert and Domshlak 2009; Pommerening et al. 2014). However, it is only recently that the first
SSP heuristics taking into account both probabilities and
costs have been proposed (Trevizan, Thiébaux, and Haslum
2017). Moreover, only a couple of heuristics exist for deterministic planning with LTL-like constraints (Baier, Bacchus, and McIlraith 2009; Bienvenu, Fritz, and McIlraith
2011), and heuristic search for SSPs with probabilistic LTL
constraints is in its infancy. Baumgartner et al. started to investigate the latter, and devised projection heuristics based
on a representation of LTL formulae and policy modes in
terms of non-deterministic Büchi automata (NBA) (Vardi
and Wolper 1994; Babiak et al. 2012). Their experimental
results show that the size of the linear programs (LPs) required to represent the projections of NBAs grows unacceptably large, so that the projection heuristic with NBAs larger
than 100 states obtains worse results than the trivial heuristic (Pr(ψi ) = 1 ∀i). To avoid generating NBAs, they also
experimented with modes obtained by formula progression

