The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

KEML: A Knowledge-Enriched Meta-Learning Framework for Lexical Relation
Classification
Chengyu Wang,1, 2 Minghui Qiu,2∗ Jun Huang,2 Xiaofeng He3
1

Zhejiang Lab
Alibaba Group
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
{chengyu.wcy, minghui.qmh, huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com, hexf@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

existence of other types of lexical relations remain few,
leading to the “pattern sparsity” problem (Shwartz and Dagan 2016; Washio and Kato 2018a). ii) Distributional models assume concepts with similar contexts have similar embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013). Representations of a concept pair learned by traditional word embedding models
are not sufficient to distinguish different types of lexical
relations (Glavas and Vulic 2018; Ponti et al. 2019). iii)
Many LRC datasets are highly imbalanced w.r.t. training instances of different lexical relations, and may contain randomly paired concepts. It is difficult for models to distinguish whether a concept pair has a particular type of lexical
relation, or has very weak or no semantic relatedness.
In this paper, we present the Knowledge-Enriched MetaLearning (KEML) framework to address these challenges
of LRC. KEML consists of three modules: Knowledge Encoder, Auxiliary Task Generator and Relation Learner. In
Knowledge Encoder, we propose the LKB-BERT (Lexical Knowledge Base-BERT) model to learn relationsensitive concept representations. LKB-BERT is built upon
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and trained via new distantly supervised learning tasks over lexical knowledge bases, encoding both contextual representations and relational lexical knowledge. In Auxiliary Task Generator, we treat recognizing single type of lexical relations as auxiliary tasks.
Based on meta-learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017),
a probabilistic distribution of auxiliary tasks is properly defined for the model to optimize, which addresses the imbalanced property and the existence of random relations in LRC
datasets. In Relation Learner, we design a feed-forward neural network for LRC, of which the training process combines
both gradient-based meta-learning and supervised learning.
Especially, a special relation recognition cell is designed and
integrated into the network for the purpose.
This paper makes the following contributions:

Lexical relations describe how concepts are semantically related, in the form of relation triples. The accurate prediction
of lexical relations between concepts is challenging, due to
the sparsity of patterns indicating the existence of such relations. We propose the Knowledge-Enriched Meta-Learning
(KEML) framework to address lexical relation classification.
In KEML, the LKB-BERT (Lexical Knowledge Base-BERT)
model is first presented to learn concept representations from
text corpora, with rich lexical knowledge injected by distant
supervision. A probabilistic distribution of auxiliary tasks is
defined to increase the model’s ability to recognize different
types of lexical relations. We further propose a neural classifier integrated with special relation recognition cells, in order
to combine meta-learning over the auxiliary task distribution
and supervised learning for LRC. Experiments over multiple
datasets show KEML outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
As an important type of linguistic resources, lexical relations
describe semantic associations between concepts, which are
organized as backbones in lexicons, semantic networks and
knowledge bases. The explicit usage of such resources has
benefited a variety of NLP tasks, including relation extraction (Shen et al. 2018), question answering (Yang et al.
2017) and machine translation (Thompson et al. 2019).
To accumulate such knowledge, Lexical Relation Classification (LRC) is a basic NLP task to classify concepts into
a finite set of lexical relations. Pattern-based and distributional methods are two major types of LRC models (Shwartz
and Dagan 2016; Wang, He, and Zhou 2017). Compared to
the classification of factual relations for knowledge graph
population (Liu et al. 2017; Wu and He 2019), the accurate classification of lexical relations is more challenging.
i) Most lexical relations represent the common sense of human knowledge, not frequently expressed in texts explicitly1 . Apart from Hearst patterns (Hearst 1992) for hypernymy (“is-a”) extraction, textual patterns that indicate the

• We present LKB-BERT to learn relation-sensitive contextual representations of concepts by leveraging rich relational knowledge in knowledge bases.

∗
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For example, “(car, meronymy, steering wheel)” can be paraphrased as “steering wheels are part of cars”. However, the expression is usually omitted in texts, since it is common sense to humans.

• A meta-learning process combined with an auxiliary task
distribution is defined to improve the ability of distributional LRC models to recognize lexical relations.
• We design a feed-forward neural network combined with
special relation recognition cells to accommodate both
13924

