The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Progressive One-Shot Human Parsing
Haoyu He, 1 Jing Zhang, 1 Bhavani Thuraisingham, 2 Dacheng Tao 1
1

The University of Sydney, Australia,
The University of Texas at Dallas, USA
hahe7688@uni.sydney.edu.au, bxt043000@utdallas.edu, {jing.zhang1,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au
2

Seen
Concepts

Abstract
Prior human parsing models are limited to parsing humans
into classes pre-defined in the training data, which is not
flexible to generalize to unseen classes, e.g., new clothing
in fashion analysis. In this paper, we propose a new problem named one-shot human parsing (OSHP) that requires to
parse human into an open set of reference classes defined
by any single reference example. During training, only base
classes defined in the training set are exposed, which can
overlap with part of reference classes. In this paper, we devise a novel Progressive One-shot Parsing network (POPNet)
to address two critical challenges , i.e., testing bias and small
sizes. POPNet consists of two collaborative metric learning modules named Attention Guidance Module and Nearest
Centroid Module, which can learn representative prototypes
for base classes and quickly transfer the ability to unseen
classes during testing, thereby reducing testing bias. Moreover, POPNet adopts a progressive human parsing framework that can incorporate the learned knowledge of parent
classes at the coarse granularity to help recognize the descendant classes at the fine granularity, thereby handling the small
sizes issue. Experiments on the ATR-OS benchmark tailored
for OSHP demonstrate POPNet outperforms other representative one-shot segmentation models by large margins and
establishes a strong baseline. Source code can be found at
https://github.com/Charleshhy/One-shot-Human-Parsing.

Support Image
Support
Image
Support Mask

Query Mask

Support
Mask

Novel
Concepts

Query
Mask

Query Image
(a)

(b)

Query
Image

(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of OSHP against the OS3 task. (a) The
classes in OS3 are large and holistic objects and only novel
classes are presented and needed to be recognized during
evaluation. (b) In OSHP, both base classes (cold colors) and
novel (warm colors) classes are presented and needed to be
recognized during the evaluation, leading to the testing bias
issue. (c) In OSHP, the part of each class is small and correlated with other parts within the same human foreground.

pre-defined classes has limited the usage of human parsing
models in various downstream applications.
To address the problem, we make the first attempt
by defining a new task named One-Shot Human Parsing
(OSHP), inspired by one-shot learning (Koch, Zemel, and
Salakhutdinov 2015; Vinyals et al. 2016). OSHP requires to
parse human in a query image into an open set of reference
classes defined by any single reference example (i.e., support image), no matter they have been seen during training
(base classes) or not (novel classes). In this way, we can flexibly add and remove the novel classes depending on the requirements of specific applications without the need for collecting and annotating new training samples and retraining.
One similar task is One-shot semantic segmentation
(OS3) (Zhang et al. 2019b,a; Wang et al. 2019a), that transfers the segmenting knowledge from the pre-defined base
classes to the novel classes as shown in Figure 1 (a). However, OSHP is more challenging than the OS3 in two ways.
Firstly, only novel classes are presented and needed to
be recognized during evaluation in OS3, while both base
classes and novel classes should be recognized simultaneously during evaluation in OSHP as shown in Figure 1 (b),
which is indeed a variant of generalized few-shot learning
(GFSL) problem (Gidaris and Komodakis 2018; Ren et al.
2019; Shi et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2019). Note that the two types

Introduction
Human parsing is a fundamental visual understanding task,
requiring segmenting human images into explicit body parts
as well as some clothing classes at the pixel level. It has
a broad range of applications especially in the fashion industry including fashion image generating (Han et al. 2019),
virtual try-on (Dong et al. 2019), and fashion image retrieval
(Wang et al. 2017). Although Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has made significant progress by leveraging
the large-scale human parsing datasets (Liang et al. 2015b,
2016; Ruan et al. 2019), the parsing results are restricted to
the classes pre-defined in the training set, e.g. 18 classes in
ATR (Liang et al. 2015a), and 19 classes in LIP (Liang et al.
2018). However, due to the vast new clothing, fast varying
styles in the fashion industry, parsing humans into fixed and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1522

