The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Class-Incremental Continual Learning with Adversarial Shapley Value
Dongsub Shim1 * , Zheda Mai1 * † , Jihwan Jeong1 * , Scott Sanner1
Hyunwoo Kim2 , Jongseong Jang2
1

University of Toronto,
2
LG AI Research
(dongsub.shim, zheda.mai)@mail.utoronto.ca, (jhjeong, ssanner)@mie.utoronto.ca, (hwkim, j.jang)@lgresearch.ai

Abstract

identified) at a time and the model can utilize task identity
during both training and testing (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Li
and Hoiem 2016; Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017). Specifically, a common practice in this setting is to assign a separate output layer (head) for each task; then the model just
needs to classify labels within a task, which is known as
multi-head evaluation (Chaudhry et al. 2018). However, this
setting requires additional supervisory signals at test time —
namely the task identity — to select the corresponding head,
which obviates its use when the task label is unavailable. In
this work, we consider a more realistic but difficult setting,
known as online class-incremental, where a model needs to
learn new classes continually from an online data stream
(each sample is seen only once). In contrast to the task incremental setting, this setting adopts the single-head evaluation, where the model needs to classify all labels without
task identity. Moreover, we focus on image classification, a
common application where this setting is used (Aljundi et al.
2019a,b; Lee et al. 2020; Chrysakis and Moens 2020).
Current CL methods can be taxonomized into three major categories: regularization-based, parameter isolation, and
memory-based methods (Parisi et al. 2019; De Lange et al.
2019). Regularization-based methods incorporate an additional penalty term into the loss function to penalize the update of critical model parameters (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017;
Zenke, Poole, and Ganguli 2017; Aljundi et al. 2018; Ritter,
Botev, and Barber 2018). Other regularization-based methods imposed knowledge distillation techniques to penalize
the feature drift on previous tasks (Li and Hoiem 2016; Wu
et al. 2019; Rannen et al. 2017). Parameter isolation methods
assign per-task parameters to bypass interference by expanding the network and masking parameters to prevent forgetting (Mallya and Lazebnik 2018; Lee et al. 2020; Yoon et al.
2018). Memory-based methods deploy a memory buffer to
store a subset of data from previous tasks. The samples from
the buffer can be either used to constrain the parameter updates such that the loss on previous tasks cannot increase
(Chaudhry et al. 2019a; Lopez-Paz and Ranzato 2017), or
simply for replay to prevent forgetting (Rebuffi et al. 2017;
Chaudhry et al. 2019b).
Regularization methods only protect the model’s ability to
classify within a task and thus they do not work well in our
setting where the ability to discriminate among classes from

As image-based deep learning becomes pervasive on every
device from cell phones to smart watches, there is a growing need to develop methods that continually learn from data
while minimizing memory footprint and power consumption. While memory replay techniques have shown exceptional promise for this task of continual learning, the best
method for selecting which buffered images to replay is still
an open question. In this paper, we specifically focus on the
online class-incremental setting where a model needs to learn
new classes continually from an online data stream. To this
end, we contribute a novel Adversarial Shapley value scoring
method that scores memory data samples according to their
ability to preserve latent decision boundaries for previously
observed classes (to maintain learning stability and avoid
forgetting) while interfering with latent decision boundaries
of current classes being learned (to encourage plasticity and
optimal learning of new class boundaries). Overall, we observe that our proposed ASER method provides competitive
or improved performance compared to state-of-the-art replaybased continual learning methods on a variety of datasets.

1

Introduction

Image-based deep learning is a pervasive but computationally expensive and memory intensive task. Yet the need for
such deep learning on personal devices to preserve privacy,
minimize communication bandwidth, and maintain realtime performance necessitates the development of methods
that can continuously learn from streaming data while minimizing memory storage and computation footprint. However, a well-documented defect of deep neural networks that
prevents it from learning continually is called catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989) — the inability of a
network to perform well in previously seen tasks after learning new tasks. To address this challenge, the field of continual learning (CL) studies the problem of learning from
a (non-iid) stream of data, with the goal of preserving and
extending the acquired knowledge over time.
Many existing CL approaches use a task incremental setting where data arrives one task (i.e., set of classes to be
* Authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9630

