The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Comprehensive Motion Representation for Action Recognition
†

Mingyu Wu1* , Boyuan Jiang3* , Donghao Luo3 , Junchi Yan1,2 , Yabiao Wang3
Ying Tai3 , Chengjie Wang3 , Jilin Li3 , Feiyue Huang3 , Xiaokang Yang1
1
2

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent
video clip

Abstract
For action recognition learning, 2D CNN-based methods are
efficient but may yield redundant features due to applying
the same 2D convolution kernel to each frame. Recent efforts
attempt to capture motion information by establishing interframe connections while still suffering the limited temporal
receptive field or high latency. Moreover, the feature enhancement is often only performed by channel or space dimension
in action recognition. To address these issues, we first devise a
Channel-wise Motion Enhancement (CME) module to adaptively emphasize the channels related to dynamic information
with a channel-wise gate vector. The channel gates generated
by CME incorporate the information from all the other frames
in the video. We further propose a Spatial-wise Motion Enhancement (SME) module to focus on the regions with the
critical target in motion, according to the point-to-point similarity between adjacent feature maps. The intuition is that
the change of background is typically slower than the motion
area. Both CME and SME have clear physical meaning in
capturing action clues. By integrating the two modules into
the off-the-shelf 2D network, we finally obtain a Comprehensive Motion Representation (CMR) learning method for
action recognition, which achieves competitive performance
on Something-Something V1 & V2 and Kinetics-400. On the
temporal reasoning datasets Something-Something V1 and
V2, our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art by
2.3% and 1.9% when using 16 frames as input, respectively.

two adjacent frames

+
(a) Channel-wise

=
(b) Spatial-wise

(c) Comprehensive

Figure 1: Comprehensive motion representation learning in
our method. a) Channel-wise: collect motion information
with global temporal receptive field for channel enhancement. b) Spatial-wise: Point-to-point similarity is introduced
to describe the motion region between adjacent frames. c)
Comprehensive learning: By combining the two aspects together, the features can be enhanced in a fine-grained way.

Most 2D CNN-based methods are dedicated to temporal
relation modeling, which employs well designed convolutional layers or blocks to process features along the temporal dimension. Since the convolution kernels are shared
when processing each frame, the features of each frame may
contain excessive redundant background information, leading to covering the crucial motion features. Therefore, motion enhancement for 2D CNN-based methods has attracted
much attention in recent years. It focuses on utilizing the
inter-frame information, especially motion clues, to guide
the feature generation progress. The goal of these methods is
to make the model automatically emphasize what is important for video recognition. Some representative work (Wang
et al. 2016b; Meng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020;
Weng et al. 2020) has proved its effectiveness with great improvement. However, there are still several issues in this direction that deserve rethinking. First, most methods focus on
designing channel enhancement module but suffer from the
limited temporal receptive field. They only collect information from part of frames to construct a channel enhancement
vector, so that some irrelevant motion information is easily
mistaken for the vital factor of video to be analyzed. It might
be much better to decide which channel is important if we
look through the whole action progress. Furthermore, pre-

Introduction
Action recognition has been an essential building block for
video understanding, whereby the key is to extract powerful
spatial-temporal features that contain rich motion information. 3D CNN-based methods (Tran et al. 2015; Carreira and
Zisserman 2017; Hara, Kataoka, and Satoh 2018) establish
spatial and temporal correlation among video frames by employing 3D convolution kernels. Due to the large number of
parameters, these methods suffer from heavy computation
and memory costs. To be light-weighted and fast, 2D CNNbased methods (Wang et al. 2016a; Qiu, Yao, and Mei 2017;
Lin, Gan, and Han 2019) are proposed.
* The first two authors contribute equally.
†

Correspondence to: Junchi Yan (yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2934

