The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Style Transfer for Line Drawings
Xueting Liu, Wenliang Wu, Huisi Wu∗ , Zhenkun Wen
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Line drawings are frequently used to illustrate ideas and concepts in digital documents and presentations. To compose a
line drawing, it is common for users to retrieve multiple line
drawings from the Internet and combine them as one image. However, different line drawings may have different line
styles and are visually inconsistent when put together. In order that the line drawings can have consistent looks, in this
paper, we make the first attempt to perform style transfer for
line drawings. The key of our design lies in the fact that centerline plays a very important role in preserving line topology
and extracting style features. With this finding, we propose
to formulate the style transfer problem as a centerline stylization problem and solve it via a novel style-guided image-toimage translation network. Results and statistics show that
our method significantly outperforms the existing methods
both visually and quantitatively.

Figure 1: The styles of multiple line drawings may be different in terms of global and local line-width. (a) Without
style transfer, the styles of the line drawings are visual inconsistent when composed together. (b) With style transfer,
the styles of the line drawings become visually consistent.

To transfer the style of an input image based on a reference image, the existing style transfer methods, either
exemplar-based (Hertzmann et al. 2001; Shih et al. 2013,
2014; Frigo et al. 2016) or learning-based (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2016; Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Li et al.
2017; Huang and Belongie 2017), require the output image
to have similar content with input and similar style with
reference by constraining on content similarity and style
similarity respectively. However, the similarity constraint is
loose, so the output image usually fails to preserve the content (topology of lines) of the input (Fig. 2(c)&(d)). Another
potential solution is to first disentangle the content from the
input and the style from the reference respectively, and then
combine the disentangled content and style to generate the
output image. While various style-content disentanglement
methods have been proposed (Huang et al. 2018; GonzalezGarcia, van de Weijer, and Bengio 2018; Yang et al. 2019;
Yu et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019), they generally require paired
data, i.e. images of the same content but different styles, for
training, which is difficult to acquire for line drawings. The
style-based image generation method (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2019) may also be adopted to synthesize the output based
on an input image and a style vector. But this method require
the output images to have similar semantics, e.g. human
faces, cats, dogs, which is not applicable in our case where
line drawings may contain arbitrary content (Fig. 2(e)).
There are three major challenges in the line style transfer

Introduction
Line drawings are frequently used to illustrate ideas and concepts in digital documents and presentations. Though there
exist a large number of line drawings on the Internet, it is
still quite common for users to combine multiple line drawings into one image based on their needs. However, different line drawings may have different line styles both globally and locally. The global line style includes the range of
the line-width and how the line-width changes spatially, e.g.
many line drawings use thicker lines for outlines and thinner lines for inner structures. The local line style refers to
how the line-width changes within each line based on local
properties, such as curvature, distance to end points, etc. For
example, in Fig. 1(a), the wolf, the bird, and the background
have clearly different line styles. (Garces et al. 2014) proposed a style similarity metric which helps to find clip arts
with similar styles. But the proposed metric only considers the average line-width. The search space is also limited
and uncontrollable to users. In order that users can pick any
line drawing they like, it is desired that all user-picked line
drawings can be transferred to the same style, as shown in
Fig. 1(b).
∗

Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

353

