The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge Refactoring for Inductive Program Synthesis
Sebastijan Dumancic, 1 Tias Guns, 1 Andrew Cropper 2
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Oxford University, United Kingdom
sebastijan.dumancic@cs.kuleuven.be, tias.guns@kuleuven.be, andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Humans constantly restructure knowledge to use it more efficiently. Our goal is to give a machine learning system similar
abilities so that it can learn more efficiently. We introduce
the knowledge refactoring problem, where the goal is to restructure a learner’s knowledge base to reduce its size and
to minimise redundancy in it. We focus on inductive logic
programming, where the knowledge base is a logic program.
We introduce Knorf, a system which solves the refactoring
problem using constraint optimisation. A key feature of Knorf
is that, rather than simply removing knowledge, it also introduces new knowledge through predicate invention. We evaluate our approach on two domains: building Lego structures and
real-world string transformations. Our experiments show that
learning from refactored knowledge can improve predictive
accuracies fourfold and reduce learning times by half.

Figure 1: Complex Lego arcades (top, built with only two
distinct Lego bricks: and
) become easier to build
after new, useful types of bricks are introduced (bottom). The
complexity is measured as the number of pieces needed for
the construction.

abstractions, we can make the structures, and potentially
future structures, easier and faster to build.
While the importance of abstraction in AI is well-known
(Saitta and Zucker 2013), the majority of learning AI agents
merely accumulate knowledge, which can be detrimental
to learning performance (Srinivasan, King, and Bain 2003;
Cropper 2020). In other words, as knowledge is a form of
inductive bias in machine learning (Mitchell 1997), increasing the amount of knowledge increases the hypothesis space
and consequently makes finding the target hypothesis more
difficult. The challenge is, therefore, to choose a learner’s inductive bias (knowledge) so that the hypothesis space is large
enough to contain the target hypothesis, yet small enough to
be efficiently searched.
This paper aims to tackle the inductive bias problem by (i)
reducing the size of the knowledge base, and (ii) restructuring
it to make it easier to learn from. Rather than only adding or
removing knowledge (De Raedt et al. 2008; Lin et al. 2014;
Cropper 2020), we argue that the human-like ability to restructure knowledge can provide a better inductive bias to a
learner and thus improve performance. We call this problem
knowledge refactoring. The idea is similar to program refactoring, where the goal of a programmer is to identify a good
set of support functions to make a program more compact
and reusable.
To restructure knowledge, we must explicitly store it. This
requirement eliminates non-symbolic learning approaches
which dissipate knowledge in the parameters of a model.
We, therefore, use symbolic learning approaches, specifically

Introduction
According to Rumelhart and Norman (1976), humans exhibit three modes of learning. Learning by accretion is an
everyday kind of learning which merely increments a person’s knowledge base with new facts. Learning by tuning
involves changes in the categories people use for interpreting
new information. For instance, the process of tuning specialises a child’s interpretation of the word ‘doggie’ from
all animals to dogs only. Restructuring devises new memory structures and organisation of already stored knowledge,
which in turn allows for better accessibility of the acquired
knowledge. This restructuring ability is the most significant
mode and is what separates well-performing individuals from
others (Karmiloff-Smith 1992; Stern 2005).
The key to effective restructuring is finding appropriate
abstractions. As a running example, consider building Lego
structures. Figure 1 (top) shows two structures built using
only two types of bricks: short and long
. Building the
structures using only these two types of bricks is complex and
requires 29 and 18 bricks respectively. However, as Figure 1
(bottom) shows, by introducing new types of bricks through
restructuring, such as pillar and horizontal bricks of various
lengths, we can build the same structures using only 7 and
11 pieces respectively. In other words, by finding suitable
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7271

