The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Efficient Transformer Decoder with Compressed Sub-layers
Yanyang Li1 * , Ye Lin1∗ , Tong Xiao1,2† , Jingbo Zhu1,2
1

NLP Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
NiuTrans Research, Shenyang, China
{blamedrlee, linye2015}@outlook.com, {xiaotong,zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract

predicts all words in parallel, but fails to model the word dependencies. Despite of their successes, all these systems still
have a deep decoder.
In this work, we propose to parallelize the sub-layers to
obtain a shallow autoregressive decoder. This way does not
suffer from the poor result of directly reducing depths and
avoids the limitation of non-autoregressive approaches. We
prove that the two attention sub-layers in a decoder layer
could be parallelized if we assume their inputs are close to
each other. This assumption holds and thereby we compress
these two attentions into one. Furthermore, we show that
the remaining feed-forward network could also be merged
into the attention due to their linearity. To the end, we propose Compressed Attention Network (C AN for short). The
decoder layer of C AN possesses a single attention sub-layer
that does the previous three sub-layers’ jobs in parallel.
As another “bonus”, C AN is simple and easy to be implemented.
In addition, Kasai et al. (2020) empirically discover that
existing systems are not well balancing the encoder and decoder depths. Based on their work, we build a system with a
deep encoder and a shallow decoder, which is 2× faster than
the widely used standard baseline without loss in performance. It requires neither the architecture modification nor
adding extra parameters. This system serves as a stronger
baseline for a more convincing comparison.
We evaluate C AN and the stronger baseline in 14 machine
translation tasks, including WMT14 English↔{German,
French} (En↔{De, Fr}) and WMT17 English↔{German,
Finnish, Latvian, Russian, Czech} (En↔{De, Fi, Lv, Ru,
Cs}). The experiments show that C AN is up to 2.82× faster
than the standard baseline with almost no loss in performance. Even comparing to our stronger baseline, C AN still
has a 1.42× speed-up, while other acceleration techniques
such as S AN and A AN are 1.12∼1.16× in the same case.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

The large attention-based encoder-decoder network (Transformer) has become prevailing recently due to its effectiveness. But the high computation complexity of its decoder
raises the inefficiency issue. By examining the mathematic
formulation of the decoder, we show that under some mild
conditions, the architecture could be simplified by compressing its sub-layers, the basic building block of Transformer,
and achieves a higher parallelism. We thereby propose Compressed Attention Network, whose decoder layer consists of
only one sub-layer instead of three. Extensive experiments
on 14 WMT machine translation tasks show that our model is
1.42× faster with performance on par with a strong baseline.
This strong baseline is already 2× faster than the widely used
standard baseline without loss in performance.

Introduction
Transformer is an attention-based encoder-decoder model
(Vaswani et al. 2017). It has shown promising results in
machine translation tasks recently (Wang et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2020a; Zhang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b). Nonetheless, Transformer suffers from the inefficiency issue at inference. This problem is attributed to the Transformer decoder
for two reasons: 1) the decoder is deep (Kasai et al. 2020).
It consists of multiple layers and each layer contains three
sub-layers, including two attentions and a feed-forward network; 2) the attention has a high (quadratic time) complexity
(Zhang, Xiong, and Su 2018), as it needs to compute the correlation between any two input words.
Previous work has focused on improving the complexity of the attention in the decoder to accelerate the inference. For example, A AN uses the averaging operation
to avoid computing the correlation between input words
(Zhang, Xiong, and Su 2018). S AN share the attention results among layers (Xiao et al. 2019). On the other hand,
we learn that vanilla attention runs faster in training than
in inference thanks to its parallelism. This offers a new direction: a higher degree of parallelism could speed up the
inference. The most representative work of this type is the
non-autoregressive approach (Gu et al. 2018). Its decoder

• We propose C AN, a novel architecture that accelerates
Transformer by compressing its sub-layers for a higher
degree of parallelism. C AN is easy to be implemented.
• Our work is based on a stronger baseline, which is 2×
faster than the widely used standard baseline.

* Authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The extensive experiments on 14 WMT machine translation tasks show that C AN is 1.42× faster than the stronger
13315

