The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Meta-Transfer Learning for Low-Resource Abstractive Summarization
Yi-Syuan Chen, Hong-Han Shuai
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
yschen.eed09g@nctu.edu.tw, hhshuai@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

related sources to improve the performance of abstractive
summarization with limited target labeled examples.
Specifically, to tackle data scarcity problems, a recent line
of research (Xiao et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Rothe,
Narayan, and Severyn 2020; Lewis et al. 2020; Liu and Lapata 2019) leverages the large pre-trained language models (Brown et al. 2020; Devlin et al. 2019), which are
trained in a self-supervised way based on unlabeled corpora. Since many natural language processing tasks share
common knowledge in syntax, semantics, or structures, the
pre-trained model has attained great success in the downstream summarization tasks. Another promising research
handling low-resource applications is meta learning. For example, the recently proposed Model-Agnositc Meta Learning (MAML) (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017) performs
well in a variety of NLP tasks, including machine translation (Li, Wang, and Yu 2020; Gu et al. 2018), dialog system
(Qian and Yu 2019; Madotto et al. 2019), relational classification (Obamuyide and Vlachos 2019), semantic parsing
(Guo et al. 2019), emotion learning (Zhao and Ma 2019),
and natural language understanding (Dou, Yu, and Anastasopoulos 2019). Under the assumption that similar tasks possess common knowledge, MAML condenses shared information of source tasks into the form of weight initialization.
The learned initialization can then be used to learn novel
tasks faster and better.
Based on these observations, we propose to integrate the
self-supervised language model and meta learning for lowresource abstractive summarization. However, three challenges arise when leveraging the large pre-trained language
models and meta learning jointly. First, most state-of-theart summarization frameworks (Zhang et al. 2020; Rothe,
Narayan, and Severyn 2020; Liu and Lapata 2019) exploit
Transformer based architecture, which possesses a large
number of trainable parameters. However, the training data
size of the tasks in MAML is often set to be small, which
may easily cause overfitting for a large model (Zintgraf et al.
2019). Second, MAML could suffer from gradient explosion
or diminishing problems when the number of inner loop iterations and model depth increase (Antoniou, Edwards, and
Storkey 2019), and both are inevitable for training summarization models. Third, MAML requires diverse source tasks
to increase the generalizability on novel target tasks. However, how to build such meta-dataset on existing corpora for

Neural abstractive summarization has been studied in many
pieces of literature and achieves great success with the aid
of large corpora. However, when encountering novel tasks,
one may not always benefit from transfer learning due to
the domain shifting problem, and overfitting could happen
without adequate labeled examples. Furthermore, the annotations of abstractive summarization are costly, which often
demand domain knowledge to ensure the ground-truth quality. Thus, there are growing appeals for Low-Resource Abstractive Summarization, which aims to leverage past experience to improve the performance with limited labeled examples of target corpus. In this paper, we propose to utilize
two knowledge-rich sources to tackle this problem, which are
large pre-trained models and diverse existing corpora. The
former can provide the primary ability to tackle summarization tasks; the latter can help discover common syntactic or
semantic information to improve the generalization ability.
We conduct extensive experiments on various summarization
corpora with different writing styles and forms. The results
demonstrate that our approach achieves the state-of-the-art
on 6 corpora in low-resource scenarios, with only 0.7% of
trainable parameters compared to previous work.

Introduction
The goal of neural abstractive summarization is to comprehend articles and generate summaries that faithfully convey the core idea. Different from extractive methods, which
summarize articles by selecting salient sentences from the
original text, abstractive methods (Song et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Gehrmann, Deng, and Rush 2018; See, Liu,
and Manning 2017; Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015) are
more challenging and flexible due to the ability to generate novel words. However, the success of these methods often relies on a large number of training data with groundtruth, while generating the ground-truth of summarization
is highly complicated and often requires professionalists
with domain knowledge. Moreover, different kinds of articles are with various writing styles or forms, e.g., news, social media posts, and scientific papers. Therefore, the LowResource Abstractive Summarization has emerged as an important problem in recent years, which aims to leverage
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12692

