The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Commission Fee is not Enough: A Hierarchical Reinforced Framework for
Portfolio Management
Rundong Wang1∗ , Hongxin Wei1∗ , Bo An1 , Zhouyan Feng2 , Jun Yao2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
WeBank Co. Ltd., China
{rundong001, hongxin001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, boan@ntu.edu.sg, {yanisfeng, junyao}@webank.com

Abstract

et al. 2020). However, these RL algorithms assume that portfolio weights can change immediately at the last price once
an order is placed. This assumption leads to a non-negligible
trading cost, that is, the price slippage – the relative deviation of the expected price of a trade and the price actually
achieved. In a more realistic trading environment, the trading cost should be taken into consideration. Moreover, due to
the need of balancing the long-term profit maximization and
short-term trade execution, it is challenge for a single/flat RL
algorithm to operate on different levels of temporal tasks.

Portfolio management via reinforcement learning is at the
forefront of fintech research, which explores how to optimally reallocate a fund into different financial assets over the
long term by trial-and-error. Existing methods are impractical
since they usually assume each reallocation can be finished
immediately and thus ignoring the price slippage as part of
the trading cost. To address these issues, we propose a hierarchical reinforced stock trading system for portfolio management (HRPM). Concretely, we decompose the trading process
into a hierarchy of portfolio management over trade execution and train the corresponding policies. The high-level policy gives portfolio weights at a lower frequency to maximize
the long term profit and invokes the low-level policy to sell
or buy the corresponding shares within a short time window
at a higher frequency to minimize the trading cost. We train
two levels of policies via pre-training scheme and iterative
training scheme for data efficiency. Extensive experimental
results in the U.S. market and the China market demonstrate
that HRPM achieves significant improvement against many
state-of-the-art approaches.

As our motivation, we observe that there is a hierarchy of
portfolio managers and traders in real-world trading. Portfolio managers assign a percentage weighting to every stock in
the portfolio periodically for a long-term profit, while traders
care about the best execution at the favorable price to minimize the trading cost. This paper gives the first attempt to
leverage a similar idea to algorithmic trading. Concretely,
we develop a Hierarchical Reinforced trading system for
Portfolio Management (HRPM). Our system consists of a
hierarchy of two decision processes. The high-level policy
changes portfolio weights at a lower frequency, while the
low-level policy decides at which price and what quantity to
place the bid or ask orders within a short time window to
fulfill goals from the high-level policy.

Introduction
The problem of portfolio management is widely studied in
the area of algorithmic trading. It aims to maximize the expected returns of multiple risky assets. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) models are gaining popularity in the fintech community (Mosavi et al. 2020), with its great performance in different fields, including playing games (Silver
et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2013), controlling robots (Lillicrap
et al. 2015), and the Internet of things (Zhang and Tao 2020).
Due to the dynamic nature of markets and noisy financial data, RL has been proposed as a suitable candidate by
its own nature (Almahdi and Yang 2017; Jiang and Liang
2017). That is, RL can directly output trade positions, bypassing the explicit forecasting step by the trial-and-error
interaction with the financial environment. Many existing
RL methods get promising results by focusing on various
technologies to extract richer representation, e.g., by modelbased learning (Tang 2018; Yu et al. 2019), by adversarial
learning (Liang et al. 2018), or by state augmentation (Ye

Our contributions are four-fold. First, we formulate the
portfolio management problem with trading cost as a hierarchical MDP, and combine portfolio management and trade
execution by utilizing the hierarchical RL (HRL) framework
to address the non-zero slippage. Second, as traditional HRL
performs poorly in this problem, we propose the entropy
bonus in the high-level policy to avoid risk, and use action
branching to handle multi-dimensional action space. Third,
to make full use of the stock data, we pre-train multiple lowlevel policies with an iterative scheme for different stocks in
the limit order book environment, and then train a high-level
policy on the top of the low-level policies. Fourth, we compare HRPM with baselines based on the historical price data
and limit order data from the U.S. market and the China market. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that HRPM
achieves significant improvement against state-of-the-art approaches. Furthermore, the ablation studies demonstrate the
effectiveness of entropy bonuses and the trading cost is a
non-negligible part in portfolio management.

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

626

