The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bandit Linear Optimization for Sequential Decision Making
and Extensive-Form Games
Gabriele Farina,1 Robin Schmucker,2 Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4,5
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Strategic Machine, Inc., 4 Strategy Robot, Inc., 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu, rschmuck@cs.cmu.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

field of online learning, has proved to be an extremely versatile tool for TFSDM. For instance, over the past decade, regret
minimization algorithms such as counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2007) and related newer,
faster algorithms have become popular for solving zero-sum
games (Tammelin et al. 2015; Brown and Sandholm 2015;
Brown, Kroer, and Sandholm 2017; Brown and Sandholm
2017a, 2019a). These newer algorithms served as an important component in the computational game-solving pipelines
that achieved several recent milestones in computing superhuman strategies in two-player limit Texas hold’em (Bowling et al. 2015), two-player no-limit Texas hold’em (Brown
and Sandholm 2017b,c) and multi-player no-limit Texas
hold’em (Brown and Sandholm 2019b).
However, those methods rely on having access to counterfactuals, that is, information on what would have happened
had the agent chosen a different action at any decision point.
While this assumption is reasonable when regret minimization algorithms are used in self-play (for instance, as a way to
converge to a Nash equilibrium in an extensive-form game),
it limits their applicability in online decision-making settings,
where the algorithm is deployed to learn strategies (for instance, exploitative strategies) against a non-stationary and
potentially adversary opponent. In the bandit setting that
assumption is reversed, and no counterfactual information
is available to the online decision maker. Despite this latter
setting being well understood for almost 20 years in one-shot
decision making, surprisingly little is known about the bandit optimization setting in sequential decision making. Part
of the reason for this gap is that the multi-stage nature of
TFSDM poses challenges that are not present in one-shot decision making, such as 1) not knowing what the environment
would have done in parts of the tree that were not reached
(and not even knowing the current path of play if you do
not observe the environment’s actions), and 2) having an exponential number of available sequential policies to choose
from.
In this paper we give the first algorithm for the wellestablished bandit linear optimization
problem in TFSDM
√
and show that it achieves O( T ) expected regret compared
to any fixed strategy even when playing against a reactive
environment, while at the same time only requiring a single
linear time tree traversal per iteration. To our knowledge,
there has been only one prior approach to bandit linear op-

Abstract
Tree-form sequential decision making (TFSDM) extends classical one-shot decision making by modeling tree-form interactions between an agent and a potentially adversarial environment. It captures the online decision-making problems
that each player faces in an extensive-form game, as well as
Markov decision processes and partially-observable Markov
decision processes where the agent conditions on observed
history. Over the past decade, there has been considerable
effort into designing online optimization methods for TFSDM.
Virtually all of that work has been in the full-feedback setting, where the agent has access to counterfactuals, that is,
information on what would have happened had the agent chosen a different action at any decision node. Little is known
about the bandit setting, where that assumption is reversed
(no counterfactual information is available), despite this latter
setting being well understood for almost 20 years in one-shot
decision making. In this paper, we give the first algorithm for
the bandit linear optimization problem for TFSDM that offers
both (i) linear-time
iterations (in the size of the decision tree)
√
and (ii) O( T ) cumulative regret in expectation compared
to any fixed strategy, at all times T . This is made possible
by new results that we derive, which may have independent
uses as well: 1) geometry of the dilated entropy regularizer,
2) autocorrelation matrix of the natural sampling scheme for
sequence-form strategies, 3) construction of an unbiased estimator for linear losses for sequence-form strategies, and 4)
a refined regret analysis for mirror descent when using the
dilated entropy regularizer.

1

Introduction

Tree-form sequential decision making (TFSDM) models
multi-stage online decision-making problems (Farina, Kroer,
and Sandholm 2019). In TFSDM, an agent interacts sequentially with a potentially reactive environment in two ways: (i)
selecting actions at decision points and (ii) partially observing
the environment at observation points. Decision points and
observation points alternate along a tree structure. TFSDM
captures the online decision process that each player faces
in an extensive-form game, as well as Markov decision processes and partially-observable Markov decision processes
where the agent conditions on observed history. Regret minimization, one of the main mathematical abstractions in the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5372

