The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Precision-based Boosting
Mohammad Hossein Nikravan, Marjan Movahedan, Sandra Zilles
Department of Computer Science, University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
nikravam@uregina.ca, marjan.movahedan@gmail.com, zilles@cs.uregina.ca

Abstract

which several base classifiers are to be aggregated, based
on their performance on a set of 100 training examples, of
which 50 have class 1 and 50 have class 2. Classifier ht predicts correct labels for 49 of the 50 instances in class 1, and
for 25 of the 50 instances in class 2, for a total error of
26%. Classifier ht0 predicts correct labels for 40 of the 50
instances in class 1, and for 40 of the 50 instances in class
2. Its total error is 20%. When aggregating all base classifiers to make a prediction on an unseen instance x, AdaBoost will assign more weight to ht0 , which appears more
“trustworthy”, given its lower error. The refined approach
that we suggest though will first evaluate both ht and ht0
on x and then decide how to weight their votes. Suppose
ht (x) = 2 and ht0 (x) = 1. Our statistics on the training
data suggest that, when ht predicts class 2, it is incorrect in
only 1/26 = 3.8% of all cases. By comparison, when ht0
predicts class 1, it is incorrect in 10/50 = 20% of all cases.
So, the chance of being incorrect on this specific instance x
is more than 5 times higher when following ht0 than when
following ht . Unlike what AdaBoost would do, the method
we propose in this paper would assign a higher weight to the
vote of ht than to the vote of ht0 , when making a prediction
on the specific instance x.
In short, our method does not simply assess the total error/accuracy of a base classifier, but its error/precision when
it predicts class y, separately for each class y. We use the
term class-specific precision to refer to the precision of a
classifier on any one chosen class label. When handling data
instance x, the weight our method assigns to a base classifier h hence increases with h’s class-specific precision on
the class y = h(x) predicted by h on x. We thus call our
method Precision-based AdaBoost, or PrAdaBoost for short.
The same idea can be applied to virtually every existing variation of AdaBoost; e.g., we propose and test PrSAMME, the
precision-based version of the multi-class AdaBoost adaptation SAMME (Hastie et al. 2009).
Following a forward-stagewise additive model (Friedman,
Hastie, and Tibshirani 2000), the choice of weight parameters in AdaBoost is optimal when only a single weight
parameter can be assigned to every individual base classifier. In this forward-stagewise model, we simply introduce
one more degree of freedom by incorporating class-specific
precision, which leads to a different optimal solution. Our
formal analysis of PrAdaBoost shows that, as in the case

AdaBoost is a highly popular ensemble classification method
for which many variants have been published. This paper
proposes a generic refinement of all of these AdaBoost variants. Instead of assigning weights based on the total error of
the base classifiers (as in AdaBoost), our method uses classspecific error rates. On instance x it assigns a higher weight
to a classifier predicting label y on x, if that classifier is less
likely to make a mistake when it predicts class y. Like AdaBoost, our method is guaranteed to boost weak learners into
strong learners. An empirical study on AdaBoost and one of
its multi-class versions, SAMME, demonstrates the superiority of our method on datasets with more than 1,000 instances
as well as on datasets with more than three classes.

Introduction
One of the most popular methods for ensemble classification
is AdaBoost, introduced by Freund and Schapire (1997).
The intuitive idea behind AdaBoost is: (i) train a simple
base classifier h1 and observe its performance on the training data; (ii) assign a higher weight to the training examples
misclassified by h1 and a lower weight to the correctly classified ones (so that the base classifier h2 to be trained in the
next iteration focuses more on those data points that h1 misclassified); (iii) iterate this procedure T times, to create base
classifiers h1 , . . . , hT ; and (iv) form a final classifier from a
weighted majority vote of the base classifiers.
If base classifier ht has a lower weighted error on the
training examples than base classifier ht0 , then ht is assigned
more weight in the final vote than ht0 . Moreover, when
reweighting training examples after iteration t, weights are
changed more substantially than after iteration t0 , because
the examples misclassified by the stronger classifier ht likely
tend to be “more difficult” than many of those misclassified by the weaker classifier ht0 . The exact coefficients by
which to reweight training examples between iterations and
by which to weight base classifiers in the final vote were
chosen so as to yield guarantees on the performance of AdaBoost.
In this paper, we follow an idea originally proposed by
Aslam (2000) and refine the principle behind AdaBoost’s
weighting scheme. Consider a hypothetical situation in
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9153

