The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Progressive Network Grafting for Few-Shot Knowledge Distillation
Chengchao Shen,1 Xinchao Wang, 2 Youtan Yin, 1 Jie Song, 1 Sihui Luo, 1
Mingli Song 1, 3*
1
Zhejiang University
Stevens Institute of Technology
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{chengchaoshen, youtanyin, sjie, sihuiluo829, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.wang@stevens.edu
2

Abstract

off between model performance and size. Network pruning
methods remove the weights of trained network based on
priors and then retrain the pruned network to recover the performance of the original network. They require massive labeled data and an iterative retraining procedure, which is often time-consuming. Knowledge distillation methods (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), on the other hand, train student networks by making them imitate the output of a given
teacher. However, as student network is in many cases initialized randomly and trained from scratch, knowledge distillation approaches also rely on numerous training data to
explore the large parameter space of student so as to train a
well-behaved model.
To alleviate data hunger in knowledge distillation, several
few-shot distillation methods have been proposed to transfer
knowledge from teacher to student with less dependency on
the amount of data. The work of (Li et al. 2018) proposes
a few-shot approach by combining network pruning and
block-wise distillation to compress the teacher model. The
one of (Wang et al. 2020) introduces an active mixup augmentation strategy that selects hard samples from a pool of
the augmented images. The work of (Bai et al. 2019) designs
a cross distillation method, combined with network pruning
to reduce the layer-wise accumulated errors in the few-shot
setting. In spite of the encouraging results achieved, existing
methods still heavily rely on pre- or post-processing techniques, such as network pruning, which per se are unstable
and error-prone.
In this paper, we propose a principled dual-stage progressive network grafting strategy for few-shot knowledge distillation, which allows us to eliminate the dependency on other
techniques that are potentially fragile and hence strengthen
the robustness of knowledge distillation. At the heart of our
proposed approach is a block-wise “grafting” scheme, which
learns the parameters of the student network by injecting
them into the teacher network and optimizing them intertwined with the parameters of the teacher in a progressive
fashion. Such a grafting strategy takes much better advantage of the well-trained parameters of the teacher network
and therefore significantly shrinks parameter space of the
student network, allowing us to training the student with
much fewer samples.
Specifically, our grafting-based distillation scheme follows a two-step procedure. In the first step, the student net-

Knowledge distillation has demonstrated encouraging performances in deep model compression. Most existing approaches, however, require massive labeled data to accomplish the knowledge transfer, making the model compression
a cumbersome and costly process. In this paper, we investigate the practical few-shot knowledge distillation scenario,
where we assume only a few samples without human annotations are available for each category. To this end, we introduce
a principled dual-stage distillation scheme tailored for fewshot data. In the first step, we graft the student blocks one by
one onto the teacher, and learn the parameters of the grafted
block intertwined with those of the other teacher blocks. In
the second step, the trained student blocks are progressively
connected and then together grafted onto the teacher network,
allowing the learned student blocks to adapt themselves to
each other and eventually replace the teacher network. Experiments demonstrate that our approach, with only a few unlabeled samples, achieves gratifying results on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ILSVRC-2012. On CIFAR10 and CIFAR100,
our performances are even on par with those of knowledge
distillation schemes that utilize the full datasets. The source
code is available at https://github.com/zju-vipa/NetGraft.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely applied to various computer vision tasks, such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016),
semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Chen et al. 2018; Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla
2017), and object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al.
2016; Zhang et al. 2018). The state-of-the-art deep models,
however, are often cumbersome in size and time-consuming
to train and run, which precludes them from being deployed in the resource-critical scenarios such as Internet of
Things (IoT).
To this end, many model compression methods, such as
network pruning (Li et al. 2017; Han et al. 2015; Wen
et al. 2016) and knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015; Romero et al. 2014), are proposed to trade
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2541

