The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

NaturalConv: A Chinese Dialogue Dataset Towards
Multi-turn Topic-driven Conversation
Xiaoyang Wang* , Chen Li* , Jianqiao Zhao, Dong Yu
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
{shawnxywang, ailabchenli, markjzhao, dyu}@tencent.com

Abstract

2020) have been released to demonstrate attempts for generating informative responses with topic related dialogue.
Knowledge/Topic grounded conversation is a kind of new
type conversation. On one hand, unlike open domain dialogue, it involves some specific topics which need extra
knowledge during response generation. On the other hand,
it also has various indirect information to the topic such as
chitchat, saying a joke, expressing personal experiences, etc.
Therefore, we believe this kind of topic grounded conversations are closer to human-like conversations than opendomain dialogue in terms of naturalness and popularity.
However, we find two common drawbacks from current
available grounded conversation corpora: one is that almost
all the mentioned work requires that the participants can
only chat within the given topic and assumes the participants
are familiar with the topic by reading the provided document
or knowledge graph. But in our real life, people can easily
extend the topic if they are very familiar with that and can
also easily shift to other topics if their partner starts an unfamiliar topic. The other shortcoming is that most mentioned
previous work encourages annotators to directly talk about
the topic once they start the conversation. The work (Moghe
et al. 2018) even explicitly forbids chitchat during the annotation stage. However, the reality is quite opposite. Few
daily conversations between people will directly step into
topic after start. People will always have greeting before any
formal or informal talk.
In order to conquer these problems, we propose NaturalConv, a Chinese dialogue dataset towards multi-turn topicdriven conversation with scenario. It is quite suitable for
modeling topic interactions in multi-turn natural human-like
dialogues. The common point with previous corpora is that
the proposed dataset is also topic grounded and collected by
annotators who communicate based on one given topic in
the form of a news article. But the biggest different characteristics are the following: First, talk does not have to be only
about the content from the article if one or both of them are
not interested in that topic. Participants can talk about anything they want as long as any information from the news
article is mentioned and the transition among the topic is
natural; Second, we require that two participants need to
suppose a scenario for their conversation. It means annotators conduct the dialogue task like a cosplay. They can assume the talk happens in any scenario as long as it follows

In this paper, we propose a Chinese multi-turn topic-driven
conversation dataset, NaturalConv, which allows the participants to chat anything they want as long as any element
from the topic is mentioned and the topic shift is smooth. Our
corpus contains 19.9K conversations from six domains, and
400K utterances with an average turn number of 20.1. These
conversations contain in-depth discussions on related topics
or widely natural transition between multiple topics. We believe either way is normal for human conversation. To facilitate the research on this corpus, we provide results of several
benchmark models. Comparative results show that for this
dataset, our current models are not able to provide significant
improvement by introducing background knowledge/topic.
Therefore, the proposed dataset should be a good benchmark
for further research to evaluate the validity and naturalness of
multi-turn conversation systems. Our dataset is available at
https://ai.tencent.com/ailab/nlp/dialogue/#datasets.

Introduction
There is a resurgent interest in developing open domain dialogue system, due to the availability of large amounts of
conversational data and the recent progress on neural approaches (Huang, Zhu, and Gao 2019). However, building
open-domain dialogue systems that can converse on various topics like humans remains extremely challenging and
most current open domain dialogue system are only good at
generating general responses without too much meaningful
information (Gao et al. 2019).
Therefore, increasing research efforts are moving to consider how to incorporate various kinds of information to improve the quality of open domain conversation. The information includes but not limited to personality (Qian et al.
2018), common sense (Zhou et al. 2018b), reasoning (Zhou,
Huang, and Zhu 2018), emotion(Zhou et al. 2018a), extra
knowledge in terms of knowledge graph (Moon et al. 2019;
Wu et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020) etc. Especially, a variety
of knowledge grounded dialogue corpora (Zhu et al. 2017;
Dinan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018; Moghe et al. 2018; Zhou,
Prabhumoye, and Black 2018; Moon et al. 2019; Qin et al.
2019; Tuan, Chen, and Lee 2019; Wu et al. 2019; Zhou et al.
* Xiaoyang Wang and Chen Li contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14006

