The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Semantic Dictionary Learning for Multi-label Image Classification
Fengtao Zhou1 , Sheng Huang1,2,* , Yun Xing1
1

2

School of Big data & Software Engineering, Chongqing University,
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society,
Shazheng street NO.174, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400044, China
{zft, huangsheng, yxing}@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared with single-label image classification, multi-label
image classification is more practical and challenging. Some
recent studies attempted to leverage the semantic information of categories for improving multi-label image classification performance. However, these semantic-based methods
only take semantic information as type of complements for
visual representation without further exploitation. In this paper, we present an innovative path towards the solution of
the multi-label image classification which considers it as a
dictionary learning task. A novel end-to-end model named
Deep Semantic Dictionary Learning (DSDL) is designed. In
DSDL, an auto-encoder is applied to generate the semantic
dictionary from class-level semantics and then such dictionary is utilized for representing the visual features extracted
by Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with label embeddings. The DSDL provides a simple but elegant way to exploit and reconcile the label, semantic and visual spaces simultaneously via conducting the dictionary learning among
them. Moreover, inspired by iterative optimization of traditional dictionary learning, we further devise a novel training strategy named Alternately Parameters Update Strategy
(APUS) for optimizing DSDL, which alternately optimizes
the representation coefficients and the semantic dictionary
in forward and backward propagation. Extensive experimental results on three popular benchmarks demonstrate that our
method achieves promising performances in comparison with
the state-of-the-arts. Our codes and models have been released1 .

cow

boat

person

Single-label Images from ImageNet

person, motor

person, motor,car

dog, sofa

Multi-label Images from Pascal VOC

Figure 1: Some examples from ImageNet and Pascal VOC.
The foreground objects in single-label images are roughly
aligned. However, the assumption of object alignment is not
valid for multi-label images in which different objects are
located at various positions under different scales and poses.

objects in multi-label images also increases the complexity
of multi-label image classification. In such a manner, the
multi-label image classification is more practical and challenging than single-label image classification.
To tackle the multi-label classification problem, extensive approaches have been proposed over the past decades.
Generally speaking, they can be divided into two categories (Zhang and Zhou 2013), i.e., problem transformation
methods and algorithm adaptation methods. The problem
transformation methods solve the multi-label image classification task by transforming it into other well-established
classification scenarios. The most straightforward way is to
treat multi-label image classification as a set of binary classification, and to train the independent classifier for each
class with cross-entropy (Guillaumin et al. 2009) or ranking
loss (Gong et al. 2013). The algorithm adaption methods address the multi-label image classification problem via adapting popular learning techniques to process multi-label images directly, such as modifying the output layer of singlelabel classification model (He et al. 2016; Simonyan 2014).
Briefly, the philosophy of problem transformation methods
is to fit data to algorithm, while the algorithm adaptation is
to fit algorithm to data.
Influenced by the recent advancement in Neural Language

Introduction
With the emergence of large-scale datasets, e.g. ImageNet,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved great
success for single-label image classification due to their
powerful representation learning abilities. However, most of
real-world images contain more than one category of objects
which are located at various positions and scales with complex background. As depicted in Figure 1, the foreground
objects of single-label images are roughly aligned while this
assumption is usually invalid for multi-label images. Furthermore, the different composition and interaction between
* indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/ZFT-CQU/DSDL.

3572

