The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Action Candidate Based Clipped Double Q-learning for Discrete and Continuous
Action Tasks
Haobo Jiang, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang∗
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{jiang.hao.bo, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

operator tends to overestimate the action values. Due to the
large positive bias, it is difficult to learn the high-quality policy for the Q-learning in many tasks (Thrun and Schwartz
1993; Szita and Lőrincz 2008; Strehl, Li, and Littman 2009).
Moreover, such overestimation bias also exists in a variety of
variants of Q-learning such as fitted Q-iteration (Strehl et al.
2006), delayed Q-learning (Ernst, Geurts, and Wehenkel
2005) and deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015).
Recently, several improved Q-learning methods have been
proposed to reduce the overestimation bias. Bias-corrected
Q-learning (Lee, Defourny, and Powell 2013) adds a bias
correction term on the target value so that the overestimation
error can be reduced. Softmax Q-learning (Song, Parr, and
Carin 2019) and Weighted Q-learning (D’Eramo, Restelli,
and Nuara 2016) are proposed to soften the maximum operation via replacing it with the sum of the weighted action
values. The softmax operation and Gaussian approximation
are employed to generate the weights, respectively. In Averaged Q-learning (Anschel, Baram, and Shimkin 2017) and
Maxmin Q-learning (Lan et al. 2020), their target values are
constructed to reduce the bias and variance via combining
multiple Q-functions.
Double Q-learning (Hasselt 2010; van Hasselt 2013;
Zhang, Pan, and Kochenderfer 2017) is another popular
method to avoid the overestimation bias. In Double Qlearning, it exploits the online collected experience sample
to randomly update one of two Q-functions. In each update,
the first Q-function selects the greedy action and the second
Q-function evaluates its value. Although Double Q-learning
can effectively relieve the overestimation bias in Q-learning
in terms of the expected value, its target value may occasionally be with the large overestimation bias during training process. To avoid it, clipped Double Q-learning (Fujimoto, Van Hoof, and Meger 2018) directly uses the maximum action value of one Q-function to clip the target value
of the Double Q-learning. Clipping Double Q-learning can
be viewed as using the clipped double estimator to approximate the maximum expected value. However, the clipped
double estimator suffers from the large underestimation bias.
In order to reduce the large negative bias of the clipped
double estimator, in this paper, we propose an action candidate based clipped double estimator for Double Q-learning.
Specifically, we first select a set of action candidates corresponding to high action values in one set of estimators. Then,

Double Q-learning is a popular reinforcement learning algorithm in Markov decision process (MDP) problems. Clipped
Double Q-learning, as an effective variant of Double Qlearning, employs the clipped double estimator to approximate the maximum expected action value. Due to the underestimation bias of the clipped double estimator, performance of clipped Double Q-learning may be degraded in
some stochastic environments. In this paper, in order to reduce the underestimation bias, we propose an action candidate based clipped double estimator for Double Q-learning.
Specifically, we first select a set of elite action candidates
with the high action values from one set of estimators. Then,
among these candidates, we choose the highest valued action
from the other set of estimators. Finally, we use the maximum value in the second set of estimators to clip the action
value of the chosen action in the first set of estimators and
the clipped value is used for approximating the maximum expected action value. Theoretically, the underestimation bias
in our clipped Double Q-learning decays monotonically as
the number of the action candidates decreases. Moreover, the
number of action candidates controls the trade-off between
the overestimation and underestimation biases. In addition,
we also extend our clipped Double Q-learning to continuous action tasks via approximating the elite continuous action candidates. We empirically verify that our algorithm can
more accurately estimate the maximum expected action value
on some toy environments and yield good performance on
several benchmark problems.

Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning has achieved more
and more attention. It aims to learn an optimal policy so
that cumulative rewards can be maximized via trial-anderror in an unknown environment (Sutton and Barto 2018).
Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992) is one of widely studied reinforcement learning algorithms. As a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm, it generates the optimal policy via selecting the action which owns the largest estimated
action value. In each update, Q-learning executes the maximization operation over action values for constructing the
target value of Q-function. Unfortunately, this maximization
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7979

