The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Low-Contrast Image Enhancement using Structure Tensor Representation
Hyungjoo Jung,1,2 Hyunsung Jang,1,3 Namkoo Ha,3 and Kwanghoon Sohn1*
1

Yonsei University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
3
LIG Nex1
jhj0220@kist.re.kr, hyunsung.jang@yonsei.ac.kr, namkoo.ha@lignex1.com, khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Abstract

due to their powerful representation ability to image structure. They utilize a set of degraded and ground-truth image pairs as training dataset, where the degraded images
are usually obtained by corrupting the clean ones. With the
paired training examples, the deep networks can be trained
to learn a high-dimensional non-linear mapping from the degraded observations to their ground-truths. The most common choice of loss functions is mean square error (MSE) or
mean absolute error (MAE), which measure per-pixel intensity difference between CNN outputs and the ground-truths.
However, these loss functions suffer from poor results due to
their independent property on local characteristics of the image. Beyond the pointwise quality metrics, several loss functions (Zhao et al. 2016; Dosovitskiy and Brox 2016) have
considered the neighboring pixels to obtain perceptually enhanced outputs. Especially, the perceptual loss (Dosovitskiy
and Brox 2016) ensures the output image to have the similar
high-level feature with that of the ground-truth image.
In the area of single image contrast enhancement, we can
train the CNNs with the above loss functions to map the lowcontrast input into the corresponding reference image. The
paired training dataset has been constructed by retouching
low-contrast images through human experts (Bychkovsky
et al. 2011) or photography algorithms (Cai, Gu, and Zhang
2018). However, there may be no unique or well-defined
high-quality ground-truth given a low-contrast image. Furthermore, the results obtained by the direct network suffer
from various distortions, such as noise amplification, false
color, and wrong contrast. Such distortions come from the
difficulties in balancing both the contrast enhancement and
color reconstruction with single ground-truth images. The
recent CNN-based enhancement approaches have resolved
the distortions assisted by additional networks (Cai, Gu, and
Zhang 2018; Ren et al. 2019), refinement (Wei et al. 2018),
or adversarial training (Ignatov et al. 2017).
In this paper, we introduce a novel deep learning framework for single image contrast enhancement, which uses
the multi-exposure image sequences, not an explicit highquality image, as weak supervision for network training. Although each exposure image has only weak contrast, the
entire sequences can provide a rich details for contrast enhancement. Our goal is to enhance the low-contrast images
using abundant details in the multi-exposure sequence. To
realize this, we first define the contrast of the sequence using

We present a new deep learning framework for low-contrast
image enhancement, which trains the network using the
multi-exposure sequences rather than explicit ground-truth
images. The purpose of our method is to enhance a lowcontrast image so as to contain abundant details in various
exposure levels. To realize this, we propose to design the loss
function using the structure tensor representation, which has
been widely used as high-dimensional image contrast. Our
loss function penalizes the difference of the structure tensors between the network output and the multi-exposure images in a multi-scale manner. Eventually, the network trained
by the loss function produces a high-quality image approximating the overall contrast of the sequence. We provide indepth analysis on our method and comparison with conventional loss functions. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the existing state-of-the art approaches in various benchmarks.

Introduction
Camera sensors often fail to capture clear images or videos
under poor conditions, such as insufficient lighting environment, limited camera performance, and inappropriate setting for the equipment. The lost details and low contrast not
only cause unpleasant subjective feelings, but also degenerate the performance of high-level vision algorithms such as
detection and stereo matching. The demand for low-contrast
image enhancement has tremendously grown for both human and machine perceptions. Over the last decades, various
methods have been proposed to enhance the low-contrast
images. Traditional enhancement techniques can be mainly
categorized into two groups: histogram-based (Arici, Dikbas, and Altunbasak 2009; Celik and Tjahjadi 2011) and
Retinex-based (Fu et al. 2016; Guo, Li, and Ling 2017)
methods. However, they require manual parameter adjustments, and fail to produce a high-quality results due to the
complex structures in natural scenes.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown a massive advance in many low-level vision
tasks (Dong et al. 2015; Kim et al. 2017; Kupyn et al. 2018),
*Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1725

