The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive Self-supervised Learning for Graph Classification
Jiaqi Zeng1 and Pengtao Xie2∗
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, USA
Gabyyyyyy@sjtu.edu.cn, p1xie@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract

CSSL-Pretrain, we use CSSL to pretrain graph encoders
on widely-available unlabeled graphs without relying on
human-provided labels, then finetune the pretrained encoders on labeled graphs. In CSSL-Reg, we develop a regularizer based on CSSL, and solve the supervised classification task and the unsupervised CSSL task simultaneously. Self-supervised learning (SSL) (Gidaris, Singh, and
Komodakis 2018; Pathak et al. 2016; Zhang, Isola, and
Efros 2016) is an unsupervised learning approach which defines auxiliary tasks on input data without using any humanprovided labels and learns data representations by solving
these auxiliary tasks. Contrastive SSL (He et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2020b,a) creates augmentations of original data examples and defines an auxiliary task which judges whether two
augmented data examples originate from the same original
data example. Recently, several self-supervised learning approaches (Peng et al. 2020; Qiu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2019)
are proposed for representation learning on graphs. These
approaches focus on learning representations of local elements in graphs, such as nodes and subgraphs. In contrast,
our method focuses on learning graph-level representations
that are more suitable for tasks like graph classification.

Graph classification is a widely studied problem and has
broad applications. In many real-world problems, the number
of labeled graphs available for training classification models
is limited, which renders these models prone to overfitting.
To address this problem, we propose two approaches based
on contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) to alleviate
overfitting. In the first approach, we use CSSL to pretrain
graph encoders on widely-available unlabeled graphs without relying on human-provided labels, then finetune the pretrained encoders on labeled graphs. In the second approach,
we develop a regularizer based on CSSL, and solve the supervised classification task and the unsupervised CSSL task
simultaneously. To perform CSSL on graphs, given a collection of original graphs, we perform data augmentation to
create augmented graphs out of the original graphs. An augmented graph is created by consecutively applying a sequence
of graph alteration operations. A contrastive loss is defined
to learn graph encoders by judging whether two augmented
graphs are from the same original graph. Experiments on
various graph classification datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/UCSD-AI4H/GraphSSL.

To perform CSSL on graphs, we first create augmented
graphs from the original graphs, based on four basic graph
alteration operations including edge deletion, edge addition,
node deletion, and node addition. To create an augmented
graph, we apply a sequence of graph alteration operations
consecutively: the operation at step t is applied to the intermediate graph generated after applying the operation at step
t−1. Given the augmented graphs, we define a CSSL task to
distinguish whether two augmented graphs are created from
the same original graph. In CSSL-Pretrain, we first pretrain
a graph encoder by solving the graph CSSL task, then use
this pretrained encoder as initialization and continue to finetune it by minimizing the graph classification loss. CSSLPretrain learns powerful graph representations on unlabeled
graphs (which are widely available) in an unsupervised way
without relying on human-provided labels. Since these representations are learned without using labels, they are less
likely to be overfitted to the labels in the small-sized training dataset and hence help to reduce overfitting. In CSSLReg, the CSSL loss serves as a regularization term and is
optimized jointly with the classification loss. CSSL-Reg enforces the graph encoder to jointly solve two tasks: an un-

Introduction
Graph classification (Zhang et al. 2019; Di et al. 2019) is a
widely studied problem in machine learning and data mining
and finds broad applications. For example, given a molecule
graph of a protein, judge whether this protein is non-enzyme.
Given a chemical compound graph, judge whether the compound is mutagen or non-mutagen. In many real-world
graph classification problems, the number of graphs available for training is oftentimes limited. For instance, it is difficult to obtain a lot of protein graphs in many biomedical
studies due to the financial cost. It is well known that when
the amount of training data is limited, the model tends to
overfit to the training data and perform less well on test data.
To address the overfitting problem in graph classification, we propose two approaches: CSSL-Pretrain and
CSSL-Reg, both based on contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) (He et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020a,b). In
∗

Corresponding Author
Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗

10824

