The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Text-Guided Graph Neural Networks for Referring 3D Instance Segmentation
Pin-Hao Huang,1 * Han-Hung Lee,1,2 * Hwann-Tzong Chen,2,4 Tyng-Luh Liu1,3
1

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
3
Taiwan AI Labs
4
Aeolus Robotics
{pinhao517, rexleeppp}@gmail.com, htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw, liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw
2

Abstract

point clouds, which tend to be unordered and are more challenging to learn. Recent techniques transform point clouds
into volumetric cells (voxels) and perform sparse convolution
on occupied cells (Graham, Engelcke, and van der Maaten
2018). Such an approach demonstrates outstanding performance on the indoor-scene 3D semantic segmentation task
and is commonly employed as the backbone model.
We adopt the above technique as the backbone for feature
extraction in the proposed two-phase approach. Specifically,
in the first phase of our method, the backbone model extracts point features and semantic classes. In parallel, an instance centroid estimation branch predicts the offsets to shift
points toward their associated instance center. With these
predictions, a fast mask prediction algorithm is proposed
to generate high-quality 3D instance masks. In the second
phase, we propose the Text-guided Graph Neural Network
that takes the instance features, centers, and text features as
input for instance referring. We use ScanRefer (Chen, Chang,
and Nießner 2020), Nr3D, and Sr3D (Achlioptas et al. 2020)
datasets to formulate the task of referring 3D instance segmentation for evaluating our method. Note that no prior art is
available to solve the proposed new task. Hence, for comparison we also apply our method to the problem of referring 3D
object localization and identification, which dose not require
precise mask predictions and has been addressed in a few
recent works. The experimental results show that our method
establishes a strong baseline for the task of referring 3D instance segmentation for future approaches and, with a simple
modification, can also achieve state-of-the-art performance
on referring 3D object localization and identification.

This paper addresses a new task called referring 3D instance
segmentation, which aims to segment out the target instance
in a 3D scene given a query sentence. Previous work on scene
understanding has explored visual grounding with natural language guidance, yet the emphasis is mostly constrained on
images and videos. We propose a Text-guided Graph Neural
Network (TGNN) for referring 3D instance segmentation on
point clouds. Given a query sentence and the point cloud of
a 3D scene, our method learns to extract per-point features
and predicts an offset to shift each point toward its object
center. Based on the point features and the offsets, we cluster
the points to produce fused features and coordinates for the
candidate objects. The resulting clusters are modeled as nodes
in a Graph Neural Network to learn the representations that encompass the relation structure for each candidate object. The
GNN layers leverage each object’s features and its relations
with neighbors to generate an attention heatmap for the input
sentence expression. Finally, the attention heatmap is used
to “guide” the aggregation of information from neighborhood
nodes. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
referring 3D instance segmentation and 3D localization on
ScanRefer, Nr3D, and Sr3D benchmarks, respectively.

Introduction
Referring image segmentation aims to make pixel-level predictions of the target object in an image described by a natural
language expression. With the development of convolutional
neural networks and the assist from several useful language
models, referring segmentation in 2D images has been widely
studied in the past few years. Yet, the joint modeling of language and 3D vision is still a new topic waiting to be explored. In this work, we design a text-guided graph-based
approach for referring 3D instance segmentation—a new task
that, to our best knowledge, has not been well investigated
before. Given a referring expression, the task is to predict
the 3D mask of the target instance in a point cloud. Figure 1
illustrates an example of our referring task.
Unlike 2D images, where pixels are arranged in an organized configuration, 3D data mostly come in the form of

Related Work
Referring Localization and Segmentation in 2D
Referring image localization aims to estimate a bounding box
on the specific object described by the referring expression
(Hu et al. 2016; Nagaraja, Morariu, and Davis 2016; Yu et al.
2016; Hu et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2017, 2018; Deng et al. 2018;
Zhuang et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019b; Wang et al. 2019a;
Yang, Li, and Yu 2019a,b; Liu et al. 2019a; Sadhu, Chen, and
Nevatia 2019; Yang, Li, and Yu 2020). In contrast, referring
image segmentation predicts a segmentation mask on the
referred object to obtain more precise results (Hu, Rohrbach,
and Darrell 2016; Liu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Margffoy-

* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1610

