The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Multi-Modality Person Re-identification
Aihua Zheng, Zi Wang† , Zihan Chen† , Chenglong Li∗ , Jin Tang
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
{ahzheng214, ziwang1121, zhchen96, lcl1314}@foxmail.com, tangjin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

ID1 and ID2 in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), their NI images are significantly affected.
To incorporate the complementary information among the
multi-modality information, there emerges the attempt of
RGBD dual-modality Re-ID (Barbosa et al. 2012; Munaro
et al. 2014b) by introducing the depth information. However,
the existing depth data are captured in indoor conditions
which significantly limit its applications and attractions in
both research and industry communities.
In this paper, we propose a new task named multimodality person Re-ID by integrating RGB, TI (Thermal)
and NI (Near Infrared) source data for robust person Re-ID.
These three kinds of data have diverse ranges of spectrum,
as shown in Fig. 1 (a), and could provide strong complementary benefits in person Re-ID. For example, NI information can overcome the low illumination therefore provides
more visible information especially in low illumination, as
the person ID3 in Fig. 1 (b). Comparing to NI images, TI
information is insensitive to lighting conditions, and has a
strong ability to penetrate haze and smog, even in a long
distance surveillance, which provides more discriminative
information between human bodies and surrounding environments, or auxiliary costumes, as the person ID1 and ID2
in Fig. 1 (b). Introducing NI and TI cameras/modalities into
RGB one has perspective applications including all-day allweather security monitoring, long distance drone investigation, autonomous vehicle in complex environments, etc.
The new task of multi-modality person Re-ID raises three
major problems. 1) How to design a suitable baseline algorithm to effectively leverage the complementary benefits of
all modalities for robust multi-modality person Re-ID even
in the presence of missing modalities. 2) How to create a
reasonable size benchmark dataset for the comprehensive
evaluation of different multi-modality person Re-ID algorithms. 3) How much do each modality, each or diverse
combinations of multiple modalities contribute in multimodality person Re-ID.
To address above problems, we first design a progressive fusion network (PFNet) to learn robust RGB-NI-TI
features for multi-modality person Re-ID. Specifically, we
employ three individual branches to extract single-modality
features and integrate the spatial attention operations to capture more meaningful regions within each modality. Then
we fuse the features of each two modalities in part-level to

To avoid the illumination limitation in visible person reidentification (Re-ID) and the heterogeneous issue in crossmodality Re-ID, we propose to utilize complementary advantages of multiple modalities including visible (RGB), near
infrared (NI) and thermal infrared (TI) ones for robust person Re-ID. A novel progressive fusion network is designed to
learn effective multi-modal features from single to multiple
modalities and from local to global views. Our method works
well in diversely challenging scenarios even in the presence
of missing modalities. Moreover, we contribute a comprehensive benchmark dataset, RGBNT201, including 201 identities
captured from various challenging conditions, to facilitate the
research of RGB-NI-TI multi-modality person Re-ID. Comprehensive experiments on RGBNT201 dataset comparing to
the state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the contribution of
multi-modality person Re-ID and the effectiveness of the proposed approach, which launch a new benchmark and a new
baseline for multi-modality person Re-ID.

Introduction
The last decade has witnessed an exponential surge in person re-identification (Re-ID). However, primary efforts on
a single visible modality faces severe challenges in adverse
illumination and weather conditions like total darkness and
dense fog, which restrict its applications in all-day and allweather surveillance. For example, as shown in Fig. 1 (a)
and (b), RGB images almost become invalid in harsh lighting conditions and the performance of RGB-based person
Re-ID would thus be limited.
To overcome imaging limitations of visible sensors, Wu
et al. (2017) propose an RGB and Near Infrared (RGB-NI)
dataset SYSU-MM01 for cross-modal person Re-ID, which
has been drawn much more attention in recent years from
both academic and industrial communities (Dai et al. 2018;
Hao et al. 2019a; Wang et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2018; Li et al.
2020). However, the heterogeneous properties across RGB
and NI modalities caused by distinct wavelength ranges
bring additional challenges to person Re-ID. In addition, the
imaging quality of NI is still limited in some challenging
scenarios, such as high illumination. For instance, for the
∗

Corresponding author, † Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3529

