The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An LP-Based Approach for Goal Recognition as Planning
Luı́sa R. de A. Santos1 , Felipe Meneguzzi2 , Ramon Fraga Pereira3 , André G. Pereira1
1

2

Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
3
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
1
{lrasantos, agpereira}@inf.ufrgs.br
2
felipe.meneguzzi@pucrs.br
3
pereira@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

information of admissible heuristic functions through an integer program (IP) (Pommerening et al. 2014). These heuristics provide constraints that must be satisfied by every plan
of the planning task. In general, the objective value of the
linear program (LP), a linear relaxation of the integer program, is used as heuristic function to guide the search. A major advantage of this framework is that it enables to reason
and to manipulate the information of the heuristics directly.
We develop an LP-based approach to solve goal recognition tasks, including five main contributions. First, we modify the operator-counting framework to efficiently compute
solutions that satisfy the counts of observations of a goal
recognition task. We also use this framework to estimate the
cost of an optimal plan for each goal candidate in the task.
Then, we use the information generated to solve the goal
recognition task. Second, we show how to contrast the objective value of the modified linear program and the length
of the sequence of observations to estimate the uncertainty
of the decision of our approach which we use to improve
our solution. Third, we develop an approach to explicitly address noisy observations. Given the unreliability of the sensor of observations, we create an integer program that aims
to automatically ignore noisy observations when computing solutions. Fourth, we show that higher heuristic values
from lower bound heuristics for the reference goal predict
the quality of our solution. Finally, we modify the previous
benchmarks to compare goal recognition methods by agreement ratio, showing that ours overcomes the state of the art.

Goal recognition aims to recognize the set of candidate goals
that are compatible with the observed behavior of an agent.
In this paper, we develop a method based on the operatorcounting framework that efficiently computes solutions that
satisfy the observations and uses the information generated
to solve goal recognition tasks. Our method reasons explicitly about both partial and noisy observations: estimating uncertainty for the former, and satisfying observations given the
unreliability of the sensor for the latter. We evaluate our approach empirically over a large data set, analyzing its components on how each can impact the quality of the solutions.
In general, our approach is superior to previous methods in
terms of agreement ratio, accuracy, and spread. Finally, our
approach paves the way for new research on combinatorial
optimization to solve goal recognition tasks.

Introduction
Goal recognition as planning consists of inferring the set of
compatible goals from a set of goal candidates, given a planning task without a goal, and a sequence of observations. A
solution for a goal recognition task is a subset of goal candidates that are compatible with the sequence of observations.
A plan for the planning task with the reference goal, part of
the set of goal candidates, generates the sequence of observations. This sequence may be partial, containing any number of observations from the plan. Existing methods on goal
recognition try to cope with three main classes of observation sequences: optimal (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009), suboptimal (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2010), and noisy (Sohrabi,
Riabov, and Udrea 2016). Since approaches to goal recognition as planning often employ standard planning technology to solve goal recognition tasks, many of them can benefit from improvements in the underlying planning technology (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009; E-Martı́n, R.-Moreno, and
Smith 2015; Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi 2017; Harman
and Simoens 2020).
Recent developments in planning include heuristics based
on the operator-counting framework, which combines the

Planning Task and Operator-Counting
Framework
An SAS+ planning task is a tuple Π = hV, O, s0 , s∗ , costi,
where V is a set of variables, O is a set of operators, s0 is
an initial state, s∗ is a goal condition, and cost a cost function. Each variable v ∈ V has a finite domain D(v). A state
is a complete assignment, a partial state is a partial assignment of the variables over V, vars(s) is the set of variables
in a (partial) state s, and s[v] is the value of variable v in a
(partial) state s. The initial state s0 is a state, and the goal
condition s∗ is a partial state. A state s is consistent with a
(partial) state s0 if s[v] = s0 [v] for all v ∈ vars(s0 ). Each
operator o ∈ O is pair of partial states hpre(o), post(o)i

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11939

