The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Listen, Understand and Translate:
Triple Supervision Decouples End-to-end Speech-to-text Translation
Qianqian Dong, 1,2∗ Rong Ye, 3 Mingxuan Wang, 3 Hao Zhou, 3 Shuang Xu, 1 Bo Xu, 1,2 Lei Li 3
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
ByteDance AI Lab, China
{dongqianqian2016, shuang.xu, xubo}@ia.ac.cn, {yerong, wangmingxuan.89, zhouhao.nlp, lileilab}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

perception systems and cognitive systems to process different information. Ideally, a neural encoder-decoder network should also benefit from imitating these intermediate
steps. The challenges are: a) there is no sufficient supervision to guide the internals of an encoder-decoder to process the audio input and obtain acoustic and semantic information properly. b) the training corpus for ST with pairs
of source audio and target text is much smaller than those
typically used for ASR and MT. Previous works attempt to
relieve these challenges using pre-training and fine-tuning
approaches.They usually initialize the ST model with the
encoder trained on ASR data to mimic the speech recognizing process and then fine-tune on a speech translation
dataset to make the cross-lingual translation. However, pretraining and fine-tuning are still not sufficient enough to train
an effective ST system, for the following reasons: a) the encoder for speech recognition is mainly used to extract acoustic information, while the ST model requires to encode both
acoustic and semantic information. b) previous studies (Battenberg et al. 2017) have proved that the learned alignments
between input and output units in the ASR models are local
and monotonic, which is not conducive to modeling longdistance dependencies for translation models. c) the gap of
length between the input audio signals (typically ∼ 1000
frames) and target sentences (typically ∼ 20 tokens) renders
the association from the encoder to decoder difficult to learn.
Based on the above analysis, we explore decoupled model
structure, LUT, with an acoustic encoder (to Listen), a semantic encoder (to Understand), and a translation decoder
(to Translate) to imitate the intermediate steps for effective end-to-end speech translation. In addition to the widelyused translation loss with cross-entropy, we exploit two additional auxiliary supervising signals. We utilize the monotonic alignment for transcriptions to ensure the acoustic encoder capture necessary acoustic information from the input audio spectrum sequence. In this way, the local relations
among the nearby audio frames are preserved. We utilize
the pre-trained embedding, to guide the semantic encoder to
capture a proper semantic representation. Notice that neither
of the two auxiliary supervision is required during the inference, and therefore our method is efficient.
The contributions of the paper are as follows: 1) We
design LUT, a unified framework augmented with additional components and supervisions to decouple and guide

An end-to-end speech-to-text translation (ST) takes audio in
a source language and outputs the text in a target language.
Existing methods are limited by the amount of parallel corpus. Can we build a system to fully utilize signals in a parallel ST corpus? We are inspired by human understanding
system which is composed of auditory perception and cognitive processing. In this paper, we propose Listen-UnderstandTranslate, (LUT), a unified framework with triple supervision signals to decouple the end-to-end speech-to-text translation task. LUT is able to guide the acoustic encoder to extract as much information from the auditory input. In addition, LUT utilizes a pre-trained BERT model to enforce the
upper encoder to produce as much semantic information as
possible, without extra data. We perform experiments on a
diverse set of speech translation benchmarks, including Librispeech English-French, IWSLT English-German and TED
English-Chinese. Our results demonstrate LUT achieves the
state-of-the-art performance, outperforming previous methods. The code is available at https://github.com/dqqcasia/st.

Introduction
Processing audio in one language and translating it into another language has been requested in many applications.
Traditional speech translation (ST) systems are cascaded
by connecting separately trained automatic speech recognition (ASR), spoken language normalization processing and
machine translation (MT) subsystems (Sperber et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Dong et al. 2019; Sperber et al. 2019b;
Zhang et al. 2019; Beck, Cohn, and Haffari 2019; Cheng
et al. 2019). However, such cascaded ST systems have drawbacks including higher latency, larger memory footprint, and
potential error propagation in the subsystems. In contrast,
an end-to-end ST system has a single unified model, which
is beneficial in deployment. While very promising, existing
end-to-end ST models still cannot outperform cascaded systems in terms of translation accuracy.
Cascaded ST systems usually have intermediate stages
which extract acoustic features and source-text semantic features, before translating to the target text, like humans with
∗
The work was done while QD was interning at ByteDance AI
Lab.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12749

