The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Pragmatic Code Autocomplete
Gabriel Poesia, Noah Goodman
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{poesia,ndgoodman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Human language is ambiguous, with intended meanings recovered via pragmatic reasoning in context. Such reliance on
context is essential for the efficiency of human communication. Programming languages, in stark contrast, are defined
by unambiguous grammars. In this work, we aim to make programming languages more concise by allowing programmers
to utilize a controlled level of ambiguity. Specifically, we allow single-character abbreviations for common keywords and
identifiers. Our system first proposes a set of strings that can
be abbreviated by the user. Using only 100 abbreviations, we
observe that a corpus of Python code can be compressed by
15%, a number that can be improved even further by specializing the abbreviations to a particular code base. We then use
a contextualized sequence-to-sequence model to rank potential expansions of inputs that include abbreviations. In an offline reconstruction task our model achieves accuracies ranging from 93% to 99%, depending on the programming language and user settings. The model is small enough to run
on a commodity CPU in real-time. We evaluate the usability
of our system in a user study, integrating it in Microsoft VSCode, a popular code text editor. We observe that our system
performs well and is complementary to traditional autocomplete features.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of the system we propose, utilizing the
Python programming language. Users can type their code
using one-character abbreviations, as on the left. Given a
whole abbreviated line, our model expands it using context
with near-perfect accuracy.

when we look at programming languages as a communication channel between programmers and computers. Using tools from information theory, researchers have provided
several arguments for why any efficient communication system must allow for ambiguity when context is informative
about meaning (Piantadosi, Tily, and Gibson 2012; Fortuny
and Corominas-Murtra 2013; Solé and Seoane 2015).
While programming languages eliminate ambiguity by
design, it is still true that context carries significant predictive information about source code. This fact is extensively exploited by autocomplete systems, which are pervasive in modern programming environments. Traditionally,
these systems predict completions of the code the user intends to type. Because there is often high uncertainty about
which of the plausible completions was intended, autocomplete functionality usually offers users a list of their top
predictions. However, HCI researchers have observed that
the cost of picking between predictions can eliminate efficiency gains users would gain from a predictive typing system (Quinn and Zhai 2016; Palin et al. 2019). This issue
seems to pose a dilemma. One the one hand, the redundancy
of programming languages motivates predictive features to
reduce users’ typing effort. But on the other hand, asking
users to decide between multiple possible predictions brings
its own cognitive and efficiency cost.
In this work, we provide a way around this apparent conflict. To mitigate the verbosity of programming languages,
we propose a strategy for using ambiguity in a controlled
fashion to significantly reduce users’ typing effort. First, we
observe that keywords and identifiers constitute 75% of the

Introduction

Human languages have evolved over time to be highly effective and efficient. Though a reliable means of communication, our languages are strikingly ambiguous at every linguistic level. Morphemes, words and even entire sentences
might have very different meanings in different contexts. Yet
this ambiguity does not hinder the communicative efficacy
of natural languages. This can be attributed to pragmatic
reasoning used by listeners to infer the meaning of speakers’ utterances: context usually provides the missing information listeners need to disambiguate meaning (Piantadosi,
Tily, and Gibson 2012).
Programming languages differ radically: To make compilers and interpreters practical, a programming language’s
syntax is always unambiguous, defining a single way to
parse each program. While the absence of ambiguity facilitates the creation of development tools, it also forces programs to be more verbose. This drawback becomes clear
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

445

