The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Judgment Prediction via Injecting Legal Knowledge into Neural Networks
Leilei Gan, Kun Kuang* , Yi Yang and Fei Wu*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{leileigan, kunkuang, yangyics, wufei}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Facts On June 29, 2015, the defendant XXX borrowed 350,000 RMB yuan
from the plaintiff XXX, and issued a loan note, which was agreed to
be returned on August 29, 2015, at a monthly interest rate of 2%. After
the expiry of the loan, the defendant did not repay the loan, ....

Legal Judgment Prediction (LJP) is a key problem in legal artificial intelligence, which aims to predict a law case’s judgment based on a given text describing the facts of the law
case. Most of previous works treat LJP as a text classification
task and generally adopt deep neural networks (DNNs) based
methods to solve it. However, existing DNNs based models
are data thirsty and hard to explain which legal knowledge
is based on to make such a prediction. Thus, injecting legal
knowledge into neural networks to interpret the model and
improve performance remains a significant problem. In this
paper, we propose to represent declarative legal knowledge as
a set of first-order logic rules and integrate these logic rules
into a co-attention network-based model explicitly. The use of
logic rules enhances neural networks with direct logical reasoning capabilities and makes the model more interpretable.
We take private loan scenario as a case study and demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method through comprehensive experiments and analyses conducted on the collected
dataset.

Claims C1: The defendant returned the plaintiff's loan ...
and paid interest on that amount at the rate of 2%
per month ...
a) An example of legitimate interest claim
Facts

Judge: Support

On June 10, 2013, the defendant XXX borrowed 10,000 RMB yuan
from the plaintiff XXX, and issued a loan note at a monthly interest
rate of 3%. After the expiry of the loan, the defendant did not repay
the loan, ....

Claims C1: The defendant returned the plaintiff's loan ...
and paid interest on that amount at the rate of 3%
per month ...

Judge: Reject

b) An example of illegal claim for interest

Figure 1: Two examples in private loan law cases to show
the importance of legal knowledge for predicting judgments.
Each example consists of fact description, multiple claims
proposed by the plaintiff, and a judgment made by judges.

Introduction
Recently, applying artificial intelligence (AI) technologies
to the legal domain has drawn more and more attention from
the AI community, which can help legal practitioners to reduce heavy and repeat work from many aspects, such as
legal judgment prediction, legal summarization, and legal
question answering(Ye et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2018; Duan
et al. 2019; Zhong et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2020).
Legal judgment prediction (LJP) is one of the most attractive research topic among these tasks (Xiao et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2019; Zhong et al. 2020). The goal of LJP is to
predict a law case’s judgment based on a given text, which
describes the finding facts of the law case. Most of previous
works treat LJP as a text classification task and generally
adopt deep neural networks (DNNs) based methods to solve
it. Zhong et al. (2018) and Yang et al. (2019) propose to
use multi-task learning to capture the dependencies among
subtasks by considering their topological order. Zhong et al.
(2020) use a question answering task to improves the interpretability of LJP by minimizing the questions needed to ask
through reinforcement learning.

Despite the success of applying deep neural networks
to legal judgment prediction, most of the current methods
are not combined well with legal knowledge, which distinguishes legal experts (e.g., lawyers and judges) from ordinary people. Examples in Figure 1 demonstrate the importance of legal knowledge for making correct judgment predictions. In Figure 1 (a), claim 1 (C1) proposed by the plaintiff about returning principal and paying interest at the rate of
2% per month is supported by the judge. However, in Figure
1 (b), a similar claim about paying interest at the rate of 3%
per month is refused by the judge. The reason for making
completely opposite judgments is that the claimed interest
rate in Figure 1 (b) exceeds four times the quoted interest
rate on the one-year loan market at the time the contract was
established, which is not protected by the law1 . However, the
interest rate in Figure 1 (a) is legitimate. It is not trivial for
non-legal experts or neural networks to make correct judgment predictions without knowing such legal knowledge.
Although a few works have attempted to integrate legal
knowledge into neural networks (Luo et al. 2017; Xu et al.

* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12866

http://www.court.gov.cn/fabu-xiangqing-15146.html

