The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

What are GANs?: Introducing Generative Adversarial Networks to Middle School
Students
Safinah Ali∗ , Daniella DiPaola∗ , and Cynthia Breazeal
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139
{safinah, dipaola, cynthiab}@media.mit.edu
Abstract

generative music, and generative text have now become both
features and content within social media applications.
Even though applications of GANs are already commonplace in children’s lives, there aren’t enough frameworks to
teach children about how GANs work and their use in the
real world. This is especially concerning because GANs are
accompanied by several ethical concerns such as the generation of fake media through Deepfakes which can be used
in malicious ways, the spread of misinformation, data collection and distribution, bias in datasets, and the ownership
of machine generated art. Further, GAN-created media is often hyper-realistic and difficult to tell apart from real media.
This might lead to children not being able to tell fake media
apart from real media.
While there are several efforts to teach middle school students about AI (Ali et al. 2019), not many K-12 AI Education efforts focus on generative machine learning techniques
such as GANs. In this work, we describe a lesson to introduce middle school students to GANs. The goal of the lesson was for students to conceptualize how the two parts of a
GAN (generator and discriminator) work in opposition with
one another to generate new data instances. The first part of
the lesson utilizes a web-based interactive tool to teach students how GANs work. Students use a web-tool and take on
the generator and discriminator roles to create pixel art and
give feedback. The goal of the game is to have students understand the role of the generator and the discriminator, and
how they work in opposition in a GAN. The second part of
the lesson invites students to explore four existing generative AI web tools. Through the full lesson, students are able
to apply their knowledge of how GANs work to existing web
tools that utilize this technology.

Applications of Generative Machine Learning techniques
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are used
to generate new instances of images, music, text, and videos.
While GANs have now become commonplace on social media, a part of children’s lives, and have considerable ethical
implications, existing K-12 AI education curricula do not include generative AI. We present a new module, “What are
GANs?”, that teaches middle school students how GANs
work and how they can create media using GANs. We developed an online, team-based game to simulate how GANs
work. Students also interacted with up to four web tools that
apply GANs to generate media. This module was piloted with
72 middle school students in a series of online workshops.
We provide insight into student usage, understanding, and attitudes towards this lesson. Finally, we give suggestions for
integrating this lesson into AI education curricula.

Introduction
In the summer of 2020, middle school student Jessica1
started using the social media applications Instagram,
Snapchat and TikTok. TikTok, like several other social media platforms, makes use of user demographics and interests to display advertisements. While browsing through TikTok, Jessica received an advertisement for “Reface: Swap
your faces now”, which piqued her interest. After downloading the app, Jessica uploaded a selfie and created her first
video: Hermione Granger casting a spell, but with Jessica’s
face. The Reface app makes use of a generative machine
learning technique called Generative Adversarial Networks
(or GANs) to swap faces on popular media (Lomas 2020).
GANs are generative models: they create new data instances
of data that resemble your training data (Goodfellow et al.
2014a). GANs can be used to transfer the style of one kind
of media (such as a photograph) onto another. The GAN in
this application is used to generate a Deepfake, which is synthetic media in which a person in an existing image or video
is replaced with someone else’s likeness. Like Deepfakes,
applications of GANs such as style transfer in face filters,

Background
In this work, we develop a middle school AI Education lesson focusing on the theory, practice and ethical implications
of Generative Adversarial Networks.

Generative Adversarial Networks (or GANs)
First introduced by Ian Goodfellow in 2014, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a new kind of generative machine learning model (Goodfellow et al. 2014b). GANs create new data instances of data that resemble training data.

∗
Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Name changed

15472

