The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Traffic Flow Prediction with Vehicle Trajectories
Mingqian Li,13 * Panrong Tong,12 Mo Li,12 Zhongming Jin,3 Jianqiang Huang,13 Xian-Sheng Hua3
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Alibaba Group
{mingqian001, tong0091, limo}@ntu.edu.sg, {zhongming.jinzm, jianqiang.hjq, xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract
This paper proposes a spatiotemporal deep learning framework, Trajectory-based Graph Neural Network (TrGNN), that
mines the underlying causality of flows from historical vehicle trajectories and incorporates that into road traffic prediction. The vehicle trajectory transition patterns are studied to
explicitly model the spatial traffic demand via graph propagation along the road network; an attention mechanism is designed to learn the temporal dependencies based on neighborhood traffic status; and finally, a fusion of multi-step prediction is integrated into the graph neural network design. The
proposed approach is evaluated with a real-world trajectory
dataset. Experiment results show that the proposed TrGNN
model achieves over 5% error reduction when compared with
the state-of-the-art approaches across all metrics for normal
traffic, and up to 14% for atypical traffic during peak hours or
abnormal events. The advantage of trajectory transitions especially manifest itself in inferring high fluctuation of flows
as well as non-recurrent flow patterns.

1

?
? ?
Non-recurrent pattern
Regular pattern
(a) When only flow observations are available

Regular pattern
Non-recurrent pattern
(b) When vehicle trajectories are available

Figure 1: The challenge in predicting non-recurrent traffic
flows and how vehicle trajectory information may help.

Introduction

According to studies in transportation domain (Skabardonis, Varaiya, and Petty 2003), the road traffic contains two
parts: recurrent traffic, which often arises from periodic traffic demand such as daily commuters during morning and
evening rush hours, and non-recurrent traffic, which is triggered by unexpected causes such as public transit disruptions or accidents. Existing approaches learn spatiotemporal
traffic correlations from patterns that were seen in history,
and thus are favourable in predicting recurrent traffic. In predicting non-recurrent traffic, however, existing approaches
may fail to achieve the same level of accuracy, mainly due to
insufficient observations of similar flow patterns in history.
Figure 1(a) illustrates such an issue with an example - when
only flow observations (i.e., the number of vehicles passing
each road segment) are available, existing approaches may
learn spatiotemporal correlations of recurrent flow patterns
among different road segments across different time, which
cannot effectively reason how a previously unseen part of
the traffic is credited to future road traffic.
This paper targets at addressing the current challenge
with non-recurrent traffic flow prediction - the challenge that
historical flow data cannot provide insights on how nonrecurrent traffic flows correlate in time and space. Thus,

Robust and accurate predictions of vehicular traffic conditions (e.g., flow, speed, density), either short-term or longterm, is necessary for transportation services such as traffic
control and route planning. The challenge of traffic prediction primarily stems from the complex nature of spatiotemporal interactions among vehicles and the road network.
Data driven approaches have been extensively exploited
in predicting vehicular traffic on the road network. Early
attempts leverage time series analysis (Williams and Hoel
2003), which primarily models the temporal correlations of
traffic. Conventional machine learning models (Sun, Zhang,
and Yu 2006) are applied to learn the spatiotemporal correlations of traffic from historical data. Latest works apply deep
learning to traffic prediction, and they typically follow a spatiotemporal framework, e.g., Graph Neural Network (GNN)
(Li et al. 2018), which demonstrates superior capability in
learning complicated spatiotemporal correlations.
* Mingqian Li is under the joint PhD Program with Alibaba Group and Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

294

