The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Feature Space Trojan Attack of Neural Networks by Controlled
Detoxification
Siyuan Cheng, 1 Yingqi Liu, 1 Shiqing Ma, 2 Xiangyu Zhang 1
1

Purdue University
Rutgers University
cheng535@purdue.edu, liu1751@purdue.edu, sm2283@cs.rutgers.edu, xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu
2

Abstract

Manual inspection of the training set can easily disclose the
malicious intention.
Existing defense techniques include detecting malicious
inputs (i.e., inputs stamped with triggers) at runtime and
scanning models to determine if they have backdoors. The
former cannot decide the malicious identity of a model until malicious inputs are seen at runtime. We hence focus on
the latter kind that does not require malicious inputs. Neural
Cleanse (NC) (Wang et al. 2019) uses optimization to generate a universal input pattern (or trigger) for each output
label and observes if there is a trigger that is exceptionally
smaller than the others. Note that such a trigger must exist
for each label if its size is not bounded (as it could be as
large as covering the whole input). ABS (Liu et al. 2019) intentionally enlarges activation values of individual neurons
(on benign inputs) to see if the enlarged values can lead to
misclassification. If so, such neurons are used to generate a
trigger to confirm the malicious identity. Universal Litmus
Pattern (ULP) (Kolouri et al. 2020) trains on a set of trojaned and benign models to derive a set of universal input
patterns. These patterns can lead to different output logits
for benign and trojaned models, allowing effective backdoor
model classification. More can be found in the related work
section. These techniques more or less exploit the observation that trojaned models tend to overfit on simple features.
Note that the neurons representing these features can be easily enlarged through optimization and hence allow easy trigger reverse engineering and backdoor detection.
We propose a new trojan attack that is stealthier, more
difficult to defend, and having configurable attack strength.
We call it deep feature space trojan (DFST) attack.
DFST Attack Model. DFST is a poisoning attack, assuming the attacker has access to both the model and the training
dataset, and can control the training process. The target label
can be any label chosen by the attacker and all the other labels are victims. The trojaned models will be released to the
public just like the numerous benign models. The attacker
holds a secret trigger generator. When he wants to launch
the attack, he passes a benign input to the trigger generator
to stamp an uninterpretable feature trigger, which causes the
model to misbehave. The trojaned model behaves normally
for inputs that haven’t gone through the trigger generator. 
Instead of having fixed pixel space patches/watermarks
or simple color patterns as the trojan trigger, DFST attack

Trojan (backdoor) attack is a form of adversarial attack on
deep neural networks where the attacker provides victims
with a model trained/retrained on malicious data. The backdoor can be activated when a normal input is stamped with a
certain pattern called trigger, causing misclassification. Many
existing trojan attacks have their triggers being input space
patches/objects (e.g., a polygon with solid color) or simple
input transformations such as Instagram filters. These simple triggers are susceptible to recent backdoor detection algorithms. We propose a novel deep feature space trojan attack
with five characteristics: effectiveness, stealthiness, controllability, robustness and reliance on deep features. We conduct extensive experiments on 9 image classifiers on various
datasets including ImageNet to demonstrate these properties
and show that our attack can evade state-of-the-art defense.

Introduction
Trojan (backdoor) attack is a prominent security threat to
machine learning models, especially deep learning models.
It injects secret features called trigger into a model such that
any input possessing such features causes model misclassification. Existing attacks inject such features using additional
(malicious) training samples. They vary in the way of generating these samples. For example, data poisoning (Chen
et al. 2017) assumes the attacker has the access to the training dataset such that he can directly stamp the trigger on
some benign samples and set their labels to the target label. Through training, the model picks up the correlation between the trigger and the target label. Neuron hijacking (Liu
et al. 2018) does not assume access to the training set. Instead, it hijacks a small set of neurons in the model and
makes them sensitive to the trigger features. It performs
model inversion to generate inputs to hijack these neurons.
Reflection attack (Liu et al. 2020) uses a filter to inject trigger features by making them look like faded reflection (from
glass). More discussion can be found in the related work
section. However, most these attacks do not control the trojan training process. As such, the model tends to overfit on
the trigger features and pick up simple features. In addition,
the malicious samples used in many attacks are not stealthy.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1148

