The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Convergence of Gradient Expected Sarsa(λ)
Long Yang1 , Gang Zheng1 , Yu Zhang1 , Qian Zheng2 , Pengfei Li1 , Gang Pan 1 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China.
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,Singapore.
1
{yanglong,gang zheng, hzzhangyu,pfl,gpan}@zju.edu.cn; 2 zhengqian@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

some inspirations to design a stable algorithm. Thus, extending Expected Sarsa(λ) with linear function approximation
for off-policy evaluation is a fundamental theoretical topic in
RL, including: 1) how to character the instability of off-line
Expected Sarsa(λ) with linear function approximation; 2)
how to derive a convergent algorithm; 3) what convergence
rate does Expected Sarsa(λ) with linear function approximation can reach. We focus on these questions in this paper.
Our Main Works To address the above problems, we
propose Theorem 1, which characters a sufficient and necessary condition that presents stability criteria of off-line update Expected Sarsa(λ) with linear function approximation. Theorem 1 requires the key matrix (that has been defined in (10)) keeps the negative real components. Unfortunately, due to the discrepancy between behavior policy and
target policy, off-line Expected Sarsa(λ) that is suggested
by Sutton and Barto (2018) may not satisfy the condition appears in Theorem 1, i.e., their scheme maybe unstable. Then,
we use a classic counterexample to verify the above instability lies in the off-line update Expected Sarsa(λ) with
linear function approximation, see Example 1.
Furthermore, to get a stable algorithm, we derive an online gradient Expected Sarsa(λ) (GES(λ)) algorithm. Theorem 2 shows that the proposed GES(λ) learns the optimal
solution at a linear convergence rate under a true gradient.
Finally, inspired by Srikant and Ying (2019), Wang et al.
(2019), Gupta et al. (2019), we develop a Lyapunov function
technique to establish Theorem 3, which illustrates the relationship between the finite-time performance of GES(λ) and
step-size. Result shows that the upper-bounded error consists of two different parts: the first error depends on both
step-size and the size of samples, and such error decays geometrically as the samples increase; while the second error
is only determined by the step-size and it is independent of
samples. Additionally, the technique of proving Theorem 3
can be potentially generalized to other GTD algorithms.

We study the convergence of Expected Sarsa(λ) with
function approximation. We show that with off-line estimate (multi-step bootstrapping) to Expected Sarsa(λ)
is unstable for off-policy learning. Furthermore, based on
convex-concave saddle-point framework, we propose a convergent Gradient Expected Sarsa(λ) (GES(λ)) algorithm.
The theoretical analysis shows that the proposed GES(λ)
converges to the optimal solution at a linear convergence
rate under true gradient setting. Furthermore, we develop a
Lyapunov function technique to investigate how the stepsize influences finite-time performance of GES(λ). Additionally, such a technique of Lyapunov function can be potentially generalized to other gradient temporal difference algorithms. Finally, our experiments verify the effectiveness of
our GES(λ). For the details of proof, please refer to https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/2012.07199.pdf.

Introduction
Tabular Expected Sarsa(λ) (with importance sampling)
is one of the widely used methods for off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning (RL), whose goal is to estimate the value function of a given target policy via the
data that is generated from a behavior policy. Due to the
high-dimensional state space, instead of tabular learning, a
standard approach is to estimate the value function with a
linear function (Sutton and Barto 2018). There is very little literature to study Expected Sarsa(λ) with function approximation for off-policy learning. To our best knowledge,
Sutton and Barto (2018) (section 12.9) firstly extend off-line
estimate (multi-step bootstrapping) to Expected Sarsa(λ)
with linear function approximation.
Unfortunately, as pointed out by Sutton and Barto (2018)
intuitively, their off-line approach may be unstable, i.e.,
their way to extend Expected Sarsa(λ) with linear function approximation still lacks a provable convergence guarantee, which is undesirable for RL. It is critical to find
the inherent essence of the above unstable appearance in
Expected Sarsa(λ), which not only makes a complement
for existing off-policy learning methods but also provides

Notations
We use Spec(A) to denote the eigenvalues of the matrix A ∈
Cp×p , i.e., Spec(A) = {λ1 , · · · , λp }, where λi is the root of
the characteristic equation p(λ) = det(A − λI). We use C−
to denote the collection that contains the complex numbers
with negative real components, i.e.,
C− =: {c ∈ C; Re(c) < 0}.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10621

