The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Generalized Implementation of Wasserstein Distance in GANs
Minkai Xu∗
University of Montreal
minkai.xu@umontreal.ca

Abstract

a new objective has been shown to be effective in improving
training stability.
In practice, since the primal form of the Wasserstein distance is difficult to optimize, the WGAN model (Arjovsky,
Chintala, and Bottou 2017) instead proposed to optimize
it with the Kantorovich-Rubinstein (KR) duality (Villani
2008). However, though the new WGAN scheme is theoretically more principled, it does not yield better performance
in practice compared to other variants of GANs (Lucic et al.
2017). The main obstacle is that the WGAN requires the discriminator (or the critic) to be a Lipschitz function. However,
this is very hard to satisfy in practice though a variety of different implementations have been tried such as weight clipping (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017), gradient penalty
(GP) (Gulrajani et al. 2017), Lipschitz penalty (LP) (Petzka,
Fischer, and Lukovnikov 2018) and spectral normalization
(SN) (Miyato et al. 2018). As a result, WGAN is still unable
to always achieve very compelling results.
In this paper, we argue that the strong Lipschitz condition might be unnecessary in the inner optimization loop
for WGAN’s critic. Intuitively, a looser constraint on the
critic, which results in a larger function space, can simplify the practical constrained optimization problem of the
restricted critic, and the better-trained critic would further
benefit the training of the generator. Therefore, instead of
developing new methods to impose the Lipschitz constraint,
in this paper we propose to relax this constraint. In other
words, we move our attention from “how to better implement the Lipschitz constraint” to “how to loosen the Lipschitz constraint”. More specifically, in this paper we demonstrate a new dual form of the Wasserstein distance where
the Lipschitz constraint is relaxed to the Sobolev constraint
(Adams and Fournier 2003; Mroueh et al. 2018). We further show that the new duality with the relaxed constraint
indeed is a generalization of the KR duality, and it still keeps
the gradient property of the Wasserstein distance. Based on
this relaxed duality, we propose a generalized WGAN model
called Sobolev Wasserstein GAN. To the best of our knowledge, among the restricted GAN models (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017; Mroueh et al.
2018; Mroueh and Sercu 2017; Bellemare et al. 2017; Adler
and Lunz 2018), Sobolev Wasserstein GAN is the most relaxed one that can still avoid the training instability problem.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized

Wasserstein GANs (WGANs), built upon the KantorovichRubinstein (KR) duality of Wasserstein distance, is one of the
most theoretically sound GAN models. However, in practice
it does not always outperform other variants of GANs. This
is mostly due to the imperfect implementation of the Lipschitz condition required by the KR duality. Extensive work
has been done in the community with different implementations of the Lipschitz constraint, which, however, is still hard
to satisfy the restriction perfectly in practice. In this paper, we
argue that the strong Lipschitz constraint might be unnecessary for optimization. Instead, we take a step back and try to
relax the Lipschitz constraint. Theoretically, we first demonstrate a more general dual form of the Wasserstein distance
called the Sobolev duality, which relaxes the Lipschitz constraint but still maintains the favorable gradient property of
the Wasserstein distance. Moreover, we show that the KR duality is actually a special case of the Sobolev duality. Based on
the relaxed duality, we further propose a generalized WGAN
training scheme named Sobolev Wasserstein GAN, and empirically demonstrate the improvement over existing methods
with extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have attracted huge interest in both academia and
industry communities due to its effectiveness in a variety of applications. Despite its effectiveness in various
tasks, a common challenge for GANs is the training instability (Goodfellow 2016). In literature, many works have
been developed to mitigate this problem (Arjovsky and
Bottou 2017; Lucic et al. 2017; Heusel et al. 2017a;
Mescheder, Nowozin, and Geiger 2017; Mescheder, Geiger,
and Nowozin 2018; Yadav et al. 2017).
By far, it is well known that the problem of training instability of the original GANs mainly comes from the illbehaving distance metric (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017), i.e.,
the Jensen-Shannon divergence metric, which remains constant when two distributions are disjoint. The Wasserstein
GAN (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) improves this
by using the Wasserstein distance, which is able to continuously measure the distance between two distributions. Such
∗

Work performed while at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10514

