The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ASHF-Net: Adaptive Sampling and Hierarchical Folding Network for Robust
Point Cloud Completion
Daoming Zong, Shiliang Sun∗ , Jing Zhao
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
ecnuzdm@gmail.com, slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, jzhao@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating the complete 3D point cloud from an incomplete
one lies at the core of many vision and robotics applications.
Existing methods typically predict the complete point cloud
based on the global shape representation extracted from the
incomplete input. Although they could predict the overall
shape of 3D objects, they are incapable of generating structure details of objects. Moreover, the partial input point sets
obtained from range scans are often sparse, noisy and nonuniform, which largely hinder shape completion. In this paper, we propose an adaptive sampling and hierarchical folding
network (ASHF-Net) for robust 3D point cloud completion.
Our main contributions are two-fold. First, we propose a denoising auto-encoder with an adaptive sampling module, aiming at learning robust local region features that are insensitive
to noise. Second, we propose a hierarchical folding decoder
with the gated skip-attention and multi-resolution completion
goal to effectively exploit the local structure details of partial
inputs. We also design a KL regularization term to evenly distribute the generated points. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods on multiple 3D point cloud completion benchmarks.

Figure 1: Our method has advantages in acquiring highfidelity dense point clouds and avoiding uneven distribution,
blurred details, or geometric structure loss.

Introduction
Point cloud, as a common data format for describing the 3D
shape of an object, has achieved significant attention due to
the rapid development of 3D acquisition technologies, and
can be easily collected by 3D sensors and depth cameras.
However, raw point clouds produced by those devices are
usually highly sparse, noisy, and seriously incomplete due
to limited sensor resolution and occlusion (Yuan et al. 2018;
Wen et al. 2020), which hampers the downstream tasks,
such as shape classification (Sarmad, Lee, and Kim 2019)
and rendering. Consequently, recovering the complete point
clouds from partial observations, namely point cloud completion, is important for subsequent 3D vision applications.
Unlike images or voxel grids where convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can be directly applied, point cloud
processing poses great challenges to directly applying 2D
and 3D convolutions due to its sparsity and disorder properties. Several methods (Li et al. 2016; Dai, Ruizhongtai Qi,

and Nießner 2017; Han et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019b) convert point clouds into 3D voxels and then apply 3D CNNs to
them. However, the voxelization operation leads to an irreversible loss of geometric information and has a high computational cost. Therefore, most of the existing methods (Qi
et al. 2017a,b) use the Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) to
process point clouds directly. Generally, these methods first
use sampling approaches to select central points from the incomplete input point clouds, and then utilize max-pooling
to aggregate features across points in a global or hierarchical fashion. Finally, global point features are formed to
model the complete shape. Despite the modest success of
these methods, they have two main bottlenecks. First, raw
point cloud data captured from these 3D sensors or reconstruction algorithms inevitably contain outliers or noise in
real-world scenarios. However, a common issue in existing
sampling approaches is that the sampled points are limited
to a subset of the original point clouds, where little attention
is paid to the biased effects of outliers and noise on point
feature learning. Second, previous work on point completion

∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3625

