The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unified Tensor Framework for Incomplete Multi-view Clustering and
Missing-view Inferring
Jie Wen,†1 Zheng Zhang,†∗1,2 Zhao Zhang,∗3 Lei Zhu,4 Lunke Fei,5 Bob Zhang,6 Yong Xu1,2
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Shenzhen
518055, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230006, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250358, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
6
PAMI Research Group, Dept. of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau
jiewen pr@126.com, darrenzz219@gmail.com, cszzhang@gmail.com, leizhu0608@gmail.com, flksxm@126.com,
bobzhang@um.edu.mo, yongxu@ymail.com
Abstract

Wang et al. 2019a; Zhang et al. 2020, 2019). For instance,
not all webpages are composed of links, images, and texts
in web document analysis. Clustering on such incomplete
multi-view data is called incomplete MVC (IMVC) (Hu and
Chen 2019a; Wen et al. 2020). The missing views not only
lead to information loss, but also increase the difficulties of
the excavation of complementary information. These factors
make IMVC a challenging problem.
For IMVC, Trivedi et al. proposed a two-step kernel learning based approach, which first recovers the incomplete kernel and then performs the kernel canonical correlation analysis for clustering (Trivedi et al. 2010). Since this method
needs one complete view as a reference for the missing view
completion, it is inapplicable to practical applications. In
recent years, many more flexible multiple kernel learning
based methods have been proposed to address the above issue (Liu et al. 2019c,b, 2020, 2019a; Wang et al. 2019b).
For instance, incomplete multiple kernel k-means with mutual kernel completion (IMKKM-IK-MKC) designs a joint
framework for incomplete kernel completion and clustering
(Liu et al. 2019c). Besides of these methods, several graph
learning and matrix factorization (MF) based methods have
also been proposed for IMVC. Representatively, incomplete
multi-view spectral clustering with adaptive graph learning
(IMVSC AGL) explores the certain self-representation information learned from the available instances to obtain the
consensus representation (Wen, Xu, and Liu 2020). Different from the graph learning based methods which transfer
the view missing problem from the feature space to graph
space, MF based methods focus on obtaining the consensus representation shared by all views from the original feature space. Partial multi-view clustering (PMVC) is one of
the pioneer works, which jointly decomposes all available
views into one consensus representation whose uniformity
is guaranteed by the connections among paired views (Li,
Jiang, and Zhou 2014). Based on PMVC, incomplete multimodal grouping (IMG) (Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016), partial
multi-view subspace clustering (Xu et al. 2018), and IMVC
via graph regularized matrix factorization (IMVC GRMF)

In this paper, we propose a novel method, referred to as incomplete multi-view tensor spectral clustering with missingview inferring (IMVTSC-MVI) to address the challenging
multi-view clustering problem with missing views. Different
from the existing methods which commonly focus on exploring the certain information of the available views while ignoring both of the hidden information of the missing views
and the intra-view information of data, IMVTSC-MVI seeks
to recover the missing views and explore the full information
of such recovered views and available views for data clustering. In particular, IMVTSC-MVI incorporates the feature
space based missing-view inferring and manifold space based
similarity graph learning into a unified framework. In such a
way, IMVTSC-MVI allows these two learning tasks to facilitate each other and can well explore the hidden information
of the missing views. Moreover, IMVTSC-MVI introduces
the low-rank tensor constraint to capture the high-order correlations of multiple views. Experimental results on several
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of IMVTSC-MVI for
incomplete multi-view clustering.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) which attempts to group a set
of data points by adaptively exploring the information of
multiple views without the guidance of label information,
has witnessed great development in the past decades (Yang
and Wang 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2020; Tang
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b; Huang, Kang, and Xu 2020;
Zhan et al. 2018). Generally, conventional MVC performs
model learning and clustering based on the assumption that
all views are fully observed and strictly aligned. However, it
is common that some views are unavailable in many practical applications, which forms incomplete multi-view data
(Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015; Liu et al. 2018; Wen et al. 2021;
∗
‘†’ indicates co-first authors; ‘∗’ indicates the corresponding
authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10273

