The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DecAug: Augmenting HOI Detection via Decomposition
Hao-Shu Fang,1∗ Yichen Xie,1∗ Dian Shao,2 Yong-Lu Li,1 Cewu Lu1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
fhaoshu@gmail.com, xieyichen@sjtu.edu.cn, sd017@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, yonglu li@sjtu.edu.cn, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection requires a large
amount of annotated data. Current algorithms suffer from
insufficient training samples and category imbalance within
datasets. To increase data efficiency, in this paper, we propose
an efficient and effective data augmentation method called
DecAug for HOI detection. Based on our proposed object
state similarity metric, object patterns across different HOIs
are shared to augment local object appearance features without changing their states. Further, we shift spatial correlation between humans and objects to other feasible configurations with the aid of a pose-guided Gaussian Mixture Model
while preserving their interactions. Experiments show that our
method brings up to 3.3 mAP and 1.6 mAP improvements on
V-COCO and HICO-DET dataset for two advanced models.
Specifically, interactions with fewer samples enjoy more notable improvement. Our method can be easily integrated into
various HOI detection models with negligible extra computational consumption.

(a) Instance-Level Augmentation Example: heatmap-guided
instaboost (Fang et al. 2019) (left: original, right: augmented)

(b) Our Approach: local object appearance augmentation (left)
and global spatial correlation augmentation (right)

Figure 1: (a) shows the result of heatmap-guided instaboost.
The left is the original image while the right has been augmented. The board is moved far away, which has no negative
effect on object detection or instance segmentation. However, it devastates the relationship between the human and
object. In contrast, (b) shows the two steps of our DecAug.
Local object appearance is changed in the left image. Then,
global spatial correlation augmentation is applied in the right
one. The human-object interaction remains distinguishable
in both.

Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize
humans and objects as well as infer their interaction categories in a still image. For each interaction, a triplet of
hsubject, predicate, objecti should be retrieved. As a subtask of visual relationship detection, HOI detection pays
attention to human-centric interactions with objects. It plays
an essential role in the understanding of scenes, which facilitates many other fields like activity understanding (Pang
et al. 2020), image captioning (Li et al. 2017) and robot
learning (Argall et al. 2009).
Along with the recent achievements computer vision has
reached, many exciting deep neural network (DNN) models
for HOI detection have been developed. They took various
types of features into account such as visual features (Gupta
and Malik 2015), spatial location (Chao et al. 2018; Xu et al.
2019), human poses (Yao and Fei-Fei 2010; Gkioxari et al.

2018b) or text corpus (Liang, Guan, and Rojas 2020). However, the progress of HOI detection is still slower compared
with the achievement in other tasks like object detection and
instance segmentation. There are currently two main hindrances to further performance gains. For one thing, HOI
detection depends on a better understanding of contextual
information. It calls for a large amount of high quality data.
However, large datasets are not easily accessible due to the
labor intensity of annotation. For another thing, an apparent
imbalance inevitably exists between different interaction categories in current large datasets (Gupta and Malik 2015; Chao
et al. 2018; Zhuang et al. 2017). Some interactions naturally
have much more positive samples than others, such as look
at, sit on and stand on, which causes a serious long-tail issue.

∗

Equal contribution. Names in alphabetical order.
Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi
Zhi institute.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1300

