The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair Influence Maximization: A Welfare Optimization Approach
Aida Rahmattalabi,1 Shahin Jabbari,2 Himabindu Lakkaraju,2 Phebe Vayanos,1 Max Izenberg,3
Ryan Brown,3 Eric Rice,1 Milind Tambe2
1

University of Southern California
2
Harvard University
3
RAND Corporation
{rahmatta, phebe.vayanos, ericr}@usc.edu, {jabbari, milind tambe}@seas.harvard.edu, hlakkaraju@hbs.edu, {izenberg,
rbrown}@rand.org
Abstract

well-connected individuals who can act as peer-leaders to
detect warning signals (suicide prevention) or disseminate
relevant information (HIV prevention or landslide risk management). The influence maximization framework has been
employed to find such individuals (Wilder et al. 2020). However, such interventions may lead to discriminatory solutions
as individuals from racial minorities or LGBTQ communities
may be disproportionately excluded from the benefits of the
intervention (Rahmattalabi et al. 2019; Tsang et al. 2019).

Several behavioral, social, and public health interventions,
such as suicide/HIV prevention or community preparedness
against natural disasters, leverage social network information
to maximize outreach. Algorithmic influence maximization
techniques have been proposed to aid with the choice of “peer
leaders” or “influencers” in such interventions. Yet, traditional
algorithms for influence maximization have not been designed
with these interventions in mind. As a result, they may disproportionately exclude minority communities from the benefits
of the intervention. This has motivated research on fair influence maximization. Existing techniques come with two major
drawbacks. First, they require committing to a single fairness
measure. Second, these measures are typically imposed as
strict constraints leading to undesirable properties such as
wastage of resources. To address these shortcomings, we provide a principled characterization of the properties that a fair
influence maximization algorithm should satisfy. In particular, we propose a framework based on social welfare theory,
wherein the cardinal utilities derived by each community are
aggregated using the isoelastic social welfare functions. Under
this framework, the trade-off between fairness and efficiency
can be controlled by a single inequality aversion design parameter. We then show under what circumstances our proposed
principles can be satisfied by a welfare function. The resulting
optimization problem is monotone and submodular and can
be solved efficiently with optimality guarantees. Our framework encompasses as special cases leximin and proportional
fairness. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real world
datasets including a case study on landslide risk management
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed framework12

Introduction
The success of many behavioral, social, and public health
interventions relies heavily on effectively leveraging social
networks (Isaac et al. 2009; Valente et al. 2007; Tsang et al.
2019). For instance, health interventions such as suicide/HIV
prevention (Yonemoto et al. 2019) and community preparedness against natural disasters involve finding a small set of
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Full version at https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07906
2
The first two authors contributed equally.

11630

Recent work has incorporated fairness directly into influence maximization by proposing various notions of fairness
such as maximin fairness (Rahmattalabi et al. 2019) and
diversity constraints (Tsang et al. 2019). Maximin fairness
aims at improving the minimum amount of influence that any
community receives. On the other hand, diversity constraints,
inspired by the game theory literature, ensure that each community is at least as well-off had they received their share
of resources proportional to their size and allocated them
internally. Each of these notions offers a unique perspective
on fairness. However, they also come with drawbacks. For
example maximin fairness can result in significant degradation in total influence due to its stringent requirement to help
the worst-off group as much as possible, where in reality it
may be hard to spread the influence to some communities
due to their sparse connections. On the other hand, while the
diversity constraints aim at taking the community’s ability
in spreading influence into account, it does not explicitly account for reducing inequality (i.e., does not exhibit inequality
aversion). Consequently, there is no universal agreement on
what fairness means and in fact, it is widely known that fairness is domain dependent (Narayanan 2018). For example,
excluding vulnerable communities from suicide prevention
might have higher negative consequences compared to interventions promoting a healthier lifestyle.
Building on cardinal social welfare theory from the economics literature and principles of social welfare, we propose
a principled characterization of the properties of social influence maximization solutions. In particular, we propose a
framework for fair influence maximization based on social
welfare theory, wherein the cardinal utilities derived by each
community are aggregated using the isoelastic social welfare
functions (Bergson 1938). Isoelastic functions are in the gen-

