The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpreting Neural Networks as Quantitative Argumentation Frameworks
Nico Potyka
University of Stuttgart,
Universitätsstraße 32,
70569 Stuttgart, Germany,
nico.potyka@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

We explain the basics of QBAFs and MLPs in Sections
and , respectively. In Section , we introduce an MLPbased semantics for QBAFs that is based on computing the
strength of arguments in an iterative way. In acyclic graphs,
the result is equal to the result of the usual evaluation procedure (forward propagation) for MLPs. We give sufficient
conditions for convergence of this procedure in cyclic graphs
and analyze the convergence rate. Simply put, convergence
is guaranteed when the edge weights and the indegree of
arguments is not too large. We give an example that demonstrates that our convergence conditions cannot be improved
without adding additional assumptions about the structure of
the graph. In order to improve the guarantees, we introduce
a continuous variant that agrees with its discrete counterpart
in the known convergence cases, but still converges in more
general cases. Finally, we show that the MLP-based semantics satisfies all properties for QBAF semantics proposed in
(Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2017; Potyka 2018a, 2019b) almost perfectly. This is surprising because it actually gives
stronger semantical guarantees than some semantics that
have been designed specifically for QBAFs. We close the
paper with some ideas about how this relationship can be
exploited to combine ideas for QBAFs and neural networks
fruitfully for both fields.

We show that an interesting class of feed-forward neural
networks can be understood as quantitative argumentation
frameworks. This connection creates a bridge between research in Formal Argumentation and Machine Learning. We
generalize the semantics of feed-forward neural networks to
acyclic graphs and study the resulting computational and semantical properties in argumentation graphs. As it turns out,
the semantics gives stronger guarantees than existing semantics that have been tailor-made for the argumentation setting.
From a machine-learning perspective, the connection does
not seem immediately helpful. While it gives intuitive meaning to some feed-forward-neural networks, they remain difficult to understand due to their size and density. However, the
connection seems helpful for combining background knowledge in form of sparse argumentation networks with dense
neural networks that have been trained for complementary
purposes and for learning the parameters of quantitative argumentation frameworks in an end-to-end fashion from data.

Introduction
In this paper, we establish a relationship between neural networks and abstract argumentation frameworks. More precisely, we study relationships between quantitative bipolar
argumentation frameworks (QBAFs) and multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). QBAFs are a knowledge representation formalism that can be used to solve decision problems in a very
intuitive way by weighing up pro and contra arguments (Baroni et al. 2015; Rago et al. 2016; Amgoud and Ben-Naim
2017). QBAFs and their variants have been combined with
machine learning methods in order to add explainability to
problems like product recommendation (Rago, Cocarascu,
and Toni 2018), review aggregation (Cocarascu, Rago, and
Toni 2019) and stance aggregation in fake news detection
(Kotonya and Toni 2019). Multilayer perceptrons (MLPs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2016) are a very flexible class of feedforward neural networks that can be applied in basically all
machine learning tasks. This includes applications like classification (Heidari et al. 2019), regression (Hiransha et al.
2018) and function approximation in reinforcement learning
(Tesauro 1995).

QBAF Basics
In this work, our conceptual understanding of an argument
follows Dung’s notion of abstract argumentation: ”an argument is an abstract entity whose role is solely determined
by its relations to other arguments” (Dung 1995). That is,
we abstract from the content of arguments and focus on
their acceptability dependent on the acceptability of their
attackers and supporters. This idea can be formalized in
different ways, we refer to (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2018) for an overview of some classical approaches.
Here, we consider quantitative bipolar argumentation frameworks (QBAFs) similar to (Baroni, Rago, and Toni 2018).
In general, these frameworks interpret arguments by values
from an arbitrary domain D. For simplicity, we assume that
D = [0, 1]. Intuitively, the value 0 means that an argument
is fully rejected, 1 means that it is fully accepted and values
in between balance between these extremes.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6463

