The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploration by Maximizing Renyi Entropy for Reward-Free RL Framework
Chuheng Zhang∗ , Yuanying Cai∗ , Longbo Huang, Jian Li
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University
zhangchuheng123@live.com, cai-yy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Since the agent still needs to explore the environment under the new tasks in the meta-testing phase (sometimes it
may need more new samples in some new task, and sometimes less), it is less clear how to evaluate the effectiveness
of the exploration in the meta-training phase. Another setting is to learn a policy in a reward-free environment and
test the policy under the task with a specific reward function
(such as the score in Montezuma’s Revenge) without further training with the task (Burda et al. 2019b; Ecoffet et al.
2019; Burda et al. 2019a). However, there is no guarantee
that the algorithm has fully explored the transition dynamics
of the environment unless we test the learned model for arbitrary reward functions. Recently, Jin et al. (2020) proposed
reward-free RL framework that fully decouples exploration
and exploitation. Further, they designed a provably efficient
algorithm that conducts a finite number of steps of rewardfree exploration and returns near-optimal policies for arbitrary reward functions. However, their algorithm is designed
for the tabular case and can hardly be extended to continuous or high-dimensional state spaces since they construct a
policy for each state.
The reward-free RL framework is as follows: First, a set
of policies are trained to explore the dynamics of the rewardfree environment in the exploration phase (i.e., the metatraining phase). Then, a dataset of trajectories is collected
by executing the learned exploratory policies. In the planning phase (i.e., the meta-testing phase), an arbitrary reward function is specified and a batch RL algorithm (Lange,
Gabel, and Riedmiller 2012; Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019) is applied to solve for a good policy solely based on
the dataset, without further interaction with the environment.
This framework is suitable to the scenarios when there are
many reward functions of interest or the reward is designed
offline to elicit desired behavior. The key to success in this
framework is to obtain a dataset with good coverage over all
possible situations in the environment with as few samples
as possible, which in turn requires the exploratory policy to
fully explore the environment.
Several methods that encourage various forms of exploration have been developed in the reinforcement learning literature. The maximum entropy framework (Haarnoja
et al. 2017) maximizes the cumulative reward in the meanwhile maximizing the entropy over the action space conditioned on each state. This framework results in several

Exploration is essential for reinforcement learning (RL). To
face the challenges of exploration, we consider a reward-free
RL framework that completely separates exploration from
exploitation and brings new challenges for exploration algorithms. In the exploration phase, the agent learns an exploratory policy by interacting with a reward-free environment and collects a dataset of transitions by executing the
policy. In the planning phase, the agent computes a good policy for any reward function based on the dataset without further interacting with the environment. This framework is suitable for the meta RL setting where there are many reward
functions of interest. In the exploration phase, we propose to
maximize the Rényi entropy over the state-action space and
justify this objective theoretically. The success of using Rényi
entropy as the objective results from its encouragement to explore the hard-to-reach state-actions. We further deduce a policy gradient formulation for this objective and design a practical exploration algorithm that can deal with complex environments. In the planning phase, we solve for good policies
given arbitrary reward functions using a batch RL algorithm.
Empirically, we show that our exploration algorithm is effective and sample efficient, and results in superior policies for
arbitrary reward functions in the planning phase.

1

Introduction

The trade-off between exploration and exploitation is at the
core of reinforcement learning (RL). Designing efficient exploration algorithm, while being a highly nontrivial task,
is essential to the success in many RL tasks (Burda et al.
2019b; Ecoffet et al. 2019). Hence, it is natural to ask the
following high-level question: What can we achieve by pure
exploration? To address this question, several settings related to meta reinforcement learning (meta RL) have been
proposed (see e.g., Wang et al. 2016; Duan et al. 2016; Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017). One common setting in meta RL
is to learn a model in a reward-free environment in the metatraining phase, and use the learned model as the initialization
to fast adapt for new tasks in the meta-testing phase (Eysenbach et al. 2019; Gupta et al. 2018; Nagabandi et al. 2019).
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work. See the full
version of this paper on arXiv:2006.06193.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10859

