The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Rethinking Boundaries: End-To-End Recognition of Discontinuous Mentions
with Pointer Networks
Hao Fei,1 Donghong Ji,1 Bobo Li,1 Yijiang Liu,1 Yafeng Ren,2 Fei Li1 *

1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of
Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
{hao.fei, dhji, boboli, cslyj, renyafeng}@whu.edu.cn, foxlf823@gmail.com
(a) Standard NER
I already have anemia due to the gastric bleed .

Abstract

e1

A majority of research interests in irregular (e.g., nested or
discontinuous) named entity recognition (NER) have been
paid on nested entities, while discontinuous entities received
limited attention. Existing work for discontinuous NER, however, either suffers from decoding ambiguity or predicting using token-level local features. In this work, we present an innovative model for discontinuous NER based on pointer networks, where the pointer simultaneously decides whether a
token at each decoding frame constitutes an entity mention
and where the next constituent token is. Our model has three
major merits compared with previous work: (1) The pointer
mechanism is memory-augmented, which enhances the mention boundary detection and interactions between the current
decision and prior recognized mentions. (2) The encoderdecoder architecture can linearize the complexity of structure prediction, and thus reduce search costs. (3) The model
makes every decision using global information, i.e., by consulting all the input, encoder and previous decoder output
in a global view. Experimental results on the CADEC and
ShARe13 datasets show that our model outperforms flat and
hypergraph models as well as a state-of-the-art transitionbased model for discontinuous NER. Further in-depth analysis demonstrates that our model performs well in recognizing
various entities including flat, overlapping and discontinuous
ones. More crucially, our model is effective on boundary detection, which is the kernel source to NER.

e2

(b) Irregular NER
tolerate the malformed knee with inflammation and cramps .

e3

e4
e5

Figure 1: Examples for standard NER (a) and irregular NER
(b). Different entity mentions (ei ) are in distinct colors. e1
and e2 are regular entity mentions. e3 overlaps with two discontinuous mentions e4 and e5 at the token “knee”.
be nested, overlapped or discontinuous (Lu and Roth 2015;
Li et al. 2018; Wang and Lu 2019).
Nested NER (Kim et al. 2003), as one of common irregular NER problems, has drawn much research attention (Kim
et al. 2003; Alex, Haddow, and Grover 2007; Finkel and
Manning 2009; Lu and Roth 2015; Katiyar and Cardie 2018;
Yu, Bohnet, and Poesio 2020). Yet discontinuous NER,
where entities may consist of a discontinuous sequence of
words, has been neglected by most of previous work. Discontinuous NER is ubiquitous in many practical scenarios,
especially in biomedical and clinical domain (Tang et al.
2013; Xu et al. 2015; Tang et al. 2018). Another character
of discontinuous entity mentions is that there certain words
may be overlapped, and thus recognizing discontinuous entities also needs to handle the nested mentions. In Figure 1,
we exemplify some cases of irregular entity mentions. For
example, the mentions e4 and e5 are discontinuous, and they
share a common word “knee” with the mention e3 . Apparently, discontinuous NER poses more challenges than traditional NER (Muis and Lu 2016; Wang and Lu 2019; Dai
et al. 2020).
Existing works for discontinuous NER can be roughly
divided into several categories. The first one is still based
on the sequence labeling architecture but extending the
BIO label scheme to more complex label schemes such
as BIOHD (Tang et al. 2013) to represent discontinuous
and overlapping structures (Xu et al. 2015; Metke-Jimenez
and Karimi 2016; Tang et al. 2018). Other approaches aim
to build more effective inference systems by modeling the
structure as a whole graph, e.g. such as hypergraph models

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER), which aims to detect the
span as well as the semantic category of an entity mention
from text, has long been a fundamental task in natural language processing (NLP) (Florian et al. 2004; Sutton, McCallum, and Rohanimanesh 2007; Collobert et al. 2011; Lample
et al. 2016; Yu, Bohnet, and Poesio 2020). Most traditional
methods formalize NER as a sequence labeling task (Lafferty, Mccallum, and Pereira 2001; Collobert et al. 2011;
Lample et al. 2016), assigning a single label to each token.
Those methods, however, only solve flat NER where a token
can only be assigned to one mention, while they are incapable of handling irregular NER where entity mentions may
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12785

