The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Symbolic Search for Oversubscription Planning
David Speck1 and Michael Katz2
1

2

University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
speckd@informatik.uni-freiburg.de, michael.katz1@ibm.com

Abstract

space heuristic search (Bonet and Geffner 1999) and the
symbolic search (Cimatti et al. 1997). For net-benefit in particular, symbolic branch-and-bound search was introduced
(Edelkamp and Kissmann 2009; Kissmann 2012), solving
a so-called planning with soft-goals problem. More precisely, instead of a general state utility function, a subset of
variables, so-called soft goals, is specified, each associated
with a certain utility value. An introduction of a compilation
of soft-goals into classical planning (Keyder and Geffner
2009), has allowed to apply classical planners to solving netbenefit planning tasks. The underlying idea behind the compilation is that each net-benefit planning task can be reduced
to finding a shortest path from a single source node to a single goal node in a graph under a single objective function.

The objective of optimal oversubscription planning is to find
a plan that yields an end state with a maximum utility while
keeping plan cost under a certain bound. In practice, the situation occurs whenever a large number of possible, often competing goals of varying value exist, or the resources are not
sufficient to achieve all goals. In this paper, we investigate
the use of symbolic search for optimal oversubscription planning. Specifically, we show how to apply symbolic forward
search to oversubscription planning tasks and prove that our
approach is sound, complete and optimal. An empirical analysis shows that our symbolic approach favorably competes
with explicit state-space heuristic search, the current state of
the art for oversubscription planning.

For oversubscription planning, however, unlike for netbenefit planning, there is no simple reduction to classical
planning with a single objective function. In fact, the complexity of several fragment of these two problems is different (Katz and Mirkis 2016). The first practically efficient
approaches to optimally solving oversubscription planning
applied an explicit branch-and-bound search with heuristics adapting the ideas of classical planning to oversubscription planning (Mirkis and Domshlak 2013, 2014; Domshlak and Mirkis 2015; Muller and Karpas 2018). Later, Katz
et al. (2019a) introduced reformulations of oversubscription
planning as classical planning with two cost functions, but
without an utility function. The reformulations allowed to
directly adapt classical planning heuristics to oversubscription planning by simply ignoring the secondary cost function, improving the efficiency of branch-and-bound search.
Finally, Katz and Keyder (2019) show that these reformulations are useful for search as well, allowing switching to
the more efficient A? search (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael
1968), performed on the reformulated task. The search can
then use the aforementioned adapted heuristics from classical planning (Katz and Keyder 2019). However, if such
heuristics are used as-is, and not adapted to account for the
secondary cost function, their informativeness is not sufficient to compensate for the time spent on the computation.
As a result, the informed search is often outperformed by a
simple blind search. If, however, the heuristics are adapted
to account for the secondary cost function, the performance
of the informed search improves significantly (Katz and
Keyder 2019). Despite these advances, an exhaustive unin-

Introduction
The objective of classical planning is to find a plan, i.e., a
sequence of actions with low cumulative cost that leads to
a goal state. Goal states are usually specified by a goal formula, and most planning algorithms are designed to find a
plan that satisfies the entire formula. In practice, however,
there can be a large number of possible, often competing
goals of varying value, and a system (e.g. Mars rover) might
not be able to achieve all these goals with the available resources (e.g. battery power). In such scenarios, it is natural
to consider a utility of a state instead and search for states
that maximize the overall utility value. If the action costs
and state utility values, i.e., solution cost and solution utility,
are comparable, the problem of finding a plan is called netbenefit planning (van den Briel et al. 2004). If solution cost
and utility are not comparable, the problem is called oversubscription planning (Smith 2004). In other words, oversubscription planning defines a utility function that maps
states to the utility value associated with achieving these
states, and the objective is to find a plan whose cost does
not exceed a specified cost bound, while reaching a state
that achieves a high utility. Both net-benefit and oversubscription planning are also known under the common name
partial satisfaction planning.
Over the past decades, both classical and partial satisfaction planning have seen a variety of competitive approaches, with the most successful being the explicit stateCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11972

