The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A One-Size-Fits-All Solution to Conservative Bandit Problems
Yihan Du,1 Siwei Wang,1 Longbo Huang1
1
Tsinghua University
duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {wangsw2020, longbohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

cumulative reward must stay above a fixed percentage of
what one can obtain by always playing the default arm.
CBPs have extensive real-world applications including
recommendation systems, company operation and finance.
For instance, in finance, investors are offered various financial products including the fixed-income security such as
bank deposit (default arm), and the fluctuating equity securities such as stocks (regular arms). While the fixed-income
security is a safe and reasonable option, investors want to
find better choices to earn higher returns. Meanwhile, compared to the returns they can obtain by simply depositing
the money, investors do not want to lose too much when exploring other investment choices. CBPs provide an effective
model for such exploration-exploitation trade-off with the
safe exploration guarantees.
We propose a general one-size-fits-all solution GenCB
for CBPs, and present its applications to three important CBP problems, i.e., conservative multi-armed bandits
(CMAB), conservative linear bandits (CLB) and conservative contextual combinatorial bandits (CCCB). We provide
theoretical analysis and empirical evaluations for these algorithms, and show that our algorithms outperform existing
ones both theoretically and empirically. Table 1 presents the
comparison of regret bounds between our algorithms and
existing ones. In the table, each regret term contains two
components, the first component incurred by regular arms
and the second term due to playing the default arm. One
can see that our algorithms possess better regret guarantees. Moreover, unlike existing algorithms that only provide
high probability bounds with T -dependent conservative regrets, we not only obtain expected bounds but also have T independent conservative regrets.
Our work distinguishes itself from previous conservative
bandit works, e.g., (Wu et al. 2016; Kazerouni et al. 2017;
Garcelon et al. 2020; Zhang, Li, and Liu 2019) in two aspects: (i) Previous works consider high probability guarantees on the expected reward. Such models cannot directly
handle many risk-adverse tasks, e.g., a start-up does not
wish to tolerate any failure probability to reach the basic
earning under the debt, or an asset management company
must perform better than the promised return. While one
can choose a very small δ in previous algorithms to provide high-probability guarantees, the ln(1/δ)-dependent regrets will boost accordingly. Instead, we focus on a certainty

In this paper, we study a family of conservative bandit problems (CBPs) with sample-path reward constraints, i.e., the
learner’s reward performance must be at least as well as a
given baseline at any time. We propose a general one-sizefits-all solution to CBPs and present its applications to three
encompassed problems, i.e., conservative multi-armed bandits (CMAB), conservative linear bandits (CLB) and conservative contextual combinatorial bandits (CCCB). Different from previous works which consider high probability
constraints on the expected reward, our algorithms guarantee sample-path constraints on the actual received reward,
and achieve better theoretical guarantees (T -independent additive regrets instead of T -dependent) and empirical performance. Furthermore, we extend the results and consider
a novel conservative mean-variance bandit problem (MVCBP), which measures the learning performance in both the
expected reward and variability. We design a novel algorithm
with O(1/T ) normalized additive regrets (T -independent in
the cumulative form) and validate this result through empirical evaluation.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (Thompson 1933;
Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) is a classic online learning model that characterizes the explorationexploitation trade-off in sequential decision making. While
existing bandit algorithms achieve satisfactory regret bounds
over the whole learning processes, they can perform wildly
and lose much in the initial exploratory phase. This limitation has hindered their applications in real-world scenarios
such as health sciences, marketing and finance, where it is
important to guarantee safe and smooth algorithm behavior
in initialization. Hence, studying bandit problems with safe
(conservative) exploration contributes to solving this issue.
In this paper, we study the conservative bandit problems
(CBPs) with sample-path reward constraints. Specifically,
a learner is given a set of regular arms and a default arm.
At each timestep, the learner chooses a regular arm or the
default arm to play and receives a reward according to the
played arm. The learning’s objective is to minimize the expected cumulative regret (equivalently, maximize the expected cumulative reward), while ensuring that the received
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7254

