The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Beyond Class-Conditional Assumption: A Primary Attempt to Combat
Instance-Dependent Label Noise
Pengfei Chen,1 Junjie Ye,2∗ Guangyong Chen,3∗ Jingwei Zhao,2 Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
VIVO AI Lab
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{pfchen, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {junjie.ye, jingwei.zhao}@vivo.com, gy.chen@siat.ac.cn
Abstract
Supervised learning under label noise has seen numerous advances recently, while existing theoretical findings and empirical results broadly build up on the class-conditional noise
(CCN) assumption that the noise is independent of input features given the true label. In this work, we present a theoretical
hypothesis testing and prove that noise in real-world dataset
is unlikely to be CCN, which confirms that label noise should
depend on the instance and justifies the urgent need to go
beyond the CCN assumption.The theoretical results motivate
us to study the more general and practical-relevant instancedependent noise (IDN). To stimulate the development of theory and methodology on IDN, we formalize an algorithm to
generate controllable IDN and present both theoretical and
empirical evidence to show that IDN is semantically meaningful and challenging. As a primary attempt to combat IDN, we
present a tiny algorithm termed self-evolution average label
(SEAL), which not only stands out under IDN with various
noise fractions, but also improves the generalization on realworld noise benchmark Clothing1M. Our code is released1 .
Notably, our theoretical analysis in Section 2 provides rigorous motivations for studying IDN, which is an important topic
that deserves more research attention in future.

1

Figure 1: Examples of 8 in MNIST (first row) and Airplane
in CIFAR-10 (second row). The corruption probability dependent on the true class does not model such diverse features in
each class.

Introduction

Noisy labels are unavoidable in practical applications, where
instances are usually labeled by workers on crowdsourcing
platforms (Yan et al. 2014; Schroff, Criminisi, and Zisserman 2010). Unfortunately, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
can memorize noisy labels easily but generalize poorly on
clean test data (Zhang et al. 2017). Hence, how to mitigate
the effect of noisy labels in the training of DNNs has attracted considerable attention recently. Most existing works,
for their theoretical analysis or noise synthesizing in experiments, follow the class-conditional noise (CCN) assumption (Scott, Blanchard, and Handy 2013; Zhang and Sabuncu
2018; Menon et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2020), where the label
noise is independent of its input features conditional on the
latent true label.
∗
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/chenpf1025/IDN

11442

In fact, instances with the same label can be entirely different, hence the probability of mislabeling should be highly
dependent on the specific instance. As shown in the first row
of Fig. 1, the second right image is likely to be mislabeled
as the number 6 and the fourth right image is likely to be
manually mislabeled as the number 7; in the second row, the
last image is more likely to be mislabeled as the ship. In
this paper, our first contribution (Section 2) is to present a
theoretical hypothesis testing on the well-known real-world
dataset, Clothing1M, to demonstrate the urgent need to go
beyond the CCN assumption in practical applications. Meanwhile, we discuss the challenge of instance-dependent noise
(IDN) with both theoretical and empirical evidence. Some
pioneer efforts has been contributed to IDN, but most results
are restricted to binary classification (Menon, van Rooyen,
and Natarajan 2018; Bootkrajang and Chaijaruwanich 2020;
Cheng et al. 2020) or based on assumptions such as the noise
is parts-dependent (Xia et al. 2020).
To stimulate the development of theory and methodology
on more practical-relevant IDN, we propose an algorithm to
generate controllable IDN and present extensive characterizations of training under IDN, which is our second contribution
(Section 3). Our third contribution (Section 4) is to propose
an algorithm termed self-evolution average label (SEAL) to
defend IDN, motivated by an experimental observation that
the DNN’s output corresponding to the latent true label can
be activated with oscillation before memorizing noise. Specifically, SEAL provides instance-dependent label correction
by averaging predictions of a DNN on each instance over
the whole training process, then retrains a classifier using the
averaged soft labels. The superior performance of SEAL is
verified on extensive experiments, including synthetic/real-

