The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combining Preference Elicitation with
Local Search and Greedy Search for Matroid Optimization
Nawal Benabbou, Cassandre Leroy, Thibaut Lust, Patrice Perny
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
nawal.benabbou@lip6.fr, cassandre.leroy@lip6.fr, thibaut.lust@lip6.fr, patrice.perny@lip6.fr

Abstract

(Kruskal 1956)) and more generally to the weighted matroid
structure underlying the problem.
Matroids are indeed of special interest both for greedy
search and local search. First, they are the only non-empty
hereditary structures for which the greedy algorithm provides optimal solutions (Oxley 2006). But local search also
benefits from matroid structures. In a combinatorial optimization problem where the admissible solutions are the
bases of a weighted matroid, a local search algorithm can
indeed be used from any base to progressively improve the
current base using swaps of elements until reaching the optimal one, as suggested in (Lee 2004) with a simple exchange
algorithm. To perform useful swaps in a local search or optimal greedy choices in the construction of a solution, we need
to know the relative values of the elements composing the
feasible solutions. When this preference information is not
available at the beginning of the search, it can be acquired
during the search via preference elicitation procedures to reduce the elicitation burden. The goal of this paper is to make
some propositions in this direction for matroid optimization.
The standard assumption in preference-based optimization is that preferences have been elicited beforehand and
are known when the optimization procedure is launched.
Nevertheless, some recent works in AI and algorithmic decision theory have relaxed this assumption to extend search
procedures to the case of imprecisely known objective functions. The idea is to combine preference elicitation methods
aiming to progressively specify the objective with the exploration of the set of solutions in order to focus the elicitation
task on acquiring the part of preference information that is
necessary to solve the instance under consideration. Thus,
the optimal solution can be found after a reduced number of
preference queries. This approach which is both incremental and adaptive to answers provided by the Decision Maker
was first implemented in non-combinatorial problems, in
various contexts such as multiattribute utility theory (White
III, Sage, and Dozono 1984; Braziunas and Boutilier 2007),
decision making under risk (Ha and Haddawy 1997; Chajewska, Koller, and Parr 2000; Wang and Boutilier 2003),
collective decision making (Lu and Boutilier 2011) and multicriteria decision making (Benabbou, Perny, and Viappiani
2017). Elicitation for decision making on combinatorial domains is more challenging and has motivated several contributions in various contexts, e.g., constraint satisfaction prob-

We propose two incremental preference elicitation methods
for interactive preference-based optimization on weighted
matroid structures. More precisely, for linear objective (utility) functions, we propose an interactive greedy algorithm interleaving preference queries with the incremental construction of an independent set to obtain an optimal or nearoptimal base of a matroid. We also propose an interactive local search algorithm based on sequences of possibly improving exchanges for the same problem. For both algorithms,
we provide performance guarantees on the quality of the returned solutions and the number of queries. Our algorithms
are tested on the uniform, graphical and scheduling matroids
to solve three different problems (committee election, spanning tree, and scheduling problems) and evaluated in terms of
computation times, number of queries, and empirical error.

Introduction
Local search is a very general heuristic approach standardly
used in AI to determine good solutions to hard combinatorial optimization problems (Russell and Norvig 2002;
E.H. Aarts 2003). Local search algorithms start from a candidate solution and then iteratively move to a neighbor solution with the aim of finding the optimal one. A typical instance of local search algorithm is hill climbing, which consists in choosing the neighbor solution among the ones that
locally optimize the objective function in the neighborhood.
In many cases, local search delivers sub-optimal solutions to the global problem and the search method needs to
be modified to continue the search beyond local optimality. However, there are some well known examples of problems for which local search algorithms deliver optimal solutions. For example, in continuous optimization, the simplex
algorithm used to solve linear programs is essentially a local search algorithm passing from vertices of a polytope to
neighbor vertices until reaching a local optimum, which is
known to be a global optimum. In discrete optimization, the
minimum spanning tree problem can also be solved by local
search from any arbitrary initial spanning tree using neighborhoods and improving sequences based on edge swaps.
This result is strongly related to the correctness of the greedy
algorithm in the spanning tree problem (Kruskal algorithm
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12233

