The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Asynchronous Optimization Methods for Efficient Training of Deep Neural
Networks with Guarantees
Vyacheslav Kungurtsev,1 Malcolm Egan, 2 Bapi Chatterjee 3 Dan Alistarh 3
1

Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Electrical Engineering Czech Technical University in Prague
2
University of Lyon, INSA Lyon, INRIA
3
IST Austria
vyacheslav.kungurtsev@fel.cvut.cz, malcom.egan@inria.fr, bapi.chatterjee@ist.ac.at, dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at
Abstract

Machine learning applications, including training deep
neural networks, have also motivated optimization algorithms that use high performance parallel computing parallel. In this paper, we focus on the shared-memory paradigm,
although our results can be efficiently extended to realistic
distributed settings. Recent interest in this topic was sparked
by (Recht et al. 2011), although precursors exist. Later work
in (Lian et al. 2015) refined this analysis and generalised
to nonconvex smooth problems, under restricted scheduling models. Subsequently, (Cannelli et al. 2019) introduced
a more general and realistic probabilistic model of asynchronous computation on shared memory architectures.
Asynchronous proximal gradient methods have been studied in (Zhu, Niu, and Li 2018) for problems of the form
f (x) + g(x), where f (x) is smooth and nonconvex, and
g(x) is nonsmooth but with an easily computable closed
form proximal evaluation. This class of problems is only relevant for training DNNs wherein every activation function is
smooth. However, current popular DNN models make extensive use of ReLU activation functions nor max-pooling, and
thus this literature on convergence, speedup, etc. on asynchronous parallel stochastic (sub)gradient descent does not
apply, when considered from the standpoint of mathematical
rigor. This leaves a clear gap between practical implementation and convergence guarantees.
This gap is understandable, given that the general problem
of nonsmooth and nonconvex stochastic optimisation is notoriously difficult (Bagirov, Karmitsa, and Mäkelä 2014). A
standard framework to establish convergence of such algorithms in the centralized sequential setting is stochastic approximation, with early work in (Ermol’ev and Norkin 1998;
Ruszczyński 1987) and comprehensive surveys in (Kushner
and Yin 2003) and (Borkar 2009). In (Davis et al. 2018; Majewski, Miasojedow, and Moulines 2018), stochastic approximation for (sequential) nonsmooth and nonconvex problems has been recently developed, motivated by DNNs.
In this paper, we take a first step towards bridging the
gap and establish the convergence of stochastic subgradient descent for nonsmooth and nonconvex problems in a realistic asynchronous computation framework. In particular,
we show that generic asynchronous stochastic subgradient
methods converge with probability one for a general class of
nonsmooth and nonconvex objectives. Aside from the limited presentation in (Kushner and Yin 2003, Chapter 12), this

Asynchronous distributed algorithms are a popular way to reduce synchronization costs in large-scale optimization, and
in particular for neural network training. However, for nonsmooth and nonconvex objectives, few convergence guarantees exist beyond cases where closed-form proximal operator
solutions are available. As training most popular deep neural
networks corresponds to optimizing nonsmooth and nonconvex objectives, there is a pressing need for such convergence
guarantees. In this paper, we analyze for the first time the
convergence of stochastic asynchronous optimization for this
general class of objectives. In particular, we focus on stochastic subgradient methods allowing for block variable partitioning, where the shared model is asynchronously updated
by concurrent processes. To this end, we use a probabilistic model which captures key features of real asynchronous
scheduling between concurrent processes. Under this model,
we establish convergence with probability one to an invariant set for stochastic subgradient methods with momentum.
From a practical perspective, one issue with the family of
algorithms that we consider is that they are not efficiently
supported by machine learning frameworks, which mostly focus on distributed data-parallel strategies. To address this, we
propose a new implementation strategy for shared-memory
based training of deep neural networks for a partitioned but
shared model in single- and multi-GPU settings. Based on
this implementation, we achieve on average about 1.2x speedup in comparison to state-of-the-art training methods for popular image classification tasks, without compromising accuracy.

Introduction
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) is a difficult problem
in several respects (Goodfellow et al. 2016). First, due to
multiple layers of nonlinear activation functions, the resulting optimization problems are nonconvex. Second, ReLU
activation functions and max-pooling in convolutional networks induce nonsmoothness, i.e., the objective is not differentiable everywhere. Finally, in applications it is often
unreasonable to store entire data sets in memory in order
to compute the objective or subgradients. As such, it is necessary to exploit stochastic methods.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8209

