The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Guiding Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation Decoding
with Reordering Information
Qiu Ran∗ , Yankai Lin∗ , Peng Li∗ , Jie Zhou
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
{soulcaptran,yankailin,patrickpli,withtomzhou}@tencent.com

Abstract

target words are independent, which enables parallel computation of the decoder in NAT models. NAT models could
achieve 10-15 times speedup compared to AT models while
maintaining considerable translation quality.
However, NAT models still suffer from the multimodality problem (Gu et al. 2018): it discards the dependencies
among the target words, and therefore the target words may
be chosen from multiple feasible translations, resulting in
duplicate, missing or even wrong words. For example, the
German phrase “Vielen Dank” can be translated as both
“thank you” and “many thanks”. Unfortunately, as each target word is generated independently, “thank thanks” and
“many you” may also be assigned high probabilities, resulting in inferior translation quality. In this work, we argue reordering information is essential for NAT models and helpful for alleviating the multimodality problem.
To this end, we propose a novel NAT framework named
ReorderNAT in this work, which explicitly models the reordering information to guide the decoding of NAT. To be
specific, as shown in Figure 1, ReorderNAT first reorders the
source sentence into a pseudo-translation formed by source
words but in the target language word order, and then translates the source sentence conditioned on it. We further introduce two guiding decoding strategies which utilize the reordering information (i.e. pseudo-translation) to guide the
word selection in decoding. The first one is deterministic
guiding decoding which first generates a most likely pseudotranslation and then generates the target sentence based on
it. The second one is non-deterministic guiding decoding
which utilizes the conditional distribution of the pseudotranslation as a latent variable to guide the decoding of target
sentences.
Ideally, the pseudo-translation can be viewed as a final
translation written in source language. Guiding decoding
with it could help to model the conditional dependencies of
the target words and encourage the decoder to choose words
belonging to the same translation, which naturally reduces
the multimodality problem. Moreover, the decoding space of
generating pseudo-translation is limited to the permutation
of words in the source sentence, which can be well modeled
by a small model. Therefore, ReorderNAT could effectively
alleviate the multimodality problem by introducing the reordering information in NAT.
Experimental results on several widely-used benchmarks

Non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT) generates each target word in parallel and has achieved promising inference acceleration. However, existing NAT models
still have a big gap in translation quality compared to autoregressive neural machine translation models due to the multimodality problem: the target words may come from multiple feasible translations. To address this problem, we propose a novel NAT framework ReorderNAT which explicitly
models the reordering information to guide the decoding of
NAT. Specially, ReorderNAT utilizes deterministic and nondeterministic decoding strategies that leverage reordering information as a proxy for the final translation to encourage the
decoder to choose words belonging to the same translation.
Experimental results on various widely-used datasets show
that our proposed model achieves better performance compared to most existing NAT models, and even achieves comparable translation quality as autoregressive translation models with a significant speedup.

Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) models with encoderdecoder framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) significantly outperform
conventional statistical machine translation models (Koehn,
Och, and Marcu 2003; Koehn et al. 2007). Despite their success, the state-of-the-art NMT models usually suffer from
the slow inference speed, which has become a bottleneck to
apply NMT in real-world translation systems. The slow inference speed of NMT models is due to their autoregressive
property, i.e., decoding the target sentence word-by-word
according to the translation history.
Recently, Gu et al. (2018) introduced non-autoregressive
NMT (NAT) which can simultaneously decode all target
words to break the bottleneck of the autoregressive NMT
(AT) models. To this end, NAT models (Gu et al. 2018;
Wei et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019a) usually directly copy the source word representations to the input of the decoder, instead of using previous predicted target word representations. Hence, the inference of different
∗

indicates equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13727

