The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Neural Group-wise Sentiment Analysis Model with Data Sparsity Awareness
Deyu Zhou1∗ , Meng Zhang1 , Linhai Zhang1 , Yulan He2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK
{d.zhou, m.zhang, lzhang472}@seu.edu.cn, yulan.he@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Sentiment analysis on user-generated content has achieved
notable progress by introducing user information to consider each individual’s preference and language usage. However, most existing approaches ignore the data sparsity problem,
where the content of some users is limited and the model fails to capture discriminative features of users. To address this
issue, we hypothesize that users could be grouped together
based on their rating biases as well as degree of rating consistency and the knowledge learned from groups could be
employed to analyze the users with limited data. Therefore,
in this paper, a neural group-wise sentiment analysis model
with data sparsity awareness is proposed. The user-centred
document representations are generated by incorporating a
group-based user encoder. Furthermore, a multi-task learning
framework is employed to jointly model users’ rating biases and their degree of rating consistency. One task is vanilla
population-level sentiment analysis and the other is groupwise sentiment analysis. Experimental results on three realworld datasets show that the proposed approach outperforms
some state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, model analysis and
case study demonstrate its effectiveness of modeling user rating biases and variances.

A

No frills. Great food. I'd eat there again. 3

B

Nice place, great food. 3

C

Great place for good Asian cuisine! 3
Great place, great food !!!!!

D

Great pizza and nutella cepes.

E

Great fish tacos, love the atmosphere.

F

5
5

5

No wifi?!?!?! Shame!!!!!

G

No wifi???

1

3

Love it here, nice place to drink wine.

5
5

Love it here! So fun and adorable!

5

H

Love it here, always will.

Figure 1: Example snippets of reviews posted by different
users in the Yelp 2013 dataset.

2015). Following this way, user information was incorporated into a Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) network with
attention mechanism (Chen et al. 2016). More recently, Wu
et al. (2018) utilized a hierarchical neural network with user attention mechanisim to encode user information. Wang
et al. (2018) proposed an adversarial cross-lingual learning
framework to utilize both English and Chinese corpora for
personalized microblog sentiment analysis. Amplayo (2019)
investigated the influences of different ways and locations
of the attribute incorporation. However, the aforementioned
approaches did not consider the data sparsity issue that most
users only generate limited content online. According to the
study (Wojcik and Hughes 2019), most users rarely tweet,
but the top 10% active users create 80% of tweets. Therefore, it is important to tackle the user data sparsity problem
in sentiment analysis.
Based on the observation on user-generated content, we
found that some users exhibit a similar correlation pattern
between their chosen words and their ratings. As shown in
the upper part of Figure 1, user A, B and C all used ‘great’ in
their reviews, but they only gave ratings of 3 stars, showing
that they seem to be more cautious about giving high rating scores. While user D, E and F also used ‘great’ in their
reviews, however they gave ratings of 5 stars. These examples illustrate that a sentiment analysis model trained solely
on review texts is unable to capture the users’ diverse rating

Introduction
Sentiment analysis on user-generated content aims to map
a given text, such as a post on Twitter or a review on Yelp,
to the corresponding sentiment label or score. Traditional
methods for sentiment analysis assume that the mapping between a text and a sentiment score is the same for all users.
However, such an assumption is rarely true in the real world
as people construct preferences based on their own experiences and express their sentiment in many difference ways,
exhibiting a diverse range of rating behaviors. Thus, it is crucial to develop a sentiment analysis model considering user
information.
Early approaches incorporate the user information into
sentiment analysis model in a more crude way. For example,
user embeddings were randomly initialized and concatenated with document embeddings before being fed into a neural
network to train a sentiment classifier (Tang, Qin, and Liu
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14594

