The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Anchor Learning for Arbitrary-Oriented Object Detection
Qi Ming, Zhiqiang Zhou∗ , Lingjuan Miao, Hongwei Zhang, Linhao Li
School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
chaser.ming@gmail.com, {zhzhzhou, miaolingjuan}@bit.edu.cn,
zhanghw.hongwei@gmail.com, lilinhao@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Arbitrary-oriented objects widely appear in natural scenes,
aerial photographs, remote sensing images, etc., and thus
arbitrary-oriented object detection has received considerable
attention. Many current rotation detectors use plenty of anchors with different orientations to achieve spatial alignment
with ground truth boxes. Intersection-over-Union (IoU) is
then applied to sample the positive and negative candidates
for training. However, we observe that the selected positive
anchors cannot always ensure accurate detections after regression, while some negative samples can achieve accurate
localization. It indicates that the quality assessment of anchors through IoU is not appropriate, and this further leads
to inconsistency between classification confidence and localization accuracy. In this paper, we propose a dynamic anchor learning (DAL) method, which utilizes the newly defined matching degree to comprehensively evaluate the localization potential of the anchors and carries out a more
efficient label assignment process. In this way, the detector
can dynamically select high-quality anchors to achieve accurate object detection, and the divergence between classification and regression will be alleviated. With the newly introduced DAL, we can achieve superior detection performance
for arbitrary-oriented objects with only a few horizontal preset anchors. Experimental results on three remote sensing
datasets HRSC2016, DOTA, UCAS-AOD as well as a scene
text dataset ICDAR 2015 show that our method achieves substantial improvement compared with the baseline model. Besides, our approach is also universal for object detection using
horizontal bound box. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/ming71/DAL.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Predefined anchor (red) and its regression box
(green). (a) shows that anchors with a high input IoU cannot guarantee perfect detection. (b) reveals that the anchor
that is poorly spatially aligned with the GT box still has the
potential to localize object accurately.

Since objects in the real scene tend to appear in diverse
orientations, the issue of oriented object detection has gradually received considerable attention. There are many approaches have achieved oriented object detection by introducing the extra orientation prediction and preset rotated
anchors (Ma et al. 2018; Liao, Shi, and Bai 2018). These
detectors often follow the same label assignment strategy
as general object detection frameworks. For simplicity, we
call the IoU between GT box and anchors as input IoU, and
the IoU between GT box and regression box as output IoU.
The selected positives tend to obtain higher output IoU compared with negatives, because their better spatial alignment
with GT provides sufficient semantic knowledge, which is
conducive to accurate classification and regression.
However, we observe that the localization performance of
the assigned samples is not consistent with the assumption
mentioned above. As shown in Figure 1, the division of positive and negative anchors seems not always related to the
detection performance. Furthermore, we have counted the
distribution of the anchor localization performance for all
candidates to explore whether this phenomenon is universal. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), a considerable percentage
(26%) of positive anchors are poorly aligned with GT after
regression, revealing that the positive anchors cannot ensure
accurate localization. Besides, more than half of the candidates that achieve high-quality predictions are regressed
from negatives (see Figure 2(b)) which implies that a consid-

Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision. In recent years, with the
development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
, tremendous successes have been achieved on object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2016). Most detection frameworks utilize preset
horizontal anchors to achieve spatial alignment with groundtruth(GT) box. Positive and negative samples are then selected through a specific strategy during training phase,
which is called label assignment.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2355

