The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generating CCG Categories
Yufang Liu, Tao Ji, Yuanbin Wu, Man Lan
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
{yfliu.antnlp, taoji.cs}@gmail.com, {ybwu, mlan}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous CCG supertaggers usually predict categories using
multi-class classification. Despite their simplicity, internal
structures of categories are usually ignored. The rich semantics
inside these structures may help us to better handle relations
among categories and bring more robustness into existing supertaggers. In this work, we propose to generate categories
rather than classify them: each category is decomposed into
a sequence of smaller atomic tags, and the tagger aims to
generate the correct sequence. We show that with this finer
view on categories, annotations of different categories could
be shared and interactions with sentence contexts could be
enhanced. The proposed category generator is able to achieve
state-of-the-art tagging (95.5% accuracy) and parsing (89.8%
labeled F1) performances on the standard CCGBank. Furthermore, its performances on infrequent (even unseen) categories,
out-of-domain texts and low resource language give promising
results on introducing generation models to the general CCG
analyses.

United

serves

Miami

NP

(S\NP)/NP

NP

S\NP

>
<

S

Figure 1: An example of CCG supertagging and parsing.
“United” and “Miami” are noun phrases (NP). The transition
verb “serves” has a category (supertag) “(SKNP)/NP” which
means it first combines a right NP, then combines a left NP,
and finally forms a sentence S.
(NP\NP)/NP

(S\NP)/NP

/
\
NP

/
NP

NP

\
S

NP
NP

Figure 2: Two categories with similar internal structures. The
left represents a transitive verb, and the right represents a
preposition attached to a noun phrase.

Introduction
Supertagging is the first step of parsing natural language with
Combinatory Categorial Grammar (Steedman 2000) (Figure
1). The morpho-syntax enriched categories are of great interest not only because they can help to build hierarchical
representations of sentences, but also because they provide
a compact and concise way to encode syntactic functions
behind words. As many other data-driven NLP models, applications of CCG analyses are constrained with the quality
of annotations and the pre-defined category set. Here, for
helping parsing texts in various domains, we aim to improve
the robustness of current taggers and extend their abilities on
discovering new unknown categories.
The primary model for CCG supertagging is sequence
labeling: a classifier autoregressively predicts categories of
sentence words. Internal structures of categories, however,
are often ignored in this classification-based methods. As a
key feature of CCG, these structures are actually quite informative for handling relations among categories. For example,
the two categories in Figure 2 are different, but the functions
they represent have the same combining strategy (first takes
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13443

an argument from left, then from right) and identical argument types (two NPs). For building data-driven taggers, this
fine-grained view on categories is able to expose more shared
information and thus helps to build a more robust model. For
instance, we may rely on internal structures to improve performance of infrequent categories by transferring knowledge
from more frequent categories (which are learned more robustly). We can also use them to induce unknown categories
by building new structures or filling new arguments, which is
impossible for existing supertaggers.
Following Kogkalidis, Moortgat, and Deoskar (2019) work
on fine-grained type-logical category generation, in this paper, we propose generation paradigms for CCG supertagging.
Instead of viewing categories as simple class labels, we decompose them into smaller atomic tags. Predicting a category
is now equal to generate the corresponding atomic tag sequence. For example, one decomposition of (NPKNP)/NP
could be [(, NP, K, NP, ), /, NP] which is identical to the same
decomposition of category (SKNP)/NP except the first NP
is replaced by S. Based on the tag sequences, the classifier
can know more about the shared and the private learning sig-

