The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Teaching Active Human Learners
Zizhe Wang1,3 , Hailong Sun* 1,2,3
1

SKLSDE Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China 100191
2
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China 100191
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China 100191
wangzz@act.buaa.edu.cn, sunhl@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Third, human learners know what they need. After learning
a certain amount of examples, a human learner can realize
which knowledge she has not learnt well. Although we cannot perfectly model human learners, we can take full advantage of their initiative to improve teaching results by allowing them to review the previous teaching examples.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of teaching crowdsourcing workers to improve their skills. We propose a new
teaching form that stimulates the learner’s initiative and introduce a review mechanism into the new teaching form.
Different from traditional teaching form, a learner in our
teaching form can have two options during the process of
learning: reviewing a historical example or receiving a new
example. Then we design a learner model to characterize
the learning behavior of the learners. As existing learner
models do not consider the initiative of the learners (Singla
et al. 2014; Aodha et al. 2018), we propose an active learner
model with three factors that influence human learners’ cognition: (1) the consistency between a hypothesis and a teaching example; (2) the differences between the current teaching example and previous ones; (3) the times that an example
has been reviewed. With the learner model, we then design
a greedy algorithm to select the examples and we show the
theoretical approximation guarantee on the convergence to
certain error rate.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Teaching humans is an important topic under the umbrella
of machine teaching, and its core problem is to design an algorithm for selecting teaching examples. Existing work typically regards humans as passive learners, where an ordered
set of teaching examples are generated and fed to learners sequentially. However, such a mechanism is inconsistent with
the behavior of human learners in practice. A real human
learner can actively choose whether to review a historical example or to receive a new example depending on the belief
of her learning states. In this work, we propose a model of
active learners and design an efficient teaching algorithm accordingly. Experimental results with both simulated learners
and real crowdsourcing workers demonstrate that our teaching algorithm has better teaching performance compared to
existing methods.

1

Introduction

Machine teaching studies the problem of finding an optimal
training set to guide a “student” to learn a target model (Zhu
2015; Zhu et al. 2018). And the students usually fall into
two categories, including humans and machines. As for humans, machine teaching helps reduce the cost of education
and improve the learning experience. For example, teaching
algorithms can be used to select a curriculum of learning
materials for students in intelligent tutoring systems (ITS),
or to train crowdsourcing workers for doing complex tasks.
However, conventional researches of teaching humans
typically regard a human learner passively as a machine (Piech et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2017; Aodha et al.
2018), where learners are assumed to receive the examples
one by one in the order given by certain algorithms. Thus,
these approaches cannot fulfill the potentials of humans because there are three salient differences between humans and
machines. First, machines never forget and they remember
every single input, while humans may forget what they have
learned (Zhou, Nelakurthi, and He 2018). Second, the learning process of humans is hard to model. We may know all
the details of a machine learning algorithm, but we cannot
perfectly model how humans learn. That means it is hard to
find an optimal teaching algorithm to teach a human learner.

• We design a new teaching form with a review mechanism
that takes advantage of human learners’ initiative.
• We model the active learner under the new teaching form
and propose a teaching algorithm called Active Learner
Teaching Algorithm (ALTA).
• We conducted both simulations and experiments on a
well-known crowdsourcing platform, and the results show
the superiority of our approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
gives a brief introduction of the related works on machine teaching and teaching humans. Section 3 provides the
problem description and introduces a classic learner model
STRICT. Section 4 defines the active learner model and designs a teaching algorithm ALTA. Section 5 presents the experimental evaluation results. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude this work.

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5850

