The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Attribute-Guided Adversarial Training for Robustness to Natural Perturbations
Tejas Gokhale1 * , Rushil Anirudh2 , Bhavya Kailkhura2 , Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan2 ,
Chitta Baral1 , Yezhou Yang1
1
Arizona State University, 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
{tgokhale, chitta, yz.yang}@asu.edu, {anirudh1, kailkhura1, jjayaram}@llnl.gov

Abstract

encountered at test time. For example, geometric transforms
such as rotation, translation, or scaling of images, that are
commonly encountered in the real world are not accounted
for by pixel-wise `p bounded perturbations.
As such, images are parameterized by several unique
attributes ranging from low-level information responsible
for image formation like lighting, camera angle and resolution; to high-level semantic information like changes in
background, size, shape, or color of objects in a scene.
Perturbations along many of these attributes are irrelevant
to tasks like image classification and are thus “semanticspreserving” perturbations. For instance, translating a digit
inside an image in a digit classification task, or manipulating the shape of an object in a color classification task, will
not result in a change in the true class-label. Yet, perturbations along these attributes are likely to cause models to fail
when they are changed intentionally or otherwise (Xiao et al.
2020; Joshi et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018). Shifts in such “nuisance attributes” typically result in large `p perturbations,
posing significant challenges for existing pixel-level perturbation models. On the other hand, it is impractical to sample
the entire attribute space effectively in order to guard against
potential failures at test time.
In this work, we propose a robust modeling technique for
image classification problems, which learns to generate new
samples so as to maximize the exposure of the classifier to
variations in the attribute space. Our approach falls under the
broad category of adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017),
and utilizes a min-max optimization setup, wherein the inner maximization step generates adversarial attribute perturbations while the outer minimization step identifies model
parameters that reduce the task-specific loss (e.g., categorical cross entropy) under these perturbations. We find that
the attribute-based specification produces models that can
more effectively handle challenging real-world distribution
shifts than standard `p norm-bounded perturbations (Qiao,
Zhao, and Peng 2020). Furthermore, our proposed approach
is flexible to support a wide-range of attribute specifications,
which we demonstrate with three different use-cases:
1. Object-level shifts from a conditional GAN for adversarial training on a new variant of the CLEVR dataset;
2. Geometric transformations implemented using a spatial
transformer for MNIST data; and
3. Synthetic image corruptions on CIFAR-10 data.

While existing work in robust deep learning has focused on
small pixel-level norm-based perturbations, this may not account for perturbations encountered in several real-world settings. In many such cases although test data might not be
available, broad specifications about the types of perturbations (such as an unknown degree of rotation) may be known.
We consider a setup where robustness is expected over an unseen test domain that is not i.i.d. but deviates from the training domain. While this deviation may not be exactly known,
its broad characterization is specified a priori, in terms of attributes. We propose an adversarial training approach which
learns to generate new samples so as to maximize exposure of
the classifier to the attributes-space, without having access to
the data from the test domain. Our adversarial training solves
a min-max optimization problem, with the inner maximization generating adversarial perturbations, and the outer minimization finding model parameters by optimizing the loss
on adversarial perturbations generated from the inner maximization. We demonstrate the applicability of our approach
on three types of naturally occurring perturbations — objectrelated shifts, geometric transformations, and common image
corruptions. Our approach enables deep neural networks to
be robust against a wide range of naturally occurring perturbations. We demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed
approach by showing the robustness gains of deep neural
networks trained using our adversarial training on MNIST,
CIFAR-10, and a new variant of the CLEVR dataset.

1

Introduction

The goal of robust machine learning models for tasks such
as image classification is to make accurate predictions on
unseen samples. The i.i.d. assumption is the simplest case in
which unseen samples come from the same distribution as
the training dataset. However, in most real-world situations,
this assumption breaks down and so do models trained under
the i.i.d. paradigm (Recht et al. 2018; Bulusu et al. 2020).
Most work on adversarial robustness has focused on
pixel-level `p norm-bounded perturbations such as additive
noise (2014; 2018; 2018; 2018). While such perturbations
allow the use of tractable mathematical formulations, in
practice, they are not the only perturbations that might be
* Work performed during internship at LLNL.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7574

