The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploratory Machine Learning with Unknown Unknowns*
Peng Zhao, Yu-Jie Zhang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhaop, zhangyj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

low-confidence region

Abstract
asthma

In conventional supervised learning, a training dataset is given
with ground-truth labels from a known label set, and the
learned model will classify unseen instances to known labels.
In real situations, when the learned models do not work well,
learners generally attribute the model failure to the inadequate
selection of learning algorithms or the lack of enough labeled
training samples. In this paper, we point out that there is an
important category of failure, which owes to the fact that there
are unknown classes in the training data misperceived as other
labels, and thus their existence is unknown from the given
supervision. Such problems of unknown unknown classes can
hardly be addressed by common re-selection of algorithms or
accumulation of training samples. For this purpose, we propose the exploratory machine learning, where in this paradigm
once learner encounters unsatisfactory learning performance,
she can examine the possibility and, if unknown unknowns
really exist, deploy the optimal strategy of feature space augmentation to make unknown classes observable and be enabled
for learning. Theoretical analysis and empirical study on both
synthetic and real datasets validate the efficacy of our proposal.

1

asthma

pneu- lung
pneucommunity
monia cancer
healthcare centers monia

ground-truth
label space

known
label space

asthma
pneumonia
lung cancer

Figure 1: Unknown unknowns in medical diagnosis task

Introduction

Machine learning has achieved great success in many realworld applications. The success heavily relies on the suitable
learning algorithm and sufficient supervised training data.
Therefore, facing model failure, the learner would always
doubt the inadequate selection of algorithms and the lack
of data. A common practice is to try other algorithms or
accumulate more data, and such an approach could work
effectively when there are no other factors leading to the
failure. In this paper, however, we point out that there is
an important cause of model failure always ignored before:
unknown unknowns hidden in the training dataset.
Specifically, we attribute the unknown unknowns to the
fact that some training instances of certain unknown classes
are wrongly perceived as others, and thus appear unknown to
the learned model with the given supervision. This is always
the case when the label space is misspecified due to the insufficient feature information. Consider the task of medical
diagnosis, where we need to train a model for community
* This research was supported by NSFC (61921006).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10999

healthcare centers based on their patient records, to help diagnose the cause of a patient with cough and dyspnea. As
shown in Figure 1, there are actually three causes: two common ones (asthma and pneumonia), as well as an unusual
one (lung cancer) whose diagnosis crucially relies on the
computerized tomography (CT) scan device, yet too expensive to purchase. Thus, the community healthcare centers
are not likely to diagnose patients with dyspnea as cancer,
resulting in that the class of “lung cancer” becomes invisible
and hidden in the collected training dataset. As a result, the
learned model will be unaware of this unobserved class.
Similar phenomena occur in many other applications. For
instance, the trace of a new-type aircraft was mislabeled as
old-type ones until performance of aircraft detectors is found
poor (i.e., capability of collected signals is inadequate), and
the officer suspects that there are new-type aircrafts unknown
previously. When feature information is insufficient, there
is a high risk to misperceive some classes of training data
as others, leading to existence of hidden classes. Especially,
hidden classes are sometimes of more interest, like in above
two cases. Thus, it is crucial to discover hidden unknown
classes and classify known classes well simultaneously.
Conventional supervised learning (SL) cannot obtain a
satisfied model when such unknown unknowns emerge in the
training dataset, even if we could accumulate more data and
re-select algorithms exhaustively. The reason lies in that the
unknown factors are beyond the expressivity of training data.
We thus require new ideas to tackle such unknown unknowns.

2

ExML: A New Learning Framework

The problem we are concerned with is essentially a class
of unknown unknowns. In fact, how to deal with unknown
unknowns is the fundamental question of robust artificial
intelligence (Dietterich 2017), and many studies have been

