The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Fair and Efficient Allocations of Indivisible Goods
Aniket Murhekar, Jugal Garg
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{aniket2, jugal}@illinois.edu

Abstract

fairness concepts like envy-freeness have been defined (Foley 1967; Varian 1974), which requires that every agent prefer their own bundle of goods to that of any other. On the
other hand, when the goods are indivisible, envy-free allocations need not even exist, e.g., in the simple case of one
good and two agents. Other classical notions of fairness, like
equitability and proportionality, may also be impossible to
satisfy when goods are indivisible. However, fair division of
indivisible goods remains an important problem since goods
cannot always be shared, and also because it models several practical scenarios such as a course allocation (Othman
et al. 2010). Since allocations satisfying standard fairness
criteria fail to exist in the case of indivisible goods, several
weaker fairness notions have been defined.
A relaxation of envy-freeness, called envy-freeness up to
one good (EF1) was defined by Budish (2011). An allocation
is said to be EF1 if every agent prefers their own bundle over
the bundle of any other agent after removing at most one
good from the other agent’s bundle. When the valuations of
the agents for the goods are monotone, EF1 allocations exist
and are polynomial time computable (Lipton et al. 2004).
The standard notion of economic efficiency is Pareto optimality (PO). An allocation is said to be PO if no other allocation makes an agent better off without making someone else
worse off. A natural question to ask is whether EF1 can be
achieved in conjunction with PO under additive valuations.
The concept of Nash welfare provides a positive answer to
this question. The Nash welfare is the geometric mean of the
agents’ utilities, and by maximizing it we achieve a tradeoff
between efficiency and fairness. Caragiannis et al. (2016)
showed that any maximum Nash welfare (MNW) allocation is EF1 and PO. For binary valuations, the MNW allocation can be computed in polynomial time (Barman et
al. (2018b)). However, in general, the problem of computing
the MNW allocation is APX-hard (Lee 2015).
Bypassing this barrier, Barman, Krishnamurthy, and
Vaish (2018a) devised a pseudo-polynomial time algorithm
that computes an allocation that is both EF1 and PO. They
also showed that allocations that are both EF1 and fractionally Pareto-optimal (fPO) always exist, where an allocation
is said to be fPO if no fractional allocation exists that makes
an agent better off without making anyone else worse off.
They showed this result via a non-constructive convergence
argument used in real analysis, and did not provide an al-

We study the problem of fair and efficient allocation of a set
of indivisible goods to agents with additive valuations using the popular fairness notions of envy-freeness up to one
good (EF1) and equitability up to one good (EQ1) in conjunction with Pareto-optimality (PO). There exists a pseudopolynomial time algorithm to compute an EF1+PO allocation, and a non-constructive proof of existence of allocations
that are both EF1 and fractionally Pareto-optimal (fPO). We
present a pseudo-polynomial time algorithm to compute an
EF1+fPO allocation, thereby improving the earlier results.
Our techniques also enable us to show that an EQ1+fPO allocation always exists when the values are positive, and that it
can be computed in pseudo-polynomial time.
We also consider the class of k-ary instances where k is a
constant, i.e., each agent has at most k different values for
the goods. We show that for such instances an EF1+fPO allocation can be computed in polynomial time. When all values
are positive, we show that an EQ1+fPO allocation for such instances can be computed in polynomial time. Next, we consider instances where the number of agents is constant, and
show that an EF1+PO (also EQ1+PO) allocation can be computed in polynomial time. These results significantly extend
the polynomial-time computability beyond the known cases
of binary or identical valuations.
Further, we show that the problem of computing an EF1+PO
allocation polynomial-time reduces to a problem in the complexity class PLS. We also design a polynomial-time algorithm that computes Nash welfare maximizing allocations
when there are constantly many agents with constant many
different values for the goods.

Introduction
The problem of fair division was formally introduced by
Steinhaus (1948), and has since been extensively studied in
various fields, including economics and computer science
(Brams and Taylor 1996; Moulin 2003). It concerns allocating resources to agents in a fair and efficient manner, and has
various practical applications such as rent division, division
of inheritance, course allocation and government auctions.
Much of the work has focused on divisible goods, which can
be shared between agents. In this setting, several appealing
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5595

