The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Restricted Domains of Dichotomous Preferences
with Possibly Incomplete Information
Zoi Terzopoulou,1 Alexander Karpov,2 and Svetlana Obraztsova3
1

Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
HSE University, Institute of Control Sciences of Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract

the voters hold an approved and a disapproved set of
alternatives—although very natural—were developed only
recently. Elkind and Lackner (2015) introduced various domains of this kind (later generalized by Yang, 2019); they
showed that a number of structures of dichotomous preferences admit polynomial algorithms in the context of two
popular approval-based multiwinner rules, for which determining the winning committee is known to be NP-hard: Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) and Maximin Approval
Voting (MAV), described by Kilgour and Marshall (2012)
and Brams, Kilgour, and Sanver (2007), respectively.
This paper consists of two parts. The first part builds on
Elkind and Lackner’s work with the following contribution:
• We prove characterisation theorems for restricted dichotomous domains on which the results of Elkind and Lackner
(2015) rely, by identifying the patterns that prevent a preference profile from exhibiting a certain structure.
In particular, introducing an order of the alternatives and introducing an order of the voters are the two main approaches
when defining structured dichotomous preferences. But a
structure of the voters is dual to a structure of the alternatives. So, we present all our results for domains resting on
voter structures, but these results can be directly translated
and assumed to hold for structures of alternatives as well.
The literature on domains of total orders contains characterization results using forbidden patterns, reminiscent
to ours. Ballester and Haeringer (2011) characterised the
single-peaked and the group-separable domains, while Bredereck, Chen, and Woeginger (2013) performed the task for
the single-crossing domain, and Peters and Lackner (2020)
worked on the domain of single-peaked preferences on a circle. We now know that all these domains are characterised
by a finite number of forbidden patterns—but this is not true
for other domains of total orders. For instance, Chen, Pruhs,
and Woeginger (2017) proved that finitely many forbidden
patterns are not enough for the one-dimensional euclidean
domain. It is also worth stressing here that, for any domain
characterised by a finite number of forbidden patterns, it is
computationally easy to check whether a preference profile
conforms to it. Bartholdi III and Trick (1986) designed the
original algorithm for detecting whether a profile is singlepeaked, while Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko (2012) and
Bredereck, Chen, and Woeginger (2013) solved the same exercise for single-crossing preferences.

Restricted domains over voter preferences have been extensively studied within the area of computational social choice,
initially for preferences that are total orders over the set of alternatives and subsequently for preferences that are dichotomous—i.e., that correspond to approved and disapproved
alternatives. This paper contributes to the latter stream of
work in a twofold manner. First, we obtain forbidden subprofile characterisations for various important dichotomous domains. Then, we are concerned with incomplete profiles that
may arise in many real-world scenarios, where we have partial information about the voters’ preferences. We tackle the
problem of determining whether an incomplete profile admits
a completion within a certain restricted domain and design
constructive polynomial algorithms to that effect.

1

Introduction

Individual preferences on the one hand, and the aggregation
of these preferences into one collective choice on the other
hand, constitute central elements of AI research (Domshlak
et al. 2011). With applications ranging from recommender
systems to electronic voting and automated personal assistants, the problem of choosing suitable preference models and aggregation methods becomes evident. But wellbehaved aggregation mechanisms are not always easy to
find, notably because determining the outcome of the aggregation is often an intractable task (e.g., Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar, 2007). Luckily, good news come to light
under the assumption that the agents’ preferences conform
to a certain structure, also known as a domain restriction.
For the above reason, domain restrictions over the preferences of voters have received increasing attention within the
field of computational social choice (see Elkind, Lackner,
and Peters (2017) for a recent survey). On a conceptual level,
restricted domains represent structures that arise as sensible
preference models in many real-life settings; on a technical level, they allow for the efficient application of several
voting mechanisms, the utilisation of which is in general a
computationally hard problem.
More specifically, restricted domains of preferences that
are total orders over the set of alternatives are well-studied.
In contrast, domains of dichotomous preferences where
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5726

