The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Effective Context for Meta-Reinforcement Learning:
an Approach based on Contrastive Learning
Haotian Fu1 , Hongyao Tang1 , Jianye Hao1,2∗ , Chen Chen2 , Xidong Feng3 , Dong Li2 , Wulong Liu2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei,
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
{haotianfu, bluecontra}@tju.edu.cn,
{haojianye, chenchen9, lidong106, liuwulong}@huawei.com, fengxidongwh@gmail.com
Abstract

ing adaptation (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Rothfuss
et al. 2019). Such methods require on-policy meta-training
and are empirically proved to be sample inefficient. To alleviate this problem, a number of methods (Rakelly et al.
2019; Fakoor et al. 2020) are proposed to meta-learn a policy that is able to adapt with off-policy data by leveraging
context information. Typically, an agent adapts to a new environment by inferring latent context from a small number
of interactions with the environment. The latent context is
expected to be able to capture the distribution of tasks and
efficiently infer new tasks. Context-based Meta-RL methods
then train a policy conditioned on the latent context to improve generalization.
As the key component of context-based Meta-RL, the
quality of latent context can affect algorithms’ performance
significantly. However, current algorithms are sub-optimal
in two aspects. Firstly, the training strategy for context encoder is flawed. A desirable context is expected to only extract task-specific information from trajectories and throw
away other information. However, the latent context learned
by existing methods (i.e. recovering value function (Rakelly
et al. 2019) or dynamics prediction (Lee et al. 2020; Zhou,
Pinto, and Gupta 2019)) are quite noisy as it may model irrelevant dependencies and ignore some task-specific information. Instead, we propose to directly analyze and discriminate the underlying structure behind different tasks’ trajectories by leveraging contrastive learning. Secondly, prior
context-based Meta-RL methods ignore the importance of
collecting informative trajectories for generating distinctive
context. If the exploration process does not collect transitions that are able to reflect the task’s individual property
and distinguish it from dissimilar tasks, the latent context
would be ineffective. For instance, in many cases, tasks in
one distribution only vary in the final goals, which means
the transition dynamics remains the same in most places of
the state space. Without a good exploration policy it is hard
to obtain information that is able to distinguish tasks from
each other, which leads to a bad context. A comparison of
different learned latent embeddings are shown in Figure 6.
In this paper, we propose a novel off-policy Meta-RL
algorithm CCM (Contrastive learning augmented Contextbased Meta-RL), aiming to improve the quality of context

Context, the embedding of previous collected trajectories, is a
powerful construct for Meta-Reinforcement Learning (MetaRL) algorithms. By conditioning on an effective context,
Meta-RL policies can easily generalize to new tasks within
a few adaptation steps. We argue that improving the quality
of context involves answering two questions: 1. How to train
a compact and sufficient encoder that can embed the taskspecific information contained in prior trajectories? 2. How
to collect informative trajectories of which the corresponding
context reflects the specification of tasks? To this end, we propose a novel Meta-RL framework called CCM (Contrastive
learning augmented Context-based Meta-RL). We first focus
on the contrastive nature behind different tasks and leverage
it to train a compact and sufficient context encoder. Further,
we train a separate exploration policy and theoretically derive
a new information-gain-based objective which aims to collect
informative trajectories in a few steps. Empirically, we evaluate our approaches on common benchmarks as well as several
complex sparse-reward environments. The experimental results show that CCM outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms
by addressing previously mentioned problems respectively.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) combined with deep neural
networks has achieved impressive results on various complex tasks (Mnih et al. 2015; Lillicrap et al. 2016; Schulman
et al. 2015). Conventional RL agents need large amount of
environmental interactions to train a single policy for one
task. However, in real-world problems many tasks share
similar internal structures and we expect agents to adapt
to such tasks quickly based on prior experiences. MetaReinforcement Learning (Meta-RL) proposes to address
such problems by learning how to learn (Wang et al. 2016).
Given a number of tasks with similar structures, Meta-RL
methods aim to capture such common knowledge from previous experience on training tasks and adapt to a new task
with only a small amount of interactions.
Based on this idea, many Meta-RL methods try to learn a
general model initialization and update the parameters dur∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7457

