The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Understanding Catastrophic Overfitting in Single-step Adversarial Training
Hoki Kim∗ , Woojin Lee∗ , Jaewook Lee†
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
ghrl9613@snu.ac.kr, wj926@snu.ac.kr, jaewook@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Although fast adversarial training has demonstrated both robustness and efficiency, the problem of “catastrophic overfitting” has been observed. This is a phenomenon in which, during single-step adversarial training, robust accuracy against
projected gradient descent (PGD) suddenly decreases to 0%
after a few epochs, whereas robust accuracy against fast gradient sign method (FGSM) increases to 100%. In this paper,
we demonstrate that catastrophic overfitting is very closely
related to the characteristic of single-step adversarial training which uses only adversarial examples with the maximum
perturbation, and not all adversarial examples in the adversarial direction, which leads to decision boundary distortion and
a highly curved loss surface. Based on this observation, we
propose a simple method that not only prevents catastrophic
overfitting, but also overrides the belief that it is difficult to
prevent multi-step adversarial attacks with single-step adversarial training.

1

Figure 1: Visualization of distorted decision boundary. The
origin indicates the original image x, the label of which is
“dog”. In addition, v1 is the direction of a single-step adversarial perturbation and v2 is a random direction. The adversarial image x+v1 is classified as the correct label, although
there is distorted interval where x + k · v1 is misclassified
even when k is less than 1. Due to this decision boundary
distortion, single-step adversarial training becomes vulnerable to multi-step adversarial attacks.

Introduction

Adversarial examples are perturbed inputs that are designed
to deceive machine learning classifiers by adding adversarial noises to the original data. Although such perturbations
are sufficiently subtle and undetectable by humans, they result in an incorrect classification. Since deep-learning models were found to be vulnerable to adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al. 2013), a line of work was proposed to mitigate the problem and improve robustness of the models.
Among the numerous defensive methods, projected gradient
descent (PGD) adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017) is
one of the most successful approaches for achieving robustness against adversarial attacks. Although PGD adversarial
training serves as a strong defensive algorithm, because it relies on a multi-step adversarial attack, a high computational
cost is required for multiple forward and back propagation
during batch training.
To overcome this issue, other studies (Shafahi et al. 2019;
Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020) on reducing the computational burden of adversarial training using single-step adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014)

have been proposed. Among them, inspired by Shafahi et al.
(2019), Wong, Rice, and Kolter (2020) suggested fast adversarial training, which is a modified version of fast gradient
sign method (FGSM) adversarial training designed to be as
effective as PGD adversarial training.
Fast adversarial training has demonstrated both robustness and efficiency; however, it suffers from the problem of
“catastrophic overfitting,” which is a phenomenon that robustness against PGD suddenly decreases to 0%, whereas
robustness against FGSM rapidly increases. Wong, Rice,
and Kolter (2020) first discovered this issue and suggested
the use of early stopping to prevent it. Later, it was found
that catastrophic overfitting also occurs in different singlestep adversarial training methods such as free adversarial
training (Andriushchenko and Flammarion 2020).

∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8119

