The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bridging the Domain Gap: Improve Informal Language Translation via
Counterfactual Domain Adaptation
Ke Wang,1,2 Guandan Chen,3 Zhongqiang Huang,3 Xiaojun Wan,1,2 Fei Huang3
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{wangke17, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn {guandan.cgd, z.huang, f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract

A natural solution to this problem is domain adaptation,
which aims to adapt NMT models trained on one or more
source domains (formal texts in our case) to the target domain (informal texts in our case). Domain adaptation methods can be roughly categorized into model-based and databased ones (Chu and Wang 2018). The model-based methods make explicit changes to NMT model such as designing
new training objectives (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015;
Chu, Dabre, and Kurohashi 2017), modifying the model architecture (Kobus, Crego, and Senellart 2017; Johnson et al.
2017; Dou et al. 2019), and changing the decoding method
(Khayrallah et al. 2017). In contrast, the data-based methods focus on the data being used, such as using monolingual corpus (Gülçehre et al. 2015), combining sourcedomain and target-domain parallel corpora (Johnson et al.
2017; Caswell, Chelba, and Grangier 2019; Marie, Rubino, and Fujita 2020), dynamic source-domain data selection
from easy to complex for target-domain translation (van der
Wees, Bisazza, and Monz 2017), etc. Nevertheless, most of
these methods train the model based on the observed data,
which depends on the quality of corpora used.
To improve target-domain translation (e.g, informal texts)
that lacks large-scale high-quality parallel corpora, we explore the use of counterfactual thinking (Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018) to augment the
training set of models with counterfactual representations that do not exist in the observed data but are useful for
improving the target-domain translation. Specifically, we
propose a model-agnostic counterfactual domain adaptation
(CDA) method, which first pre-trains the NMT model on
the large-scale source-domain parallel corpus (e.g., formal
texts) with artificial domain tags to indicate specific domains, and then fine-tune on a mixture of the source-domain and
target-domain parallel corpora (i.e., informal texts) with a
counterfactual training strategy. In the counterfactual training strategy, we use the concatenations of source-domain
texts and the target-domain tag (i.e, counterfactual conditions) to construct counterfactual representations, and propose three objectives to use both observed and counterfactual data.
Our proposed method is motivated by the observation that
not every training sample in the source-domain parallel corpus (e.g., formal texts) is equally useful for target-domain
translation (e.g., informal texts), due to the difference be-

Despite the near-human performances already achieved on
formal texts such as news articles, neural machine translation still has difficulty in dealing with ”user-generated” texts
that have diverse linguistic phenomena but lack large-scale
high-quality parallel corpora. To address this problem, we
propose a counterfactual domain adaptation method to better
leverage both large-scale source-domain data (formal texts)
and small-scale target-domain data (informal texts). Specifically, by considering effective counterfactual conditions (the
concatenations of source-domain texts and the target-domain
tag), we construct the counterfactual representations to fill the
sparse latent space of the target domain caused by a small
amount of data, that is, bridging the gap between the sourcedomain data and the target-domain data. Experiments on
English-to-Chinese and Chinese-to-English translation tasks
show that our method outperforms the base model that is
trained only on the informal corpus by a large margin, and
consistently surpasses different baseline methods by +1.12 ∼
4.34 BLEU points on different datasets. Furthermore, we also
show that our method achieves competitive performances on
cross-domain language translation on four language pairs.

Introduction
With the rapid development of economic globalization and
the Internet, machine translation of informal texts can facilitate the communication between people who speak different languages in the world, especially in messaging applications (Messenger, Whatsapp, iMessage, Wechat, DingTalk),
content sharing on social media (Facebook, Instagram, Twitter), and discussion forums (Reddit) (Pennell and Liu 2014).
However, the lack of large-scale high-quality parallel corpora of informal texts brings challenges to neural machine
translation (NMT) (Koehn and Knowles 2017; Chu and
Wang 2018; Hu et al. 2019). The existing small-scale parallel corpora of informal texts make NMT models easy to
overfit on the small training set and cannot generalize well
on the test set. Although NMT has achieved near-human
performances on formal texts such as news articles, some
researches (Hu et al. 2019) reveal that NMT is sensitive to
domain shift and the performance is bounded by the similarity between training data (e.g., formal texts) and test data
(e.g., informal texts).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13970

