The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Decentralized Policy Gradient Descent Ascent for
Safe Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Songtao Lu1 , Kaiqing Zhang2 , Tianyi Chen3 , Tamer Başar2 , Lior Horesh1
1

IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598, USA
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York 12144, USA
songtao@ibm.com, kzhang66@illinois.edu, chent18@rpi.edu, basar1@illinois.edu, lhoresh@us.ibm.com

Background of Multi-Agent RL

Abstract

The studies of MARL can be traced back to Q-learning
in (Claus and Boutilier 1998) and (Wolpert, Wheeler, and
Tumer 1999), with applications to network routing (Boyan
and Littman 1994) and power network control (Schneider
et al. 1999). However, all the algorithms involved in these
works are heuristic without performance guarantees. Recent
empirical results of deep multi-agent collaborative RL algorithms can also be found in (Gupta, Egorov, and Kochenderfer
2017; Lowe et al. 2017; Omidshafiei et al. 2017). One of the
earliest distributed RL algorithm with convergence guarantees was reported in (Lauer and Riedmiller 2000), which is
tailored to the tabular multi-agent Markov decision process
(MDP) setting, and another one (Nguyen et al. 2014). Then,
a distributed Q-learning algorithm was developed with being
provably able to learn the desired value function and the optimal stationary control policy at each network agent through
a consensus network, where each agent can only communicate with their neighbors (Kar, Moura, and Poor 2013). In
the same setup, fully decentralized actor-critic algorithms
with function approximation were developed in (Zhang et al.
2018) to handle large or even continuous state-action spaces.
However, the convergence in (Zhang et al. 2018) was again
established in an asymptotic sense. For a fixed policy, decentralized policy evaluation (value function approximations)
approaches for MARL have been studied in (Wai et al. 2018;
Doan, Maguluri, and Romberg 2019; Qu et al. 2019). (Please
see also the recent surveys (Zhang, Yang, and Başar 2019;
Lee et al. 2020) and references therein.)

This paper deals with distributed reinforcement learning problems with safety constraints. In particular, we consider that a
team of agents cooperate in a shared environment, where each
agent has its individual reward function and safety constraints
that involve all agents’ joint actions. As such, the agents aim
to maximize the team-average long-term return, subject to all
the safety constraints. More intriguingly, no central controller
is assumed to coordinate the agents, and both the rewards
and constraints are only known to each agent locally/privately.
Instead, the agents are connected by a peer-to-peer communication network to share information with their neighbors. In
this work, we first formulate this problem as a distributed constrained Markov decision process (D-CMDP) with networked
agents. Then, we propose a decentralized policy gradient (PG)
method, Safe Dec-PG, to perform policy optimization based
on this D-CMDP model over a network. Convergence guarantees, together with numerical results, showcase the superiority
of the proposed algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first decentralized PG algorithm that accounts for the
coupled safety constraints with a quantifiable convergence rate
in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Finally, we emphasize
that our algorithm is also novel in solving a class of decentralized stochastic nonconvex-concave minimax optimization
problems, where both the algorithm design and corresponding
theoretical analysis are of independent interest.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved tremendous success in many sequential decision-making problems in (Mnih
et al. 2015; Sutton and Barto 2018), such as operations research, optimal control, bounded rationality, machine learning, etc., where an agent explores the interactions with an
environment so that it is able to maximize a cumulative reward through this learning process. Beyond applying the classical RL techniques in control systems, physical constraints
or safety considerations will also be the key components of
determining the performance of an RL system. Especially,
this is more important in multi-agent RL (MARL) that models the sequential decision-making of multiple agents in a
shared environment, while each agent’s objective and the
system evolution are both affected by the decisions made by
all agents (Nguyen et al. 2014).

Related Work
Decentralized and distributed algorithms with quantifiable
convergence rate guarantees in the optimization community
have been developed for many decades (Nedic, Ozdaglar,
and Parrilo 2010) in various scenarios, including (strongly)
convex and non-convex cases. Recent advances in distributed
non-convex optimization show that decentralized stochastic
gradient descent or tracking (DSGD/DSGT) is able to train
neural networks much faster than the centralized algorithms
in terms of running time numerically (Lian et al. 2017; Lu
et al. 2019). Also, it has been indicated in theory that there is
a linear speed-up of performing decentralized optimization
compared with the centralized one in terms of the number of
nodes (Lian et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2018; Lu and Wu 2020).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8767

