The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Compositional Sparse Gaussian Processes with a Shrinkage Prior
Anh Tong1 , Toan M Tran2 , Hung Bui2 , Jaesik Choi3,4
1

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
2
VinAI Research
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
4
INEEJI
anhth@unist.ac.kr, {v.toantm3,v.hungbh1}@vinai.io, jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract

Although this model obtains expressive kernel functions
for GPs and consequently achieves good predictive performances, it is hard to interpret compared to existing Bayesian
kernel learning methods, e.g. (Lloyd et al. 2014).

Choosing a proper set of kernel functions is an important
problem in learning Gaussian Process (GP) models since each
kernel structure has different model complexity and data fitness. Recently, automatic kernel composition methods provide not only accurate prediction but also attractive interpretability through search-based methods. However, existing
methods suffer from slow kernel composition learning. To
tackle large-scaled data, we propose a new sparse approximate posterior for GPs, MultiSVGP, constructed from groups
of inducing points associated with individual additive kernels in compositional kernels. We demonstrate that this approximation provides a better fit to learn compositional kernels given empirical observations. We also provide theoretically justification on error bound when compared to the traditional sparse GP. In contrast to the search-based approach,
we present a novel probabilistic algorithm to learn a kernel
composition by handling the sparsity in the kernel selection
with Horseshoe prior. We demonstrate that our model can
capture characteristics of time series with significant reductions in computational time and have competitive regression
performance on real-world data sets.

1

This paper presents a new kernel composition learning
method which encourages to learn a sparse composition of
kernels with a shrinkage prior, Horseshoe prior, which is
proven to be effective in learning sparse signal (Carvalho,
Polson, and Scott 2009; Bhadra et al. 2019). To retain the
model interpretability, we formulate compositional kernels
as the sum of individual additive kernels which can be explained in natural language.
To scale up the model for large-scaled data, we introduce a new approximate posterior for GP, Multi-inducing
Sparse Variational GP (MultiSVGP). Existing sparse inducing GP (Snelson and Ghahramani 2006; Hensman, Fusi,
and Lawrence 2013) methods give an approximation for GP
for a kernel function in general with a single set of inducing points. However, we can further improve this approach
specifically for additive compositional kernels by considering a group of inducing points and assigning an individual
member of inducing points responsible for an additive kernel in our approximating posterior. We justify that our approximation with compositional kernels produces a better
error bound than the sparse inducing GP. In experiments, we
demonstrate that our models can capture appropriate kernel structures for time series from small-scaled data sets
to large-scaled data sets. In general, our model runs faster
than existing compositional kernel learning methods (Lloyd
et al. 2014; Kim and Teh 2018) five to twenty times while
maintaining similar accuracy. We also show that our model
to have competitive extrapolation performance in regression
tasks as well as improve additive GPs (Duvenaud, Nickisch,
and Rasmussen 2011) with our kernel selection.

Introduction

Recently, there are numerous advancements in automating
model learning with statistical methods. There are still many
challenging problems including making the automatic procedure efficient and applying methods on large-scaled data.
The Automatic Statistician framework (Grosse et al.
2012; Duvenaud et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2014; Ghahramani
2015; Steinruecken et al. 2019) aims to address challenges
on automating model discovery. The framework adopts
search procedures over a space of models, enumerating possible compositional Gaussian Process (GP) kernel functions
generated from base ones and compositional grammar rules.
Learned models can produce human-readable explanations
as dissecting small explainable components in the compositional kernel models. However, existing methods suffer from
slow kernel composition learning due to the huge search
space.
Recently, a differential compositional learning inspired
by deep neural networks (Sun et al. 2018) is proposed.

The paper offers the following contributions1 : (1) a new
accurate GP approximation for additive compositional kernels; (2) kernel selection using Horseshoe prior so that the
learned models can capture the inductive kernel structure in
data and remain interpretable.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9906

See https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.11339 for an extended version

