The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Consumer Loan Fraud Detection: Graph Neural Networks
with Role-Constrained Conditional Random Field
Bingbing Xu1,2∗ , Huawei Shen1,2† , Bingjie Sun3 , Rong An3† , Qi Cao1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Ant Financial Services Group
{xubingbing, shenhuawei, caoqi, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, bingjie-nash@163.com,rongan0915@qq.com

Abstract

Generally, on a consumer loan platform, there exist three
typical roles, i.e., applicants, sellers, and intermediaries. An
applicant applies for loan on the platform to purchase goods,
then the platform examines the application and pays to the
seller. After receiving the goods from the seller, the applicant
needs to repay the loan in time. Here, the platform can be
thought as a third-party financial institution. However, when
faced with thousands of goods and loan products, choosing a
proper one by applicants themselves is like finding a needle
in a haystack, due to information asymmetry. Thus, intermediaries become another necessary role during the dealing, which bridge the gap between sellers and applicants,
and help applicants solve difficulties during loan application.
However, some intermediaries also play important roles in
loan fraud. Specifically, they connect with sellers and applicants, and let applicants apply for the loan from the platform
to purchase goods from sellers. Upon getting paid from the
platform, sellers return most of the money to the applicants.
The intermediaries also get a share of the money. Finally, the
three roles all benefit from this dealing, while the loan will
often be in arrears. Figure. 1 illustrates two common patterns
of normal loans and fraudulent loans.
Our goal is to predict whether an applicant will maliciously default on the loan. Previous methods mainly leverage applicant’s attributes and historical behavior for loan
fraud detection. Based on these features, different classifiers
are employed, e.g., tree-based models and neural networks.
Although these methods gain success at detecting potential
charge-offs, yet they perform worse when multiple persons
with various roles (e.g., sellers, intermediaries) collude to
apply fraudulent loan. The data used for loan fraud detection is a network where four roles of nodes, i.e., applicants,
sellers, intermediaries, and other users (i.e., the users who
do not belong to any of the above roles)1 , are connected by
multiple relationships, including social connections, capital
transactions, and device dependence, and each link stores
the starting and ending time, as well as other attributes of
the relationship. With the network representation, loan fraud
detection is formulated as a node classification problem, i.e.,
predict whether an applicant node is fraudulent given node
attribute and social relationships among nodes.

Consumer loans, i.e., loans to finance consumers to buy
certain types of expenditures, is increasingly popular in ecommerce platform. Different from traditional loans with
mortgage, online consumer loans only take personal credit
as collateral for loans. Consequently, loan fraud detection
is particularly critical for lenders to avoid economic loss.
Previous methods mainly leverage applicant’s attributes and
historical behavior for loan fraud detection. Although these
methods gain success at detecting potential charge-offs, yet
they perform worse when multiple persons with various roles
(e.g., sellers, intermediaries) collude to apply fraudulent loan.
To combat this challenge, we consider the problem of loan
fraud detection via exploiting roles of users and multi-type
social relationships among users. We propose a novel Graph
neural network with a Role-constrained Conditional random
field, namely GRC, to learn the representation of applicants
and detect loan fraud based on the learned representation.
The proposed model characterizes the multiple types of relationships via self-attention mechanism and employs conditional random field to constrain users with the same role to
have similar representation. We validate the proposed model
through experiments in large-scale auto-loan scenario. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves stateof-the-art results in loan fraud detection on Alipay, one online
credit payment service serving more than 450 million users in
China.

Introduction
With the rapid development of e-commerce, consumer loans
have become a popular form of credit activity, which can
support the applicants to purchase valuable commodities on
the online trading platform. Different from traditional loans,
consumer loans only take personal credit as collateral for
loans. Thus, fraud happens frequently, where applicants maliciously default on the loan although they have the ability
to repay. To avoid huge economic losses, it is important to
accurately assess loan risk and find out possible fraudulent
applications.
∗
Work done while Bingbing Xu was an intern at Ant Financial
Services Group.
†
Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Note that one node may have multiple roles, e.g., one node can
be both an intermediary and an applicant.

4537

