The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mind the Gap: Cake Cutting With Separation
Edith Elkind,1 Erel Segal-Halevi,2 Warut Suksompong3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Computer Science, Ariel University
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

such an allocation can be found by a simple and efficient
algorithm (Dubins and Spanier 1961).
In this paper, we initiate the study of cake cutting with
separation requirements. Besides the social distancing example that we mentioned, our setting captures the task of
allocating machine processing time, where we need time to
erase data from the previous process before the next process
can be started, as well as land division, where we want space
between different plots in order to avoid cross-fertilization.
When separation is imposed, it is no longer the case that proportionality can always be satisfied—an extreme example is
when all agents place their entire value on a small piece of
length less than the minimum gap required. A similar failure
of proportionality has notably been observed in the allocation of indivisible items (without separation), and a solution
that has been proposed and widely studied in that context
is maximin share fairness (Budish 2011; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2018). Maximin share fairness requires each
agent to receive her “maximin share”, which is the best share
that the agent can secure by dividing the items into n bundles and getting the worst bundle. In this work, we demonstrate that maximin share fairness is an appropriate substitute for proportionality in cake cutting with separation, and
analyze it from a computational perspective. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first use of maximin share fairness
in connected cake cutting.

We study the problem of fairly allocating a divisible resource,
also known as cake cutting, with an additional requirement
that the shares that different agents receive should be sufficiently separated from one another. This captures, for example, constraints arising from social distancing guidelines.
While it is sometimes impossible to allocate a proportional
share to every agent under the separation requirement, we
show that the well-known criterion of maximin share fairness
can always be attained. We then establish several computational properties of maximin share fairness—for instance, the
maximin share of an agent cannot be computed exactly by
any finite algorithm, but can be approximated with an arbitrarily small error. In addition, we consider the division of a
pie (i.e., a circular cake) and show that an ordinal relaxation
of maximin share fairness can be achieved.

1

Introduction

The end of the year is fast approaching, and members of
a city council are busy planning the traditional New Year’s
fair on their city’s main street. As usual, a major part of their
work is to divide the space on the street among interested
vendors. Each vendor naturally has a preference over potential locations, possibly depending on the proximity to certain attractions or the estimated number of customers visiting that space. Additionally, this year is different from previous years due to the social distancing guidelines issued by
the government—vendors are required to be placed at least
two meters apart. How should the city council allot the space
so that all vendors feel fairly treated and at the same time everyone stays safe and sound under the new guidelines?
The problem of fairly allocating a heterogeneous divisible good among a set of agents in a fair manner has a long
history and is commonly known as cake cutting (Brams and
Taylor 1996; Robertson and Webb 1998; Procaccia 2016).
A typical fairness criterion in cake cutting is proportionality, which means that each agent should receive her proportionally fair share—specifically, this amounts to 1/n of the
agent’s value for the whole cake, where n denotes the total
number of agents. For any set of agents with arbitrary valuations, a proportional allocation in which each agent receives
a single connected piece is guaranteed to exist. Better still,

1.1

Our Results

As is commonly done in cake cutting, we assume that the
cake is represented by an interval and each agent is to be
allocated a single subinterval of the cake. We further require
the pieces of any two agents to be separated by distance at
least s, where s > 0 is a given separation parameter.
In Section 3, we begin by proving that an allocation that
gives every agent at least her maximin share always exists, meaning that maximin share fairness can be guaranteed.
Such an allocation can be found by a simple algorithm provided that the algorithm knows the maximin share of each
agent. Unfortunately, we show that no finite algorithm can
compute the maximin share of an agent exactly in the standard Robertson-Webb model—this impossibility holds even
when n = 2 and the agents have piecewise constant valuations. Nevertheless, we design an algorithm that approximates the maximin share up to an arbitrarily small error,

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5330

