The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

R3 Det: Refined Single-Stage Detector with Feature Refinement for Rotating Object
Xue Yang1,2 , Junchi Yan1,2,∗ , Ziming Feng3 , Tao He4,5
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
China Merchants Bank Credit Card Center
4
Anhui COWAROBOT CO., Ltd.
5
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation
{yangxue-2019-sjtu, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn zimingfzm@cmbchina.com tommie.he@cowarobot.com
2

Abstract

mote sensing object detection whereby the objects can appear in various orientations. Therefore, many rotation detectors based on a general detection framework have been
proposed in the above fields. In particular, three challenges
are pronounced, as analyzed as follows:
1) Large aspect ratio. The Skew Intersection over Union
(SkewIoU) score between large aspect ratio objects is sensitive to change in angle, as sketched in Figure 3b.
2) Densely arranged. As illustrated in Figure 6, many
objects usually appear in densely arranged forms.
3) Arbitrary orientations. Objects in images can appear
in various orientations, which requires the detector to have
accurate direction estimation capabilities.
This paper is devoted to design an accurate and fast rotation detector. To maintain high detection accuracy and
speed for large aspect ratio objects, we have adopted a refined single-stage rotation detector. First, we find that rotating anchors can perform better in dense scenes, while horizontal anchors can achieve higher recalls in fewer quantities. Therefore, a progressive regression form from coarse
to fine is adopted in the refined single-stage detector, that
is, the horizontal anchors are used in the first stage for faster
speed and higher recall, and then the refined rotating anchors
are used in the subsequent refinement stages to adapt to intensive scenarios. Second, we also notice that existing refined single-stage detectors (Zhang et al. 2018a; Chi et al.
2019) have feature misalignment problems1 , which greatly
limits the reliability of classification and regression during
the refined stages. We design a feature refinement module
FRM that uses the feature interpolation to obtain the position information correspond to the refined anchors and reconstruct the whole feature map by pixel-wise manner to
achieve feature alignment. FRM can also reduce the number of refined bounding box after the first stage, thus speeding up the model. Experimental results have shown that feature refinement is sensitive to location and its improvement
in detection results is very noticeable. Finally, an approximate SkewIoU loss is devised to address the indifferentiable
problem of SkewIoU calculation for more accurate rotation
estimation. Combing these three techniques as a whole, our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance with consid-

Rotation detection is a challenging task due to the difficulties
of locating the multi-angle objects and separating them effectively from the background. Though considerable progress
has been made, for practical settings, there still exist challenges for rotating objects with large aspect ratio, dense distribution and category extremely imbalance. In this paper,
we propose an end-to-end refined single-stage rotation detector for fast and accurate object detection by using a progressive regression approach from coarse to fine granularity.
Considering the shortcoming of feature misalignment in existing refined single-stage detector, we design a feature refinement module to improve detection performance by getting more accurate features. The key idea of feature refinement module is to re-encode the position information of
the current refined bounding box to the corresponding feature points through pixel-wise feature interpolation to realize feature reconstruction and alignment. For more accurate
rotation estimation, an approximate SkewIoU loss is proposed to solve the problem that the calculation of SkewIoU
is not derivable. Experiments on three popular remote sensing public datasets DOTA, HRSC2016, UCAS-AOD as well
as one scene text dataset ICDAR2015 show the effectiveness of our approach. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/R3Det Tensorflow and is also
integrated in our open source rotation detection benchmark:
https://github.com/yangxue0827/RotationDetection.

Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, and many high-performance general-purpose
object detectors have been proposed. Current popular detection methods can be in general divided into two types: twostage object detectors (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015;
Ren et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017a) and singlestage object detectors (Liu et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016;
Lin et al. 2017b). Two-stage methods have achieved promising results on various benchmarks, while the single-stage approach maintains faster detection speed.
However, current general horizontal detectors have fundamental limitations for many practical applications. For instance, scene text detection, retail scene detection and re∗

Corresponding author is Junchi Yan.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Mainly refers to misalignment between region of interest (RoI)
and the feature, see details in Figure 4c.

3163

