The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SMART Frame Selection for Action Recognition
Shreyank N Gowda1

Marcus Rohrbach2
1

Laura Sevilla-Lara1

University of Edinburgh
Facebook AI Research

2

Abstract

highly temporally redundant data, making it easier to skip
parts without losing much information (Fan et al. 2018).
Second, some parts of a video can be more discriminative
than others, due to their content, or other phenomena like
blur, occlusions, etc. Supporting this intuition, Huang et al.
(2018) show experimentally that using an oracle to make an
optimal selection of frames (or clips), produces more accurate classification results than using the entire video. Additionally, Sevilla-Lara et al. (2019) show that many action
classes in standard datasets do not require motion or temporal information to be identified. For a human observer, a few
still frames are often discriminative enough. This suggests
that large parts of a video can be discarded.
Several recent works(Korbar, Tran, and Torresani 2019;
Wu et al. 2019c; Zhu et al. 2019) have successfully leveraged these principles to reduce computational cost at test
time. These methods have used a common strategy: they use
an inexpensive way to decide which regions of the video are
important and discriminative, and only process those with an
expensive method. This general problem has been referred to
as frame or clip selection. While very successful, most frame
and clip selection methods have focused on a particular
domain of action recognition, namely long, and frequently
sparse videos with a typical length of a minute or more, e.g.
ActivityNet(Caba Heilbron et al. 2015), Sports1M(Karpathy
et al. 2014), FCVID(Jiang et al. 2017a), Youtube 8M(AbuEl-Haija et al. 2016). This is indeed the domain where discarding portions of a video is easier and has potentially the
largest effect. In contrast, the problem of frame selection in
short videos of a few seconds remains much less explored,
probably due to its difficulty.
In this paper we propose a method to do frame selection in
the core, standard activity classification setting of trimmed
video clips. Part of the challenge in this setting is that “good”
frames are often temporally close together within a video.
Since most existing frame selection methods consider the
value of choosing a frame one at a time, the selected frames
tend to only represent part of the action. In other words, the
diversity of frames, and their ability to tell a story are disregarded. We also show that using language features along
with visual features helps improve the performance.
To handle these challenges, we propose a model that, in
addition to considering the discriminative value of a single
frame, also considers its relation to others in a video. We do

Action recognition is computationally expensive. In this paper, we address the problem of frame selection to improve
the accuracy of action recognition. In particular, we show
that selecting good frames helps in action recognition performance even in the trimmed videos domain. Recent work has
successfully leveraged frame selection for long, untrimmed
videos, where much of the content is not relevant, and easy to
discard. In this work, however, we focus on the more standard short, trimmed action recognition problem. We argue
that good frame selection can not only reduce the computational cost of action recognition but also increase the accuracy by getting rid of frames that are hard to classify. In
contrast to previous work, we propose a method that instead
of selecting frames by considering one at a time, considers
them jointly. This results in a more efficient selection, where
“good” frames are more effectively distributed over the video,
like snapshots that tell a story. We call the proposed frame
selection SMART and we test it in combination with different backbone architectures and on multiple benchmarks (Kinetics, Something-something, UCF101). We show that the
SMART frame selection consistently improves the accuracy
compared to other frame selection strategies while reducing
the computational cost by a factor of 4 to 10 times. We also
show that when the primary goal is recognition performance,
our selection strategy can improve over recent state-of-the-art
models and frame selection strategies on various benchmarks
(UCF101, HMDB51, FCVID, and ActivityNet).

Introduction
Video processing is computationally expensive. At the same
time, the amount of video content being generated is increasing fast and constitutes a large part of the computation of
many big social media platforms. Traditionally, most efforts
in action recognition have focused on improving accuracy
by creating larger architectures. These architectures take as
input either a frame or a set of frames (also called a clip) and
produce a prediction. These predictions are then aggregated
over time. The frames or clips are either sampled densely
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Yue-Hei Ng et al. 2015) or
randomly (Wang et al. 2016).
Videos, however, provide an opportunity for reducing
computational cost in multiple ways. First, videos contain
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1451

