The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-SpectroGAN: High-Diversity and High-Fidelity Spectrogram Generation
with Adversarial Style Combination for Speech Synthesis
Sang-Hoon Lee1 , Hyun-Wook Yoon2 , Hyeong-Rae Noh1 , Ji-Hoon Kim3 , Seong-Whan Lee1,3
1

2

Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{sh lee, hw yoon, hr noh, jihoon kim, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr
Abstract

works (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) based TTS models
demonstrate that adversarial feedback is important for learning to synthesize high-quality audio. MelGAN (Kumar et al.
2019) successfully converts mel-spectrograms to waveforms
using a window-based discriminator. The Parallel WaveGAN (PWG) (Yamamoto, Song, and Kim 2020) also converts mel-spectrograms to raw waveforms using the adversarial feedback of audio with multi-resolution spectrogram
losses. The GAN-TTS (Bińkowski et al. 2019) also generates raw speech audio with GANs conditioning features that
are predicted by separate models. The EATS (Donahue et al.
2020) generates the raw waveform from raw phoneme inputs, which is learned end-to-end with various adversarial
feedbacks and prediction losses. However, these methods
have not yet learned the model without the prediction loss.
In this paper, we present the Multi-SpectroGAN (MSG),
which can generate high-diversity and high-fidelity melspectrograms with adversarial feedback. We introduce an
end-to-end learned frame-level condition and conditional
discriminator to train the model without prediction loss
between ground-truth and generated mel-spectrogram. By
making the discriminator learn to distinguish which features
are converted to mel-spectrogram with a frame-level condition, the generator is trained with frame-level adversarial
feedback to synthesize high-fidelity mel-spectrograms. We
also propose the adversarial style combination, which can
learn the latent representations of mel-spectrograms synthesized with the mixed speaker embeddings. By training with
adversarial feedback from the mixed-style mel-spectrogram,
we demonstrate that the MSG synthesizes a more diverse
mel-spectrogram by interpolation of multiple styles and synthesizes more natural audio of the unseen speaker. The main
contributions of this study are as follows:

While generative adversarial networks (GANs) based neural text-to-speech (TTS) systems have shown significant improvement in neural speech synthesis, there is no TTS system
to learn to synthesize speech from text sequences with only
adversarial feedback. Because adversarial feedback alone is
not sufficient to train the generator, current models still require the reconstruction loss compared with the ground-truth
and the generated mel-spectrogram directly. In this paper,
we present Multi-SpectroGAN (MSG), which can train the
multi-speaker model with only the adversarial feedback by
conditioning a self-supervised hidden representation of the
generator to a conditional discriminator. This leads to better guidance for generator training. Moreover, we also propose adversarial style combination (ASC) for better generalization in the unseen speaking style and transcript, which
can learn latent representations of the combined style embedding from multiple mel-spectrograms. Trained with ASC and
feature matching, the MSG synthesizes a high-diversity melspectrogram by controlling and mixing the individual speaking styles (e.g., duration, pitch, and energy). The result shows
that the MSG synthesizes a high-fidelity mel-spectrogram,
which has almost the same naturalness MOS score as the
ground-truth mel-spectrogram.

Introduction
Recently, there has been a significant progress in the end-toend text-to-speech (TTS) model, which can convert a normal text into speech. When synthesizing speech, the recently proposed methods use additional speech audio as
an input to reflect the style features from the input audio
to the synthesized audio (Wang et al. 2018; Skerry-Ryan
et al. 2018). However, there are limitations to transferring
and controlling the style without a large amount of highquality text-audio data (e.g., audiobook dataset). Moreover,
because it is difficult to acquire high-quality data, some studies use the knowledge distillation method to improve the
performance (Ren et al. 2019). However, knowledge distillation makes the training complicated, and the generated melspectrogram is not complete unlike the ground-truth melspectrogram (Ren et al. 2020).
For better generalization, the current models are trained
with adversarial feedback. These generative adversarial net-

• Through an end-to-end learned frame-level condition and
conditional discriminator, our model can learn to synthesize mel-spectrogram without prediction loss.
• We propose adversarial style combination, which learns
the mixed style of mel-spectrogram with adversarial feedback.
• The MSG achieves a mean opinion score (MOS) of 3.90
with a small amount of multi-speaker data and almost the
same MOS with ground-truth mel-spectrogram in single
speaker model.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13198

