The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

THOR, Trace-Based Hardware-Driven Layer-Oriented Natural Gradient Descent
Computation
Mengyun Chen1* , Kaixin Gao2* , Xiaolei Liu2* , Zidong Wang1* , Ningxi Ni1* , Qian Zhang3∗
Lei Chen4† , Chao Ding5 , Zhenghai Huang2 , Min Wang1 ,
Shuangling Wang1 , Fan Yu1 , Xinyuan Zhao3 , Dachuan Xu3
1

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
2
Tianjin University
3
Beijing University of Technology
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenmengyun1, wang1, niningxi, wangmin106, wangshuangling1, fan.yu@huawei.com
gaokaixin, liuxiaolei, huangzhenghai@tju.edu.cn, zhangqian@emails.bjut.edu.cn
xyzhao, xudc@bjut.edu.cn, leichen@cse.ust.hk, dingchao@amss.ac.cn
Abstract

Among all the proposed optimization techniques, the most
popular and promising one is Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) [Robbins and Monro 1951], which is a first-order
optimization algorithm. Specifically, SGD tries to minimize
an objective function J(θ) with respect to the parameters θ,
i.e., θ is updated as: θ ← θ − α∇θ J(θ), where ∇θ J(θ) is
gradient, α represents the learning rate.
SGD is difficult to choose proper learning rate. Therefore,
many variants of SGD have been introduced, such as Momentum [Qian 1999], AdaGrad [Zeiler 2012], Adam [Kingma
and Ba 2014], etc. These improved optimization algorithms
can use the historical information of gradient to adaptively update the parameters, making easier to adjust hyper-parameters.
However, considering that the loss function of the neural network is a highly non-convex function and the curvature of
loss surface is unbalanced, using second-order matrix information will speed up the convergence.
Specifically, for the second-order optimization algorithm, the parameters θ are usually updated by θ ← θ −
αG−1 ∇θ J(θ), where G−1 is the inverse of second-order
information matrix G. The definitions of G in different
second-order optimization algorithms are not the same. Common second-order optimization algorithms include Newton’s
method and natural gradient method, where their secondorder information matrix G is Hessian matrix (HM) and
Fisher information matrix (FIM), respectively. The biggest
challenge to use second-order optimizer is that its computation increases cubically and space cost increases quadratically
compared to SGD. Therefore, it is quite impractical to compute the inverse of second-order information matrix directly.
To reduce the computation cost of the second-order optimizer, quite a few approximation approaches have been
proposed. For instance, for Newtons method, Quasi-Newton
methods [Nocedal and Wright 2006] can be used to approximate the inverse of HM. One of the advantages of these methods over the classical Newton method is that the HM does
not need to be inverted explicitly. In particular, the Limitedmemory BFGS (L-BGFS) algorithm [Zhu et al. 1997]has

It is well-known that second-order optimizer can accelerate the
training of deep neural networks, however, the huge computation cost of second-order optimization makes it impractical
to apply in real practice. In order to reduce the cost, many
methods have been proposed to approximate a second-order
matrix. Inspired by KFAC, we propose a novel Trace-based
Hardware-driven layer-ORiented Natural Gradient Descent
Computation method, called THOR, to make the second-order
optimization applicable in the real application models. Specifically, we gradually increase the update interval and use the
matrix trace to determine which blocks of Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) need to be updated. Moreover, by resorting
the power of hardware, we have designed a hardware-driven
approximation method for computing FIM to achieve better
performance. To demonstrate the effectiveness of THOR, we
have conducted extensive experiments. The results show that
training ResNet-50 on ImageNet with THOR only takes 66.7
minutes to achieve a top-1 accuracy of 75.9 % under an 8 Ascend 910 environment with MindSpore, a new deep learning
computing framework. Moreover, with more computational
resources, THOR can only takes 2.7 minutes to 75.9 % with
256 Ascend 910.

Introduction
Recently, deep learning has made significantly progress in
various computer vision and natural language applications.
However, with the increase of complexity of models, tons of
parameters needed to be trained. For example, according to
[Devlin et al. 2018] and [He et al. 2016], training BERT (over
340 million parameters) and ResNet-50 (over 23 million
trainable parameters) will take around 3 days on 16 TPUv3
and 29 hours on 8 Tesla P100, respectively. Therefore, many
efforts have been put to propose optimization solutions to
reduce the training time.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7046

