The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inverse Reinforcement Learning From Like-Minded Teachers
Ritesh Noothigattu, 1∗ , Tom Yan,1∗ Ariel D. Procaccia2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Harvard University
{riteshn, tyyan}@cmu.edu, arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

of the other components of the MDP — the agent can easily
compute an optimal policy to follow.
Our point of departure is that we are interested in IRL
from multiple agents rather than a single agent. Specifically,
we observe n different agents executing policies that are optimal for their individual reward functions. Our approach is
to aggregate these observations into a single policy, by applying an inverse reinforcement learning algorithm to the set
of all observations.
However, if individual agents have wildly divergent reward functions then the aggregate policy may not represent
coherent behavior. In addition, to formally reason about the
quality of the optimal policy, we need to relate it to some
notion of ground truth. For these reasons, we assume that
the agents are like-minded, in that individual reward functions are nothing but noisy versions of an underlying reward
function.
In summary, our research challenge is this:

We study the problem of learning a policy in a Markov
decision process (MDP) based on observations of the actions taken by multiple teachers. We assume that the teachers are like-minded in that their (linear) reward functions —
while different from each other — are random perturbations
of an underlying reward function. Under this assumption, we
demonstrate that inverse reinforcement learning algorithms
that satisfy a certain property — that of matching feature expectations — yield policies that are approximately optimal
with respect to the underlying reward function, and that no
algorithm can do better in the worst case. We also show how
to efficiently recover the optimal policy when the MDP has
one state — a setting that is akin to multi-armed bandits.

Introduction
A Markov decision process (MDP) is a formal specification
of a sequential decision making environment, which consists
of a set of states, a set of actions, a reward function, and a
stochastic transition function. Reinforcement learning (RL)
deals with learning a policy in an MDP — which specifies a
possibly randomized action that is taken in each state — to
maximize cumulative reward.
RL has long history in AI (Sutton and Barto 1998; Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996), as well as in many other
disciplines. But in recent years, interest in the area has exploded, in part due to breakthroughs in game playing (Mnih
et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016) and fast-growing applications
to robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013). It is safe to
say that, nowadays, RL is widely considered to be one of
the basic building blocks in the construction of intelligent
agents.
While most work in the area focuses on maximizing a
given reward function, some settings require the AI system
to emulate the behavior of an expert or teacher (Ng and Russell 2000; Abbeel and Ng 2004) — this is known as inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL). The idea is to observe an agent
executing a policy in an MDP, where everything is known to
the learner except the reward function, and extract a reward
function that is most likely to be the one being optimized
by the agent. Using this reward function — and knowledge

Given observations from policies that are optimal with
respect to different reward functions, each of which is
a perturbation of an underlying reward function, identify IRL algorithms that can recover a good policy with
respect to the underlying reward function.
We believe that this problem is both natural and general.
To further motivate it, though, let us briefly instantiate it
in the context of beneficial AI. One of the prominent approaches in this area is to align the values of the AI system
with the values of a human through IRL (Russell, Dewey,
and Tegmark 2015; Hadfield-Menell et al. 2016). Our extension to multiple agents would allow the alignment of the
system with the values of society.
A compelling aspect of this instantiation is that, if we
think of the underlying reward function as embodying a
common set of moral propositions, then our technical assumption of like-minded agents can be justified through the
linguistic analogy, originally introduced by Rawls (1971).
It draws on the work of Chomsky (1965), who argued that
competent speakers have a set of grammatical principles in
mind, but their linguistic behavior is hampered by “grammatically irrelevant conditions such as memory limitations,
distractions, shifts of attention and interest, and errors.”
Analogously, Rawls claimed, humans have moral rules —
a common “moral grammar” — in our minds, but, due to

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9197

