The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling the Probabilistic Distribution of Unlabeled Data for
One-shot Medical Image Segmentation
Yuhang Ding1 , Xin Yu2 , Yi Yang2∗
1

Baidu Research, China
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
dyh.ustc.uts@gmail.com, xin.yu@uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
Existing image segmentation networks mainly leverage largescale labeled datasets to attain high accuracy. However, labeling medical images is very expensive since it requires sophisticated expert knowledge. Thus, it is more desirable to
employ only a few labeled data in pursuing high segmentation performance. In this paper, we develop a data augmentation method for one-shot brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) image segmentation which exploits only one labeled MRI image (named atlas) and a few unlabeled images. In particular, we propose to learn the probability distributions of deformations (including shapes and intensities) of different unlabeled MRI images with respect to
the atlas via 3D variational autoencoders (VAEs). In this
manner, our method is able to exploit the learned distributions of image deformations to generate new authentic brain MRI images, and the number of generated samples will be sufficient to train a deep segmentation network. Furthermore, we introduce a new standard segmentation benchmark to evaluate the generalization performance
of a segmentation network through a cross-dataset setting
(collected from different sources). Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-theart one-shot medical segmentation methods. Our code has
been released at https://github.com/dyh127/Modeling-theProbabilistic-Distribution-of-Unlabeled-Data.

Figure 1: Illustration of our generated diverse deformations.
From top to bottom: intensity offsets, shape deformations,
synthesized images using the corresponding deformations
and segmentation labels. Red frames highlight variations.

One-shot medical image segmentation, also called single atlas-based segmentation, has been proposed to reduce
the demand for copious labeled data. Hand-crafted data
augmentations (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Milletari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016; Roth et al. 2015; Pereira
et al. 2016), such as random elastic deformations, generate
new labeled images to improve segmentation performance.
However, those methods often generate non-realistic images
since they do not take the distribution of real images into
account. Thus, their learned segmentation networks may not
generalize well on real data. Recently, deep learning based
data augmentation methods (Zhao et al. 2019; Xu and Niethammer 2019; Chaitanya et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020) have been exploited. Those methods often leverage image registration to obtain profile and intensity
differences between the atlas and other MR images, and then
combine the profiles and intensities to generate new images
for segmentation.
Considering the domain gap and insufficient variations of
synthesized data by previous methods, we aim to develop
a novel medical image (i.e., MRI) augmentation method to

Introduction
Medical image segmentation aims to partition medical
images, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) image, into different anatomic regions. It plays an important role in many medical analysis applications, such as
computer-assisted diagnosis and treatment planning. In recent years, benefiting from deep convolution neural networks (CNNs), fully supervised medical image segmentation methods (Zhou et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019) have been
extensively studied and achieved promising progress. However, labeling anatomic regions for large-scale 3D images requires a huge amount of time and expert knowledge. Hence,
obtaining sufficient labelled data often becomes the bottleneck of fully supervised segmentation methods.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1246

