The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Auto-Encoding Transformations in Reparameterized Lie Groups for
Unsupervised Learning
Feng Lin,1 Haohang Xu,2 Houqiang Li,1,4 Hongkai Xiong,2 Guo-Jun Qi3,*
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Laboratory for MAPLE, Futurewei Technologies
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
Abstract

Unsupervised training of deep representations has demonstrated remarkable potentials in mitigating the prohibitive expenses on annotating labeled data recently. Among them is
predicting transformations as a pretext task to self-train representations, which has shown great potentials for unsupervised
learning. However, existing approaches in this category learn
representations by either treating a discrete set of transformations as separate classes, or using the Euclidean distance as
the metric to minimize the errors between transformations.
None of them has been dedicated to revealing the vital role of
the geometry of transformation groups in learning representations. Indeed, an image must continuously transform along
the curved manifold of a transformation group rather than
through a straight line in the forbidden ambient Euclidean
space. This suggests the use of geodesic distance to minimize
the errors between the estimated and groundtruth transformations. Particularly, we focus on homographies, a general
group of planar transformations containing the Euclidean,
similarity and affine transformations as its special cases. To
avoid an explicit computing of intractable Riemannian logarithm, we project homographies onto an alternative group
of rotation transformations SR(3) with a tractable form of
geodesic distance. Experiments demonstrate the proposed approach to Auto-Encoding Transformations exhibits superior
performances on a variety of recognition problems.

Figure 1: The deviation between two transformations should
be measured along the curved manifold (Lie group) of
transformations rather than through the forbidden Euclidean
space of transformations.
works to explore the possibility of pretraining representations in an unsupervised fashion by removing the reliance
on labeled data.
Specifically, self-supervised representation learning from
transformed images has shown great potential. The idea can
trace back to the data augmentation in supervised learning of convolutional neural networks in AlexNet, where labeled data are augmented by various copies of their transformed copies. The fine structure of transformations have
also been explored in training deep network representations.
For example, the celebrated convolutional neural networks
are trained to transform equivariantly against the translations to capture the translated visual structures. This idea has
been extended to train deep convolutional networks that are
equivariant to to a family of transformations beyond translations. However, these models still rely on supervised pretraining of representations on labeled data.
Recently, unsupervised pretraining of representations was
proposed in a self-supervised fashion. The deep networks
are trained by decoding the pretext signals without labeled data (Kolesnikov, Zhai, and Beyer 2019). The stateof-the-art performances have been achieved by the representations learned through various transformations as the
self-supervisory signals. Among them is a representative
paradigm of Auto-Encoding Transformations (AET) (Qi
2019) that extends the conventional autoencoders from reconstructing data to transformations. The AET seeks to ex-

Introduction
Representation learning plays a vital role in many machine
learning problems. Among them is supervised pretraining
from large-scale labeled datasets such as ImageNet and MS
COCO for various recognition tasks ranging from image
classification, object detection, and segmentation. Previous
results have shown that representations learned through supervised training on labeled data is critical to competitive
performances before being finetuned on the downstream
tasks. However, it becomes prohibitively expensive to collect labeled data for the purpose of pre-training representation networks, which prevents the application of deep networks in many practical applications. This inspires many
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* corresponding author
† The work of Houqiang Li was supported by NSFC under Contract 61836011 and 62021001.

8610

