The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Sample Efficiency in Model-Free Reinforcement Learning from Images
Denis Yarats,12 Amy Zhang,234 Ilya Kostrikov,1 Brandon Amos,2 Joelle Pineau,234 Rob Fergus1
1

New York University
Facebook AI Research
3
McGill University
4
MILA
denisyarats@cs.nyu.edu
2

Abstract

Some natural solutions to improve sample efficiency are i)
to use off-policy methods and ii) add an auxiliary task with
an unsupervised objective. Off-policy methods enable more
efficient sample re-use, while the simplest auxiliary task is
an autoencoder with a pixel reconstruction objective. Prior
work has attempted to learn state representations from pixels
with autoencoders, utilizing a two-step training procedure,
where the representation is first trained via the autoencoder,
and then either with a policy learned on top of the fixed
representation (Lange and Riedmiller 2010; Munk, Kober,
and Babuska 2016; Higgins et al. 2017b; Zhang, Satija, and
Pineau 2018; Nair et al. 2018; Dwibedi et al. 2018), or with
planning (Mattner, Lange, and Riedmiller 2012; Finn et al.
2015). This allows for additional stability in optimization by
circumventing dueling training objectives but leads to suboptimal policies. Other work utilizes continual model-free
learning with an auxiliary reconstruction signal in an onpolicy manner (Jaderberg et al. 2017; Shelhamer et al. 2016).
However, these methods do not report of learning representations and a policy jointly in the off-policy setting, or note
that it performs poorly (Shelhamer et al. 2016).
We revisit the concept of adding an autoencoder to modelfree RL approaches, with a focus on off-policy algorithms.
We perform a sequence of careful experiments to understand why previous approaches did not work well. We confirm that a pixel reconstruction loss is vital for learning a
good representation, specifically when trained jointly, but
requires careful design choices to succeed. Based on these
findings, we recommend a simple and effective autoencoderbased off-policy method that can be trained end-to-end. We
believe this to be the first model-free off-policy approach to
train the latent state representation and policy jointly and
match performance with state-of-the-art model-based methods 1 (Hafner et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2019) on many challenging control tasks. In addition, we demonstrate robustness to observational noise and outperform prior methods in
this more practical setup.
This paper makes three main contributions: (i) a methodical study of the issues involved with combining autoencoders with model-free RL in the off-policy setting that ad-

Training an agent to solve control tasks directly from highdimensional images with model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has proven difficult. A promising approach is to
learn a latent representation together with the control policy. However, fitting a high-capacity encoder using a scarce
reward signal is sample inefficient and leads to poor performance. Prior work has shown that auxiliary losses, such as
image reconstruction, can aid efficient representation learning. However, incorporating reconstruction loss into an offpolicy learning algorithm often leads to training instability.
We explore the underlying reasons and identify variational
autoencoders, used by previous investigations, as the cause of
the divergence. Following these findings, we propose effective techniques to improve training stability. This results in a
simple approach capable of matching state-of-the-art modelfree and model-based algorithms on MuJoCo control tasks.
Furthermore, our approach demonstrates robustness to observational noise, surpassing existing approaches in this setting. Code, results, and videos are anonymously available at
https://sites.google.com/view/sac-ae/home.

1

Introduction

Cameras are a convenient and inexpensive way to acquire
state information, especially in complex, unstructured environments, where effective control requires access to the
proprioceptive state of the underlying dynamics. Thus, having effective RL approaches that can utilize pixels as input
would potentially enable solutions for a wide range of real
world applications, for example robotics.
The challenge is to efficiently learn a mapping from pixels to an appropriate representation for control using only
a sparse reward signal. Although deep convolutional encoders can learn good representations (upon which a policy can be trained), they require large amounts of training
data. As existing reinforcement learning approaches already
have poor sample complexity, this makes direct use of pixelbased inputs prohibitively slow. For example, model-free
methods on Atari (Bellemare et al. 2013) and DeepMind
Control (DMC) (Tassa et al. 2018) take tens of millions of
steps (Mnih et al. 2013; Barth-Maron et al. 2018), which is
impractical in many applications, especially robotics.

1

We define model-based methods as those that train a dynamics
model. By this definition, SLAC (Lee et al. 2019) is a model-based
method.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10674

