The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning of Structurally Unambiguous Probabilistic Grammars
Dolav Nitay* , Dana Fisman, Michal Ziv-Ukelson
Ben Gurion University
dolavn@post.bgu.ac.il, dana@cs.bgu.ac.il, michaluz@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

while regular languages can be learned using both membership queries and equivalence queries (Angluin 1987), it was
shown that learning CFGs using both membership queries
and equivalence queries is computationally as hard as key
cryptographic problems for which there is currently no
known polynomial-time algorithm (Angluin and Kharitonov
1995). See more on the difficulties of learning context-free
grammars in (de la Higuera 2010, Chapter 15). Hardness results for the probabilistic setting have also been established.
(Abe and Warmuth 1992) have shown a computational hardness result for the inference of probabilistic automata, in particular, that an exponential blowup with respect to the alphabet size is inevitable unless RP = NP.
The problem of identifying a probabilistic grammar from
examples has two aspects: the first is determining the rules
of the grammar up to variable renaming and the second is estimating probabilistic weights for each rule. Given the hardness results mentioned above, most of the literature has concentrated on the second problem. Two dominant approaches
for solving the second problem are the forward-backward
algorithm for HMMs (Rabiner 1989) and the inside-outside
algorithm for PCFGs (Baker 1979; Lari and Young 1990).
In this work we address the first problem. Due to the hardness results regarding learning probabilistic grammars using
membership and equivalence queries (MQ and EQ) we use
structured membership queries and structured equivalence
queries (SMQ and SEQ), as was done by (Sakakibara 1988)
for learning context-free grammars. Structured strings, proposed by (Levy and Joshi 1978), are strings over the given
alphabet that includes parentheses that indicate the structure
of a possible derivation tree for the string. One can equivalently think about a structured string as a derivation tree in
which all nodes but the leaves are marked with ?, namely an
unlabeled derivation tree.
It is known that the set of derivation trees of a given CFG
constitutes a regular tree-language, where a regular treelanguage is a tree-language that can be recognized by a tree
automaton. (Sakakibara 1988) has generalized Angluin’s L∗
algorithm (for learning regular languages using MQ and EQ)
to learning a tree automaton, and provided a polynomial
learning algorithm for CFGs using SMQ and SEQ. Let T(G)
denote the set of derivation trees of a CFG G, and S(T(G))
the set of unlabeled derivation trees (namely the structured
strings of G). While a membership query (MQ) asks whether

The problem of identifying a probabilistic context free grammar has two aspects: the first is determining the grammar’s
topology (the rules of the grammar) and the second is estimating probabilistic weights for each rule. Given the hardness results for learning context-free grammars in general,
and probabilistic grammars in particular, most of the literature has concentrated on the second problem. In this work we
address the first problem. We restrict attention to structurally
unambiguous weighted context-free grammars (SUWCFG)
and provide a query learning algorithm for structurally unambiguous probabilistic context-free grammars (SUPCFG).
We show that SUWCFG can be represented using co-linear
multiplicity tree automata (CMTA), and provide a polynomial learning algorithm that learns CMTAs. We show that the
learned CMTA can be converted into a probabilistic grammar,
thus providing a complete algorithm for learning a strucutrally unambiguous probabilistic context free grammar (both
the grammar topology and the probabilistic weights) using
structured membership queries and structured equivalence
queries. We demonstrate the usefulness of our algorithm in
learning PCFGs over genomic data.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic context free grammars (PCFGs) constitute
a computational model suitable for probabilistic systems
which observe non-regular (yet context-free) behavior. They
are vastly used in computational linguistics (Chomsky
1956), natural language processing (Church 1988) and biological modeling, for instance, in probabilistic modeling of
RNA structures (Grate 1995). Methods for learning PCFGs
from experimental data have been thought for over half a
century. Unfortunately, there are various hardness results regarding learning context-free grammars in general and probabilistic grammars in particular. It follows from (Gold 1978)
that context-free grammars (CFGs) cannot be identified in
the limit from positive examples, and from (Angluin 1990)
that CFGs cannot be identified in polynomial time using
equivalence queries only. Both results are not surprising
for those familiar with learning regular languages, as they
hold for the class of regular languages as well. However,
* This research was partially funded by BSF Grant #2016239,
ISF Grant #939/18 & Frankel Center for Computer Science, BGU.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9170

