The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gated Linear Networks
Joel Veness,∗ Tor Lattimore,∗ David Budden,∗ Avishkar Bhoopchand,∗
Christopher Mattern, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Eren Sezener, Jianan Wang, Peter Toth,
Simon Schmitt and Marcus Hutter
DeepMind
aixi@google.com, lattimore@google.com, budden@google.com, avishkar@google.com

Abstract

EWC) have been effective in compensating for these limitations, it is interesting to explore whether alternative methods
of credit assignment can give rise to complementary neural
models with different strengths and weaknesses.

This paper presents a new family of backpropagation-free
neural architectures, Gated Linear Networks (GLNs). What
distinguishes GLNs from contemporary neural networks is
the distributed and local nature of their credit assignment
mechanism; each neuron directly predicts the target, forgoing
the ability to learn feature representations in favor of rapid
online learning. Individual neurons are able to model nonlinear functions via the use of data-dependent gating in conjunction with online convex optimization. We show that this
architecture gives rise to universal learning capabilities in the
limit, with effective model capacity increasing as a function
of network size in a manner comparable with deep ReLU networks. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the GLN learning
mechanism possesses extraordinary resilience to catastrophic
forgetting, performing almost on par to an MLP with dropout
and Elastic Weight Consolidation on standard benchmarks.

This paper introduces one such family of neural models, Gated Linear Networks (GLNs), and studies their contrasting empirical properties. The distinguishing feature of
a GLN is its distributed and local credit assignment mechanism. This technique is a generalization of the PAQ family
(Mahoney 2000, 2005, 2013) of online neural network models, which are well-known in the data compression community for their excellent sample efficiency (Mahoney 2013).
By interpreting these systems within an online convex programming (Zinkevich 2003) framework as a sequence of
data dependent linear networks coupled with a choice of
gating function, we are able to provide a new algorithm and
gating mechanism that opens up their usage to the wider machine learning community.

Introduction
Backpropagation has long been the de-facto credit assignment technique underlying the successful training of popular neural network architectures such as convolutional neural networks and multilayer perceptions (MLPs). It is well
known that backpropagation enables these networks to learn
highly-relevant task-specific features. However, this method
is not without its limitations. Contemporary neural networks
trained via backpropagation require many epochs of training over massive datasets, limiting their effectiveness for
data-efficient online learning. This has motivated many recent studies on alternate credit assignment mechanisms such
as layer-wise training and/or single pass learning (Zhang,
Liang, and Wainwright 2017; Belilovsky, Eickenberg, and
Oyallon 2019, 2020; Jaderberg et al. 2017; Löwe, O’Connor,
and Veeling 2019; Nøkland and Eidnes 2019).
Interpretibility limitations can also prevent their application in domains where a human understandable solution
is a mandatory requirement. Their effectiveness is further
limited in the continual learning setting by their tendency
to catastrophically forget previously learnt tasks. Although
various meta-learning (Ortega et al. 2019) algorithms such
as Elastic Weight Consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017,

GLNs have a number of desirable properties. Their local credit assignment mechanism is derived by associating a separate convex loss function to each neuron, which
greatly simplifies parameter initialization and optimization,
and provides significant sample efficiency benefits when
learning online. Importantly, we show that these benefits do
not come at the expense of capacity in practice, which adds
further weight to previously obtained asymptotic universality results (Veness et al. 2017). GLNs possess excellent online learning capabilities, which we demonstrate by showing
performance competitive with batch-trained MLPs on a variety of standard classification, regression and density modeling tasks, using only a single online pass through the data.
In terms of interpretibility, we show how the data-dependent
linearity of the predictions can be exploited to trivialise the
process of constructing meaningful saliency maps, which
can be of great reassurance to practitioners that the model
is predicting well for the right reasons. Perhaps most interestingly, we demonstrate that our credit assignment mechanism is extraordinarily resilient to catastrophic forgetting,
achieving performance competitive with EWC on a standard
continual learning benchmark with no knowledge of the task
boundaries.

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10015

