The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contract-based Inter-user Usage Coordination in Free-floating Car Sharing
Kentaro Takahira, 1 Shigeo Matsubara 2
1

2

Kyoto University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan,
Osaka University, Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531 Japan
kentaro.takahira@gmail.com, matsubara@sigmath.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract

are dropped off and picked up at many points. Existing studies often take the approach of mixed integer programming,
but if we try to apply methods developed for station-based
car sharing to free-floating car sharing, the increase in the
number of pick-up/drop-off points makes solutions difficult
to obtain. Some studies partition free-floating service areas
into smaller zones that serve as virtual stations (Pan et al.
2019). This causes another problem of how to partition the
service area so that pick-up/drop-off points can be efficiently
repositioned. In addition, existing methods more or less assume that usage data is available for prediction. We may be
able to collect such data, but it is difficult to accurately predict the demand and the price elasticity of demand at each
point. This means that methods developed for obtaining solutions for station-based car sharing systems are difficult to
extend to free-floating car sharing systems.
To solve this problem, we introduce negotiation among a
pick-up user and drop-off users. A pick-up user asks dropoff users to place the car closer to her current location, and
drop-off users may thus change their initially intended dropoff locations. More precisely, a pick-up user bids a function
that indicates the cost of picking up the vehicle. Drop-off
users bid their functions that indicate the additional cost for
changing their drop-off point. We also consider the social
value of vehicle usage. The use of a vehicle can be viewed as
vehicle relocation for other pick-up users. A trip to a remote
area is often valuable for many users. We develop a method
for estimating relocation values and use the Vickrey-ClarkeGroves (VCG) mechanism to determine pairs of pick-up and
drop-off users and the monetary transfers.
The previous methods can be considered as centralized
regulation in that the operator designs adequate incentives
assuming that demand predictions are accurate, whereas our
method can be viewed as distributed regulation in that the
regulation is executed among users through auctions. To the
best of our knowledge, our method is the first regulation
strategy for free-floating car sharing systems that satisfies
(1) scalability against an increase in the number of pickup/drop-off points (the set of OD demand points of potential pick-up/drop-off users), (2) no requirement to partition
the service area, and (3) no requirement for accurate demand
predictions. Also, by virtue of the VCG mechanism, misreporting of the cost functions and the destinations of drop-off
users can be prevented.

We propose a novel distributed user-car matching method
based on a contract between users to mitigate the imbalance problem between vehicle distribution and demand in
free-floating car sharing. Previous regulation methods involved an incentive system based on the predictions of origindestination (OD) demand obtained from past usage history.
However, the difficulty these methods have in obtaining accurate data limits their applicability. To overcome this drawback, we introduce contract-based coordination among dropoff and pick-up users in which an auction is conducted for
drop-off users’ intended drop-off locations. We theoretically
analyze the proposed method regarding the upper bound of
its efficiency. We also compare it with a baseline method and
non-regulation scenario on a free-floating car-sharing simulator. The experimental results show that the proposed method
achieves a higher social surplus than the existing method.

Introduction
This paper examines free-floating car sharing services. This
service model allows users to travel one-way and to pick
up and drop off cars anywhere in a dedicated service area.
The high flexibility of such a usage model can be equivalent to that of private car ownership. At present, such services include SHARE NOW and Enjoy. Free-floating car
sharing is an interesting application of multi-agent system
technologies because it requires fine-grained coordination
among drop-off and pick-up users.
Regardless of whether car sharing is free-floating or
station-based, a central concern in car sharing studies is imbalance between the distributions of available vehicles and
origin-destination (OD) demand, which ends up decreasing service efficiency. Many studies have tried to solve this
problem by pricing usage (Jorge, Molnar, and Correia 2015;
Febbraro, Sacco, and Saeednia 2012; Waserhole, Jost, and
Brauner 2013; Singla et al. 2015; Reiss and Bogenberger
2017; Pan et al. 2019) and by predicting demand (Ciari,
Balac, and Balmer 2015; Schmöller et al. 2015; Weikl and
Bogenberger 2013; Li et al. 2019).
Free-floating service models make the problem of imbalance worse due to their flexibility (Weikl and Bogenberger
2013; Wielinski, Trépanier, and Morency 2015), i.e., cars
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11361

