The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive Triple Extraction with Generative Transformer
Hongbin Ye1,2 * , Ningyu Zhang1,2∗† , Shumin Deng1,2 , Mosha Chen3 , Chuanqi Tan3 ,
Fei Huang3 , Huajun Chen1,2†
1
Zhejiang University
AZFT Joint Lab for Knowledge Engine
3
Alibaba Group
{yehb,zhangningyu,231sm,huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn, {chenmosha.cms,chuanqi.tcq,f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract
Triple extraction is an essential task in information extraction
for natural language processing and knowledge graph construction. In this paper, we revisit the end-to-end triple extraction task for sequence generation. Since generative triple
extraction may struggle to capture long-term dependencies
and generate unfaithful triples, we introduce a novel model,
contrastive triple extraction with a generative transformer.
Specifically, we introduce a single shared transformer module for encoder-decoder-based generation. To generate faithful results, we propose a novel triplet contrastive training object. Moreover, we introduce two mechanisms to further improve model performance (i.e., batch-wise dynamic attentionmasking and triple-wise calibration). Experimental results on
three datasets (i.e., NYT, WebNLG, and MIE) show that our
approach achieves better performance than that of baselines.

Input

The United States President Trump was raised
in the borough of Queens in New York City,
and lived there until age 13.

Output

Trump→president→of→United→States→
[S2S SEQ]→Trump→born→in→Queens→
[S2S SEQ]→Trump→live→in→Queens

Gold

(Trump, president of, United States)
(Trump, born in, Queens)
(Trump, live in, Queens)

Negative

(Trump, president of, Queens)
(Trump, born in, 13)
(Trump, live in, 13)

Table 1: Contrastive triple extraction as sequence generation. We encourage the model to generate gold triples and
does not generate negative ones.

Introduction
Triple extraction is an essential information extraction task
for natural language processing (NLP) and knowledge graph
(KG), which is used to detect pairs of entities and their relations from unstructured text. Consider this sentence: “Paris
is known as the romantic capital of France.” From this, an
ideal triple extraction would comprise hParis, Capital of,
Francei, in which Capital of is the relation of Paris and
France.
Researchers have proposed pipeline approaches in the
past (Lample et al. 2016; Zeng et al. 2015) in which they typically deconstructed the triple extraction problem into two
separate tasks: named-entity recognition (NER) (used to extract entities) and relation classification. Thus, they first recognized the entities; then, they predicted their relationships.
Unfortunately, this and similar pipeline approaches suffer
drawbacks (Roth and Yih 2007) in that they omit the evident
correlations between entity recognition and relation extraction tasks, resulting in error propagation.
Recently, several neural-network-based models (Zeng
et al. 2018a) have been proposed to jointly extract entities
and relations from sentences. These models use a parametersharing mechanism to extract entities and relations from

the same network. Apart from those approaches, Zeng
et al. (2018b) proposed a recurrent neural-network-based
encoder-decoder model (i.e., CopyRE) to extract triples with
overlapping entities. Such end-to-end generative triple extraction not only directly obtain the triples and mitigate the
error propagation issue, but also enable the generation of out
of domain entities and relations in a T5-style (Raffel et al.
2019) (text-to-text). Besides, Zeng, Zhang, and Liu (2020)
proposed a multi-task learning framework equipped with a
copy mechanism (i.e., CopyMTL) to allow the prediction
of multi-token entities. Nayak and Ng (2019) introduced
a representation scheme for triples and a pointer-networkbased decoding approach, which further improved the performance of CopyRE.
Encoder-decoder models are powerful tools that have seen
success in many NLP tasks, including machine translation
(Cho et al. 2014), and open information extraction (Zhang,
Duh, and Van Durme 2017). Although significant progress
has been achieved, there remain two key problems with the
existing methods. First, owing to the intrinsic shortfalls of
recurrent neural networks (RNN), they cannot capture longterm dependencies, which results in the loss of important information otherwise reflected in the sentence. Such a drawback prevents the model from being applied to longer texts.

* Equal contribution and shared co-first authorship.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14257

