The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ethically Compliant Sequential Decision Making
Justin Svegliato

Samer B. Nashed

Shlomo Zilberstein

College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{jsvegliato,snashed,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

within the decision-making model implicitly (Taylor et al.
2016). These problems cause the behavior of an autonomous
system to fail to reflect the intentions of developers or the
values of stakeholders (Hadfield-Menell and Hadfield 2019).
Ideally, any developer who builds an autonomous system
with the ability to comply with an ethical theory could instead use an approach that exhibits several desirable properties. First, it should be general-purpose by supporting any
task or ethical theory as long as they can be represented appropriately. Next, it should be modular by encapsulating the
task and ethical theory as separate modules that avoid an objective function that blends them implicitly. Finally, it should
be interpretable by describing the ethical theory in terms of
the behavior and environment of the autonomous system.
We propose a novel approach with these properties for
building ethically compliant autonomous systems that optimize completing a task subject to following an ethical
framework. As expected, the task defines the goal that the
system must achieve using a decision-making model. More
importantly, the ethical framework approximates a wellknown ethical theory that the system must comply with using a moral principle and an ethical context. The moral principle evaluates whether or not the system violates the ethical framework and the ethical context includes the contextual information needed to evaluate the system. Formally, this is expressed as an optimization problem with
a set of constraints for the task and a constraint for the
ethical framework. While our approach supports different
decision-making models and ethical frameworks, we consider a Markov decision process as the decision-making
model and divine command theory, prima facie duties, and
virtue ethics as the ethical frameworks in this paper.
We evaluate our approach in two ways. In a set of autonomous driving simulations, we observe that our approach
produces optimal behavior that meets a set of moral requirements. In a user study, we find that planning and robotics
experts who use our approach to produce optimal behavior
that meets a set of moral requirements make fewer development errors and need less development time than a simple
approach that modifies the decision-making model directly.
Our contributions are: (1) a definition of an ethically compliant autonomous system and its properties, (2) a range of
ethical frameworks for divine command theory, prima facie
duties, and virtue ethics, and (3) a set of autonomous driving
simulations and a user study of planning and robotics experts
that show the accuracy and usability of our approach.

Enabling autonomous systems to comply with an ethical theory is critical given their accelerating deployment in domains
that impact society. While many ethical theories have been
studied extensively in moral philosophy, they are still challenging to implement by developers who build autonomous
systems. This paper proposes a novel approach for building
ethically compliant autonomous systems that optimize completing a task while following an ethical framework. First, we
introduce a definition of an ethically compliant autonomous
system and its properties. Next, we offer a range of ethical
frameworks for divine command theory, prima facie duties,
and virtue ethics. Finally, we demonstrate the accuracy and
usability of our approach in a set of autonomous driving simulations and a user study of planning and robotics experts.

Introduction
Enabling autonomous systems to comply with an ethical
theory is critical given their accelerating deployment in domains that impact society (Charisi et al. 2017). For example,
a self-driving car that drives a route ought to slow near a
school zone, crosswalk, or park to avoid endangering pedestrians (Svegliato et al. 2019; Basich et al. 2020). Similarly,
an elder care robot that helps caregivers perform medical diagnostics ought to tailor its support based on the physical
and mental state of the patient to reduce the risk of injury
and the loss of dignity (Shim, Arkin, and Pettinatti 2017).
While many ethical theories have been studied extensively
in moral philosophy, they are still challenging to implement
by developers who build autonomous systems. Hence, there
is a growing need to simplify and standardize the process of
implementing an ethical theory within autonomous systems.
A simple approach to enabling an autonomous system
to comply with an ethical theory is to modify its objective
function directly. Modifying this objective function, however, poses two problems. First, adjusting the objective function can lead to unpredictable effects on the behavior of the
autonomous system due to the complexity of its decisionmaking model. In fact, small changes to the objective function can generate large changes to the behavior of the autonomous system (Bostrom 2016). Second, using the objective function to represent both a task and an ethical theory
can result in incommensurable conversions as it blends them
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11657

