The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Early Safety Warnings for Long-Distance Pipelines:
A Distributed Optical Fiber Sensor Machine Learning Approach
*

Yiyuan Yang,1 Yi Li,1 Taojia Zhang,2 Yan Zhou,2 Haifeng Zhang3
1

International Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China,
PetroChina Pipeline Company, Langfang, China, 3 Research Institute of Tsinghua, Pearl River Delta, Guangzhou, China
yangyy19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liyi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zhangtj01, kjzhouyan}@petrochina.com.cn, zhanghf@tsinghua-gd.org
2

losses, casualties, environmental pollution, and extremely
negative publicity. In 2016, an excavator in Alabama, USA
damaged a gas pipeline, causing a gas leak that triggered an
explosion and forest fire, affecting the lives of millions of
people and causing fluctuations in gas prices2. In 2019, an
oil pipeline explosion caused by man-made destruction in
Hidalgo, Mexico resulted in 142 casualties3.
To ensure the safety of oil and gas transportation and supply, it is necessary to monitor the safety of oil and gas pipelines in real time using technical means and issue a warning
before the damage happens. Nevertheless, current pipeline
safety early warning (PSEW) systems are still based mainly
on manual patrolling. With increasing pipeline mileages,
these inefficient and high-cost monitoring approaches have
become a major obstacle to the development of a modern,
intelligent, and safe transportation pipeline system.
In recent years, the rapid development of sensors and artificial intelligence has provided an opportunity to promote
the construction of intelligent pipelines. On one hand, fiber
optic sensors are widely used in industrial settings such as
transportation pipelines because of their long detection distances, good real-time performance, and weak radiation. On
the other hand, big data and data storage technology can provide a large number of high-quality data resources for our
algorithms. The goal is to provide datasets and deep learning
(DL) to build a model with a powerful fitting ability for realtime early warning and spatiotemporal positioning.
Nevertheless, the following problems with PSEW systems remain: (1) The spatiotemporal features of sensor signals consistently change, making them difficult to process
with a single algorithm. (2) Strong noise, weak signals, and
signal fluctuations at the scene make an algorithm trained on
an ideal condition difficult to fit. (3) A low-frequency signal
can be processed at higher speed with a cheaper solution,

Abstract
Automated pipeline safety early warning (PSEW) systems
are designed to automatically identify and locate third-party
damage events on oil and gas pipelines. They are intended to
replace traditional, inefficient manual inspection methods.
However, current PSEW methods cannot achieve universality for various complex environments because they are sensitive to the spatiotemporal stability of the signal obtained by
its distributed sensors at various locations and times. Our research aimed to improve the accuracy of long-distance oil–
gas PSEW systems through machine learning. In this paper,
we propose a novel real-time action recognition method for
long-distance PSEW systems based on a coherent Rayleigh
scattering distributed optical fiber sensor. More specifically,
we put forward two complementary feature calculation methods to describe signals and build a new action recognition
deep learning network based on those features. Encouraging
empirical results on the data collected at a real location confirm that the features can effectively describe signals in an
environment with strong noise and weak signals, and the entire approach can identify and locate third-party damage
events quickly under various hardware conditions with accuracies of 99.26% (500 Hz) and 97.20% (100 Hz). More generically, our method can be applied to other fields as well.

Introduction1
Oil and gas pipelines are known as the backbone of global
energy. Their small size and fast construction make them
widely used in the field of energy transportation. Currently,
the length of long-distance transportation pipelines worldwide exceeds 3.5 million km and is increasing by approximately 30,000 km per year1. However, because buried pipes
are not easy to supervise, and the environments along those
pipelines are complicated, accidents are unfortunately not
rare enough. If an accident occurs, it may cause oil and gas
leakage or even an explosion, and cause great economic

2
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/1-dead-colonial-gas-pipeline-explosion-alabama-n676046
3
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/20-dead-54-injured-rupturedpipeline-explosion-outside-mexico-city-n960516

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_transport

14991

