The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Investigate Indistinguishable Points in Semantic Segmentation of 3D Point Cloud
Mingye Xu1, 2 * , Zhipeng Zhou1, 4 * , Junhao Zhang1 , Yu Qiao1 3†
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
4
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{my.xu, zp.zhou, zhangjh, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn
Abstract
This paper investigates the indistinguishable points (difficult
to predict label) in semantic segmentation for large-scale 3D
point clouds. The indistinguishable points consist of those located in complex boundary, points with similar local textures
but different categories, and points in isolate small hard areas,
which largely harm the performance of 3D semantic segmentation. To address this challenge, we propose a novel Indistinguishable Area Focalization Network (IAF-Net), which select
indistinguishable points adaptively by utilizing the hierarchical semantic features and enhance fine-grained features for
points especially those indistinguishable points. We also introduce multi-stage loss to improve the feature representation
in a progressive way. Moreover, in order to analyze the segmentation performances of indistinguishable areas, we propose a new evaluation metric called Indistinguishable Points
Based Metric (IPBM). Our IAF-Net achieves the comparable
results with state-of-the-art performance on several popular
3D point cloud datasets e.g. S3DIS and ScanNet, and clearly
outperform other methods on IPBM. Our code will be available at https://github.com/MingyeXu/IAF-Net

1

Figure 1: Three types of the indistinguishable areas.

is called complex boundary areas (orange areas in Figure
1) which belong to the boundary points (object boundaries
and prediction boundaries). In most cases, it is difficult to
identify the boundaries between different objects accurately.
Because the features of each point are characterized by the
information of local regions, the predictions of the boundary
points will be over smooth between objects of different categories which are close in Euclidean space. The second type
is named confusing interior areas (cyan areas in Figure 1)
which contains interior points from objects of different categories with similar textures and geometric structures. For
example, door and wall have similar appearance which are
almost flat and share similar colors. Even for human being,
it is hard to identify part of door and wall accurately in these
cases. The last type is called isolate small areas (yellow
areas in Figure 1), which are scattered and hard to be predicted. In addition, objects in the scenes would not be fully
captured by the devices because of the occlusion. All of the
challenges mentioned above hinder the accuracy of semantic segmentation of 3D point cloud. As far as we know, these
“indistinguishable” points are not deeply explored in most of
the previous methods (Jiang et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019) on
point cloud semantic segmentation task.
To improve the segmentation performance on indistinguishable points mentioned above, we design an efficient
neural network which is able to enhance the features of
points especially indistinguishable points. However, this
task has two challenges to be addressed: 1) How to discover
indistinguishable points adaptively in the training process;

Introduction

Deep learning on point cloud analysis has been attracting
more and more attention recently. Among the tasks of point
cloud analysis, efficient semantic segmentation of largescale 3D point cloud is a challenging task with huge applications (Rusu et al. 2008; Chen et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2020).
A key challenge is that 3D point cloud semantic segmentation relies on unstructured data which is typically irregularly
sampled and unordered. Due to the complexity of large-scale
3D point cloud, this task also requires the understanding of
the fine-grained details for each point.
For point cloud semantic segmentation, there exist some
areas which are hard to be segmented, and we name these
areas as “indistinguishable” areas. In order to analyze the
image semantic segmentation results in detail, (Li et al.
2017) divide pixels into different difficulty levels. Inspired
by (Li et al. 2017), we can also categorize these “indistinguishable” areas into three types (Figure 1): The first type
* M.Xu and Z.Zhou contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3047

