The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stock Selection via Spatiotemporal Hypergraph Attention Network:
A Learning to Rank Approach
Ramit Sawhney1∗ , Shivam Agarwal2∗ , Arnav Wadhwa3 , Tyler Derr4 , Rajiv Ratn Shah1
1

IIIT Delhi
Manipal Institute of Technology
3
MIDAS, IIIT-D, India
4
Vanderbilt University, USA
{ramits, rajivratn}@iiitd.ac.in, tyler.derr@vanderbilt.edu
2

Abstract
Quantitative trading and investment decision making are intricate financial tasks that rely on accurate stock selection.
Despite advances in deep learning that have made significant progress in the complex and highly stochastic stock prediction problem, modern solutions face two significant limitations. They do not directly optimize the target of investment in terms of profit, and treat each stock as independent
from the others, ignoring the rich signals between related
stocks’ temporal price movements. Building on these limitations, we reformulate stock prediction as a learning to rank
problem and propose STHAN-SR, a neural hypergraph architecture for stock selection. The key novelty of our work is the
proposal of modeling the complex relations between stocks
through a hypergraph and a temporal Hawkes attention mechanism to tailor a new spatiotemporal attention hypergraph
network architecture to rank stocks based on profit by jointly
modeling stock interdependence and the temporal evolution
of their prices. Through experiments on three markets spanning over six years of data, we show that STHAN-SR significantly outperforms state-of-the-art neural stock forecasting
methods. We validate our design choices through ablative and
exploratory analyses over STHAN-SR’s spatial and temporal
components and demonstrate its practical applicability.

1

Figure 1: Illustration showing that more accurate stock prediction R2 (↓MSE), C1 (↑Acc.) may not always be more profitable than less accurate methods R1 (↑MSE),C2 (↓Acc.)

are not directly optimized towards the target of investment
as they do not factor in the expected earned profit (Feng
et al. 2019b). This gap arises because stock prediction is
commonly framed either as a classification task to bucket
stock movements (price rise, fall or no significant change)
or as a regression task to predict stock prices, rather than selecting the stocks with the maximum expected profit (Wang,
Wang, and Li 2020; Li et al. 2020). Consider the toy example
shown in Figure 1, where we show that methods with high
prediction performance do not always lead to the most profitable selection of stocks. Such classification and regression
are optimized towards price movement accuracy or minimizing the error in predicting the stock return, and not necessarily towards profit directly. This gap hints towards the disparity between optimizing predictive performance and optimal
stock selection for maximizing profit and leads us to think
towards a new direction of stock selection, where both predictive performance and the expected profit are jointly and
directly optimized.
The second drawback is that the majority of existing
work (Feng et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2020; Poli, Park, and
Ilievski 2020) treats stock movements to be independent of
each other, or utilizes an oversimplified model of the stock
market with a graph consisting of pairwise relations between
individual stocks when in reality, this is contrary to true
market function (Diebold and Yilmaz 2014). Often, stocks
are related to each other, and there exist rich signals in the
complex higher-order relationships between stocks (or companies) (Nobi et al. 2014; Sawhney et al. 2020b). Publicly
available company information can be used to identify connections between stocks that might influence other stocks’

Introduction

The stock market, a financial ecosystem involving transactions between businesses and investors, observed a market capitalization of more than $68 trillion globally as of
the year 2019.1 Stock trading presents opportunities that increasingly attract traders and investors to utilize the market
as a platform for investing and forecasting risk to maximize
profit. However, making the right investment decisions and
designing trading strategies has many challenges due to the
market’s highly volatile and non-stationary nature (Adam,
Marcet, and Nicoli 2016). Recent advances in deep learning present a promising prospect in quantitative trading and
stock prediction (Cavalcante et al. 2016).
However, the vast majority of modern neural stock prediction solutions have two significant drawbacks. First, they
∗
Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/CM.MKT.LCAP.CD/

497

