The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Reweight Imaginary Transitions
for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Wenzhen Huang,1,2 Qiyue Yin,1,2 Junge Zhang,1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
huangwenzhen2014@ia.ac.cn, {qyyin,jgzhang, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

can solve higher dimensional control problems (Gal, McAllister, and Rasmussen 2016; Depeweg et al. 2017; Nagabandi et al. 2018). However, learned high-capacity dynamics models ineluctably face predicting error, which results
in the suboptimal performance and even catastrophic failures (Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011).
Plenty of approaches have been proposed to alleviate the
above problem. For example, (Chua et al. 2018) learns an
ensemble of probabilistic models to mitigate the model error. (Clavera et al. 2018) also learns the ensemble of models,
and meta-trains a policy to adapt all the models so that the
policy can be robust against model-bias. Among this line
of research, a type of solution tries to tune model usage
to reduce adverse effects of the imaginary data generated
by inaccurate models, and promising results have been obtained. (Kalweit and Boedecker 2017) only uses imaginary
trajectories in the case of high uncertainties of Q-function.
(Heess et al. 2015) only uses imaginary data to compute policy gradients. (Janner et al. 2019) replaces model-generated
rollouts begin from the initial state distribution with short
model-generated rollouts branched from the real data.
Above simple tuning schemes would result in that the
generated data is always ignored in some training processes
even it is completely accurate. Since samples with large prediction errors in the imaginary experience will lead to the
value or policy function trained on it being inaccurate, adaptively filtering the samples with large prediction errors can
reduce the performance degradation caused by the model
bias. This makes a basic motivation of our study. However,
the prediction error of an imaginary transition is difficult to
obtain, because it is hard to decide a threshold of prediction
error to determine whether the sample should be abandoned
or not. For instance, when the value or policy function is
very imprecise, even the samples with relatively large prediction errors can be used to optimize the function.
To handle above predication errors problem, we attempt to
adaptively tune model usage through reweighting the imaginary samples according to their potential effect on training, which is totally different from previous model usage approaches. More specifically, we measure the effect through
comparing the values of the optimization object (e.g, TD error) computed on the real samples before and after updating the functions using the imaginary transition. In this way,
the filtering process can be taken as selecting an appropriate

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) is more sample efficient than model-free RL by using imaginary trajectories
generated by the learned dynamics model. When the model
is inaccurate or biased, imaginary trajectories may be deleterious for training the action-value and policy functions.
To alleviate such problem, this paper proposes to adaptively
reweight the imaginary transitions, so as to reduce the negative effects of poorly generated trajectories. More specifically, we evaluate the effect of an imaginary transition by calculating the change of the loss computed on the real samples when we use the transition to train the action-value
and policy functions. Based on this evaluation criterion, we
construct the idea of reweighting each imaginary transition
by a well-designed meta-gradient algorithm. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art model-based and model-free RL algorithms
on multiple tasks. Visualization of our changing weights further validates the necessity of utilizing reweight scheme.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are typically divided into two categories, i.e., model-free RL and modelbased RL. The former directly learns the policy from the
interactions with the environment, and has achieved impressive results in many areas, such as games (Mnih et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2016). But these model-free algorithms
are data-expensive to train, which limits their applications to
simulated domains. Different from model-free approaches,
model-based reinforcement learning algorithms learn an internal model of the real environment to generate imaginary
data, perform online planning or do policy search, which
holds promise to provide significantly lower sample complexity (Luo et al. 2018).
Previously, model-based RL with linear or Bayesian models has obtained excellent performance on the simple low
dimensional control problems (Abbeel, Quigley, and Ng
2006; Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Levine and Koltun
2013; Levine and Abbeel 2014; Levine et al. 2016). But
these methods are hard to be applied to high-dimensional
domains. Since neural network models can represent more
complex transition functions, model-based RL with them
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7848

