The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Human-Level Interpretable Learning for Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Rohan K Yadav, Lei Jiao, Ole-Christoffer Granmo, Morten Goodwin
Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, University of Agder, 4879, Grimstad, Norway
rohan.k.yadav@uia.no, lei.jiao@uia.no, ole.granmo@uia.no, morten.goodwin@uia.no

Abstract

of attention-based ABSA approaches are progressively improved, the interpretability of these models is still questionable, making them less trust-worthy. Not surprisingly, little
research has been done on ABSA learning techniques that
are interpretable at a human level (Do et al. 2019).
Recently, interpretable AI has taken a big leap in industrial application (Samek et al. 2019). Indeed, the scientific
community has performed extensive research on ways to interpret neural networks. In a modern neural network, one can
use the fact that the variants of attention (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015) assign soft weights to the input representations, and then extract highly weighted tokens as rationales. However, these attention weights do not provide faithful explanations for classification (Serrano and Smith 2019;
Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019; Brunner et al. 2020; Vashishth
et al. 2019). On the other hand, certain classic models, like
Decision Trees, are particularly easy to understand, yet still
compromise on accuracy compared with neural networks.
Hence, an effective trade-off between accuracy and interpretability has still not been achieved.
In this article, we propose a Tsetlin Machine (TM)
(Granmo 2018) based ABSA that employs a binary representation of the input features. The resulting architecture is
interpretable and achieves competitive accuracy compared
with state-of-the-art techniques. The ABSA task has two
important inputs: a context word and an aspect word. Such
aspect-based classification usually relies heavily on the position of the aspect word in the context. Such position information can be easily embedded in the neural network
models. However, in TM, as all patterns and outputs are expressed in bits, learning and classification depend on bit manipulation, making it a challenging task to embed all the information into binary form. We therefore also aim to propose
an extensive pre-processing approach for the ABSA inputs
so that the binary form retains as much useful information
as possible for the classification.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

This paper proposes a human-interpretable learning approach
for aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), employing the
recently introduced Tsetlin Machines (TMs). We attain interpretability by converting the intricate position-dependent
textual semantics into binary form, mapping all the features
into bag-of-words (BOWs). The binary-form BOWs are encoded so that the information on the aspect and context words
are retained for sentiment classification. We further adopt the
BOWs as input to the TM, enabling learning of aspect-based
sentiment patterns in propositional logic. To evaluate interpretability and accuracy, we conducted experiments on two
widely used ABSA datasets from SemEval 2014: Restaurant 14 and Laptop 14. The experiments show how each relevant feature takes part in conjunctive clauses that contain
the context information for the corresponding aspect word,
demonstrating human-level interpretability. At the same time,
the obtained accuracy is on par with existing neural network
models, reaching 78.02% on Restaurant 14 and 73.51% on
Laptop 14.

Introduction
Sentiment analysis, which identifies people’s opinion on
specific topics, is a classic problem in natural language processing (NLP). Under the umbrella of sentiment analysis,
aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), which is a finegrained evaluation framework for sentiment classification
(Zhang and Liu 2017), has become a hot research topic (Pontiki et al. 2014). Among various tasks in ABSA, this paper
focuses on the sentiment polarity (positive, neutral, negative) of a target word in given comments or reviews. For
example, let us consider a review: “Certainly not the best
sushi in New York, however, it is always fresh and the place
is very clean, sterile”. The target word “sushi” is closely
associated with its context words “not best”, assorting it
as a negative polarity. The target word, “place”, is associated with its context words “clean” and “sterile”, classifying it as a positive sentiment. Such a complex form of
sentiment classification is highly dependent on where the
word appears in the sentence. To address this challenge, several recent approaches to ABSA have been based on attention mechanisms (Ma et al. 2017). Although the accuracy

• We propose a novel pre-processing scheme to convert the
ABSA inputs into binary form with limited information
loss.
• We design an interpretable learning architecture using
TM. The architecture offers human-level interpretable results with comparable classification accuracy.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14203

