The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Storytelling via Causal, Commonsense Plot Ordering
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Wesley Cheung, William Broniec, and Mark O. Riedl
Georgia Institute of Technology
{raj.ammanabrolu,wcheung8,d.tu,wbroniec3,riedl}@gatech.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we consider the challenge of automatically
generating narratives that have recognizable causal entailment between events. Specifically, we approach the problem
of story generation as a plot-infilling (Ippolito et al. 2019;
Donahue, Lee, and Liang 2020) where an outline of plot
points is extracted from a source then elaborated upon. We
introduce the concept of soft causal relations, where causal
entailment between story events does not need to be strictly
logically consistent, but draws upon people’s everyday commonsense understanding of whether one event tends to be
preceded or succeeded by another.
We demonstrate an approach to story generation using
soft causal relations in the C2PO (Commonsense, Causal
Plot Ordering) system, which generates narratives via plot
infilling using soft causal relations. Inspired by work on
plot graph learning (Li et al. 2013), C2PO attempts to create a branching space of possible story continuations that
bridge between plot points that are automatically extracted
from existing natural language plot summaries. To create this
branching story space, we iteratively extract commonsense
causal inferences from the COMET (Bosselut et al. 2019)
model of commonsense reasoning. Finally, once the space—a
plot graph—has been constructed, we search the space for
complete sequences.
Using human participation studies, we evaluate C2PO
against baseline text infilling systems with different uses
of commonsense reasoning and inductive biases to determine
the role of soft causal relations on perceptions of story quality.
We choose two story corpora in different genres: real-world
mystery stories such as Sherlock Holmes—known for generally being consistent with everyday commonsense norms,
and children’s fairy tales such as Hansel and Gretel—stories
which usually shatter commonsense expectations. Through
these studies we further explore the broader issue of how
the change in commonsense norms across storytelling genres
affects perceptions of story quality.

Automated story plot generation is the task of generating
a coherent sequence of plot events. Causal relations between plot events are believed to increase the perception
of story and plot coherence. In this work, we introduce the
concept of soft causal relations as causal relations inferred
from commonsense reasoning. We demonstrate C2PO, an approach to narrative generation that operationalizes this concept
through Causal, Commonsense Plot Ordering. Using humanparticipant protocols, we evaluate our system against baseline
systems with different commonsense reasoning approaches
and inductive biases to determine the role of soft causal relations in perceived story quality. Through these studies we also
probe the interplay of how changes in commonsense norms
across storytelling genres affect perceptions of story quality.1

Introduction
Automated story generation is a standing grand challenge
of AI. One of the central challenges of automated story
generation is causal progression such that the events of
the story follow from events that have come before. Many
prior approaches to plot generation relied on symbolic planning (Lebowitz 1987; Gervás et al. 2005; Porteous and
Cavazza 2009; Riedl and Young 2010; Ware and Young
2011)—reasoning directly about causal enablement in the
form of predicate precondition and post-condition matching.
While these systems can guarantee causal entailment between
story events, these approaches also require extensive domain
knowledge engineering and limited vocabularies of events
and characters.
Machine learning approaches to automated story generation can learn storytelling and domain knowledge from a corpus of existing stories or plot summaries. This theoretically
allows them to overcome the knowledge engineering bottlenecks. However, neural language model based approaches to
automated story generation learn probabilistic relationships
between words, sentences, and events and thus have difficulty
modeling causal entailment between actions and events. Additionally, stories need to remain consistent with respect to
genre and commonsense norms.

Background and Related Work
Narrative generation systems that use symbolic planning (Lebowitz 1987; Gervás et al. 2005; Porteous and
Cavazza 2009; Riedl and Young 2010; Ware and Young 2011)
explicitly ensure causal relations between actions via predicate calculus operations over explicitly modeled action preconditions and post-conditions. These symbolic proposition

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code found at https://github.com/rajammanabrolu/C2PO.

5859

