The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Advice-Guided Reinforcement Learning in a non-Markovian Environment
Daniel Neider1 , Jean-Raphael Gaglione2 , Ivan Gavran1 , Ufuk Topcu3 , Bo Wu3 , Zhe Xu4
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Kaiserslautern, Germany
2
Ecole Polytechnique, France
3
University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA
4
Arizona State University, Arizona, USA

Abstract

Clearly, a reward function is Markovian or nonMarkovian only with respect to the underlying MDP, and
one can augment the states of any MDP with (relevant
parts of) the history to obtain an equivalent problem with
a Markovian reward function. However, the exact augmentation is crucial: if done naively, the augmented state space
becomes too large to be computationally tractable. To overcome this problem, finite-state machines or (equivalently)
temporal logic formulas have been proposed to concisely
capture the temporal nature of non-Markovian reward functions and make the RL task feasible (Bacchus, Boutilier, and
Grove 1996; Jothimurugan, Alur, and Bastani 2019; Icarte
et al. 2018b; Brafman, Giacomo, and Patrizi 2018; Camacho et al. 2019). In this paper we focus on a specific type of
finite-state machines, called reward machines, which have,
since proposed by Icarte et al. (2018b), been adopted as a
way to encode non-Markovian reward functions.
The approaches above assume that the reward machine
is fully known prior to the start of the RL process. However, this assumption is often unrealistic: in practice, reward
functions (and, thus, reward machines) are notoriously difficult to find and often not fully known. Luckily, recent research has shown how to eliminate this requirement. For instance, Gaon and Brafman (2020) and Xu et al. (2020) combine automata learning with standard reinforcement learning
techniques in order to infer the underlying reward machine
through interactions with the environment. Although both
Gaon and Brafman’s and Xu et al.’s approaches guarantee
convergence to the optimal policy and provide convincing
experimental evaluations, methods that have to infer the reward machine necessarily converge slower than the ones that
assume full knowledge of it.
While assuming full knowledge of the reward machine
is rightly deemed overly optimistic (see above), we believe
that assuming no knowledge is overly pessimistic. Indeed, a
typical situation will be between the two extremes: a human
engineer certainly has some high-level knowledge about the
reward function/machine and can often provide some sort of
“advice”.
In this paper, we think of advice as suggesting which of
the agent’s observation sequences are promising (i.e., for
which sequences the agent could get a reward, without determining the numerical value of the reward), and which are
not. Formally, an observation (later called label sequence)

We study a class of reinforcement learning tasks in which the
agent receives its reward for complex, temporally-extended
behaviors sparsely. For such tasks, the problem is how to
augment the state-space so as to make the reward function
Markovian in an efficient way. While some existing solutions
assume that the reward function is explicitly provided to the
learning algorithm (e.g., in the form of a reward machine),
the others learn the reward function from the interactions with
the environment, assuming no prior knowledge provided by
the user. In this paper, we generalize both approaches and
enable the user to give advice to the agent, representing the
user’s best knowledge about the reward function, potentially
fragmented, partial, or even incorrect. We formalize advice
as a set of DFAs and present a reinforcement learning algorithm that takes advantage of such advice, with optimal convergence guarantee. The experiments show that using wellchosen advice can reduce the number of training steps needed
for convergence to optimal policy, and can decrease the computation time to learn the reward function by up to two orders
of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) assumes the environment in
which an intelligent agent operates to be modeled by a
Markov Decision Process (MDP): the states of the MDP
capture the relevant information about the environment,
while state-action pairs are equipped with rewards that either
reinforce desired or penalize undesired behaviors. In many
RL tasks, however, the agent receives its reward sparsely for
complex actions over a long period of time.
Learning an optimal policy in such settings is hard: they
do not map naturally to MDPs as the reward does not depend on the immediate state of the environment and the chosen action but rather on the history of the actions that the
agent has performed—in other words, the reward function
is non-Markovian. A similar problem occurs under different
guises: a non-Markovian dynamics of the MDP or partial
observability that creates an illusion of a non-Markovian environment. For the moment, we focus on the non-Markovian
reward formulation of the problem and discuss the other formulations with related work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9073

