The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RpBERT: A Text-image Relation Propagation-based BERT Model for Multimodal
NER
Lin Sun1∗ , Jiquan Wang2,1∗ , Kai Zhang3 , Yindu Su2,1 , Fangsheng Weng1
1

Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
sunl@zucc.edu.cn, wangjiquan@zju.edu.cn, drogozhang@gmail.com, yindusu@zju.edu.cn, 31801131@stu.zucc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recently multimodal named entity recognition (MNER) has
utilized images to improve the accuracy of NER in tweets.
However, most of the multimodal methods use attention
mechanisms to extract visual clues regardless of whether the
text and image are relevant. Practically, the irrelevant textimage pairs account for a large proportion in tweets. The visual clues that are unrelated to the texts will exert uncertain
or even negative effects on multimodal model learning. In this
paper, we introduce a method of text-image relation propagation into the multimodal BERT model. We integrate soft or
hard gates to select visual clues and propose a multitask algorithm to train on the MNER datasets. In the experiments,
we deeply analyze the changes in visual attention before and
after the use of text-image relation propagation. Our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the MNER datasets.

(a) [PER Radiohead] offers old and new at first concert in
four years.

(b) Nice image of [PER Kevin Love] and [PER Kyle Korver]
during 1st half #NBAFinals #Cavsin9 # [LOC Cleveland].

Introduction
Social media platforms such as Twitter have become part
of the everyday lives of many people. They are important
sources for various information extraction applications such
as open event extraction (Wang, Deyu, and He 2019) and
social knowledge graph construction (Hosseini 2019). As a
key component of these applications, named entity recognition (NER) aims to detect named entities (NEs) and classify
them into predefined types, such as person (PER), location
(LOC) and organization (ORG). Recent works on tweets
based on multimodal learning have been increasing (Moon,
Neves, and Carvalho 2018; Lu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
Arshad et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020). These researchers investigated to enhance linguistic representations with the aid of
visual clues in tweets. Most of the MNER methods used attention weights to extract visual clues related to the NEs (Lu
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Arshad et al. 2019). For example, Fig. 1(a) shows a successful visual attention example in (Lu et al. 2018). In fact, texts and images in tweets
could also be irrelevant. Vempala and Preoţiuc-Pietro (2019)
categorized text-image relations according to whether the
“Image adds to tweet meaning”. The “Image does not add
to tweet meaning” type accounts for approximately 56%
of instances in Vempala’s text-image relation classification

Figure 1: Visual attention examples of MNER from (Lu et al.
2018). The left column is a tweet’s image and the right column is its corresponding attention visualization. (a) Successful case, (b) failure case.
(TRC) dataset. In addition, we trained a classifier of whether
the “Image adds to tweet meaning” on a large randomly collected corpus, Twitter100k (Hu et al. 2017), and the proportion of classified negatives was approximately 60%. The
attention-based models would also produce visual attention
although the text and image are irrelevant, and such visual
attention might exert negative effects on the text inference.
Fig. 1(b) shows a failure visual attention example. The visual attention focuses on the wall and ground, resulting in
tagging “[ORG] Cleveland” with the wrong label “LOC”.
In this paper, we consider inferring the text-image relation to address the problem of inappropriate visual attention
clues in multimodal models. The contributions of this paper
can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel text-image relation propagationbased multimodal BERT model. We investigate the
soft and hard ways of propagating text-image relations
through the model by training. A training procedure for
the multiple tasks of text-image relation classification and
downstream NER is also presented.

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13860

