The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Preserving Condorcet Winners under Strategic Manipulation
Sirin Botan and Ulle Endriss
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam
{sirin.botan, ulle.endriss}@uva.nl

Abstract

If an agent manipulates under a Condorcet extension—
meaning she submits a preference other than her true one—
it is possible that this will result in a reported profile without
a Condorcet winner, despite the fact that the truthful profile
has one. In particular, it is possible that a Condorcet extension in some cases fails to return the Condorcet winner of the
truthful profile as the outcome. We examine exactly when
the lack of strategyproofness affects whether we can trust
that a Condorcet extension will give us all “true” Condorcet
winners, even under the assumption that agents might vote
strategically.
Strategyproofness on profiles with a Condorcet winner is
also appealing from a practical viewpoint as real-world elections have a high probability of giving us a Condorcet winner (Gehrlein 2006; Gehrlein and Lepelley 2011).

Condorcet extensions have long held a prominent place in
social choice theory. A Condorcet extension will return the
Condorcet winner as the unique winner whenever such an alternative exists. However, the definition of a Condorcet extension does not take into account possible manipulation by
the voters. A profile where all agents vote truthfully may have
a Condorcet winner, but this alternative may not end up in the
set of winners if agents are acting strategically. Focusing on
the class of tournament solutions, we show that many natural
social choice functions in this class, such as the well-known
Copeland and Slater rules, cannot guarantee the preservation
of Condorcet winners when agents behave strategically. Our
main result in this respect is an impossibility theorem that establishes that no tournament solution satisfying a very weak
decisiveness requirement can provide such a guarantee. On
the bright side, we identify several indecisive but otherwise
attractive tournament solutions that do guarantee the preservation of Condorcet winners under strategic manipulation for
a large class of preference extensions.

1

Related work. There are various methods in the literature
for circumventing the impossibility result due to Gibbard
(1973) and Satterthwaite (1975). A well-employed strategy
is to consider a restricted domain for the social choice function, where strategyproofness is guaranteed. Among these
domain restrictions, the best-known is the single-peaked domain of Black (1948).1 There are also many examples of
positive results relative to more fine-grained axioms that focus on—and limit—the type of manipulation performed by
the agent (Sato 2013; Bossert and Sprumont 2014; Kruger
and Terzopoulou 2020). Similar positive results have been
obtained by considering voters’ ignorance of others’ preference as an informational barrier (Conitzer, Walsh, and Xia
2011; Reijngoud and Endriss 2012; Osborne and Rubinstein
2003). Another approach has been to argue for the computational hardness of computing a successful manipulation
strategy as a barrier to manipulation (Bartholdi, Tovey, and
Trick 1989; Conitzer and Walsh 2016).
While the Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem pertains to resolute social choice functions, there are similar impossibility results for irresolute rules (Gärdenfors 1976; Kelly 1977;
Barberà 1977; Duggan and Schwartz 2000; Sato 2008).
These results differ in how they define manipulability, as
they by necessity must make assumptions about agents’
preferences over sets of alternatives. Duggan and Schwartz
(2000), for example, work with optimistic and pessimistic

Introduction

The notion of strategyproofness has been studied across disciplines, including economics, game theory, and artificial intelligence (Arrow, Sen, and Suzumura 2010; Shoham and
Leyton-Brown 2009; Brandt et al. 2016; Meir 2018). For
multiagent systems, including those utilising voting to reach
a collective decision, ensuring some level of strategyproofness is an important consideration (Amanatidis, Birmpas,
and Markakis 2016; Hajaj et al. 2015).
By a seminal result in social choice theory, we know that
every non-trivial resolute social choice function—or voting rule—is susceptible to strategic manipulation by voters
(Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975). Our proposal in this paper is to define a more fine-grained strategyproofness axiom
that dictates a specific kind of “undesirable” manipulation
should not occur. We do not examine whether strategyproofness can be satisfied alongside a set of other desirable axioms, but whether the fact that strategyproofness fails can
affect the “strength” of the other axiom(s). Our focus is on
Condorcet extensions, and how failure of strategyproofness
affects Condorcet consistency.

1
For a more thorough treatment of single-peakedness and many
other domain restrictions, see Gaertner (2001).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5202

