The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Residual Shuffle-Exchange Network
for Fast Processing of Long Sequences
Andis Draguns, Emı̄ls Ozoliņš, Agris Šostaks, Matı̄ss Apinis, Kārlis Freivalds
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Latvia
{andis.draguns, emils.ozolins, agris.sostaks, matiss.apinis, karlis.freivalds}@lumii.lv

Abstract

The ability to combine distant information is even more
important for algorithmic tasks where each output symbol
typically depends on every input symbol. The goal of algorithm induction is to derive an algorithm from input-output
examples which are often given as sequences. Algorithmic
tasks are especially challenging due to the need for processing sequences of unlimited length. Also, generalization
plays an important role since training is often performed on
short sequences but testing on long ones.
The commonly used attention mechanism (for example,
in Transformers) can deal with such long-range dependencies but its time and space complexity is quadratic depending on the sequence length, therefore, is not an attractive
choice for long sequences. The attention mechanism’s complexity also makes it slower at inference time, making it less
suitable for tasks with strict latency requirements, such as
realtime sound processing. The recently introduced neural
Shuffle-Exchange networks allow modelling of long-range
dependencies in sequences in O(n log n) time (Freivalds,
Ozoliņš, and Šostaks 2019). The idea is very promising
and offers a computation-efficient alternative to the attention mechanism. However, the model is quite complex, involving a sophisticated gating mechanism derived from the
Gated Recurrent Unit (Cho et al. 2014).
In this paper, we present a much simpler and faster version
of the neural Shuffle-Exchange network which is based on
the residual network idea employing Gaussian Error Linear
Units (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) and Layer Normalization (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016) instead of gates.
We empirically validate our improved model on algorithmic tasks, LAMBADA question answering and multiinstrument musical note recognition (MusicNet dataset). It
surpasses the original Shuffle-Exchange network by 2.1%
on the LAMBADA language modelling task and achieves
state-of-the-art 78.02% average precision score on MusicNet.
We introduce a modification where we prepend our proposed model with strided convolutions to increase the speed
and applicability to long sequences even more. This change
enables processing a sequence of length 2M symbols in only
3.97 seconds.
Our main contributions are:
• We propose a much simpler and faster Switch Unit – the
core part of the Shuffle-Exchange network. This improve-

Attention is a commonly used mechanism in sequence processing, but it is of O(n2 ) complexity which prevents its application to long sequences. The recently introduced neural
Shuffle-Exchange network offers a computation-efficient alternative, enabling the modelling of long-range dependencies
in O(n log n) time. The model, however, is quite complex,
involving a sophisticated gating mechanism derived from the
Gated Recurrent Unit. In this paper, we present a simple and
lightweight variant of the Shuffle-Exchange network, which
is based on a residual network employing GELU and Layer
Normalization. The proposed architecture not only scales to
longer sequences but also converges faster and provides better
accuracy. It surpasses the Shuffle-Exchange network on the
LAMBADA language modelling task and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on the MusicNet dataset for music transcription while being efficient in the number of parameters.
We show how to combine the improved Shuffle-Exchange
network with convolutional layers, establishing it as a useful
building block in long sequence processing applications.

Introduction
More and more applications of sequence processing performed by neural networks require dealing with long inputs.
A key requirement is to allow modelling of dependencies
between distant parts of the sequences. Such long-range dependencies occur in natural language when the meaning of
some word depends on other words in the same or previous
sentence. There are important cases, e.g., to resolve coreferences, when such distant information may not be disregarded.
In music, dependencies occur on several scales. At the
finest scale samples of the waveform correlate to form note
pitches, at medium scale neighbouring notes relate to each
other by forming melodies and chord progressions, at coarse
scale common melodies reappear throughout the entire piece
creating a coherent musical form (Thickstun, Harchaoui, and
Kakade 2017; Huang et al. 2019). Dealing with such dependencies requires processing very long sequences (several
pages of text or the entire musical composition) in a manner
that aggregates information from their distant parts. Especially challenging are approaches that work directly on the
raw audio waveform.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7245

