The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Personalizing Individual Comfort in the Group Setting
Emil Laftchiev, Diego Romeres, Daniel Nikovski
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
Cambridge, MA 02139
laftchiev@merl.com

Abstract

environment, such as opening a window or adjusting a heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) device. Yet,
each of these actions represents a learned intuitive model
that is more complex than readily apparent. In search of an
easily deployable method, here we focus on setting HVAC
set-points, which in practice means learning the complicated non-linear relationship between the thermal conditions
at an individual’s location in the room and the temperature at a measurement point that controls the HVAC device.
Users typically do not approximate these relationships very
well. Most often, users learn heuristics on how to set the
HVAC set-point or learn the most acceptable compromise
on their thermal comfort. The problem is further complicated in common spaces, such as offices and living rooms.
Here, choosing how to set the room temperature acquires a
social/political component, and users may try to satisfy immediate desires by overshooting their perceived set-points,
resulting in more discomfort for themselves and other occupants, as well as wasted energy. Yet, studies show that it is
exactly in these environments where improving comfort is
most important, leading to improved work performance and
satisfaction, as well as increased social happiness (Hedge,
Wafa, and Anshu 2005). Thus, the ability to improve comfort automatically is very desirable, particularly in group settings. This is reflected in the recent increased interest in solving this problem (Smith et al. 2017).

Maintaining individual thermal comfort in indoor spaces
shared by multiple occupants is difficult because it requires
both intuition about the thermal properties of the room and
an understanding of the thermal comfort preferences of each
individual. We explore an approach to optimizing individual
thermal comfort within a group through temperature set-point
optimization of HVAC equipment. We propose a weaklysupervised algorithm to learn the individual thermal comfort
preferences and an autoencoding framework to learn static
approximations of room thermodynamics. We further propose two approaches to learn a control law that sets the HVAC
set-points subject to the preferred user temperatures. The proposed method is tested on a real data-set obtained from workers in an open office. The results show that, on average, the
temperature in the room at each user’s location can be regulated to within 0.5o C of the user’s desired temperature.

Introduction
At any given time, a person’s feeling of thermal comfort
is somewhere on a continuum from cold to hot (ASHRAE
2013). The conditions that make a person comfortable are
unique and dependent on physiological factors such as ethnicity, body composition, gender, and state of health, as well
as environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, airflow, and weather. As a consequence of the difficulty in
measuring many of these variables and the computational
complexity of using many measured variables, individual
thermal comfort is commonly summarized by the easily
measured variables of temperature and humidity (ASHRAE
2013; CEN 2006; Haldi 2010). The set of temperature and
humidity values for which a person is comfortable is commonly called their comfort zone, and zones common to
many individuals are defined by engineering standard bodies
(ASHRAE 2013; CEN 2006). These comfort zones provide
an imperfect method to attempting to optimize user comfort
that so far has been the best approach available for mass deployment.
Traditionally, maintaining thermal comfort has been an
individual’s own responsibility. Comfort is usually maintained through clothing adjustments or adjustments in the

Background
Modern methods in sensing and learning offer the promise
of developing the ability to automatically improve and maintain personal comfort. Here, we briefly review the state of
the art in several fields relevant to this application, focusing
mainly on thermal comfort modeling and thermodynamic
modeling of the room.
Several recent papers have explored the problem of modeling personal thermal comfort (Laftchiev and Nikovski
2016; Ranjan and Scott 2016; Huang, Yang, and Newman
2015; Jiang and Yao 2016; Farhan et al. 2015; Yi, Jia, and
Ler 2019; Kim, Schiavon, and Brager 2018). An important
focus of this work has been on reducing the need for human
feedback (Natarajan and Laftchiev 2019; Hu et al. 2019).
This is because we know that, given sufficient feedback from
the users, it is possible to learn a personalized model of the
user’s thermal preferences using statistical machine learning

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15339

