The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GDPNet: Refining Latent Multi-View Graph for Relation Extraction
Fuzhao Xue1 , Aixin Sun1, * , Hao Zhang1,2 , Eng Siong Chng1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
{fuzhao001@e., axsun@, hao007@e., aseschng@}ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

S1:
S2:
S1:
S2:
S1:
S2:

Relation Extraction (RE) is to predict the relation type of two
entities that are mentioned in a piece of text, e.g., a sentence
or a dialogue. When the given text is long, it is challenging to
identify indicative words for the relation prediction. Recent
advances on RE task are from BERT-based sequence modeling and graph-based modeling of relationships among the
tokens in the sequence. In this paper, we propose to construct
a latent multi-view graph to capture various possible relationships among tokens. We then refine this graph to select important words for relation prediction. Finally, the representation
of the refined graph and the BERT-based sequence representation are concatenated for relation extraction. Specifically,
in our proposed GDPNet (Gaussian Dynamic Time Warping
Pooling Net), we utilize Gaussian Graph Generator (GGG)
to generate edges of the multi-view graph. The graph is then
refined by Dynamic Time Warping Pooling (DTWPool). On
DialogRE and TACRED, we show that GDPNet achieves the
best performance on dialogue-level RE, and comparable performance with the state-of-the-arts on sentence-level RE. Our
code is available at https://github.com/XueFuzhao/GDPNet.

S1:

Hey Pheebs.
Hey!
Any sign of your brother?
No, but he is always late.
I thought you only met him once?
Yeah, I did. I think it sounds y’know big sistery,
y’know, ‘Frank’s always late.’
Well relax, he’ll be here.

R1
R2

Argument Pair
(Frank, S2)
(S2, Pheebs)

Trigger
brother
none

Relation type
per:siblings
per:alternate names

Table 1: An example from DialogRE dataset (Yu et al. 2020).

tic relation between the two entities. Most of the remaining words in the given sentence are less relevant to the prediction. Another example from DialogRE (Yu et al. 2020)
dataset is shown in Table 1. Observe that Relation 1 (R1) can
be easily predicted based on a trigger word (e.g., “brother”),
despite the long conversation between S1 and S2. DialogRE
even provides trigger word annotation, which is the smallest
span of text that most clearly indicates the existence of the
relation between two arguments (see Table 1). This observation motives us to find and rely more on such indicative
words for RE, particularly when the context is long.
Graph-based neural models have been widely adopted for
RE due to their outstanding performance. Typically, each
node in graph represents a token or an entity in the given
text. There are multiple ways to construct edges. Many studies rely on an external parser converting text sequences to
dependency trees to initialize the graph. Errors made by
the parser therefore propagate to the graph. Recent studies directly learn a latent graph from text (Christopoulou,
Miwa, and Ananiadou 2018, 2019; Hashimoto and Tsuruoka
2017). The challenge is to handle long texts, as in the example shown in Table 1. It is difficult to learn latent graphs
from long sequences, with token level node representations.
Christopoulou, Miwa, and Ananiadou (2019) simplifies the
latent graph by using predefined rules and extra labels, but
these rules and labels are not readily available in raw data.
Similar to many other tasks, BERT-based models have
demonstrated effectiveness on both sentence-level RE (Wu

Introduction
Given two entities and a piece of text where the two entities
are mentioned in, the task of relation extraction (RE) is to
predict the semantic relation between the two entities. The
piece of text serves as the context for the prediction, which
can be a short sentence, a long sentence, or even a dialog.
We use an example from TACRED (Zhang et al. 2017) to
illustrate the RE task. In this example, we are interested in
predicting the relation type between two entities: “Cathleen
P. Black” and “chairwoman”. Based on a sentence: “Carey
will succeed Cathleen P. Black, who held the position for
15 years and will take on a new role as chairwoman of
Hearst Magazines, the company said”, we aim to predict the
two entities’ relation to be “per:title”. Note that, the relation
types in RE tasks are predefined. For instance, TARCED defines 41 types and a special “no relation” type if a predicted
relation is not covered in the 41 predefined types.
Observe from the example, only a few words (e.g., “take
a new role as”) in the given context are related to the seman* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14194

