The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-view Inference for Relation Extraction with Uncertain Knowledge
Bo Li1,2 , Wei Ye1∗ , Canming Huang3 , Shikun Zhang1
1

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
deepblue.lb@stu.pku.edu.cn, wye@pku.edu.cn,
huangzzk@bupt.edu.cn, zhangsk@pku.edu.cn
WordNet1 ; Lei et al. (2018) extracted the n-gram text matching words of each entity from FreeBase (Bollacker et al.
2008); Li et al. (2019a) used relative semantic frames from
FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al. 2006). The other way is to
explore the latent semantics of KGs. Researchers may incorporate pre-trained entity and relation embeddings (Wang
et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2019), e.g., from TransE (Bordes et al.
2013), or jointly learn the entity embedding and RE models’
parameters (Han, Liu, and Sun 2018; Xu and Barbosa 2019).
Despite various ways of leveraging KGs, most previous
RE methods focus on deterministic KGs, where a specific
relation either exists between two entities or not. However,
in real-world scenarios, prior knowledge resources may contain inconsistent, ambiguous, and uncertain information (Wu
et al. 2012). It would not be easy to capture highly-related
external information if we treat all relations between entities
as equally important. Another type of KGs, called Uncertain
KGs (Chen et al. 2019) such as ConceptNet (Speer, Chin,
and Havasi 2017) and ProBase (Wu et al. 2012), come to the
rescue. Given two words (typically two entities or an entity
and a concept) and a relation, uncertain KGs provide a confidence score that measures the possibility of the two words
having the given relation. This inspires us to exploit the prior
probability distribution of relational facts in uncertain KGs
to improve relation extraction.
As a representative uncertain KG, ProBase provides IsA
relation between an entity and a concept, indicating to what
extent the target entity belongs to the concept, which is essential information for RE. Meanwhile, the concise structure of ProBase makes it convenient to be coupled with supervised relation extraction datasets. Therefore, we choose
to use ProBase as our external uncertain KG and retrieve
highly-related concepts of each entity. The relational facts
and their confidence scores provide a prior probability distribution of concepts for an entity, which can serve as valuable
supplementary knowledge given limited local contextual information.
ProBase brings global knowledge about related concepts
for an entity pair, while the target document (or sentence)
provides local semantic information about related mentions.
We now have three views for the contextual information of a
relational fact: concept view, entity view, and mention view.

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are widely used to facilitate relation extraction (RE) tasks. While most previous RE methods
focus on leveraging deterministic KGs, uncertain KGs, which
assign a confidence score for each relation instance, can provide prior probability distributions of relational facts as valuable external knowledge for RE models. This paper proposes
to exploit uncertain knowledge to improve relation extraction.
Specifically, we introduce ProBase, an uncertain KG that indicates to what extent a target entity belongs to a concept, into
our RE architecture. We then design a novel multi-view inference framework to systematically integrate local context and
global knowledge across three views: mention-, entity- and
concept-view. The experiment results show that our model
achieves competitive performances on both sentence- and
document-level relation extraction, which verifies the effectiveness of introducing uncertain knowledge and the multiview inference framework that we design.

Introduction
The goal of relation extraction (RE) is to classify the semantic relation between entities in a given context. It has
plenty of practical applications, such as question answering
(Yu et al. 2017) and information retrieval (Kadry and Dietz 2017). Knowledge graphs (KGs) (Bollacker et al. 2008;
Ruppenhofer et al. 2006; Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017; Wu
et al. 2012), which contain pre-defined nodes (usually entities or concepts) and their relations, have been widely incorporated into RE tasks to integrate various prior knowledge
in recent years.
The interaction between KGs and RE lies in two main
aspects. On the one hand, we can use relational facts in exiting KGs to assign relation labels for entity pairs in unlabeled corpora to build datasets for distant supervision RE
(Mintz et al. 2009). On the other hand, we can leverage the
external knowledge in KGs to boost the performance of RE
models, which is the case of this paper. Generally, there are
two ways to integrate prior knowledge into RE. One way
is to utilize structured information explicitly. For example,
Can et al. (2019) retrieved the synonyms of each entity from
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13234

https://wordnet.princeton.edu/

