The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Query-Memory Re-Aggregation for Weakly-supervised Video Object
Segmentation
Fanchao Lin1 , Hongtao Xie1∗ , Yan Li1,2 , Yongdong Zhang1
1

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Beijing Kuaishou Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
lfc1995@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, liyan@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised video object segmentation (WVOS) is an
emerging video task that can track and segment the target given a simple bounding box label. However, existing WVOS
methods are still unsatisfied in either speed or accuracy, since they only use the exemplar frame to guide the prediction while they neglect the reference from other frames. To
solve the problem, we propose a novel Re-Aggregation based
framework, which uses feature matching to efficiently find the
target and capture the temporal dependencies from multiple
frames to guide the segmentation. Based on a two-stage structure, our framework builds an information-symmetric matching process to achieve robust aggregation. In each stage,
we design a Query-Memory Aggregation (QMA) module to
gather features from the past frames and make bidirectional aggregation to adaptively weight the aggregated features,
which relieves the latent misguidance in unidirectional aggregation. To exploit the information from different aggregation stages, we propose a novel coarse-fine constraint by using the Cascaded Refinement Module (CRM) to combine the
predictions from different stages and further boost the performance. Experimental results on three benchmarks show
that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance in
WVOS (e.g., an overall score of 84.7% on the DAVIS 2016
validation set).

Figure 1: Visual comparison between semi-supervised, unsupervised and weakly-supervised VOS. The first row is the
exemplar frame and corresponding target labels. The second
row shows the query frame and corresponding segmentation
results. Only the weakly-supervised VOS can tackle multiple targets with the simple labels.

However, the acquisition of the pixel-wise segmentation label is time-consuming and may be impractical in many cases. Unsupervised methods do not need any prior label and
can make tracking and segmentation for the salient object, but they usually need to decide a main target in a video,
leading to suboptimal accuracy and the restricted use in the
cases with multiple targets.
In view of the limitations in both semi-supervised and
unsupervised solutions, recent researchers tend to solve the
VOS task in a weakly-supervised manner, which gives an
easily obtained bounding box label as prior. In this way,
users can conveniently mark the objects they want and the
number of objects is not limited. SiamMask (Wang et al.
2019) uses the feature matching in a light-weighted network
to make real-time tracking and segmentation. Though fast
enough, its performance is not satisfactory as it only uses the exemplar frame as guidance. BoltVOS (Voigtlaender, Luiten, and Leibe 2019) designs a two-stage framework
where the first stage tracks the bounding box and the second
stage makes segmentation. Due to the utilization of conditional R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015) and extra segmentation network, this method achieves high accuracy while runs at a
low speed.
Inspired by the recent temporal aggregation mechanism
in video tasks, we use an aggregation based framework to
take care of both efficiency and accuracy. The temporal aggregation usually calculates a pixel-wise similarity matrix

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims to track and give the
pixel-wise identification of specific objects in a video sequence, which has many application scenarios like contentbased interaction, video editing, video conference, and so
on. With the prevalence of large-scale video-based datasets
(Perazzi et al. 2016; Pont-Tuset et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018),
it has been a mainstream to solve the VOS using deep neural
networks.
Most works in VOS can be divided into semi-supervised
methods (Wang et al. 2019; Oh et al. 2019), unsupervised methods(Lu et al. 2019; Ventura et al. 2019) and
weakly-supervised methods(Wang et al. 2019; Voigtlaender, Luiten, and Leibe 2019). As shown in Fig. 1, semisupervised methods can generate accurate segmentation results given a concrete mask label in the exemplar frame.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2038

