The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Imagine, Reason and Write: Visual Storytelling with Graph Knowledge and
Relational Reasoning
Chunpu Xu1 , Min Yang1 * , Chengming Li1 , Ying Shen2 , Xiang Ao3 , Ruifeng Xu4
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
chunpuxu19@gmail.com, {min.yang, cm.li}@siat.ac.cn, sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn, aoxiang@ict.ac.cn,
xuruifeng@hit.edu.cn
Abstract

the semantics of images (Wang et al. 2018a; Huang et al.
2019; Jung et al. 2020). The common idea of these methods is to use the convolutional neural network (CNN) as an
encoder to extract the visual feature of each image and fuse
them together to obtain the whole image stream representation, and then feed this representational vector into a hierarchical long short-term memory (LSTM) so as to generate
the narrative story. Seq2seq models have brought great improvements for VST and almost dominate this field, since
they have the capacity to generate stories with good flexibility and quality.
Despite the remarkable progress of previous methods,
there are still several technical challenges for visual storytelling. First, one major challenge for storytelling is how to
learn the storyline (a sequence of coherent concepts) for the
image stream, which can serve as a guidance for generating a subjective and imaginative story. However, most previous methods learn the main concepts for each image without
considering the previously generated sentences (i.e., semantic features), which may hurt the coherence of the generated story. Second, most existing studies merely learn finegrained visual features for images, which do not explicitly
detect the objects and reason about their visual relationship.
Fortunately, with advanced progress in deep learning and
image recognition, higher-level visual understanding tasks
such as scene graph construction have achieved noticeable
success in various computer vision tasks (Teney, Liu, and
van Den Hengel 2017; Johnson, Gupta, and Fei-Fei 2018),
which may provide complementary strengths with symbolic
reasoning for visual storytelling. Third, previous Seq2Seq
models generate the stories solely from the original images.
Such information is insufficient for generating diversity and
imaginative stories since a certain story could contain not
only the concepts described in the image, but also the imaginary concepts that do not appear in the image.
In this study, we aim at resolving the aforementioned
challenges in a unified framework. We explore the symbolic
knowledge (graph knowledge) and relation reasoning for visual storytelling, aiming to benefit from the complementary
strengths of both symbolic reasoning and end-to-end multimodal feature mapping. To this end, we propose a novel

Visual storytelling is the task of generating a short story to
describe an ordered image stream. Different from visual captions, stories contain not only factual descriptions, but also
imaginary concepts that do not appear in the images. In this
paper, we propose a novel imagine-reason-write generation
framework (IRW) for visual storytelling, inspired by the logic
of humans when they write a story. First, a multimodal imagining module is leveraged to learn the imaginative storyline
explicitly, improving the coherence and reasonability of the
generated story. Second, we employ a relational reasoning
module to fully exploit the external knowledge (commonsense knowledge base) and task-specific knowledge (scene
graph and event graph) with a relational reasoning method
based on the storyline. In this way, we can effectively capture the most informative commonsense and visual relationships among objects in images, enhancing the diversity and
informativeness of the generated story. Finally, we integrate
the visual information and semantic (concept) information
to generate human-like stories. Extensive experiments on a
benchmark dataset (i.e., VIST) demonstrate that the proposed
IRW framework substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods across multiple evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Visual storytelling (VST), which aims to generate a sequence of coherent sentences to describe an ordered image
stream, has gained increasing attention in the vision and language communities. Different from visual captions, stories
have more diverse structures and include imaginary concepts that do not explicitly appear in the image sequence.
VST is challenging because it requires machines not only to
fully understand semantic meaning of each image in a steam
and the relations among the images, but also to possess the
linguistic intelligence to generate the fluent paragraph and
imaginary concepts for storytelling.
Most recent VST methods employ the sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) models to generate the stories based on
* Min Yang is corresponding author (min.yang@siat.ac.cn).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3022

