The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Narrative Plan Generation with Self-Supervised Learning
Mihai Polceanu, 1 Julie Porteous, 2 Alan Lindsay, 3 Marc Cavazza 1
1

School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Greenwich, London, UK
2
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
3
School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK
m.polceanu@gre.ac.uk, julie.porteous@rmit.edu.au, alan.lindsay@hw.ac.uk, m.cavazza@gre.ac.uk

Abstract

Charles, and Cavazza 2016) or narrative trajectories (Porteous et al. 2011), which play an important role in story
quality, can be captured by Planning representations. With
the increasing availability of large-scale narrative resources
(Finlayson 2013), an alternative approach could be to harness Deep Learning (DL) methods that have demonstrated
their appropriateness for sequence generation.
In this paper, we wish to first demonstrate the basic ability of DL methods, learning from a dataset of well-formed
plots, to produce novel narrative sequences, which preserve
those story properties that justified the previous use of planning in narrative generation. We thus use as a dataset plot
sequences produced by a narrative planning approach that
adopts a plot-centric perspective (Riedl and Young 2010), to
train Generative Recurrent Neural Networks. We then analyze the generated plots for their plan well-formedness, diversity, and narrative properties. This method for training
DL networks with ”synthetic” data is also inspired from the
use of computer graphics to train DL models in computer
vision (Qiu et al. 2017).

Narrative Generation has attracted significant interest as a
novel application of Automated Planning techniques. However, the vast amount of narrative material available opens the
way to the use of Deep Learning techniques. In this paper, we
explore the feasibility of narrative generation through selfsupervised learning, using sequence embedding techniques
or auto-encoders to produce narrative sequences. We use
datasets of well-formed plots generated by a narrative planning approach, using pre-existing, published, narrative planning domains, to train generative models. Our experiments
demonstrate the ability of generative sequence models to produce narrative plots with similar structure to those obtained
with planning techniques, but with significant plot novelty in
comparison with the training set. Most importantly, generated plots share structural properties associated with narrative
quality measures used in Planning-based methods. As planbased structures account for a higher level of causality and
narrative consistency, this suggests that our approach is able
to extend a set of narratives with novel sequences that display
the same high-level narrative properties. Unlike methods developed to extend sets of textual narratives, ours operates at
the level of plot structure. Thus, it has the potential to be used
across various media for plots of significant complexity, being initially limited to training and generation operating in the
same narrative genre.

Previous and Related Work
The use of planning techniques is well-established in narrative generation (Riedl and Young 2010), and has been used
to represent complex structures such as narrative arcs (Porteous et al. 2011) and discourse-level phenomena (Young
et al. 2013). It is primarily intended to generate a plot structure in which planning operators represent core narrative
actions. Wang et al. (2017) have complemented traditional
plan-based narrative generation with a deep Reinforcement
Learning (RL) component, aimed at personalizing narrative generation. Finlayson (2015) is one of the earliest examples of applying Machine Learning (ML) to plot structures, using Propp’s narrative functions as elementary narrative units. Finlayson’s system operates through annotation
of textual stories with narrative functions and aims to extract
a plot structure independent of its linguistic realization. Subsequent ML approaches directly process textual stories without narrative annotation, thereby acquiring simultaneously
plot structure and semantic aspects: their plot structures are
however often of limited length. Xu et al. (2018) generate a short textual narrative from a one-sentence thematic
description using a combination of Seq2Seq (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) encoder-decoders with RL to con-

Introduction
Narrative Generation has attracted significant attention in
the Entertainment AI community for its potential to develop
new media genres such as Interactive Narrative or provide
new gameplay content in computer games (Riedl and Bulitko 2012). There has been substantial work in the use of
Planning technologies (Riedl and Young 2010) to support
the generation of consistent plots, in particular preserving
the causality of narrative actions (Young et al. 2013). Planning technologies can support generation in various media,
from 3D graphics to text or even video, as they are essentially media neutral. It has also been demonstrated, through
various user evaluations of the end-product narrative, that
plan-based narratives are recognized as realistic by users
and that sophisticated aspects such as sub-plots (Porteous,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5984

