The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-level Distance Regularization for Deep Metric Learning
Yonghyun Kim1 * , Wonpyo Park2 *
1

AI Lab, Kakao Enterprise
2
Kakao Corp.
aiden.d@kakaoenterprise.com, tony.nn@kakaocorp.com

Abstract

can be aligned too far in the embedding space. Therefore,
several loss functions employ additional terms to avoid positive pairs to be too close and negative pairs to be too far,
e.g., margin m in Triplet loss (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015) and Constrastive loss (Hadsell, Chopra, and
LeCun 2006). Despite these attempts, they still can suffer
from overfitting due to the lack of explicit regularization for
the distances.
Our insight is that a learning procedure of DML can be enhanced by explicitly regularizing the distance between pairs
to disturb a loss function of DML from optimizing an embedding network; one easy way to constrain a distance is to
pull the value of the distance to a predefined level. Conventional loss functions of DML adjust the distance according
to its label, on the other hand, explicit distance-based regularization prevents the distance from deviating from the predefined level. Those two interfere with the objective of each
other, thus it makes the learning process difficult and allows
the embedding network to be more robust for generalization. Additionally, we consider multiple levels with disjoint
intervals to regularize distances, not a single level, because
a degree of inter-class similarity or intra-class variation can
be different depending on classes or instances.
We propose a novel method called Multi-level Distance
Regularization (MDR) that makes the conventional loss
functions of DML have difficulty in converging by holding
each distance so that it does not deviate from the belonging
level. At first, MDR normalizes pairwise distances among
the embedding vectors of a mini-batch, with their mean and
standard deviation to obtain the objective degree of similarity between a pair by considering overall distribution. MDR
defines the multiple levels that represent various degrees of
similarity for pairwise distances, and the levels and the belonging distances are trained to approach each other (Figure
1b). A conventional loss function of DML struggles to optimize a model by overcoming the disturbance from the proposed regularization. Therefore, the learning process succeeds in learning a model with a better generalization ability.
We summarize our contributions:

We propose a novel distance-based regularization method for
deep metric learning called Multi-level Distance Regularization (MDR). MDR explicitly disturbs a learning procedure
by regularizing pairwise distances between embedding vectors into multiple levels that represents a degree of similarity
between a pair. In the training stage, the model is trained with
both MDR and an existing loss function of deep metric learning, simultaneously; the two losses interfere with the objective of each other, and it makes the learning process difficult.
Moreover, MDR prevents some examples from being ignored
or overly influenced in the learning process. These allow the
parameters of the embedding network to be settle on a local
optima with better generalization. Without bells and whistles,
MDR with simple Triplet loss achieves the-state-of-the-art
performance in various benchmark datasets: CUB-200-2011,
Cars-196, Stanford Online Products, and In-Shop Clothes Retrieval. We extensively perform ablation studies on its behaviors to show the effectiveness of MDR. By easily adopting
our MDR, the previous approaches can be improved in performance and generalization ability.

Introduction
Deep Metric Learning (DML) aims to learn an appropriate
metric that measures the semantic difference between a pair
of images as a distance between embedding vectors. Many
research areas such as image retrieval (Sohn 2016; Yuan,
Yang, and Zhang 2017; Oh Song et al. 2017; Duan et al.
2018; Ge 2018) and face recognition (Wang et al. 2017; Liu
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2019) are based on
DML to seek appropriate metrics among instances. Those
studies focus on devising a better loss function for DML.
Most of previous loss functions (Sohn 2016; Bromley
et al. 1994; Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006; Yi et al. 2014;
Hoffer and Ailon 2015; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
2015) use binary supervision that indicates whether a given
pair is positive or negative. Their common objective is to
minimize the distance between a positive pair and maximize
the distance between a negative pair (Figure 1a). However,
without any constraints, a model trained with such objective is prone to overfitting on a training set because positive pairs can be aligned too closely while the negative pairs

• We introduce MDR, a novel regularization method for
DML. The method disturbs optimizing pairwise distances
by preventing them from deviating from its belonging
level for better generalization.

* Equal Contribution

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1827

