The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GoT: a Growing Tree Model for Clustering Ensemble
Feijiang Li, Yuhua Qian, Jieting Wang
Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University
feijiangli@email.sxu.edu.cn, yuhuaqian@126.com, jietingwang@email.sxu.edu.cn

form the co-association matrix (also known as CA matrix).
For a set of clustering results Π = {π1 , π2 , . . . , πl } on a data
set with n samples U = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }, the CA matrix is

Abstract
The clustering ensemble technique that integrates multiple
clustering results can improve the accuracy and robustness of
the final clustering. In many clustering ensemble algorithms, the co-association matrix (CA matrix), which reflects the
frequency of any two samples being partitioned into the same
cluster, plays an important role. However, generally, the CA
matrix is highly sparse with low value density, which may
limit the performance of an algorithm based on it. To handle
these issues, in this paper, we propose a growing tree model (GoT). In this model, the CA matrix is firstly refined by
the shortest path technique so that its sparsity will be mitigated. Then, a set of representative prototype examples is discovered. Finally, to handle the low value density of the CA
matrix, the prototypes gradually connect to their neighborhood, which likes a set of trees growing up. The rationality of
the discovered prototype examples is illustrated by theoretical
analysis and experimental analysis. The working mechanism
of the GoT is visually shown on synthetic data sets. Experimental analyses on eight UCI data sets and eight image data
sets show that the GoT outperforms nine representative clustering ensemble algorithms.

CA = {aij }n×n ,

(1)

l

1X
I cb (xi ), cb (xj ) ,
l

(2)

where
aij =

b=1

and
 b
1, c (xi ) = cb (xj )
I c (xi ), c (xj ) =
0, cb (xi ) 6= cb (xj ).
b

b



To obtain a consensus clustering π∗ , the CA matrix is utilized by a large number of clustering ensemble techniques.
However, some limitations of the CA matrix may affect the
performance of clustering ensemble methods based on it.
The limitations mainly come from two aspects:
• High Sparsity. The CA matrix is highly sparse, which
makes most of the samples’ relations can not be reflected.
• Low Value Density. A higher co-association value offers
more reliable information, while most of the elements of
the CA matrix are small values.

Introduction
Data clustering is an interesting unsupervised technique in
machine learning (Vega-Pons and Ruiz-Shulcloper 2011;
Zhou 2019), which aims to partition a data set into homogeneous groups or clusters based on the similarity between
samples. The clustering ensemble technique has drawn
much attentions due to its ability of improving clustering
effectiveness and robustness. The clustering ensemble technique discovers the group structure of data through combining multiple diverse clustering results without involving the
original data set (Strehl and Ghosh 2003). Due to the flexible process, clustering ensemble technique has been widely
applied in many challenging tasks, such as high dimensional data clustering (Li et al. 2018), large-scale data clustering
(Yu et al. 2019), temporal data clustering (Yang and Chen
2010), image segmentation (Zhang et al. 2008), etc.
Given a set of clustering results, the frequency that two
samples appear in the same cluster is used to measure the
relation between two samples. All the pairwise frequencies

To show the above limitations, we utilize the example in
(Huang, Lai, and Wang 2016). They generate 10 base clustering results on the MNIST handwritten digits data set and
construct the CA matrix. Firstly, we show the fraction of the
zero value in the CA matrix in Figure 1 (a). From Figure
1 (a), it is easy to see that this CA matrix contains a large
number of zero values, which indicates a highly sparse matrix. Figure 1 (b) shows the low value density limitation by
showing the relations between the ratio and accuracy of coassociation values. The accuracy of a co-association value
is the proportion of the links with the co-association value
that makes a correct decision. As shown by Figure 1 (b), a
higher co-association value obtains a higher accuracy value, while a lower co-association value obtains a higher ratio,
which means that the CA matrix contains many unreliable
information.
The sparsity of the CA matrix means that a number of
sample pairs have no relation. As a result, the clusters may

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8349

