The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PC-HMR: Pose Calibration for 3D Human Mesh Recovery from 2D Images/Videos
Tianyu Luan 1 * , Yali Wang 1 * , Junhao Zhang 1 * , Zhe Wang 3 , Zhipeng Zhou 1 ,
Yu Qiao 1 2†
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
University of California, Irvine
{ty.luan, yl.wang, zhangjh, zp.zhou, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, zwang15@uci.edu

Abstract
The end-to-end Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) approach
(Kanazawa et al. 2018) has been successfully used for 3D
body reconstruction. However, most HMR-based frameworks
reconstruct human body by directly learning mesh parameters
from images or videos, while lacking explicit guidance of 3D
human pose in visual data. As a result, the generated mesh
often exhibits incorrect pose for complex activities. To tackle
this problem, we propose to exploit 3D pose to calibrate human mesh. Specifically, we develop two novel Pose Calibration frameworks, i.e., Serial PC-HMR and Parallel PC-HMR.
By coupling advanced 3D pose estimators and HMR in a
serial or parallel manner, these two frameworks can effectively correct human mesh with guidance of a concise pose
calibration module. Furthermore, since the calibration module is designed via non-rigid pose transformation, our PCHMR frameworks can flexibly tackle bone length variations
to alleviate misplacement in the calibrated mesh. Finally, our
frameworks are based on generic and complementary integration of data-driven learning and geometrical modeling. Via
plug-and-play modules, they can be efficiently adapted for
both image/video-based human mesh recovery. Additionally,
they have no requirement of extra 3D pose annotations in the
testing phase, which releases inference difficulties in practice. We perform extensive experiments on the popular benchmarks, i.e., Human3.6M, 3DPW and SURREAL, where our
PC-HMR frameworks achieve the SOTA results.

1

Figure 1: Motivation. The widely-used HMR (Kanazawa
et al. 2018) reconstructs human body by directly regressing mesh parameters, while lacking explicit guidance from
3D pose. As a result, it often fails to capture complex pose
variations, e.g., the right arm of this actor. To tackle such
problem, we propose pose calibration for human mesh recovery (PC-HMR), which can effectively integrate advanced
3D estimator and HMR in a novel manner to correct mesh.

been gradually used as the mainstream architecture for endto-end 3D reconstruction. However, HMR reconstructs body
configuration by directly regressing 3D mesh parameters of
SMPL (Loper et al. 2015), while lacking explicit and geometrical knowledge of 3D human pose. As a result, the
generated mesh often fails to correctly capture human pose
variations in complex activities, e.g., HMR achieves an unsatisfactory mesh on the right arm of the actor in Fig. 1.
Hence, our basic idea is to use 3D human pose as guidance to reduce structural ambiguity in the 3D mesh. However, the ground truth 3D pose is usually unavailable in the
testing phase. Fortunately, 3D pose estimation has recently
made remarkable progress (Martinez et al. 2017; Cai et al.
2019; Pavllo et al. 2019), based on the fast development of
deep learning. Inspired by this observation, we propose to
integrate 3D pose estimators and HMR approaches in a unified fashion, so that we can take advantage of their complementary combination to calibrate human mesh.
Specifically, we introduce three contributions in this
work. First, we develop two novel frameworks for Pose
Calibration (PC), i.e., Serial and Parallel PC-HMR. Serial
PC-HMR is a mesh-pose AutoEncoding framework. It can
adaptively refine 3D pose to correct HMR mesh via multilevel encoding-decoding architecture. Parallel PC-HMR is
a mesh-pose TwoStream framework. It can directly take ad-

Introduction

3D human mesh reconstruction is an important computer vision task with wide real-life applications such as virtual tryon, robotics, etc. However, it is often challenging to reconstruct human body mesh from images or monocular videos,
due to inherent ambiguity in unconstrained environments.
Recently, deep learning has proven to be promising to alleviate such limitation (Kanazawa et al. 2018, 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019b; Nikos Kolotouros 2019; Kolotouros et al. 2019;
Sun et al. 2019b; Wang, Shin, and Fowlkes 2020; Kocabas,
Athanasiou, and Black 2020). In particular, a Human Mesh
Recovery (HMR) framework (Kanazawa et al. 2018) has
* T.Luan, Y.Wang and J.Zhang contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2269

