The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Scalable Two Stage Approach to Computing Optimal Decision Sets*
Alexey Ignatiev1 , Edward Lam1,2 , Peter J. Stuckey1 , Joao Marques-Silva3
1 Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2 CSIRO Data61, Melbourne, Australia
3 ANITI, IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France

{alexey.ignatiev,edward.lam,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, joao.marques-silva@irit.fr

brard, and O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska et al. 2018; Hu,
Rudin, and Seltzer 2019; Aglin, Nijssen, and Schaus 2020),
decision lists (Angelino et al. 2017; Rudin and Ertekin 2018)
or decision sets (Lakkaraju, Bach, and Leskovec 2016; Ignatiev et al. 2018; Malioutov and Meel 2018; Ghosh and
Meel 2019; Yu et al. 2020), where concise explanations can
be obtained directly from the model. This paper focuses on
the decision set (DS) model, which comprises an unordered
set of if-then rules.
One of the advantages of decision sets over other rulebased models is that rule independence makes it straightforward to explain a prediction: a user can pick any rule
that “fires” the prediction and the rule itself serves as the
explanation. As a result, generation of minimum-size decision sets is of great interest. Recent work proposed SATbased methods for generating minimum-size decision sets
by solving a sequence of problems that determine whether
a decision set of size K exists, with K being the number of
rules (Ignatiev et al. 2018) or the number of literals (Yu et al.
2020) s.t. the decision set agrees with the training data. Unfortunately, scalability of both approaches is limited due to
the large size of the propositional encoding.
Motivated by this limitation, our work proposes a novel
approach that splits the DS generation problem into two
parts: (1) exhaustive rule enumeration and (2) computing a
subset of rules agreeing with the training data. In general,
this novel approach enables a significantly more compact
propositional encoding, which makes it scalable for problem
instances that are out of reach for the state of the art. The
proposed approach is inspired by the standard setup used
in two-level logic minimization (Quine 1952, 1955; McCluskey 1956). While the first part can be done using enumeration of maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT) solutions, the
second part is reduced to the set cover problem, for which
integer linear programming (ILP) is effective. Experiments
on a wide range of datasets indicate that this approach outperforms the state of the art. The remainder of this paper
presents these developments in detail.

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) is ubiquitous in modern life. Since it
is being deployed in technologies that affect our privacy and
safety, it is often crucial to understand the reasoning behind
its decisions, warranting the need for explainable AI. Rulebased models, such as decision trees, decision lists, and decision sets, are conventionally deemed to be the most interpretable. Recent work uses propositional satisfiability (SAT)
solving (and its optimization variants) to generate minimumsize decision sets. Motivated by limited practical scalability
of these earlier methods, this paper proposes a novel approach
to learn minimum-size decision sets by enumerating individual rules of the target decision set independently of each
other, and then solving a set cover problem to select a subset
of rules. The approach makes use of modern maximum satisfiability and integer linear programming technologies. Experiments on a wide range of publicly available datasets demonstrate the advantage of the new approach over the state of the
art in SAT-based decision set learning.

1

Introduction

Rapid advances in artificial intelligence and, in particular, in
machine learning (ML), have influenced all aspects of human lives. Given the practical achievements and the overall success of modern approaches to ML (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015; Jordan and Mitchell 2015; Mnih et al.
2015), one can argue that it will prevail as a generic computing paradigm and it will find an ever growing range of
practical applications. Unfortunately, the most widely used
ML models are opaque, which makes it hard for a human
decision-maker to comprehend the outcomes of such models. This motivated efforts on validating the operation of ML
models (Ruan, Huang, and Kwiatkowska 2018; Katz et al.
2017) but also on devising approaches to explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Lundberg and Lee 2017; Monroe 2018).
One of the major lines of work in XAI is devoted to training logic-based models, e.g. decision trees (Bessiere, He* This work is supported in part by the AI Interdisciplinary Institute ANITI, funded by the French program “Investing for the
Future - PIA3” under Grant agreement no. ANR-19-PI3A-0004.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

Preliminaries

Satisfiability and Maximum Satisfiability. We use the
standard definitions for propositional satisfiability (SAT)
3806

