The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Research Reproducibility as a Survival Analysis
Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
raff edward@bah.com
raff.edward@umbc.edu

Abstract

amount of effort. We will refer to this as reproduction time in
order to reduce our use of standard terminology that has the
opposite connotation of what we desire. Our goal, as a community, is to reduce the reproduction time toward zero and
to understand what factors increase or decrease reproduction
time.
We will start with a review of related work on reproducibility, specifically in machine learning, in §2. Next, we will
detail how we developed an extended dataset with paper
survival times in §3. We will use models with the Cox proportional hazards assumption to perform our survival analysis,
which will begin with a linear model in §4. The linear model
will afford us easier interpretation and statistical tools to verify that the Cox proportional hazards model is reasonable for
our data. In §5 we will train a non-linear Cox model that is
a better fit for our data in order to perform a more thorough
analysis of our data under the Cox model. Specifically, we
show in detail how the Cox model allows us to better explain
observations originally noted in (Raff 2019). This allows us to
measure a meaningful effect size for each feature’s impact on
reproducibility, and better study their relative importance’s.
We stress that the data used in this study does not mean these
results are definitive, but useful as a new means to think about
and study reproducibility.

There has been increasing concern within the machine learning community that we are in a reproducibility crisis. As
many have begun to work on this problem, all work we are
aware of treat the issue of reproducibility as an intrinsic binary property: a paper is or is not reproducible. Instead, we
consider modeling the reproducibility of a paper as a survival analysis problem. We argue that this perspective represents a more accurate model of the underlying meta-science
question of reproducible research, and we show how a survival analysis allows us to draw new insights that better explain prior longitudinal data. The data and code can be found
at https://github.com/EdwardRaff/Research-ReproducibilitySurvival-Analysis

1

Introduction

There is current concern that we are in the midst of a reproducibility crisis within the fields of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and Machine Learning (ML) (Hutson 2018). Rightfully,
the AI/ML community has done research to understand and
mitigate this issue. Most recently, Raff (2019) performed a
longitudinal study attempting to independently reproduce
255 papers, and they provided features and public data to
begin answering questions about the factors of reproducibility in a quantifiable manner. Their work, like all others of
which we are aware, evaluated reproducibility using a binary
measure. Instead, we argue for and demonstrate the value of
using a survival analysis. In this case, we model the hazard
function λ(t|x), which predicts the likelihood of a an event
(i.e., reproduction) occurring at time t, given features about
the paper x. In survival analysis, we want to model the likely
time until the occurrence of an event. This kind of analysis
is common in medicine where we want to understand what
factors will prolong a life (i.e., increase survival), and what
factors may lead to an early death.
In our case, the event we seek to model is the successful
reproduction of a paper’s claims by a reproducer that is independent of the original paper’s authors. Compared to the
normal terminology used, we desire factors that decrease
survival meaning a paper takes less time to reproduce. In
the converse situation, a patient that “lives forever” would
be equivalent to a paper that cannot be reproduced with any

2

Related Work

The meta-science question of reproducibility — scientifically
studying the research process itself — is necessary to improve
how research is done in a grounded and objective manner
(Ioannidis 2018). Significant rates of non-reproduction have
been reported in many fields, including a 6% rate in clinical
trials for drug discovery (Prinz, Schlange, and Asadullah
2011), making this an issue of greater concern in the past
few decades. Yet, as far as we are aware, all prior works in
machine learning and other disciplines treat reproducibility as
a binary problem (Gundersen and Kjensmo 2018; Glenn and
P.A. 2015; Ioannidis 2017; Wicherts et al. 2006). Even works
that analyze the difference in effect size between publication
and reproduction still view the issue result in a binary manner
(Collaboration 2015).
Some have proposed varying protocols and processes that
authors may follow to increase the reproducibility of their
work (Barba 2019; Gebru et al. 2018). While valuable, we
lack quantification of their effectiveness. In fact, little has

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

469

