The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fractal Autoencoders for Feature Selection
Xinxing Wu, Qiang Cheng∗
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
xinxingwu@gmail.com, qiang.cheng@uky.edu

Abstract

tant features directly from the original feature space (Guyon
and Elisseeff 2003).
There exist various feature selection approaches. According to whether labels are used, they can be categorized as supervised (Cheng, Zhou, and Cheng 2011), semi-supervised,
and unsupervised methods (Alelyani, Tang, and Liu 2013).
Unsupervised approaches have potentially extensive applications, since they do not require labels that can be rare
or expensive to obtain. A variety of techniques for unsupervised feature selection have been proposed, e.g., Laplacian score (LS) (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2005) and concrete autoencoders (CAE) (Abid, Balin, and Zou 2019). While often
used, the existing approaches may still exhibit suboptimal
performance in downstream learning tasks on many datasets,
which can be seen, e.g., in Table 3. There are two major reasons that cause such under-performance. First, the space to
search for potentially important subsets of features in the
absence of the guidance by labels is often very large, which
renders unsupervised feature selection to be like finding a
needle in a haystack. Second, it is necessary, yet challenging, to take account of the inter-feature interactions. Ideally,
the selected features should be globally representative and
as diverse as possible. If the selected features are all important yet highly correlated, they may be capable of representing only partial data, and thus they would hardly comprise
a globally representative feature subset. For example, if a
pixel of a natural image is important, then some neighboring
ones are also likely to be so because of the typical spatial dependence in images; thus, to select diverse, salient features
to represent the overall contents, if a pixel is important and
selected, those neighboring pixels of high correlations with
it should not be included into the feature subset. Existing
unsupervised approaches have limited abilities to simultaneously explore the large search space for features that can
represent the overall contents and take into account the diversity, which is reflected by the inter-correlation of features,
thus leading to suboptimal performances.
To overcome these difficulties, in this paper we propose a
novel unsupervised feature selection framework, called fractal autoencoders (FAE). It trains a neural network (NN) to
identify potentially informative features for representing the
contents globally; simultaneously, it exploits a dependence
sub-NN to select a subset locally from the globally informative features to examine their diversity, which is efficiently

Feature selection reduces the dimensionality of data by identifying a subset of the most informative features. In this paper, we propose an innovative framework for unsupervised
feature selection, called fractal autoencoders (FAE). It trains
a neural network to pinpoint informative features for global
exploring of representability and for local excavating of diversity. Architecturally, FAE extends autoencoders by adding
a one-to-one scoring layer and a small sub-neural network for
feature selection in an unsupervised fashion. With such a concise architecture, FAE achieves state-of-the-art performances;
extensive experimental results on fourteen datasets, including
very high-dimensional data, have demonstrated the superiority of FAE over existing contemporary methods for unsupervised feature selection. In particular, FAE exhibits substantial advantages on gene expression data exploration, reducing
measurement cost by about 15% over the widely used L1000
landmark genes. Further, we show that the FAE framework is
easily extensible with an application.

Introduction
High-dimensional data is pervasive in almost every area of
modern data science (Clarke et al. 2008; Blum, Hopcroft,
and Kannan 2020). Dealing with high-dimensional data is
challenging due to the known phenomenon – the curse of
dimensionality (Bellman 1957). In numerous applications,
principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson 1901) and autoencoders (AE) (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1985;
Ballard 1987), two traditional and simple approaches, are
typically used for dimensionality reduction. For example,
PCA is adopted to reduce the dimensions of gene expression data before the extraction of the samples’ rhythmic
structures (Anafi et al. 2017); AE are employed to process
high-dimensional datasets prior to clustering (Xie, Girshick,
and Farhadi 2016) and subspace learning (Ji et al. 2017).
Despite their widespread usage, the interpretation of lowerdimensional feature spaces produced by PCA and AE is not
straightforward, because these feature spaces are different
from the original feature space. In contrast to PCA and AE,
feature selection allows for ready interpretability with the input features, by identifying and retaining a subset of impor∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10370

