The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stochastic Precision Ensemble: Self-Knowledge Distillation for Quantized Deep
Neural Networks
Yoonho Boo,1 Sungho Shin,1 Jungwook Choi, 2 and Wonyong Sung 1
1

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
dnsgh337@snu.ac.kr, sungho.develop@gmail.com, choij@hanyang.ac.kr, wysung@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Choi et al. 2018; Hou and Kwok 2018), but most of them
suffer from accuracy loss due to quantization.
To enhance the performance of low-capacity models,
knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Bucilu, Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006) (KD) has been
widely adopted. KD employs a more accurate model as a
teacher network to guide the training of the student model.
For the same input, the teacher network provides its prediction as a soft label, which can be further considered in
the loss function to guide the training of the student network. In the case of QDNNs, the quantized student network
can compensate for its accuracy loss via supervision of the
teacher model (Mishra and Marr 2018; Polino, Pascanu, and
Alistarh 2018; Shin, Boo, and Sung 2019; Kim et al. 2019).
However, the need for large and high-performance teacher
models introduces significant overhead when applying KD.
In particular, KD has not been successfully employed in the
emerging study of on-device training for model adaptation
and transfer learning, since the memory-intensive teacher
models may not be available once the quantized models are
deployed.
In this work, we propose a new practical approach to KD
for QDNNs, called stochastic precision ensemble training
for QDNNs (SPEQ). SPEQ is motivated by an inspiring observation about activation quantization. Table 1 shows that
the accuracy of the WFA2 (float weight and 2-bit activation)
model improves as the activation precision increases. However, the W2AF (2-bit weight and float activation) model
shows the opposite characteristic. The accuracy drops as the
weight precision increases for inference. This simple experiment reveals interesting insights: the activation quantization mostly adds noise to the decision boundary (Boo, Shin,
and Sung 2020). Therefore, inference with various activation
precision results in selective removal of such noise, leading
to diverse guidance that can be exploited for self knowledge
distillation.
In SPEQ, we form a teacher network that shares the quantized weights with the student but employs different bit precision for activation. The clipping levels of activation are
also shared. In fact, the activation precision for the teacher is
randomly selected between the low and high precision, such
as 2 and 8-bit. Since the teacher stochastically applies the
target low-bit activation quantization for its soft label computation, it can experience the impact of quantization for the

The quantization of deep neural networks (QDNNs) has
been actively studied for deployment in edge devices. Recent studies employ the knowledge distillation (KD) method
to improve the performance of quantized networks. In this
study, we propose stochastic precision ensemble training for
QDNNs (SPEQ). SPEQ is a knowledge distillation training
scheme; however, the teacher is formed by sharing the model
parameters of the student network. We obtain the soft labels of the teacher by randomly changing the bit precision of
the activation stochastically at each layer of the forward-pass
computation. The student model is trained with these soft labels to reduce the activation quantization noise. The cosine
similarity loss is employed, instead of the KL-divergence,
for KD training. As the teacher model changes continuously
by random bit-precision assignment, it exploits the effect
of stochastic ensemble KD. SPEQ outperforms the existing
quantization training methods in various tasks, such as image classification, question-answering, and transfer learning
without the need for cumbersome teacher networks.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
accuracy for tasks in a wide range of applications, including image processing (He et al. 2016a), machine translation (Gehring et al. 2017), and speech recognition (Zhang
et al. 2017). These state-of-the-art neural networks use very
deep models, consuming hundreds of ExaOps of computation during training and GBytes of storage for model and
data. This complexity poses a tremendous challenge for
widespread deployment, especially in resource-constrained
edge environments, leading to a plethora of explorations
in model compression that minimize memory footprint and
computational complexity while attempting to preserve the
performance of the model. Among them, research on quantized DNNs (QDNNs) focuses on quantizing key data structures, namely weights and activations, into low-precision.
Hence, we can save memory access overhead and simplify
the arithmetic unit to perform reduced-precision computation. There have been extensive studies on QDNNs (Fengfu,
Bo, and Bin 2016; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6794

