The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Transfer Graph Neural Networks for Pandemic Forecasting
George Panagopoulos1 , Giannis Nikolentzos 2 , Michalis Vazirgiannis 1
1

École Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
george.panagopoulos@polytechnique.edu, {nikolentzos, mvazirg}@aueb.gr
2

Abstract

to emerge as a promising methodology to combat COVID19. However, it turns out that the nature of the problem is
rather challenging (Zeroual et al. 2020). In many domains,
data admits a natural graph representation. For instance, to
predict the spread of COVID-19, ideally, we would like to
have access to the social network of all individuals and to
make predictions based on the interactions between them.
However, in the absence of such data, we consider a similar
problem: predicting the development of the disease based on
mass mobility data, i. e., how many people moved from one
place to another. Mobility inside a region can be regarded
as a proxy of the interaction i.e. the more people move, the
higher the risk of transmission inside the region. Interestingly, mobility between different regions is known to play
a crucial role in the growth of the pandemic, especially for
long range travels (Colizza et al. 2006; Soriano-Panos et al.
2020). Mobility gives rise to a natural graph representation
allowing the application of recent relational learning techniques such as graph neural networks (GNNs).
GNNs have been applied to a wide variety of tasks, including node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017), graph
classification (Morris et al. 2019) and text categorization
(Nikolentzos, Tixier, and Vazirgiannis 2020). GNNs capitalize on the concept of message passing, that is, at every
iteration, the representation of each vertex is updated based
on messages received from its neighbors. Since GNNs have
been successfully applied to several real-world problems, in
this paper, we also investigate their effectiveness in forecasting COVID-19. We focus on the problem of predicting
the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in each node. We
propose a model that captures both spatial and temporal information, thus combining mobility data with the history of
COVID-19 cases.
To investigate if the model can learn the underlying complex dynamics associated with COVID-19, we evaluate it
on recent data where we predict the number of new cases.
Our results demonstrate that GNNs on mobility exhibit a
substantial potential in predicting the disease spread. Furthermore, since the availability of data is limited at the start
of the outbreak in a country, we employ a transfer learning
method based on Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML)
to capitalize on knowledge from other countries’ models.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

The recent outbreak of COVID-19 has affected millions of individuals around the world and has posed a significant challenge to global healthcare. From the early days of the pandemic, it became clear that it is highly contagious and that human mobility contributes significantly to its spread. In this paper, we utilize graph representation learning to capitalize on
the underlying relationship of population movement with the
spread of COVID-19. Specifically, we create a graph where
the nodes correspond to a country’s regions, the features include the region’s history of COVID-19, and the edge weights
denote human mobility from one region to another. Subsequently, we employ graph neural networks to predict the number of future cases, encoding the underlying diffusion patterns
that govern the spread into our learning model. Furthermore,
to account for the limited amount of training data, we capitalize on the pandemic’s asynchronous outbreaks across countries and use a model-agnostic meta-learning based method
to transfer knowledge from one country’s model to another’s.
We compare the proposed approach against simple baselines
and more traditional forecasting techniques in 4 European
countries. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our method, highlighting the usefulness of GNNs in epidemiological prediction. Transfer learning provides the best
model, highlighting its potential to improve the accuracy of
the predictions in case of secondary waves, given data from
past/parallel outbreaks.

1

Introduction

In late 2019, a highly infectious new virus, SARS-CoV2, started spreading in Wuhan, China. In early 2020, the
virus had spread to most countries around the world causing
the pandemic of the COVID-19 disease. As of December
7, 2020, a total of 1,532,418 deaths and 66,422,058 cases
of COVID-19 were confirmed worldwide1 . During a pandemic, accurately predicting the spread of the infection is of
paramount importance to governments and policymakers in
order to impose measures to combat the spread of the virus
or decide on the allocation of healthcare resources.
Given the severity of the pandemic and the need for accurate forecasting of the disease spread, machine learning,
and artificial intelligence approaches have recently started
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://covid19.who.int

• We propose a model for learning the spreading of
4838

