The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Turing Patterns from Cellular Automata
Nurislam Tursynbek1 , Ilya Vilkoviskiy1 , Maria Sindeeva1 , Ivan Oseledets1
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
nurislam.tursynbek@gmail.com, reminguk@gmail.com, maria.sindeeva@skoltech.ru, i.oseledets@skoltech.ru

Abstract

where authors proposed iterative strategy of gradually pushing a data point to the decision boundary. However, to construct a successful perturbation thousands of images were
needed, whereas Khrulkov et. al (Khrulkov and Oseledets
2018) proposed an efficient algorithm of constructing UAPs
with a very small number of samples. The proposed universal perturbations construct complex and interesting unusual
patterns. Studying how these patterns emerge will allow better understanding the nature of adversarial examples.
We start from an interesting observation that patterns generated in (Khrulkov and Oseledets 2018) visually look very
similarly to the so-called Turing patterns (Figure 1) which
were introduced by Alan Turing in the seminal paper “The
Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis” (Turing 1952). It describes the way in which patterns in nature such as stripes
and spots can arise naturally out of a homogeneous uniform state. The original theory of Turing patterns, a twocomponent reaction-diffusion system, is an important model
in mathematical biology and chemistry. Turing found that a
stable state in the system with local interactions can become
unstable in the presence of diffusion. Reaction–diffusion
systems have gained significant attention and was used as
a prototype model for pattern formation.
In this paper, we provide an explanation why UAPs from
(Khrulkov and Oseledets 2018) bear similarity to the Turing
patterns using the formalism of cellular automata (CA): the
iterative process for generating UAPs can be approximated
by such process, and Turing patterns can be easily generated by cellular automata (Young 1984). Besides, this gives
a very simple way to generate new examples by learning the
parameters of such automata by black-box optimization. We
also experimentally show this formalism can produce examples very close to so-called single Fourier attacks by studying Fourier harmonics of the obtained examples.
The main contributions of the paper are following:

State-of-the-art deep classifiers are intriguingly vulnerable
to universal adversarial perturbations: single disturbances of
small magnitude that lead to misclassification of most inputs. This phenomena may potentially result in a serious security problem. Despite the extensive research in this area,
there is a lack of theoretical understanding of the structure of
these perturbations. In image domain, there is a certain visual similarity between patterns, that represent these perturbations, and classical Turing patterns, which appear as a solution of non-linear partial differential equations and are underlying concept of many processes in nature. In this paper,
we provide a theoretical bridge between these two different
theories, by mapping a simplified algorithm for crafting universal perturbations to (inhomogeneous) cellular automata,
the latter is known to generate Turing patterns. Furthermore,
we propose to use Turing patterns, generated by cellular automata, as universal perturbations, and experimentally show
that they significantly degrade the performance of deep learning models. We found this method to be a fast and efficient
way to create a data-agnostic quasi-imperceptible perturbation in the black-box scenario. The source code is available at
https://github.com/NurislamT/advTuring.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown success in solving complex problems for different applications ranging from medical diagnoses to self-driving cars, but recent findings surprisingly show they are not safe and vulnerable to well-designed
negligibly perturbed inputs (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), called adversarial examples, compromising people’s confidence in them. Moreover,
most of modern defenses to adversarial examples are found
to be easily circumvented (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner
2018). One reason why adversarial examples are hard to defend against is the difficulty of constructing a theory of the
crafting process of them.
Intriguingly, adversarial perturbations can be transferable
across inputs. Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs),
single disturbances of small magnitude that lead to misclassification of most inputs, were presented in image domain
by Moosavi-Dezfooli et. al (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017),

• We show that the iterative process to generate Universal
Adversarial Perturbations from (Khrulkov and Oseledets
2018) can be reformulated as a cellular automata that generates Turing patterns.
• We experimentally show Turing patterns can be used to
generate UAPs in a black-box scenario with high fooling
rates for different networks.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2683

