The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Conservation: A Latent-Dynamics Model
for Exact Satisfaction of Physical Conservation Laws
Kookjin Lee1 , Kevin T. Carlberg2
1

Sandia National Laboratories, 2 University of Washington
koolee@sandia.gov, ktcarlb@uw.edu

Abstract

namical system. These methods traditionally learn a nonlinear embedding (e.g., via autoencoders (Lusch, Kutz, and
Brunton 2018; Morton et al. 2018; Otto and Rowley 2019;
Takeishi, Kawahara, and Yairi 2017)), and—inspired by
Koopman operator theory—learn a dynamics model that is
constrained to be linear. In a control (Lesort et al. 2018)
or reinforcement-learning context (Böhmer et al. 2015),
the embedding and locally linear dynamics models can
be learned simultaneously from observations of the state
(Goroshin, Mathieu, and LeCun 2015; Karl et al. 2017; Watter et al. 2015; Banijamali et al. 2018). More recently, deeplearning-based techniques for constructing nonlinear embeddings and nonlinear dynamics, e.g., via long short-term
memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), neural ordinary differential equations (Chen et al. 2018), have been proposed (Gonzalez and Balajewicz 2018; Maulik, Lusch, and
Balaprakash 2020; Portwood et al. 2019).
The second class of methods corresponds to projectionbased dynamics learning, which learns the embedding in a
data-driven manner, but computes the dynamics model via
a projection process executed on the governing system of
ODEs, which must be known a priori. As opposed to the
data-driven dynamics learning, projection-based methods almost always employ a linear embedding, which is typically
defined by principal component analysis (or “proper orthogonal decomposition” (Holmes et al. 2012)) performed on
measurements of the state. The projection process that produces the latent-dynamics model requires substituting the
linear embedding in the governing ODEs and enforcing orthogonality of the resulting residual to a low-dimensional
linear subspace (Benner, Gugercin, and Willcox 2015),
yielding a (Petrov–) Galerkin projection formulation.
Each approach suffers from particular shortcomings. Because data-driven dynamics learning lacks explicit a priori
knowledge of the governing ODEs—and thus predicts latent dynamics separately from any computational-physics
code—these methods risk severe violation of physical principles underpinning the dynamical system. On the other
hand, projection-based dynamics-learning methods heavily
rely on linear embeddings and, thus, exhibit limited dimensionality reduction compared with what is achievable with
nonlinear embeddings (Ohlberger and Rave 2016). Recently,
this limitation has been resolved by employing a nonlinear embedding (learned by deep convolutional autoenoders)

This work proposes an approach for latent-dynamics learning
that exactly enforces physical conservation laws. The method
comprises two steps. First, the method computes a lowdimensional embedding of the high-dimensional dynamicalsystem state using deep convolutional autoencoders. This defines a low-dimensional nonlinear manifold on which the
state is subsequently enforced to evolve. Second, the method
defines a latent-dynamics model that associates with the solution to a constrained optimization problem. Here, the objective function is defined as the sum of squares of conservationlaw violations over control volumes within a finite-volume
discretization of the problem; nonlinear equality constraints
explicitly enforce conservation over prescribed subdomains
of the problem. Under modest conditions, the resulting dynamics model guarantees that the time-evolution of the latent
state exactly satisfies conservation laws over the prescribed
subdomains.

Introduction
Learning a latent-dynamics model for complex real-world
physical processes (e.g., fluid dynamics (Morton et al. 2018;
Wiewel, Becher, and Thuerey 2019; Lee and Carlberg 2020),
deformable solid mechanics (Fulton et al. 2019)) comprises
an important task in science and engineering, as it provides
a mechanism for modeling the dynamics of physical systems and can provide a rapid simulation tool for time-critical
applications such as control and design optimization. Two
main ingredients are required to learn a latent-dynamics
model: (1) an embedding, which provides a mapping between high-dimensional dynamical-system states and lowdimensional latent variables, and (2) a dynamics model,
which prescribes the time evolution of the latent variables
in the latent space.
There are two primary classes of methods for learning a latent-dynamics model. The first class comprises
data-driven dynamics learning, which aims to learn both
the embedding and the dynamics model in a purely datadriven manner that requires only measurements of the
state/velocity. As such, this class of methods does not require a priori knowledge of the system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) governing the high-dimensional dyCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

277

