The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Task-Independent Knowledge Makes for Transferable Representations for
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Chaoqun Wang1 2 , Xuejin Chen* 1 2 , Shaobo Min2 , Xiaoyan Sun2 , Houqiang Li1 2
1

School of Data Science
The National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
cq14@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn, mbobo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {sunxiaoyan, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
2

(a) Semantic Alignment

Abstract

(b) Instance Discrimination
𝜑𝑣

Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) targets recognizing new categories by learning transferable image representations. Existing methods find that, by aligning image representations with corresponding semantic labels, the semanticaligned representations can be transferred to unseen categories. However, supervised by only seen category labels,
the learned semantic knowledge is highly task-specific, which
makes image representations biased towards seen categories.
In this paper, we propose a novel Dual-Contrastive Embedding Network (DCEN) that simultaneously learns taskspecific and task-independent knowledge via semantic alignment and instance discrimination. First, DCEN leverages
task labels to cluster representations of the same semantic category by cross-modal contrastive learning and exploring semantic-visual complementarity. Besides task-specific
knowledge, DCEN then introduces task-independent knowledge by attracting representations of different views of the
same image and repelling representations of different images.
Compared to high-level seen category supervision, this instance discrimination supervision encourages DCEN to capture low-level visual knowledge, which is less biased toward
seen categories and alleviates the representation bias. Consequently, the task-specific and task-independent knowledge
jointly make for transferable representations of DCEN, which
obtains averaged 4.1% improvement on four public benchmarks.

Fox: Yellow
Cow: Hooves

𝜑𝑣

Leopard: Patches

Embedding Space

Testing
Unseen Image

Lion: Furry

√

Rat: Small

Dolphin: Swims

Figure 1: Motivation of this paper. (a) Existing methods focus on using task labels to learn semantic-aligned representations, which can be transferred to unseen categories. (b)
Besides, this paper further learns task-independent knowledge via instance discrimination supervision, which significantly improves the representation transferability.
representations (Jiang et al. 2018; Tong et al. 2019). Previous methods tackle this problem by aligning image representations with corresponding category attributes (Xian
et al. 2018a), as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Since seen and unseen domain categories share a common attribute space, the
semantic-aligned representation can be transferred to unseen
categories, and the recognition becomes a nearest neighbour
searching problem, i.e., images and category attributes serve
as queries and anchors, respectively. Based on this paradigm,
most GZSL methods focus on designing elaborate semanticvisual alignment mechanism, such as visual and attribute attentions (Zhu et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2019; Huynh and Elhamifar 2020), semantic auto-encoders (Felix et al. 2018; Min
et al. 2019), and domain detectors (Atzmon and Chechik
2019). However, trained with only seen category labels, the
learned image representations are highly task-specific and
biased towards seen categories, which makes an unseen image tend to be recognized as seen categories.
To alleviate this issue, we introduce task-independent

Introduction
Deep learning-based methods are highly successful on various computer vision tasks, such as image classification (He
et al. 2016), object detection (Girshick et al. 2014), and semantic segmentation (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla
2017). However, these models require a huge demand for
manually labelled training data for numerous classes. To this
end, Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL), which aims
to recognize either seen or unseen categories thereby reduces manual annotation labors, recently has attracted great
interests.
Due to unavailable unseen category data during training, GZSL puts a high demand on transferability of image
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2710

