The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Partial Is Better Than All:
Revisiting Fine-tuning Strategy for Few-shot Learning
∗

∗

Zhiqiang Shen1 , Zechun Liu1,2 , Jie Qin3 , Marios Savvides1 and Kwang-Ting Cheng2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
{zhiqians,marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu; zliubq@connect.ust.hk; qinjiebuaa@gmail.com; timcheng@ust.hk
2

Abstract

1

The goal of few-shot learning is to learn a classifier that can
recognize unseen classes from limited support data with labels.
A common practice for this task is to train a model on the base
set first and then transfer to novel classes through fine-tuning1
or meta-learning. However, as the base classes have no overlap
to the novel set, simply transferring whole knowledge from
base data is not an optimal solution since some knowledge in
the base model may be biased or even harmful to the novel
class. In this paper, we propose to transfer partial knowledge
by freezing or fine-tuning particular layer(s) in the base model.
Specifically, layers will be imposed different learning rates if
they are chosen to be fine-tuned, to control the extent of preserved transferability. To determine which layers to be recast
and what values of learning rates for them, we introduce an
evolutionary search based method that is efficient to simultaneously locate the target layers and determine their individual
learning rates. We conduct extensive experiments on CUB and
mini-ImageNet to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. It achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
both meta-learning and non-meta based frameworks. Furthermore, we extend our method to the conventional pre-training
+ fine-tuning paradigm and obtain consistent improvement.

!#

"($ |&$ )

#"#

Classifier

ℒ&'()

"($ |&$ )

#"%#

backbone

2

!#
backbone

Base class (Many)

Classifier

Training stage
1
!*

"($ |&%)

Fixed feature extractor Classifier ℒ

2
!*
Novel class (Few)

"($ |&%)

#"*
&'()

#"*

Adaptive feature extractor Classifier

Fine-tuning stage

Figure 1: Illustration of the conventional procedure of pretraining and fine-tuning for few-shot learning. ¬ represents
the standard transfer learning procedure which uses the preStandard
trained model as a feature extractor and the parameters
aretransfer learning pro
fixed during fine-tuning. ­ is our proposed partial transfer
strategy which can fine-tune the model trained on base data
with the few novel class data. Fine-tuning with different learning rates on different layers can optimize the feature extractor
to better fit the novel class and prevent the model from overfitting on it, since the novel data has limited samples.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown enormous potential on
understanding natural images (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Szegedy et al. 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017) in the recent
years. The learning ability of deep neural networks increases
significantly with more labeled training data. However, annotating such data is expensive, time-consuming and laborious.
Furthermore, some classes (e.g., in medical images) are naturally rare and hard to collect. The conventional training
approaches for deep neural networks often fail to obtain good
performance when the training data is insufficient. Considering that humans can easily learn from very few examples
and even generalize to many different new images, it will be
greatly helpful if the network can also learn to generalize to

new classes with only a few labeled samples from unseen
classes. Previous studies in this direction (i.e., few-shot learning) can be mainly divided into two categories. One is the
meta-learning based methods (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017; Vinyals et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017)
that model the few-shot learning process with samples belonging to the base classes, and optimize the model for the
target novel classes. The other is the plain solution (nonmeta and also called baseline method (Chen et al. 2019)) that
trains feature extractor from abundant base class then directly
predicts the weights of the classifier for the novel ones.
As the number of images in the support set of novel classes
are extremely limited, directly training models from scratch
on the support set is unstable and tends to be overfitting.
Even utilizing the pre-trained parameters on base classes and

∗

indicates equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Here fine-tuning procedure is defined as transferring knowledge
from base to novel data, i.e. learning to transfer in few-shot scenario.

9594

