The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relative and Absolute Location Embedding
for Few-Shot Node Classification on Graph
Zemin Liu,1 Yuan Fang,1 Chenghao Liu,1,2 Steven C.H. Hoi1,2
1

Singapore Management University, Singapore
2
Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore
{zmliu, yfang}@smu.edu.sg, {chenghao.liu, shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
SVM
{"# , "% , … , "' }

Node classification is an important problem on graphs. While
recent advances in graph neural networks achieve promising
performance, they require abundant labeled nodes for training. However, in many practical scenarios, there often exist
novel classes in which only one or a few labeled nodes are
available as supervision, known as few-shot node classification. Although meta-learning has been widely used in vision
and language domains to address few-shot learning, its adoption on graphs has been limited. In particular, graph nodes in a
few-shot task are not independent and relate to each other. To
deal with this, we propose a novel model called Relative and
Absolute Location Embedding (RALE) hinged on the concept of hub nodes. Specifically, RALE captures the task-level
dependency by assigning each node a relative location within
a task, as well as the graph-level dependency by assigning
each node an absolute location on the graph to further align
different tasks toward learning a transferable prior. Finally,
extensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate
the state-of-the-art performance of RALE.

Explainable AI
{-# }
-#

-*

"'
")

",

Meta-train tasks
(base classes)

-%
".

"*

"%

?

Fair ML
{-% }

"+

Neural networks
{"+ , "/ , ". , ", }

Base classes

Novel classes

(a) Base and novel classes on graph

Query

")

"+

".

Support

Query

"#

"*

"/

Transferable
Prior

"/
"#

Support

Meta-test tasks
(novel classes)

……

Support

Query

-#

-*

-%

?

……
(b) Few-shot node classification

Figure 1: Illustration of few-shot node classification.
data in order to achieve satisfactory performance. In a typical setting for node classification, we are given a set of
classes (e.g., topics) fixed in advance, where each node (e.g.,
paper) belongs to one of the classes. The goal is then to predict the classes of the remaining unlabeled nodes. However,
in many scenarios, we often need to deal with novel classes
that we have not seen before. On one hand, there are some
existing classes known as the base classes where a sufficient
number of nodes per class are labeled. On the other hand,
the novel classes only have one or very few labeled nodes
per class as we just begin to tackle them. For instance, on
a toy citation network in Fig. 1(a), while there are abundant
labeled nodes for established topics like “SVM” and “Neural networks” (i.e., base classes), very few labeled nodes
are available for emerging topics like “Explainable AI” and
“Fair ML” (i.e., novel classes). In this paper, we study the
problem of node classification for the novel classes, where
each novel class only has one or a few labeled nodes, known
as few-shot node classification.

Introduction
Real-world entities often interact with each other and connect into complex graphs, such as e-commerce graphs and
citation networks. Many analytical tasks on such networks
can be formulated as instances of node classification, e.g.,
predicting user intent on an e-commerce graph, and inferring paper topic on a citation network. As a consequence,
the problem of node classification on graphs has attracted a
surge of research interest.
Traditional approaches for network analysis attempt to
engineer and exploit informative features from the graph
(Backstrom and Leskovec 2011), yet facing high cost. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al. 2020)
emerge as a powerful family of graph representation learning techniques, which resort to the recursive aggregation of
information from neighboring nodes. The recursive neighborhood aggregation is able to effectively exploit both graph
structures and node features, and attains state-of-the-art performance on node classification.

Prior work. Unfortunately, manually labeling a large number of papers in the novel classes is not only expensive but
also infeasible as there may not be enough papers in these
emerging topics. To rapidly enable novel classes without
a large number of examples, meta-learning (Vinyals et al.
2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017) has become a popular solution, which learns
a transferable prior from the base classes with sufficient examples, and adapts the prior to the novel classes.

Problem. Although effective in node classification on
graphs, GNNs often require a significant amount of labeled
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4267

