The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bounding Causal Effects on Continuous Outcome
Junzhe Zhang, Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University
{junzhez,eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

Several criteria and algorithms have been developed (Pearl
2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Bareinboim
and Pearl 2016). For example, a criterion called back-door
(Pearl 2000, Ch. 3.2.2) permits one to determine whether
causal effects can be obtained by covariate adjustment and
subsequent inverse probability weighting. This condition is
also known as conditional ignorability and unconfoundeness
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983). Efficient estimators were developed based on the propensity score (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983; Bang and Robins 2005) and off-policy learning
(Dudı́k, Langford, and Li 2011; Li, Munos, and Szepesvari
2015; Munos et al. 2016; Thomas and Brunskill 2016).
By and large, the combination of causal assumptions
and observational data does not always allow one to pointidentify the causal effect, called the non-identifiable. That
is, there exists more than one parametrization of the target effect that are compatible with the same observational
data and qualitative assumptions (Pearl 2000, Def. 3.2.2). A
causal effect is partially identifiable if it is not identifiable,
but the set of its possible values is smaller than the original parameter space. Inferring about the treatment effect in
the partially identifiable settings has been a target of growing interest in the domains of causal inference (Balke and
Pearl 1995; Chickering and Pearl 1996; Richardson et al.
2014; Cinelli et al. 2019), and more recently, in machine
learning (Kallus and Zhou 2018; Kallus, Puli, and Shalit
2018). Among these works, two approaches are often employed: (1) bounds are derived for the target effect under
minimal assumptions; or (2) additional untestable assumptions are invoked under which the causal effect is identifiable, and then sensitivity analysis is conducted to assess how
the target causal effect varies as the untestable assumptions
are changed. This paper focuses on the bounding approach.
(Robins 1989; Manski 1990) derived the first informative bounds over the causal effects from studies with imperfect compliance, under a set of non-parametric assumptions called instrumental variables. In their seminal work
(Balke and Pearl 1994a, 1997), Balke and Pearl improved
earlier results by employing a computer algebraic program
to derive analytic expressions of the causal bounds, which
are provably optimal. Despite the optimality guarantees provided in their treatment, there are still significant challenges
in performing the partial identification of the causal effects
with the presence of instrumental variables. First, Pearl’s ap-

We investigate the problem of bounding causal effects from
experimental studies in which treatment assignment is randomized but the subject compliance is imperfect. It is well
known that under such conditions, the actual causal effects
are not point-identifiable due to uncontrollable unobserved
confounding. In their seminal work, Balke and Pearl (1994)
derived the tightest bounds over the causal effects in this settings by employing an algebra program to derive analytic expressions. However, Pearl’s approach assumes the primary
outcome to be discrete and finite. Solving such a program
could be intractable when high-dimensional context variables
are present. In this paper, we present novel non-parametric
methods to bound causal effects on the continuous outcome
from studies with imperfect compliance. These bounds could
be generalized to settings with the high-dimensional context.

Introduction
One of the most common methods for policy learning used
throughout the empirical sciences is the use of randomization of the treatment assignment. This method is considered the gold standard within many disciplines and can be
traced back, at least, to Fisher (Fisher 1935) and Neyman
(Neyman 1923). Whenever human subjects are at the center
of the experiment, unfortunately, issues of non-compliance
arise, namely, subjects do not necessarily follow the experimental protocol and end up doing what they want. It
is well-understood that under such conditions, confounding
bias will emerge. For instance, subjects who did not comply
with the treatment assignment may be precisely those who
would have responded adversely to the treatment. Therefore,
the actual causal effects of the treatment, when it is applied
uniformly to the population, might be substantially less effective than of the data reveals.
To cope with this bias, analysts may resort to exploit
theoretical assumptions underlying the interactions between
compliance and response (Wright 1928; Angrist, Imbens,
and Rubin 1996). The problem of identifying causal effects
from observed data provided with causal assumptions about
the data-generating mechanisms, represented in the form of
a directed acyclic causal diagram (Pearl 2000, Ch. 1.2), has
been extensively studied in the causal inference literature.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12207

