The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Using Radio Archives for Low-Resource Speech Recognition:
Towards an Intelligent Virtual Assistant for Illiterate Users
Moussa Doumbouya,1 Lisa Einstein,1,2 Chris Piech2
1

GNCode
Stanford University
moussa@gncode.org, lisae@stanford.edu, piech@cs.stanford.edu
2

Abstract

services (Medhi et al. 2011), but the development of speech
recognition technology requires large annotated datasets.
Unfortunately, languages spoken by illiterate people who
would most benefit from speech recognition technology tend
to fall in the “low-resource” category, which in contrast
with “high-resource” languages, have few available datasets.
Transfer learning, transferring representations learned on
high-resource unrelated languages, has not been explored
for many low-resource languages (Kunze et al. 2017). Even
if transfer learning can help, labeled data is still needed to
develop useful models.
This data deficit persists for multiple reasons. Developing commercial products for languages spoken by smaller
populations can be less profitable and thus less prioritized.
Furthermore, people with power over technological goods
and services tend to speak data-rich languages themselves,
potentially leading them to insufficiently consider the needs
of users who do not (Ogbonnaya-Ogburu et al. 2020).
We take steps toward developing a simple, yet functional
intelligent virtual assistant that is capable of contact management skills in Maninka, Susu and Pular, low-resource
languages in the Niger Congo family. People who speak
Niger Congo languages have among the lowest literacy rates
in the world, and illiteracy rates are especially pronounced
for women (see Fig. 1). Maninka, Pular, and Susu are spoken by a combined 10 million people, primarily in seven
African countries, including six where the majority of the
adult population is illiterate (Roser and Ortiz-Ospina 2016).
We address the data scarcity problem by making use of unsupervised speech representation learning and show that representations learned from radio archives, which are abundant
in many regions of the world with high illiteracy rates, can
be leveraged for speech recognition in low-resource settings.

For many of the 700 million illiterate people around the
world, speech recognition technology could provide a bridge
to valuable information and services. Yet, those most in
need of this technology are often the most underserved by
it. In many countries, illiterate people tend to speak only
low-resource languages, for which the datasets necessary for
speech technology development are scarce. In this paper, we
investigate the effectiveness of unsupervised speech representation learning on noisy radio broadcasting archives, which
are abundant even in low-resource languages. We make three
core contributions. First, we release two datasets to the research community. The first, West African Radio Corpus,
contains 142 hours of audio in more than 10 languages with
a labeled validation subset. The second, West African Virtual Assistant Speech Recognition Corpus, consists of 10K
labeled audio clips in four languages. Next, we share West
African wav2vec, a speech encoder trained on the noisy radio
corpus, and compare it with the baseline Facebook speech
encoder trained on six times more data of higher quality. We
show that West African wav2vec performs similarly to the
baseline on a multilingual speech recognition task, and significantly outperforms the baseline on a West African language
identification task. Finally, we share the first-ever speech
recognition models for Maninka, Pular and Susu, languages
spoken by a combined 10 million people in over seven countries, including six where the majority of the adult population
is illiterate. Our contributions offer a path forward for ethical
AI research to serve the needs of those most disadvantaged
by the digital divide.

Introduction
Smartphone access has exploded in the Global South, with
the potential to increase efficiency; connection; and access
to critical health, banking, and education services (MHealth
2011; Harris and Cooper 2019; Avle, Quartey, and Hutchful
2018). Yet, the benefits of mobile technology are not accessible to most of the 700 million illiterate people around the
world who, beyond simple use cases such as answering a
phone call, cannot access functionalities as simple as contact management or text messaging (Chipchase 2006).
Speech recognition technology could help bridge the gap
between illiteracy and access to valuable information and

In this paper, we make three core contributions that collectively build towards the creation of intelligent virtual
assistants for illiterate users:
1. We present two novel datasets (i) the West African Radio
Corpus and (ii) the West African Virtual Assistant Speech
Recognition Corpus. These datasets of over 150 hours of
speech increase the availability of resources for speech
technology development for West African Languages.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. We investigate the effectiveness of unsupervised speech
14757

