The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

In-game Residential Home Planning via Visual Context-aware Global Relation
Learning
Lijuan Liu1 , Yin Yang2 , Yi Yuan1 * , Tianjia Shao3 , He Wang4 , Kun Zhou3
1

NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
School of Computing, Clemson University
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Leeds University
liulijuan, yuanyi@corp.netease.com, yin5@clemson.edu, tjshao@zju.edu.cn, H.E.Wang@leeds.ac.uk, kunzhou@acm.org
2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an effective global relation learning
algorithm to recommend an appropriate location of a building
unit for in-game customization of residential home complex.
Given a construction layout, we propose a visual contextaware graph generation network that learns the implicit global
relations among the scene components and infers the location of a new building unit. The proposed network takes as
input the scene graph and the corresponding top-view depth
image. It provides the location recommendations for a newlyadded building units by learning an auto-regressive edge distribution conditioned on existing scenes. We also introduce a
global graph-image matching loss to enhance the awareness
of essential geometry semantics of the site. Qualitative and
quantitative experiments demonstrate that the recommended
location well reflects the implicit spatial rules of components
in the residential estates, and it is instructive and practical to
locate the building units in the 3D scene of the complex construction.

Home customization

Relation graph with depth

Edge inferring

Suggestion heatmap

Figure 1: A high-level overview of our pipeline: from an input image of in-game the home customization site, our system extracts a relation graph. With other learned features, we
train a graph generation network to infer the deployment of
new edges. Finally, our system outputs a location prediction
indicates the “suitableness” for the next building unit.

placement of a new component in an indoor scene automatically (Wang et al. 2018, 2019; Nauata et al. 2020; Wu et al.
2019). They use deep learning techniques e.g., the FiLM
net (Perez et al. 2018), to predict a component location as an
attribute of the new node. However, these approaches do not
directly transfer to the home construction which occurs in an
open outdoor space. Clearly, planning the building construction of a residential complex involves elements of diverse
dimensions and scales. Therefore, searching all the possible
positions on the site is not efficient. Second, items/elements
in indoor scenes are normally associated with well-defined
functional constraints, which can be fully exploited by the
network. However, we have much weaker functional relations among buildings on the construction site. Certain types
of building units are also exclusive – for instance, one cannot add extra building blocks on the top of a swimming pool,
and we name such locations forbidden areas. This type of
exclusiveness is not considered in previous algorithms.
Given a layout of a housing site, we aim to suggest
the user a location directly without any prior knowledge
of the building unit to be placed. Our method is inspired
by planIT (Wang et al. 2019) converting the site layout
into a graph. To reduce the search space, we do not iterate all the candidate locations on the layout. Instead, we
infer a possible location of a building unit through global
graph relations. While building units do not have strong
local/neighborhood dependence, in a complex with multiple building units, we leverage global relations (i.e., graph

Introduction
Customized residential complex design becomes a popular
element in modern MMORPG games. This module allows
players to virtually create personalized housing experiences
with a comprehensive construction and design interface. For
instance, a player could have a palace-like mansion with a
carefully-shaped garden of pools and a greenhouse. Possessing such luxury housing is unlikely to be possible for most
of us. Yet, it could enhance the feeling of belongingness and
escalate the joyfulness during the gaming. On the downside,
designing a residential housing complex is not “as easy as
pie”, which requires professional expertise and extensive experiences. Our answer to this dilemma is to resort to machine
learning to prompt smart suggestions during the user interaction, which is similar to smart typing system that predicts
the following word we will input.
Following this motivation, we introduce an algorithm for
location recommendation, which interactively provides suggestions to players on where to place new building components etc. A few techniques have been proposed to suggest a
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

336

