The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predictive Adversarial Learning from Positive and Unlabeled Data
Wenpeng Hu1,* , Ran Le2, * , Bing Liu3,† , Feng Ji4 , Jinwen Ma1 , Dongyan Zhao2 , Rui Yan2,‡
1

Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
4
Alibaba Group
{wenpeng.hu, leran, jwma, zhaody, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn, liub@uic.edu, zhongxiu.jf@alibaba-inc.com
by a classifier) also to fool a discriminator D(·). Thus, we
can simply replace GAN’s generator with a classifier C(·) to
produce a PU learner.1 Note that the classifier is also a discriminator, but we use the term classifier here to distinguish
it from the original discriminator of GAN. Note also both
C(·) and D(·) are neural networks.2
However, direct adaptation of GAN for PU learning (which
is one of our baselines, called a-GAN) is problematic. The
reason is that GAN focuses on only high positive precision
(e.g., generating high quality positive images), but PU learning needs to consider the overall (both positive and negative)
performance of C(·). We thus need a different objective function. This paper proposes such an objective function based
on Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which also has a new
adversarial training method. The proposed PU learning technique is called PAN (Predictive Adversary Networks) due
to the use of the classifier to replace the generator in GAN.
KL-divergence in PAN measures whether C(·) can produce
similar predictions to those of D(·) for all examples in U . If
C(·) gives similar predictions, it means that the examples
obtaining high probabilities from C(·) also get high probabilities from D(·), achieving the goal of fooling D(·), which
will give us a good final PU classifier C(·).
A major advantage of PAN is that it does not need the input
of class prior probability, which many state-of-the-art systems
need. In practice, the class prior is unknown, although there
are methods to estimate it (see Sec. 2). We will see when the
class prior probability estimate is off, the existing methods
can perform quite poorly (Sec. 5.2).
In (Hou et al. 2018) and (Chiaroni et al. 2018), the authors
employed GAN to generate positive and/or negative data
and then use a separate learner to learn the final PU classifier
using the generated data, but they are not adaptations of GAN
like PAN and their generators generate only images. PAN
can be applied to any data as it has no generator.

Abstract
This paper studies learning from positive and unlabeled examples, known as PU learning. It proposes a novel PU learning
method called Predictive Adversarial Networks (PAN) based
on GAN (Generative Adversarial Networks). GAN learns a
generator to generate data (e.g., images) to fool a discriminator
which tries to determine whether the generated data belong to
a (positive) training class. PU learning can be casted as trying
to identify (not generate) likely positive instances from the
unlabeled set to fool a discriminator that determines whether
the identified likely positive instances from the unlabeled set
are indeed positive. However, directly applying GAN is problematic because GAN focuses on only the positive data. The
resulting PU learning method will have high precision but
low recall. We propose a new objective function based on KLdivergence. Evaluation using both image and text data shows
that PAN outperforms state-of-the-art PU learning methods
and also a direct adaptation of GAN for PU learning.

1

Introduction

Positive-unlabeled learning (or PU learning) learns a binary
classifier from only Positive (P) and Unlabeled (U ) examples
with no labeled negative examples (Liu et al. 2002, 2003;
Denis, Gilleron, and Letouzey 2005). PU learning has many
applications in text analysis, bio-medicine, recommendation,
remote sensing, matrix completion, etc (Lee and Liu 2003;
Li and Liu 2003; Li, Guo, and Elkan 2010; Hsieh, Natarajan,
and Dhillon 2015). A comprehensive survey of the area can
be found in (Bekker and Davis 2020).
In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial PU learning method inspired by GAN (generative adversary networks) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). GAN aims to generate data
of a particular training class, which is like the positive class P
in PU learning. GAN works by generating likely positive data
using a generator G(·) to fool a discriminator D(·), which
determines whether the generated data indeed belong to the
training (positive) class. For PU learning, this is like choosing
likely positive instances from the unlabeled set U (achieved

1
PU learning is analogous to GAN because if we put all the data
(e.g., images) that can be generated by GAN’s generator in a set,
the set should be regarded as unlabeled as it contains both good
(positive) and bad (negative) images. Then what the generator does
is like selecting good images to fool the discriminator, which is
exactly what a PU classifier does with a set of given unlabeled data.
2
Their exact architectures are given in the experiment section
(see Training Details in Sec. 5.1) since C(·) and D(·) have different
architectures for text and images.

* Equal contribution
†

The work was partly done when Bing Liu was at Peking University on leave of absence from University of Illinois at Chicago.
‡
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7806

