The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spatial-temporal Causal Inference for Partial Image-to-video Adaptation
Jin Chen,1 Xinxiao Wu,1∗ Yao Hu,2 Jiebo Luo3
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Alibaba Youku Cognitive and Intelligent Lab
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA
{chen jin, wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn, yaoohu@alibaba-inc.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu
Abstract

is very challenging since there exist two types of domain
shifts: 1) spatial domain shift caused by static appearance
variance between images and video frames, and 2) temporal
domain shift caused by the absence of dynamic motion in
images.
A rich line of prior works attempt to reduce the spatial
domain shift by learning a common feature space between
images and video frames (Li et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2016; Gan et al. 2016b,a; Sun et al. 2015). To
reduce both spatial and temporal domain shifts, several recent methods learn domain-invariant features between images and video clips via generative adversarial networks (Yu
et al. 2018, 2019), where the two domain shifts are treated
equally. It is a fact that for different video classes, the spatial
and temporal domain shifts play different roles in the adaptation process. For example, some videos such as “pour” and
“kiss” contain very little dynamic motion information and
can be easily distinguished by key frames. In this case, the
static appearance is more important and the spatial domain
shift weighs more in the adaptation. Other videos such as
“jump” and “wave” have large variations in motion and the
temporal domain shift has the main effect on the adaptation.
Hence, it is critical and non-trivial to explore the effects of
the two domain shifts to adaptively reduce the two domain
shifts.
In this paper, we propose a spatial-temporal causal inference framework for image-to-video adaptation, which infers the effects of the spatial and temporal domain shifts via
causal inference and adaptively reduces domain shifts via
causality-guided bidirectional heterogeneous mappings. We
build a spatial-temporal casual graph to infer the effects of
the two domain shifts during adaptation. The causal graph
has three nodes, including an appearance feature node A, a
motion feature node B and a video class label node Y . The
two edges A → Y and B → Y indicate that the appearance
feature A and the motion feature B together affect the class
label Y . The counterfactual causality is performed on this
graph to reveal the causal relationships among A, B and Y
through the counterfactual thinking of “If I had not seen A or
B, would I still make the same Y ?” Our insight is to manipulate the value of node A or B to infer its effect on video classification by investigating what Y would be. Specifically, we
wipe out A and keep B untouched, and then obtain a counterfactual Y that is contrary to the fact that both A and B

Image-to-video adaptation leverages off-the-shelf learned
models in labeled images to help classification in unlabeled
videos, thus alleviating the high computation overhead of
training a video classifier from scratch. This task is very challenging since there exist two types of domain shifts between
images and videos: 1) spatial domain shift caused by static
appearance variance between images and video frames, and
2) temporal domain shift caused by the absence of dynamic
motion in images. Moreover, for different video classes, these
two domain shifts have different effects on the domain gap
and should not be treated equally during adaptation. In this
paper, we propose a spatial-temporal causal inference framework for image-to-video adaptation. We first construct a
spatial-temporal causal graph to infer the effects of the spatial and temporal domain shifts by performing counterfactual
causality. We then learn causality-guided bidirectional heterogeneous mappings between images and videos to adaptively reduce the two domain shifts. Moreover, to relax the
assumption that the label spaces of the image and video domains are the same by the existing methods, we incorporate
class-wise alignment into the learning of image-video mappings to perform partial image-to-video adaptation where the
image label space subsumes the video label space. Extensive
experiments on several video datasets have validated the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Video recognition has made promising progress in recent
years owing to the success of deep neural networks. Training deep video classifiers using large-scale labeled video
datasets usually requires high storage resource and incurs heavy computational loads. Moreover, it is a timeconsuming and labor-intensive process to annotate a large
amount of videos. On the other hand, the computational cost
of learning deep classifiers of images is much less and there
are also many existing labeled image datasets that can be
readily used. It would be highly beneficial to transfer knowledge from images to videos. So the image-to-video adaptation task has been proposed, which leverages off-the-shelf
learned models in labeled images (source domain) to help
recognition in unlabeled videos (target domain). This task
∗

Corresponding author: Xinxiao Wu
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1027

