The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Living Without Beth and Craig:
Definitions and Interpolants in Description Logics
with Nominals and Role Inclusions
Alessandro Artale,1 Jean Christoph Jung, 2 Andrea Mazzullo,1 Ana Ozaki,3 Frank Wolter 4
1

Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
2
University of Hildesheim
3
University of Bergen
4
University of Liverpool
{artale,mazzullo}@inf.unibz.it, jungj@uni-hildesheim.de, ana.ozaki@uib.no, wolter@liverpool.ac.uk
property (PBDP), which states that a concept is implicitly
Abstract
definable using a signature Σ of symbols iff it is explicitly
The Craig interpolation property (CIP) states that an interdefinable using Σ. If the concept is a concept name and Σ
polant for an implication exists iff it is valid. The projective
the
set of all symbols distinct from that concept name, then
Beth definability property (PBDP) states that an explicit defiwe speak of the (non-projective) Beth definability property
nition exists iff a formula stating implicit definability is valid.
(BDP).
Thus, the CIP and PBDP transform potentially hard existence
problems into deduction problems in the underlying logic.
The BDP and PBDP have been used in ontology engiDescription Logics with nominals and/or role inclusions do
neering to extract equivalent acyclic terminologies from onnot enjoy the CIP nor PBDP, but interpolants and explicit
tologies (ten Cate et al. 2006; ten Cate, Franconi, and Seydefinitions have many potential applications in ontology engilan 2013), they have been investigated in ontology-based
neering and ontology-based data management. In this article
data management to equivalently rewrite ontology-mediated
we show the following: even without Craig and Beth, the exqueries (Seylan, Franconi, and de Bruijn 2009; Toman and
istence of interpolants and explicit definitions is decidable in
Weddell 2020), and they have been proposed to support the
description logics with nominals and/or role inclusions such
construction of alignments between ontologies (Jiménezas ALCO, ALCH and ALCHIO. However, living without
Craig and Beth makes this problem harder than deduction:
Ruiz et al. 2016). The CIP is often used as a tool to compute
we prove that the existence problems become 2E XP T IMEexplicit definitions (ten Cate et al. 2006; ten Cate, Franconi,
complete, thus one exponential harder than validity. The exand Seylan 2013; Toman and Weddell 2020). It is also the
istence of explicit definitions is 2E XP T IME-hard even if one
basic logical property that ensures the robust behaviour of
asks for a definition of a nominal using any symbol distinct
ontology modules (Konev et al. 2009). In the form of parfrom that nominal, but it becomes E XP T IME-complete if one
allel interpolation it has been investigated in (Konev et al.
asks for a definition of a concept name using any symbol dis2010) to decompose ontologies. In (Lutz, Seylan, and Wolter
tinct from that concept name.
2019), it is used to study P/NP dichotomies in ontologybased query answering. The PBDP is also related to the
Introduction
computation of referring expressions in linguistics (Krahmer
The Craig Interpolation Property (CIP) for a logic L states
and van Deemter 2012) and in ontology-based data manthat an implication ϕ ⇒ ψ is valid in L iff there exists a
agement (Borgida, Toman, and Weddell 2016). It has been
formula χ in L using only the common symbols of ϕ and ψ
convincingly argued (Borgida, Toman, and Weddell 2017)
such that ϕ ⇒ χ and χ ⇒ ψ are both valid in L. χ is then
that very often in applications the individual names used in
called an L-interpolant for ϕ ⇒ ψ. The CIP is generally reontologies are insufficient “to allow humans to figure out
garded as one of the most important and useful properties in
what real-world objects they refer to.” A natural way to adformal logic (Van Benthem 2008), with numerous applicadress this problem is to check for such an individual name
tions ranging from formal verification (McMillan 2003), to
a whether there exists a concept C not using a that provides
theory combinations (Cimatti, Griggio, and Sebastiani 2009;
an explicit definition of a under the ontology O and present
Goel, Krstic, and Tinelli 2009; Calvanese et al. 2020) and
such a concept C to the human user. Also very recently, it
query reformulation and rewriting in databases (Marx 2007;
has been observed that strongly separating concepts for posToman and Weddell 2011; Benedikt et al. 2016). Description
itive and negative examples given as data items in a knowllogics (DLs) are no exception (ten Cate et al. 2006; Seylan,
edge base can be represented as interpolants, for appropriFranconi, and de Bruijn 2009; Konev et al. 2010; ten Cate,
ately defined ontologies and implications (Funk et al. 2019;
Franconi, and Seylan 2013; Lutz, Seylan, and Wolter 2019;
Jung et al. 2020a,b). Thus, under the approach to DL concept
Jiménez-Ruiz et al. 2016). A particularly important conselearning proposed in (Fanizzi, d’Amato, and Esposito 2008;
quence of the CIP in DLs is the projective Beth definability
Lisi 2012), searching for a solution to the concept learning
problem can be reduced to computing an interpolant.
c
Copyright
2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
The CIP, PBDP, and BDP are so powerful because intuIntelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6193

