The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bi-Classifier Determinacy Maximization for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Shuang Li,1 Fangrui Lv,1 Binhui Xie,1 Chi Harold Liu,1,* Jian Liang,2 Chen Qin3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
Institute for Digital Communications, School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
{shuangli,fangruilv,binhuixie,chiliu}@bit.edu.cn, xuelang.lj@alibaba-inc.com, Chen.Qin@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Latest advances of deep UDA methods, leveraging the extraordinary feature extraction ability of DNNs, have been
continuously pushing forward the boundaries of UDA (Cui
et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020b). To mitigate the domain shift, some
UDA approaches aim at minimizing the well-defined distance metrics between domains (Tzeng et al. 2014; Long
et al. 2015). Works along this line are based on the
theoretical analysis in (Bendavid et al. 2010) that minimizes the divergence across source and target domains.
On par with them, fruitful line of works utilizing generative adversarial nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) have
also achieved remarkable performance by learning domaininvariant representations adversarially in a two player minmax game (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Saito et al. 2018b).

Unsupervised domain adaptation challenges the problem of
transferring knowledge from a well-labelled source domain
to an unlabelled target domain. Recently, adversarial learning
with bi-classifier has been proven effective in pushing crossdomain distributions close. Prior approaches typically leverage the disagreement between bi-classifier to learn transferable representations, however, they often neglect the classifier determinacy in the target domain, which could result in
a lack of feature discriminability. In this paper, we present a
simple yet effective method, namely Bi-Classifier Determinacy Maximization (BCDM), to tackle this problem. Motivated by the observation that target samples cannot always
be separated distinctly by the decision boundary, here in the
proposed BCDM, we design a novel classifier determinacy
disparity (CDD) metric, which formulates classifier discrepancy as the class relevance of distinct target predictions and
implicitly introduces constraint on the target feature discriminability. To this end, the BCDM can generate discriminative representations by encouraging target predictive outputs
to be consistent and determined, meanwhile, preserve the diversity of predictions in an adversarial manner. Furthermore,
the properties of CDD as well as the theoretical guarantees of
BCDM’s generalization bound are both elaborated. Extensive
experiments show that BCDM compares favorably against
the existing state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods.

The significant progress on computer vision tasks has
been dominated by deep neural networks (DNNs)
trained on large-scale datasets, such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), semantic
segmentation (Chen et al. 2018) and object detection (Ren
et al. 2015). Despite their tremendous success, collecting
sufficient labelled data in real-world applications is always
onerous and extremely costly. In this regard, it is highly desirable to develop unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
techniques (Pan and Yang 2010; Pan et al. 2011; Gong et al.
2012) to address the domain shift problem existing between
unlabelled target domain and labelled source domain.

There exist two popular paradigms to conduct adversarial
domain adaptation either by constructing a domain discriminator or by utilizing two distinct classifiers. However, the
first category will bring side effects of the deterioration of
feature discriminability, though the feature transferability is
strengthened (Chen et al. 2019). As for the second paradigm,
the selection of classifier discrepancy loss between two taskspecific classifiers is critical for expected adaptability. The
straightforward `1 distance between predictions p1 and p2 ,
i.e., |p1 − p2 |1 , in Maximum Classifier Discrepancy (Saito
et al. 2018b), merely measures the bi-classifier discrepancy
at the corresponding class positions while ignoring the constraint of the relevance information between classes. Thus
the certainty of predictions cannot be guaranteed, which may
further hurt the learning behavior. For instance, there could
be uncertain predictions such as values of [0.34, 0.33, 0.33]
and [0.34, 0.33, 0.33] by minimizing the `1 distance between
bi-classifier, which results in generating confused target features. Such situation can lead to ambiguous decisions and
thus should be avoided. As illustrated in Fig. 1, due to the domain shift dilemma, numerous target samples are prone to be
around the decision boundary. In other words, the classifier
determinacy that can put confident labels on target samples,
is lacking, thus impacting the feature discriminability.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To tackle the aforementioned issues, we propose a BiClassifier Determinacy Maximization (BCDM) method together with a novel metric called classifier determinacy dis-

Introduction

8455

