The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Solving Infinite-Domain CSPs Using the Patchwork Property
Konrad K. Dabrowski,1 Peter Jonsson,2 Sebastian Ordyniak,3 George Osipov2
1

Durham University
Linköping University
3
University of Leeds
konrad.dabrowski@durham.ac.uk, {peter.jonsson,george.osipov}@liu.se, sordyniak@gmail.com
2

Abstract

focus on the second kind of restrictions in this paper; these
are referred to as structural restrictions. One way of studying structural restrictions is via the primal graph: this graph
has the variables as its vertices with two of them joined by
an edge if they occur together in the scope of a constraint.
The graph parameter treewidth (Bertelé and Brioschi 1972;
Robertson and Seymour 1984) is very useful in this context since many NP-hard graph problems are tractable on instances with bounded treewidth. The treewidth of the primal
graph has been extensively used in the study of finite-domain
CSPs. It is known that the problem is fixed-parameter
tractable (fpt), i.e. it can be solved in f (w + d) · nO(1) time,
where n is the size of the instance, w is the treewidth of the
primal graph, d is the domain size, and f is some computable
function. This was proven by Gottlob et al. (2002); also see
Samer & Szeider (2010) for a more general treatment.

The constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) has important applications in computer science and AI. In particular, infinitedomain CSPs have been intensively used in subareas of AI
such as spatio-temporal reasoning. Since constraint satisfaction is a computationally hard problem, much work has been
devoted to identifying restricted problems that are efficiently
solvable. One way of doing this is to restrict the interactions of variables and constraints, and a highly successful
approach is to bound the treewidth of the underlying primal
graph. Bodirsky & Dalmau [J. Comput. System. Sci. 79(1),
2013] and Huang et al. [Artif. Intell. 195, 2013] proved that
CSP(Γ) can be solved in nf (w) time (where n is the size of
the instance, w is the treewidth of the primal graph and f is
a computable function) for certain classes of constraint languages Γ. We improve this bound to f (w) · nO(1) , where
the function f only depends on the language Γ, for CSPs
whose basic relations have the patchwork property. Hence,
such problems are fixed-parameter tractable and our algorithm is asymptotically faster than the previous ones. Additionally, our approach is not restricted to binary constraints,
so it is applicable to a strictly larger class of problems than
that of Huang et al. However, there exist natural problems
that are covered by Bodirsky & Dalmau’s algorithm but not
by ours.

Let us now consider infinite-domain CSPs. For certain
classes of constraint languages, Bodirsky & Dalmau (2013,
Corollary 1) proved that CSP(Γ) can be solved in nO(w)
time (where the exact expression in the O(w) term may depend on the constraint language) while Huang et al. (2013,
2
2
Theorem 6) proved the bound O(w3 n · ew log n ) = nO(w ) .
These results do not prove fixed-parameter tractability but
the weaker property of membership in the complexity
class XP. Algorithms with a running time bounded by nf (w)
are obviously polynomial-time when w is fixed. However,
since w appears in the exponent, such algorithms become
impractical (even for small w) when large instances are considered. It is significantly better if a problem is fpt and can be
solved in time f (w)·nO(1) since the order of the polynomial
in n does not depend at all on w.

Introduction
The constraint satisfaction problem over a constraint language Γ (CSP(Γ)) is the problem of finding a variable assignment which satisfies a set of constraints, where each
constraint is constructed from a relation in Γ. This problem can be used to model many problems encountered in
computer science and AI, see e.g. Rossi et al. (2006) or
Dechter (2003). The CSP is computationally hard in the general case; if the variable domains are finite, then the problem
is NP-complete, and otherwise it may be of arbitrarily high
complexity (Bodirsky and Grohe 2008). Hence, identifying
tractable problems is of great practical interest.
Tractable fragments have historically been identified using two different methods: either (1) restrict the relations
that are allowed in the constraint language or (2) restrict how
variables and constraints interact in problem instances. We

Our main result is an fpt algorithm for CSPs where the underlying basic relations have the patchwork property (Lutz
and Miličić 2007). Several important CSPs (such as Allen’s
algebra and RCC8) are known to have this property. The
patchwork property ensures that the union of two satisfiable
CSPs, whose constraints agree on their common variables, is
also satisfiable. With the discussion above in mind, it is clear
that our algorithm has better computational properties than
the two previous ones. We will now briefly compare the applicability of the algorithms; more information on this can
be found in the discussion section. Bodirsky & Dalmau’s
algorithm (BD) works for constraint languages that are ω-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3715

