The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Lexically Constrained Neural Machine Translation
with Explicit Alignment Guidance
Guanhua Chen1 , Yun Chen* 2 , Victor O.K. Li1
1

The University of Hong Kong
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
ghchenhku@connect.hku.hk, yunchen@sufe.edu.cn, vli@eee.hku.hk
2

Abstract

The given constraint pair: xb:e ⇠ ŷu:v b  s̃  e
Alignment score at step t:

Lexically constrained neural machine translation (NMT),
which leverages pre-specified translation to constrain NMT,
has practical significance in interactive translation and NMT
domain adaptation. Previous works either modify the decoding algorithm or train the model on augmented datasets.
These methods suffer from either high computational overheads or low copying success rates. In this paper, we investigate ATT-I NPUT and ATT-O UTPUT, two alignment-based
constrained decoding methods. These two methods revise
the target tokens during decoding based on word alignments derived from encoder-decoder attention weights. Our
study shows that ATT-I NPUT translates better while ATTO UTPUT is more computationally efficient. Capitalizing on
both strengths, we further propose EAM-O UTPUT by introducing an explicit alignment module (EAM) to a pretrained
Transformer. It decodes similarly as ATT-O UTPUT, except
using alignments derived from the EAM. We leverage the
word alignments induced from ATT-I NPUT as labels and train
the EAM while keeping the parameters of the Transformer
frozen. Experiments on WMT16 De-En and WMT16 RoEn show the effectiveness of our approaches on constrained
NMT. In particular, the proposed EAM-O UTPUT method
consistently outperforms previous approaches in translation
quality, with light computational overheads over unconstrained baseline.

Aligner
𝑠̃
Decoding steps:

ŷu

ŷu+1

yt 1

p=0
0<p<1

Editor

Editor

Dec

t + ly

t+1

t

ytk

Dec

ŷu

…

Dec

ŷv

Figure 1: The proposed model structure for constrained decoding. We modify the decoding algorithm by adding an
Aligner and Editor. During decoding, the Aligner extracts
alignment from attention weights. If the aligned source token is in a given source constraint (b ≤ s̃ ≤ e), the Editor
will revise the decoder output probabilities at the current and
the next ly −1 steps to force the generation of the target constraint ŷu:v , where ly = v − u + 1.

Introduction
Lexically constrained neural machine translation (NMT) is
a task that translates the source sentence to include prespecified lexical constraints. It is useful in a range of settings, including interactive translation with user-provided
lexical constraints (Koehn 2009), domain adaptation where
lexical constraints are from pre-specified dictionary (Hasler
et al. 2018), and scenarios where some phrases, such as
product prices, company names or web URLs, are expected to be translated perfectly without any error. Different
from statistical machine translation (Koehn, Och, and Marcu
2003), NMT has no explicit word alignment during model
training or decoding. Therefore, it is not trivial to impose
lexical constraints into the NMT model.

Previous works either modify the decoding algorithm or
train the model on augmented code-switched data to solve
this problem. Some works (Hokamp and Liu 2017; Post
and Vilar 2018; Hu et al. 2019) modify the decoding algorithm by enumerating all feasible constraints at each step
and selecting hypotheses with constraints according to the
translation probabilities. Although these methods can guarantee the presence of the constraints at test time, they significantly slow down the decoding and tend to translate the
specified source phrases repeatedly or omit source phrases
(Zhang et al. 2019). To improve the decoding efficiency,
other works (Hasler et al. 2018; Alkhouli, Bretschner, and
Ney 2018; Song et al. 2020) impose lexical constraints
with word alignments. The alignments can be extracted
with attention weights in vanilla Transformer (Alkhouli,

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12630

