The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Simpson’s Bias in NLP Training
Fei Yuan1

Longtu Zhang2

Huang Bojun2∗

Yaobo Liang3

1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Rakuten Institute of Technology, Rakuten, Inc.
3
Microsoft Research Asia
feiyuan@std.uestc.edu.cn, longtu.zhang@rakuten.com, bojun.huang@rakuten.com, yalia@microsoft.com

Pn
.
that the sample average F̄(S; M) = n1 i=1 G(i; M) can
“effectively represent” FMLE (S; M) as a surrogate objective
of the optimization. Specifically, since FMLE itself is additive
with respect to the samples in S, we can simply take the CE
.
loss GMLE (i; M) = FMLE ({i}; M), which gives

Abstract
In most machine learning tasks, we evaluate a model M on
a given data population S by measuring a population-level
metric F (S; M). Examples of such evaluation metric F include precision/recall for (binary) recognition, the F1 score
for multi-class classification, and the BLEU metric for language generation. On the other hand, the model M is trained
by optimizing a sample-level loss G(St ; M) at each learning
step t, where St is a subset of S (a.k.a. the mini-batch). Popular choices of G include cross-entropy loss, the Dice loss,
and sentence-level BLEU scores. A fundamental assumption
behind this paradigm is that the mean value of the samplelevel loss G, if averaged over all possible samples, should effectively represent the population-level metric F of the task,
such as, that E[G(St ; M)] ≈ F (S; M).
In this paper, we systematically investigate the above assumption in several NLP tasks. We show, both theoretically and experimentally, that some popular designs of the sample-level
loss G may be inconsistent with the true population-level
metric F of the task, so that models trained to optimize the
former can be substantially sub-optimal to the latter, a phenomenon we call it, Simpson’s bias, due to its deep connections with the classic paradox known as Simpson’s reversal
paradox in statistics and social sciences.

1

F̄MLE (S; M) =

∝ FMLE (S; M).

The average form of F̄MLE admits efficient stochasticgradient optimization (which requires the objective to be a
population mean such that its gradient can be unbiasedly estimated by the gradient of the sample mean over a random
mini-batch), and the proportionality between F̄MLE and FMLE
guarantees that an optimal (better) solution of the former is
also an optimal (better) solution of the latter.
However, it is rare that a task directly uses FMLE as
the end-to-end evaluation metric. Instead, common evaluation metrics used in practice include accuracy, precision/recall/F1 (for discriminative tasks), and BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) (for machine translation and other language generation tasks). While a model trained with GMLE
may well optimize the corresponding MLE objective FMLE ,
it does not necessarily optimize the true evaluation metric
of the task. For this reason, researchers have proposed to
optimize alternative objective F that is closer to, or in some
cases equal to, the true evaluation metric used at testing time.
For example, the Dice loss (Li et al. 2020) has been recently
proposed for tasks such as Paraphrase Similarity Matching
(PSM) and Named Entity Recognition (NER) because of its
similarity to the F1 metric used in these tasks. Similarly,
sentence-level BLEU scores have been used in sentencelevel training for machine translation due to its correspondence to the true corpus-level BLEU metric (Ranzato et al.
2016; Wu et al. 2016; Edunov et al. 2018).
Unfortunately, these alternative learning objectives posed
new challenges in optimization. Specifically, metrics like
F1 and BLEU (and many others) are not sample-separable,
meaning that they cannot be converted proportionally or
monotonically into an averaged form F̄ as in the case of
MLE. Consequently, while the intended objectives FF1 and
FBLEU are more aligned with the evaluation metric of the
corresponding tasks, what the training algorithms are truly

Introduction

Consider the following standard and general paradigm of
NLP training: given a corpus S consisting of n samples, each
indexed by i = {1, . . . , n}, the training of NLP model M
aims at optimizing a corpus-level objective F (S; M). For
example, a popular training method follows the maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) principle, in which a sample
is a (xi , yi ) pair with xi being a decision context, which
is usually one or more sentences in NLP tasks, and yi being a desired atomic decision, which is usually a token in
generative tasks or a class label in discriminative tasks. The
corpus-level objective F that MLE-oriented training aims
at maximizing is
the log-likelihood of the whole corpus:
. Pn
FMLE (S; M) = i=1 log M(xi , yi ).
The MLE objective is relatively easy to optimize because
we can construct a sample-level loss function G(i; M) such
∗

n
n
1X
1X
FMLE ({i}; M) =
log M(xi , yi )
n i=1
n i=1

Correspondence to: bojhuang@gmail.com

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14276

