The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

NASGEM: Neural Architecture Search via Graph Embedding Method
Hsin-Pai Cheng,1 Tunhou Zhang,1 Yixing Zhang,1 Shiyu Li, 1 Feng Liang,3 Feng Yan,4 Meng Li,2
Vikas Chandra,2 Hai Li,1 Yiran Chen1
1

Duke University
Facebook, Inc
3
Tsinghua University
4
University of Nevada, Reno
{dave.cheng, tunhou.zhang, shiyu.li, hai.li, yiran.chen}@duke.edu, {meng.li, vchandra}@fb.com, liangf16@tsinghua.org.cn,
fyan@unr.edu
2

Abstract

methods (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Luo et al. 2018))
usually result in sub-optimal solutions while reward function
based search methods (e.g., RL (Tan et al. 2019)) obtain high
quality solutions at the cost of high computing hours. There
is no effective way to trade-off search cost and architecture
quality using these NAS methods.
To address the above issues, estimator-based methods (Baker et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020) are proposed to enable
scalable and flexible architecture search. Estimator-based
NAS formulates a representation of architecture by mapping
architectures into a latent space. Such representation enables
modeling the relationship between architecture and accuracy using an estimator, such as a supervised predictor. The
estimator-based approach is scalable as the trade-off between
search cost and quality can be controlled by budgeting the
number of samples for modeling the search space. Estimator
also allows adding additional search objectives with no additional search cost. To formulate an effective representation,
recent works use graph convolutional networks (GCN) and
other graph encoding schemes (Li, Gong, and Xiatian 2020;
Ning et al. 2020) to capture the graph topology, which is
important for node-based NAS.
However, existing estimator-based methods (Li, Gong, and
Xiatian 2020; Ning et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2019) overlook
the graph distance when mapping architectures to a latent
space. This results in an inaccurate and/or reduced representation capacity of the projected latent space. When the graph
distance in the latent space cannot appropriately reflect the
graph distance in the discrete space, the found cell may not
be optimal.
To address the above problem, we propose NASGEM
(Neural Architecture Search via Graph Embedding Method)
to incorporate graph kernel equipped with a similarity measure into the estimator-based search process. NASGEM delicately encodes graphs into a latent space and enables to
search cells with high representation capacity. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: 1)
NASGEM constructs a graphically meaningful latent space to
improve the search efficiency of estimator-based method. 2)
NASGEM employs an efficiency score predictor to model the
relationship between cell structures and their performances.
With the pretrained graph embedding, our predictor can accu-

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) automates and prospers the
design of neural networks. Estimator-based NAS has been proposed recently to model the relationship between architectures
and their performance to enable scalable and flexible search.
However, existing estimator-based methods encode the architecture into a latent space without considering graph similarity.
Ignoring graph similarity in node-based search space may induce a large inconsistency between similar graphs and their
distance in the continuous encoding space, leading to inaccurate encoding representation and/or reduced representation
capacity that can yield sub-optimal search results. To preserve
graph correlation information in encoding, we propose NASGEM which stands for Neural Architecture Search via Graph
Embedding Method. NASGEM is driven by a novel graph
embedding method equipped with similarity measures to capture the graph topology information. By precisely estimating
the graph distance and using an auxiliary Weisfeiler-Lehman
kernel to guide the encoding, NASGEM can utilize additional
structural information to get more accurate graph representation to improve the search efficiency. GEMNet, a set of
networks discovered by NASGEM, consistently outperforms
networks crafted by existing search methods in classification
tasks, i.e., with 0.4%-3.6% higher accuracy while having 11%21% fewer Multiply-Accumulates. We further transfer GEMNet for COCO object detection. In both one-stage and twostage detectors, our GEMNet surpasses its manually-crafted
and automatically-searched counterparts.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) (Zoph et al. 2018) prospers the neural architecture design process. With the rise of
NAS, automated crafted CNN models have achieved recordbreaking performance for a variety of vision applications
such as image classification and object detection.
The goal of NAS is to identify good architectures within
a designated search space under application and resource
constraints. Earlier NAS works mainly adopt reinforcement
learning (Zoph et al. 2018), evolutionary algorithm (Real
et al. 2019), bayesian optimization (Kandasamy et al. 2018),
and differentiable (Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Luo et al.
2018; Liang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019) methods for searching. However, these methods usually suffer from poor search
scalability. Fast search methods (e.g., differentiable-based
7090

