The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LRC-BERT: Latent-representation Contrastive Knowledge Distillation for
Natural Language Understanding
Hao Fu1 * , Shaojun Zhou2 * , Qihong Yang2 , Junjie Tang2† , Guiquan Liu1 ,
Kaikui Liu2 , Xiaolong Li2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group
hfu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zsj148798, xiaokui.yqh, lixi.tjj}@alibaba-inc.com, gqliu@ustc.edu.cn,
{damon, xl.li}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

For example, the original BERT-base (Devlin et al. 2019)
model has 12 layers and 109 million parameters. This limits the deployment of online services because of inference
delay and device capacity constraints. Therefore, in the case
of limited computing resources, it is necessary to reduce the
computational cost of these models in practice.

The pre-training models such as BERT have achieved great
results in various natural language processing problems.
However, a large number of parameters need significant
amounts of memory and the consumption of inference time,
which makes it difficult to deploy them on edge devices. In
this work, we propose a knowledge distillation method LRCBERT based on contrastive learning to fit the output of the
intermediate layer from the angular distance aspect, which is
not considered by the existing distillation methods. Furthermore, we introduce a gradient perturbation-based training architecture in the training phase to increase the robustness of
LRC-BERT, which is the first attempt in knowledge distillation. Additionally, in order to better capture the distribution
characteristics of the intermediate layer, we design a twostage training method for the total distillation loss. Finally, by
verifying 9 datasets on the General Language Understanding
Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark, the performance of the proposed LRC-BERT exceeds the existing state-of-the-art methods, which proves the effectiveness of our method.

Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Adriana et al. 2015) is an effective method of model
compression (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015). By compressing a large teacher network into a small student network,
the student network has the same predictive ability as the
teacher network. At the same time, the student network has
fewer parameters, correspondingly faster inference speed on
specific tasks and can be effectively deployed to edge devices, greatly saving computing resources. Recalling the existing research on the KD method in NLP, DistilBERT (Sanh
et al. 2019) uses soft label distillation loss, cosine embedding loss, and initializes the student from the teacher by
taking one layer out of two. This strategy forces the structure of the transformer layer in the student network to be
consistent with the teacher, and the distillation of the output
characteristics of the intermediate layer is not fully considered. The student model in BERT-PKD (Sun et al. 2019)
patiently learns from multiple intermediate layers of the
teacher model for incremental knowledge extraction, including PKD Last and PKD Skip. The former try to learn from
the last k layers, the latter learn from each k layer. Like DistilBERT, BERT-PKD also requires the corresponding layer
in the student to be exactly the same as the teacher, which
greatly limits the flexibility of structural design and the compression scale. TinyBERT (Jiao et al. 2019) uses more finegrained knowledge including the hidden state of the transformer network and self-attention distribution. Additionally,
a parameter matrix is introduced to perform a linear transformation on the hidden state of student so as to reduce the
number of parameters in the tranformer layer of the student.
However, these models only mimic the output value of each
layer of the teacher network, without considering structural
information such as the correlation and difference of the output distribution among different samples.

Introduction
Recently, one of the main trends of natural language processing (NLP) is pre-training model (Peters et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2019). The pre-training models such as
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019)
have achieved remarkable results in tasks like Sentiment
Classification (Socher et al. 2013) and Natural Language Inference (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2017). The training
of these models usually consists of two stages: the first stage
is the model pre-training on a large scale corpus by predicting specific words according to the given context. The second stage is to add a specific prediction layer on a specific
downstream task for fine-tuning training. However, these
models usually contain hundreds of millions of parameters.
* Hao Fu and Shaojun Zhou are equal contribution first authors.
This work was mainly done when Hao Fu was an intern at Alibaba
Group.
†
Junjie Tang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12830

