The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Unified Taylor Framework for Revisiting Attribution Methods
Huiqi Deng1, * , Na Zou2 , Mengnan Du2 , Weifu Chen1,† , Guocan Feng1 , Xia Hu2
1

Sun Yat-Sen University
Texas A&M University
{denghq7@mail2,mcsfgc@mail,chenwf26@mail}.sysu.edu.cn, {nzou1,dumengnan,xiahu}@tamu.edu
2

Abstract

according to the corresponding linear weights in the pretrained model (Bach et al. 2015). The interpretations generated by those attribution methods with such intuitive rationales are difficult to compare and can not be fully trusted.
Hence, it’s highly desirable to conduct a comprehensive investigation on the rationales, fidelity, and limitations of those
various heuristic methods. Specifically, the following important questions need theoretical investigation: Rationale–
What model behaviors do these attribution methods actually
reveal; Fidelity–How much can decision making process be
attributed; Limitations–Where they may fail.
While some attempts have been made to partially answer the questions by unifying a certain kind of attribution
methods, such as additive feature attribution (Lundberg and
Lee 2017), multiplying a modified gradient with input (Ancona et al. 2018), or first-order Taylor expansion (Samek
et al. 2020), the problems are still not addressed well due
to two challenges. The first challenge (Ch1) stems from
the fact that it is difficult to unify most of existing attribution methods, i.e., to reformulate these attribution methods
into one framework, because the methods are based on various heuristics, as we discussed above. The second challenge
(Ch2) is lacking a theoretical attribution framework, which
could offer a good description to the attribution problem so
as to theoretically reveal the rationale, fidelity, and limitations of the attribution methods.
In this paper, we study the attribution of DNNs to answer the aforementioned three questions by proposing a
general Taylor attribution framework and unifying seven
mainstream attribution methods into the framework. The basic idea behind the proposed framework is to attribute an
approximation function of DNNs, instead of DNNs themselves. The proposed Taylor attribution framework has three
features: (1) the framework is based on Taylor expansion,
which is able to approximate sufficiently the behavior of
black-box DNNs and has a theoretical guarantee on approximation error; (2) Taylor expansion is a polynomial function,
in which attribution and analysis become very easy and intuitive; (3) The Taylor attribution framework is very general,
it can unify many attribution methods that are to analyze the
output change between input sample and baseline.
We then reformulate seven mainstream attribution methods into the proposed Taylor attribution framework by theoretical derivations. The unified reformulations enable us to

Attribution methods have been developed to understand the
decision making process of machine learning models, especially deep neural networks, by assigning importance scores
to individual features. Existing attribution methods often built
upon empirical intuitions and heuristics. There still lacks a
general and theoretical framework that not only can unify
these attribution methods, but also theoretically reveal their
rationales, fidelity, and limitations. To bridge the gap, in this
paper, we propose a Taylor attribution framework and reformulate seven mainstream attribution methods into the framework. Based on reformulations, we analyze the attribution
methods in terms of rationale, fidelity, and limitation. Moreover, We establish three principles for a good attribution in the
Taylor attribution framework, i.e., low approximation error,
correct contribution assignment, and unbiased baseline selection. Finally, we empirically validate the Taylor reformulations, and reveal a positive correlation between the attribution
performance and the number of principles followed by the attribution method via benchmarking on real-world datasets.

Introduction
Attribution methods have become an effective computational tool in understanding the behavior of machine learning models, especially Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Du,
Liu, and Hu 2019; Samek et al. 2019). They uncover how
machine learning models make a decision by calculating the
contribution score of each input feature to the final decision.
For example, in image classification, the attribution methods infer the contribution of each pixel to the predicted label
for a pre-trained model, and usually create saliency maps to
visualize the contributions.
Although several attribution methods (Samek et al. 2020)
have been proposed recently, they are based on different
heuristics and have very limited theoretical understanding
and support. For instance, Occlusion-1 and Occlusion-patch
observe the changes of the output induced by adjusting
each input pixel or patch (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Zintgraf
et al. 2017); Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) evaluates the contributions of each input to a non-linear neuron
* This work is done during her visit at Texas A&M University.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11462

