The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

(C OMET-)ATOMIC20
20 :
On Symbolic and Neural Commonsense Knowledge Graphs
Jena D. Hwang1∗ , Chandra Bhagavatula1∗ , Ronan Le Bras1 , Jeff Da1 , Keisuke Sakaguchi1 ,
Antoine Bosselut13 and Yejin Choi12
1

Allen Institute for AI, WA, USA
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, WA, USA
3
Stanford University, CA, USA
{jenah, chandrab, ronanl, jeffd, keisukes, antoineb, yejinc}@allenai.org
2

Abstract

social-interaction

Recent years have brought about a renewed interest in commonsense representation and reasoning in the field of natural
language understanding. The development of new commonsense knowledge graphs (CSKG) has been central to these
advances as their diverse facts can be used and referenced
by machine learning models for tackling new and challenging tasks. At the same time, there remain questions about the
quality and coverage of these resources due to the massive
scale required to comprehensively encompass general commonsense knowledge.
In this work, we posit that manually constructed CSKGs will
never achieve the coverage necessary to be applicable in all
situations encountered by NLP agents. Therefore, we propose
a new evaluation framework for testing the utility of KGs
based on how effectively implicit knowledge representations
can be learned from them.
With this new goal, we propose ATOMIC20
20 , a new CSKG of
general-purpose commonsense knowledge containing knowledge that is not readily available in pretrained language models. We evaluate its properties in comparison with other leading CSKGs, performing the first large-scale pairwise study
of commonsense knowledge resources. Next, we show that
ATOMIC20
20 is better suited for training knowledge models
that can generate accurate, representative knowledge for new,
unseen entities and events. Finally, through human evaluation, we show that the few-shot performance of GPT-3
(175B parameters), while impressive, remains ∼12 absolute
points lower than a BART-based knowledge model trained on
ATOMIC20
20 despite using over 430x fewer parameters.

1

garage
repair shop

X wants to pay
their bill
X wants to call
Uber for a ride

is located at

a mechanic
capable of
desires

Fix leaky radiator

as a result,
X wants

to maintain
the car

before,
X needs

because X
wanted

money
pay repairs
used for

X gets X’s car repaired
can be
hindered by

The car costs
too much to repair

is made of

fold into origami

happens after
happens before

used for
has property
paper

Person spent
a fortune

event-centered

Person drives
an old car

earned by working

physical-entity

Figure 1: A tiny subset of ATOMIC20
20 , a large atlas of social
and physical commonsense relations. Relations in the topleft quadrant reflects relations from ATOMIC.1
data have been shown to effectively adapt to diverse downstream tasks, achieving significant performance gains across
natural language benchmarks (Wang et al. 2019). Interestingly, as these models have grown larger (and trained on
larger amounts of data), their benchmark performance has
continued to improve (Raffel et al. 2019) despite limited
conceptual improvements, leaving open questions regarding
the source of these remarkable generalization properties.
Recent work has hypothesized that many of these performance gains could be a result of language models being able to memorize facts in their parameters during training (Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020) that can be leveraged at evaluation time. As a result, a new paradigm of
language models as knowledge bases has emerged (Petroni
et al. 2019). In this setting, language models are prompted
with natural language prefixes or questions, and they express
knowledge through language generation. The initial success
of this paradigm for representing commonsense knowledge
(Davison, Feldman, and Rush 2019; Tamborrino et al. 2020)

Introduction

Commonsense understanding and reasoning remain longstanding challenges in general artificial intelligence. However, large-scale language models have brought tremendous
progress in the sub-field of natural language processing.
Such large-scale language models (Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020) trained on extreme-scale
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
ATOMIC20
20 and ATOMIC -2020 can be used interchangeably,
but for brevity we use ATOMIC20
20 in this paper.
6384

