The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Matching on Sets: Conquer Occluded Person Re-Identification Without Alignment
Mengxi Jia1 , Xinhua Cheng2 , Yunpeng Zhai1 , Shijian Lu3 , Siwei Ma4, 5 ,
Yonghong Tian4, 5 , Jian Zhang1, 5 *
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{mxjia, ypzhai, swma,yhtian, zhangjian.sz}@pku.edu.cn, 931736813@qq.com, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

Pattern Set A

Pattern Set B

Matching on Set

Occluded person re-identification (re-ID) is a challenging
task as different human parts may become invisible in cluttered scenes, making it hard to match person images of different identities. Most existing methods address this challenge
by aligning spatial features of body parts according to semantic information (e.g. human poses) or feature similarities but
this approach is complicated and sensitive to noises. This paper presents Matching on Sets (MoS), a novel method that
positions occluded person re-ID as a set matching task without requiring spatial alignment. MoS encodes a person image by a pattern set as represented by a ‘global vector’ with
each element capturing one specific visual pattern, and it introduces Jaccard distance as a metric to compute the distance
between pattern sets and measure image similarity. To enable
Jaccard distance over continuous real numbers, we employ
minimization and maximization to approximate the operations of intersection and union, respectively. In addition, we
design a Jaccard triplet loss that enhances the pattern discrimination and allows to embed set matching into deep neural
networks for end-to-end training. In the inference stage, we
introduce a conflict penalty mechanism that detects mutually
exclusive patterns in the pattern union of image pairs and decreases their similarities accordingly. Extensive experiments
over three widely used datasets (Market1501, DukeMTMC
and Occluded-DukeMTMC) show that MoS achieves superior re-ID performance. Additionally, it is tolerant of occlusions and outperforms the state-of-the-art by large margins
for Occluded-DukeMTMC.

Set A

Set B

Pattern Conflict Penalty
channels

channels

Figure 1: Illustration of Matching on Sets (MoS) for occluded person re-ID: MoS represents a person image by a
‘global vector’ that defines a pattern set. It matches occluded
person images according to the Jaccard similarity between
their pattern sets without requiring spatial alignment of person images. We design a Jaccard triplet loss for end-to-end
network training and a conflict penalty mechanism for optimal inference.

suffer from occlusions and become invisible. Occluded reID (Zhuo et al. 2018; Miao et al. 2019) remains a very open
research challenge despite its great values in practical re-ID
systems.
The core challenge of occluded re-ID lies with two problems. The first problem comes from various occlusions that
often cover up discriminative body parts. As a result, the
trained model cannot extract sufficient representation information for re-ID. The second problem comes from the
interference of obstacles that often share similar appearances as human bodies. Such obstacle interference deteriorates the extracted representation and makes the person
matching complicated and prone to errors. Existing works
address these challenges by adopting an intuitive approach
that aligns the visible body parts and measures their similarities separately. The major line of research along this direction leverages external cues such as person masks (Song

Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) (Zheng, Yang, and Hauptmann 2016) aims to associate persons that non-overlapping
cameras capture from different places and viewpoints. It
is an indispensable component in video surveillance where
persons are often the major objects of interest (Yang et al.
2019). Though we have observed impressive progress in
holistic person re-ID in recent years (Wang et al. 2019b;
Zhai et al. 2020a; Jia et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020a), it
is still a big challenge to match persons of different identities in cluttered scenes where different body parts often
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1673

