The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Embedding Heterogeneous Networks into Hyperbolic Space Without Meta-path
Lili Wang,1 Chongyang Gao, 1 Chenghan Huang, 2 Ruibo Liu, 1 Weicheng Ma, 1
Soroush Vosoughi 1
1

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College
2
Millennium Management LLC
lili.wang.gr@dartmouth.edu, soroush.vosoughi@dartmouth.edu

Abstract

lating breadth-first and depth-first sampling, thus combining
different views of node equivalence.
After these two pioneering papers, there has been an explosion of work focused on representation learning for different types of networks. One way to divide the prior work
is to separate embedding methods for homogeneous and heterogeneous networks. Homogeneous networks contain only
one type of node. Heterogeneous networks, on the other
hand, have two or more types of nodes. For example, citation networks where all nodes are papers and all edges
correspond to citations are homogeneous. However, if we
extend the network to include authors and venues as nodes,
then it becomes a heterogeneous network. In this network,
the edges represent different kinds of relationships. For instance, author-to-author edges would represent collaboration, while author-to-paper edges would represent authorship and so on.
Various methods for embedding heterogeneous networks
have been proposed (see for instance, Dong, Chawla, and
Swami 2017; Fu, Lee, and Lei 2017; Hussein, Yang, and
Cudré-Mauroux 2018; He et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2018a;
Tang, Qu, and Mei 2015; Shi et al. 2018b; Wang, Zhang,
and Shi 2019). However, to the best of our knowledge, all
the proposed methods, with the exception of HHNE (Wang,
Zhang, and Shi 2019), embed heterogeneous networks into
Euclidean space. In this paper, we introduce a novel embedding method for heterogeneous networks in hyperbolic
space.
Hyperbolic and Euclidean spaces can both preserve certain properties, such as angles between two vectors when
the conformal transformation is used. However, there are
two main advantages of hyperbolic space compared with
Euclidean space. First, hyperbolic space has a stronger representation ability for hierarchical structures; for instance,
Sarkar (2011) show that trees can be embedded into the twodimensional hyperbolic space (Poincaré disk) with arbitrarily low distortion. On the other hand, Linial et al. (1995)
show that Euclidean space cannot represent a tree with low
distortion. A sizeable number of networks have a hierarchical structure, which makes them suitable for embedding into
hyperbolic space. Another advantage of hyperbolic space is
that it represents high-degree vertices better than Euclidean
space, which is important when dealing with complex networks where the degree of the vertices follow a power-law

Networks found in the real-world are numerous and varied.
A common type of network is the heterogeneous network,
where the nodes (and edges) can be of different types. Accordingly, there have been efforts at learning representations
of these heterogeneous networks in low-dimensional space.
However, most of the existing heterogeneous network embedding methods suffer from the following two drawbacks:
(1) The target space is usually Euclidean. Conversely, many
recent works have shown that complex networks may have
hyperbolic latent anatomy, which is non-Euclidean. (2) These
methods usually rely on meta-paths, which require domainspecific prior knowledge for meta-path selection. Additionally, different down-streaming tasks on the same network
might require different meta-paths in order to generate taskspecific embeddings. In this paper, we propose a novel selfguided random walk method that does not require metapath for embedding heterogeneous networks into hyperbolic
space. We conduct thorough experiments for the tasks of
network reconstruction and link prediction on two public
datasets, showing that our model outperforms a variety of
well-known baselines across all tasks.

Introduction
There has been an ever-increasing amount of network data
available to researchers in recent decades. Through encoding network structure into low-dimensional embeddings, researchers can mine and model networks without resorting to
feature engineering.
In the field of natural language processing, there has been
a long history of generating low dimensional embeddings for
words based on co-occurrence in the same contexts, which
is similar to the local proximity in a graph. Using language
models to embed networks was first proposed by Perozzi et
al. in their work DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014). The random walks are adopted to generate the context of nodes from the network, which are then fed into a
Skip-Gram model (Mikolov et al. 2013) as sentences. This
way, similar nodes in a network will have similar contexts
and thus have related embeddings that are near one another.
Grover et al. proposed an extension of DeepWalk called
node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016) by smoothly interpoCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10147

