The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Appearance-Motion Memory Consistency Network for Video Anomaly Detection
Ruichu Cai1, * , Hao Zhang1,∗ , Wen Liu2,3,∗ , Shenghua Gao2,† , Zhifeng Hao1,†
1

2

Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, Shanghai 201210, China.
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
{cairuichu,haodotzhang}@gmail.com, {liuwen,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn

Abstract

The consistency law existing in nature is an important concept and is widely used in computer vision (Wang, Jabri,
and Efros 2019). Unlike the above work in the use of time
correspondence, the consistency in VAD proposed in this paper considers modeling the correspondence between appearance and motion signals in regular events explicitly. For example, in a supermarket mall setting, the regular events are
that people are pushing the shopping cart forward or staying together with the shopping cart. Some anomalies could
be detected by the appearance (breaking out of the fire) or
the motion (people fighting with each other) separately. In
contrast, some anomalies need to be detected by considering the correlation between appearance and motion. For instance, the anomalies happen when people are standing still,
and the shopping cart moves forward out of human control.
From the perspective of the appearance alone, people and
the shopping cart are both regular objects with any unusual
appearance changed. People standing still and the shopping
cart moving forward are both normal cases from the motion
alone. Without Considering the correlation between appearance and movement, the anomaly detector may fail on these
anomalies inevitably. Only by modeling the consistency between the appearance (people, the shopping cart)and the motion (people pushing the shopping cart forward)could we detect these anomalies and make the anomaly detector more
robust.
However, the consistent correlation between appearance
and motion in VAD was ignored by previous methods, including reconstruction (Hasan et al. 2016), prediction (Liu
et al. 2018), and motion fusion (Xu et al. 2017; Yan et al.
2018; Vu et al. 2019). The former two methods ignore the
motion information, and the latter directly combines the information of the two modalities in the testing phase. It does
not jointly model the two types of information in the same
space during the training phase, which does not capture the
two modalities’ consistency.
To explicitly model the consistency between appearance
and motion information, we propose an appearance-motion
memory-consistency framework for video anomaly detection. 1): We first learn the prior information of appearance and motion signals in regular events and stores them
in two memory pools called AppMemPool and MotMemPool. Since there are many background pixels irrelevant to
anomaly detection in the pixel space, and the original fea-

Abnormal event detection in the surveillance video is an
essential but the challenging task and many methods have
been proposed to deal with this problem. The previous methods either only considers the appearance information or directly integrate the results of appearance and motion information without considering their endogenous consistency semantic explicitly. Inspired by the rule that humans identify
the abnormal frames from multi-modality signals, we propose an Appearance-Motion Memory Consistency Network
(AMMC-Net). Our method first makes full use of the prior
knowledge of appearance and motion signals to capture the
correspondence between them in the high-level feature space
explicitly. Then, it combines the multi-view features to obtain
a more essential and robust feature representation of regular
events, which can significantly increase the gap between an
abnormal and a regular event. In the anomaly detection phase,
we further introduce a commit error in the latent space joint
with the prediction error in pixel space to enhance the detection accuracy. Solid experimental results on various standard
datasets validate the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is a critical task in surveillance video. It has been studied for many years but remains
unsolved due to the difficulties and challenges of collecting
abnormal data (Kiran, Thomas, and Parakkal 2018). Compared to the regular events, the anomalies happen at a low
frequency, and the types of them are diverse and even unbounded. Thereby, it seems infeasible to collect balanced
normal and abnormal data and tackle this problem using traditional supervised binary-classification methods. Considering that the regular events are abundant in video surveillance, a prevalent setting (Luo, Liu, and Gao 2017a; Kiran,
Thomas, and Parakkal 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Ionescu et al.
2019) is only the normal data provided.
Under this setting, modeling the appearance and motion
information of regular events is the first principle. In addition to representing the two types of data independently, it
is also crucial to model the corresponding between them.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

938

