The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TRQ: Ternary Neural Networks With Residual Quantization
Yue Li1 , Wenrui Ding1* , Chunlei Liu1 , Baochang Zhang1 , Guodong Guo2
1

2

Beihang University
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research and National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and
Application
ppy@buaa.edu.cn, ding@buaa.edu.cn, liuchunlei@buaa.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, guoguodong01@baidu.com
Abstract

explored for quantizer optimization. TWN (Li, Zhang, and
Liu 2016) first proposed a weight quantizer that performs
ternarization via fixed thresholds and scale factors, consequently removing the multiplication operations and improving the resource-efficient. Followed by TWN, TTQ (Zhu
et al. 2016) optimizes the weight quantizier by learning different scale factors for different states of weights, achieving
higher performance on recognition tasks. Besides, GXNORNet (Deng et al. 2018) focuses on activition ternarization
and employs a derivative approximation technique for backward optimization of quantizer. Actually, though the ternary
quantizers have been improved in the above literatures, they
are consistently trained with simple thresholding operations,
which leads to large approximation error to full-precision
weights and remains the significant performance gap.
In this paper, we aim at designing a more accurate and
flexible ternary quantizer to improve the performance of
TNNs. Specifically, we propose ternary neural networks
with residual quantization (TRQ), whcih provides new
insight into ternarization by introducing a stem-residual
framework. As shown in Figure 1, rather than directly
thresholding operations, we perform the ternary weights
(O1 ) by the combination of binarized stem and residual, which are obtained via recursive quantization on fullprecision weights. Such stem-residual quantization brings
a refined reconstruction for ternary weights, thus achieving small quantization error and accurate mapping. Specially, a learnable coefficient is introduced in the quantization process, which avoids a dedicated tuning and automatically searchs for a better approximation to the full-precision
weights. Besides, TRQ could be extended to multiple bits by
recursively encoding the residual, leading to a new method
for multi-bit quantization. Experimental results indicate the
TRQ has a superior performance on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet. We summarize our contributions as follows:
1) We propose Ternary Neural Networks with Residual
Quantization (TRQ) in the stem-residual framework, which
significantly improves the performance of the thresholding
based methods by calculating ternary weights in a recursive
manner.
2) Our method is based on a learnable quantization
scale, and a more reasonable training process to better approximate full-precision weights.
3) We evaluate TRQ on three diverse classification

Ternary neural networks (TNNs) are potential for network acceleration by reducing the full-precision weights in network
to ternary ones, e.g., {−1, 0, 1}. However, existing TNNs are
mostly calculated based on rule-of-thumb quantization methods by simply thresholding operations, which causes a significant accuracy loss. In this paper, we introduce a stemresidual framework which provides new insight into ternary
quantization, termed Ternary Residual Quantization (TRQ),
to achieve more powerful TNNs. Rather than directly thresholding operations, TRQ recursively performs quantization on
full-precision weights for a refined reconstruction by combining the binarized stem and residual parts.With such a unique
quantization process, TRQ endows the quantizer with high
flexibility and precision. Furthermore, our TRQ is generic,
which can be easily extended to multiple bits through recursively encoded residual for a better recognition accuracy.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method yields great recognition accuracy while being accelerated.

Introduction
Low precision neural networks (Esser et al. 2019; Zhou
et al. 2016; Jung et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020) are currently
emerging as important machine learning technologies, as the
result of the growing need for compressing the best Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) to support embedded devices with
limited storage and computing capabilities. Ternay Neural
Networks (TNNs) (Alemdar et al. 2017; Laborieux et al.
2020; Zhu et al. 2016; Li, Zhang, and Liu 2016; Deng
et al. 2018), which constrain the key data structures (weights
and activations) to the ternary space {−1, 0, 1}, are one of
the extreme cases in low precision neural networks. TNNs
could directly replace the multiply-accumulate operations
by controlling gate along with binary logical operations, i.e.,
XNOR (Rastegari et al. 2016), thus drastically simplifying
the consumption and reducing the memory cost in the inference phase of DNNs.
For TNNs, to alleviate the performance degradation
brought by ternarization, a suitable quantizer that can accurately map full-precision values to the quantized ternary
ones is absolutely important. Many approaches have been
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8538

