The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-supervised Bilingual Syntactic Alignment for Neural Machine Translation
∗

Tianfu Zhang,1 Heyan Huang, 1 Chong Feng, 1 Longbing Cao, 2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Technology Sydney
{tianfuzhang,hhy63,fengchong}@bit.edu.cn, LongBing.Cao@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
Source Syntactic Span

While various neural machine translation (NMT) methods
have integrated mono-lingual syntax knowledge into the linguistic representation of sequence-to-sequence, no research
is available on aligning the syntactic structures of target
language with the corresponding source language syntactic
structures. This work shows the first attempt of a sourcetarget bilingual syntactic alignment approach SyntAligner
by mutual information maximization-based self-supervised
neural deep modeling. Building on the word alignment for
NMT, our SyntAligner firstly aligns the syntactic structures
of source and target sentences and then maximizes their
mutual dependency by introducing a lower bound on their
mutual information. In SyntAligner, the syntactic structure
of span granularity is represented by transforming source
or target word hidden state into a source or target syntactic span vector. A border-sensitive span attention mechanism then captures the correlation between the source
and target syntactic span vectors, which also captures the
self-attention between span border-words as alignment bias.
Lastly, a self-supervised bilingual syntactic mutual information maximization-based learning objective dynamically
samples the aligned syntactic spans to maximize their mutual
dependency. Experiment results on three typical NMT tasks:
WMT’14 English→German, IWSLT’14 German→English,
and NC’11 English→French show the SyntAligner effectiveness and universality of syntactic alignment.

It

It

NP

was did

VP

Target Syntactic Span
Es mutig

S

Es Es NP-SB

really daring ADJP

what did SBAR

what what WHNP
they did

S

they they

NP

did did

VP

wirklich mutig AP-PD
really

Bilingual Syntactic
Alignment

what
was haben S-RE

what getan VP-OC
getan

Neural Parsing
It was really daring whay they did

Source Sentence

Es wirklich mutig was haben getan

Target Sentence

Figure 1: An example shows the deep structural mapping
between source-target syntactic spans-based embeddings in
their latent spaces.

to-sequence model with the source phrase structure explicitly exploits a constituency tree to guide the decoder to generate a translated word by weakly aligning it with phrases
and words of source sentences. The graph-convolutional networks (GCN) (Bastings et al. 2017) adds layers to the standard encoder of NMT models to explicitly model source
dependency-based word representation. A multi-granularity
self-attention mechanism (Hao et al. 2019) randomly modifies several attention heads in Transformer to attend to
phrase modeling in either n-gram or syntactic formalization.
The above work shows improved translation by leveraging
the source syntax information.
However, the existing syntax-aware NMT models only
integrate monolingual syntax, omitting the correspondence
and divergence between source and target’s syntactic structures. Inspired by linguistics, there may be certain bilingual
syntactic consistency and alignment between source and target languages, which could be used as a unique linguistic
characteristic of sequence-to-sequence NMT. Fig. 1 illustrates the bilingual syntactic alignment between the source
(English) and target (German) sentences in the granularity
of their syntactic spans. A span is a triple-set syntactic unit

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has made significant
progress by developing MT-oriented deep neural translators, including recurrent neural network (RNN) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), convolutional neural network
(CNN) (Kim 2014), Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), embedding (Mukherjee et al. 2020; Piazza 2020) and their variants. In MT, syntactic knowledge has shown essential for
extracting and learning the effective linguistic representations from both source-target sequences as in both statistical machine translation (SMT) (Koehn et al. 2003) and
NMT (Bugliarello et al. 2020; Eriguchi et al. 2016; Hao
et al. 2019). For example, in (Eriguchi et al. 2016), a tree∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14454

