The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Focused Inference and System P
Marco Wilhelm and Gabriele Kern-Isberner
Department of Computer Science, TU Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
marco.wilhelm@tu-dortmund.de, gabriele.kern-isberner@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Abstract

In this paper, we define a notion of knowledge in focus which depends on a syntactical distance to the query,
investigate formal properties of inferences that are drawn
from knowledge in focus, and provide an anytime algorithm
which calculates focused inferences and converges against
System P. A complexity analysis shows that our algorithm is
able to compute System P inferences faster than direct computations if the relevant knowledge is syntactically close to
the query.

We bring in the concept of focused inference into the field of
qualitative nonmonotonic reasoning by applying focused inference to System P. The idea behind drawing focused inferences is to concentrate on knowledge which seems to be relevant for answering a query while completely disregarding the
remaining knowledge even at the risk of missing some meaningful information. Focused inference is motivated by mimicking snap decisions of human reasoners and aims on rapidly
drawing still reasonable inferences from large sets of knowledge. In this paper, we define a series of query-dependent,
syntactically-driven focused inference relations, elaborate on
their formal properties, and show that the series converges
against System P. We take advantage of this result in form of
an anytime algorithm for drawing inferences which is accompanied by a thorough complexity analysis.

Preliminaries
We consider a propositional language L which is defined
over a finite set of (propositional) variables Σ. Formulas in
L are variables or negations (¬A), conjunctions (A ∧ B), or
disjunctions (A ∨ B) of formulas A, B ∈ L. We abbreviate
¬A with A, and A ∧ B with AB. The semantics of formulas is given by interpretations I : L → {0, 1} as usual in
propositional logics. Classical entailment between formulas
A, B is defined by A |= B iff I(A) = 1 implies I(B) = 1
for all interpretations I. If both A entails B and B entails
A, then A and B are logically equivalent, written A ≡ B.
Tautologies (formulas that are true in all interpretations) are
denoted with > and contradictions (formulas that are false
in all interpretations) with ⊥.
Conditionals (B|A) with A, B ∈ L are formal representations of default options of the form “If A holds, then usually B holds, too.” and lead to a three-valued evaluation:

iff I(AB) = 1
(verification)
1
I(B|A) = 0
(falsification) .
iff I(AB) = 1

u
iff I(A) = 1
(non-applicability)
A semantics of conditionals is provided by ranking functions
over possible worlds (Spohn 2012). Here, possible worlds
are simply propositional interpretations represented by complete conjunctions of literals, i.e. positive or negated variables. The set of all possible worlds is denoted with Ω(Σ).
A ranking function κ : Ω(Σ) → N0 maps possible worlds
to a degree of implausibility and is normalized by the requirement κ−1 (0) 6= ∅. Hence, κ−1 (0) is the set of the most
plausible worlds. Ranking functions are extended to formulas A 6≡ ⊥ by κ(A) = min{κ(ω) | ω ∈ Ω(Σ), ω |= A}
and to formulas A ≡ ⊥ by κ(A) = ∞. A ranking function κ is a model of a conditional, written κ |= (B|A), iff
κ(AB) < κ(AB) or A ≡ ⊥.

Introduction
Knowledge-based systems (Rajendra and Sajja 2009) represent a subfield of artificial intelligence the essence of which
is to infer novel information of high quality from usually uncertain or vague knowledge bases. System P (Adams 1975;
Kraus, Lehmann, and Magidor 1990) constitutes a wellestablished standard of formal quality criteria which is used
to evaluate such nonmonotonic inferences of knowledgebased systems. A drawback of high quality inference formalisms is that they are typically based on rich epistemic
structures which are computationally expensive. Hence, it
is of great interest from both an epistemic and a computational point of view to focus on relevant knowledge when
drawing inferences. The most radical way of focusing on
knowledge is to disregard the remaining knowledge completely. Surprisingly, there is only few work which investigates this idea of focusing on knowledge resp. of limiting beliefs (cf., e.g., (Kern-Isberner and Brewka 2017; Schwering
2017; Lakemeyer and Levesque 2020; Rosales and Jaakkola
2005; Chechetka and Guestrin 2010)). Certainly, one reason
is that the high quality of inferences cannot be guaranteed in
general when ignoring information. Nevertheless, in order
to counter ever-growing knowledge bases and time limitation in real-time applications of knowledge-based systems,
it is necessary to develop pragmatic inference strategies.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6522

