The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Individual Fairness in Kidney Exchange Programs
Golnoosh Farnadi1, 2, 3 * , William St-Arnaud1 * , Behrouz Babaki4 * , Margarida Carvalho1
1

CIRRELT and Université de Montréal, 2 HEC Montréal, 3 Mila, 4 Polytechnique Montréal
farnadig@mila.quebec, william.st-arnaud@umontreal.ca, behrouz.babaki@hec.ca, carvalho@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract

Kingdom (Manlove and O’Malley 2012), and Canada (Malik and Cole 2014). The underlying idea in KEP is to form
cycles: a donor donates a kidney if their corresponding patient receives one. This motivates the problem of computing exchange plans that maximize the overall patients benefit, which is usually tackled by Integer Programming approaches (Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2007; Abraham, Blum,
and Sandholm 2007; Klimentova, Alvelos, and Viana 2014;
Dickerson et al. 2016). The typical objective is to maximize
the number of transplants. However, some KEPs (like the
Dutch Program) use additional hierarchical criteria (Glorie
2014), while others associate weights to reflect the benefit
and priority of an exchange (UNOS 2020).
KEP is an example of algorithmic decision making with a
significant impact on the lives of individuals. This makes it
critical to ensure fairness in the process. To the best of our
knowledge, the literature has exclusively focused on group
fairness in KEPs, and the dominant perspective in this area
is to ensure fairness towards pre-defined groups of patients
(e.g. those deemed to be hard-to-match), leading to potential
deterioration of the maximum number of transplants (Dickerson, Procaccia, and Sandholm 2014). There is no previous work that studies individual fairness in KEPs. Individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012) ensures similar treatment
for patients without grouping them a priori. This goal calls
for a new methodology. After all, in any exchange plan, only
some patients will receive a transplant. We address this problem by designing randomized policies for selecting a solution from a set of desirable solutions, such that individuals
have the same chances of receiving a transplant.
Existing works suggest that KEPs frequently have many
optimal solutions (Carvalho and Lodi 2019). Currently, the
KEP solution computed by the algorithms in place is the one
being carried out. Note that such a solution highly depends
on the order in which the instance is inputted in the system
and how the optimization is implemented. Such dependence
is not controlled by the user and thus, it can deeply affect
the evolution of the KEP pool (Canadian Blood Services
2014). Hence, solution selection has a significant impact on
the lives of the patients and special care must be taken to ensure fairness in this process. Designing a randomized policy
to select a solution from the set of optimal solutions allows
us to enforce individual fairness without compromising optimality. However, constructing the set of all optimal solu-

Kidney transplant is the preferred method of treatment for patients suffering from kidney failure. However, not all patients
can find a donor that matches their physiological characteristics. Kidney exchange programs (KEPs) seek to match such
incompatible patient-donor pairs together, usually with the
main objective of maximizing the total number of transplants.
Since selecting one optimal solution translates to a decision
on who receives a transplant, it has a major effect on the lives
of patients. The current practice in selecting an optimal solution does not necessarily ensure fairness in the selection process. In this paper, the existence of multiple optimal plans
for a KEP is explored as a mean to achieve individual fairness. We propose the use of randomized policies for selecting
an optimal solution in which patients’ equal opportunity to
receive a transplant is promoted. Our approach gives rise to
the problem of enumerating all optimal solutions, which we
tackle using a hybrid of constraint programming and linear
programming. The advantages of our proposed method over
the common practice of using the optimal solution obtained
by a solver are stressed through computational experiments.
Our methodology enables decision makers to fully control
KEP outcomes, overcoming any potential bias or vulnerability intrinsic to a deterministic solver.

1

Introduction

Chronic kidney disease is an incurable condition that leads
to a slow loss of kidney function. The worldwide population
of patients suffering from this condition reached 700 million
in 2017 (Bikbov et al. 2020) and is increasing at an annual
rate of around 6% (Fresenius Medical Care 2018). These
patients require a renal replacement therapy: kidney transplantation or dialysis. The former is generally the preferable
treatment because it reduces the economic burden of dialysis, it has the potential to improve the patient life quality and
to yield longer lifespan.
A complicating factor in transplantation is that many patients have donors which are not medically compatible with
them. Kidney Exchange Programs (KEPs) allow such patients to exchange donors. These programs have been implemented in several countries such as South Korea (Park
et al. 2004), The Netherlands (De Klerk et al. 2005), United
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11496

