The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

VMLoc: Variational Fusion For Learning-Based Multimodal Camera Localization
Kaichen Zhou1 , Changhao Chen*2 , Bing Wang1 ,
Muhamad Risqi U. Saputra1 , Niki Trigoni1 , Andrew Markham1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
College of Intelligence Science, National University of Defense Technology
1
{rui.zhou, bing.wang, muhamad.saputra, niki.trigoni, andrew.markham}@cs.ox.ac.uk
2
chenchanghao@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

E1
D

Recent learning-based approaches have achieved impressive
results in the field of single-shot camera localization. However, how best to fuse multiple modalities (e.g., image and
depth) and to deal with degraded or missing input are less
well studied. In particular, we note that previous approaches
towards deep fusion do not perform significantly better than
models employing a single modality. We conjecture that
this is because of the naive approaches to feature space fusion through summation or concatenation which do not take
into account the different strengths of each modality. To address this, we propose an end-to-end framework, termed VMLoc, to fuse different sensor inputs into a common latent
space through a variational Product-of-Experts (PoE) followed by attention-based fusion. Unlike previous multimodal
variational works directly adapting the objective function of
vanilla variational auto-encoder, we show how camera localization can be accurately estimated through an unbiased objective function based on importance weighting. Our model
is extensively evaluated on RGB-D datasets and the results
prove the efficacy of our model. The source code is available
at https://github.com/Zalex97/VMLoc.

E2

(a)

E1
D
E2

(b)

E1
D
E2

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Training process of MVAE. (b) Training process of VMLoc. (c) Inference process of VMLoc.
their complementary features will contribute to a more accurate and robust localization system.
Compared with learning-based localization algorithms
using only RGB images, e.g. PoseNet (Kendall, Grimes,
and Cipolla 2015b), Bayesian PoseNet (Kendall and
Cipolla 2016), Hourglass Network (Melekhov et al. 2017),
CNN+LSTM localization neural network (Walch et al.
2017), PoseNet17 (Kendall and Cipolla 2017), etc., multimodal localization is far less to be explored. VidLoc (Clark
et al. 2017a) simply concatenates RGB image and depth
map, and processes them together with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for camera localization. However, this
direct concatenation on the raw data level won’t take advantage of the complementary properties of different modalities.
MVAE (Wu and Goodman 2018) proposes to use variational
inference to learn an invariant space from multimodal fusion which achieved impressive results in several tasks. This
is done by directly optimizing the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) whose representation is simplified (Burda, Grosse,
and Salakhutdinov 2015). However, MVAE is hard to scale
to real-world environments with high-dimensional raw images and rich scene information (e.g. for visual localization
problem) as the objective function of MVAE cannot give a
tighter estimation of ELBO (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2015).
In order to address the aforementioned problems, we propose VMLoc (Variational Fusion For Multimodal Camera
Localization), a novel framework to learn multimodal 6DoF camera localization, which learns a joint latent representation from a pair of sensor modalities (as depicted in

Introduction
Visual localization is of great importance to many intelligent
systems, e.g. autonomous vehicles, delivery drones, and virtual reality (VR) devices. Recently, deep learning has shown
its strengths in learning camera pose regression from raw
images in an end-to-end manner. However, a single modality solution is normally confronted with issues such as environmental dynamics, changes in lighting conditions, and
extreme weather, when it is deployed in complex and everchanging real-world environments. Meanwhile, those intelligent systems are generally equipped with a combination
of sensors (e.g. RGB cameras, depth sensors, and LIDAR)
which can be exploited to improve the robustness of the
systems. Nevertheless, most studies concentrating on sensor
fusion (Liang et al. 2019; Bijelic et al. 2019) directly concatenates different feature vectors together without studying
the information contained in different feature vectors. Effectively exploiting different sensor modalities and studying
*Changhao Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6165

