The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-aware Coupled Graph Neural Network for Social Recommendation
Chao Huang1 * , Huance Xu2∗ , Yong Xu2,3,4† , Peng Dai1 , Lianghao Xia2 ,
Mengyin Lu 1 , Liefeng Bo1 , Hao Xing5 , Xiaoping Lai5 , Yanfang Ye6
1
JD Finance America Corporation, USA
South China University of Technology, China, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
4
Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong, China
5
VIPS Research, China, 6 Case Western Reserve University, USA
chaohuang75@gmail.com, {cshuance.xu, cslianghao.xia}@mail.scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn,
{peng.dai,mengyin.lu,liefeng.bo}, {hao.xing,tom.lai}vipshop.com, yanfang.ye@case.edu
2

Abstract

the collaborative ﬁltering architecture as side information to
characterize connectivity information across users.
The most common paradigm for state-of-the-art social
recommender systems is to learn an embedding function,
which uniﬁes user-user and user-item relations into latent
representations. To tackle this problem, many studies have
developed various neural network techniques to integrate
social information with the user-item interaction encoding as constraints. For example, attention-based mechanism
has been utilized to aggregate correlations among different
users (Chen et al. 2019a,b). Furthermore, inspired by the recent advance of graph neural architectures, several attempts
are built upon the message passing frameworks over the
user-user social graph. For example, social inﬂuence is simulated with layer-wise diffusion scheme for information fusion (Wu et al. 2019a). GraphRec (Fan et al. 2019) employs
the graph attention network to model the relational structures between users. To enable the modeling context-aware
social effects, DANSER (Wu et al. 2019b) stacks two-stage
of graph attention layer for distinguishing the multi-faceted
social homophily and inﬂuence.
While these solutions have provided encouraging results,
several key aspects have not been well addressed yet. In particular, First, in real-life scenarios, there typically exist relations between items which characterize item-wise fruitful
semantics relatedness, and are helpful to understand useritem interactive patterns (Wang et al. 2019a). For instance,
in online retailing systems, products of the same categories
(e.g., food & grocery, clothing & shoes) or complement
with each other, could be correlated to enrich the knowledge representation of items (Xin et al. 2019). For online
review platforms, the exploiting of dependencies among the
venues with the same functionality, is able to provide external knowledge in assisting user preference learning (Yu
et al. 2019). However, the majority of existing social recommender systems fail to capture item-wise relational structures, which can hardly distill the knowledge-aware collaborative signals from the co-interactive behaviors of users.
Second, to simplify the model design, most of current social recommendation methods have thus far focused on modeling singular type of interactive relations between user and

Social recommendation task aims to predict users’ preferences over items with the incorporation of social connections
among users, so as to alleviate the sparse issue of collaborative ﬁltering. While many recent efforts show the effectiveness of neural network-based social recommender systems,
several important challenges have not been well addressed
yet: (i) The majority of models only consider users’ social
connections, while ignoring the inter-dependent knowledge
across items; (ii) Most of existing solutions are designed for
singular type of user-item interactions, making them infeasible to capture the interaction heterogeneity; (iii) The dynamic nature of user-item interactions has been less explored
in many social-aware recommendation techniques. To tackle
the above challenges, this work proposes a Knowledge-aware
Coupled Graph Neural Network (KCGN) that jointly injects
the inter-dependent knowledge across items and users into
the recommendation framework. KCGN enables the highorder user- and item-wise relation encoding by exploiting
the mutual information for global graph structure awareness.
Additionally, we further augment KCGN with the capability of capturing dynamic multi-typed user-item interactive
patterns. Experimental studies on real-world datasets show
the effectiveness of our method against many strong baselines in a variety of settings. Source codes are available at:
https://github.com/xhcdream/KCGN.

Introduction
In recent years, social recommendation which aims to exploit users’ social information for modeling users’ preferences in recommendations, has attracted signiﬁcant attention (Liu et al. 2019). As has been stated in many socialaware recommendation literature (Wu et al. 2019a; Chen
et al. 2019b), social inﬂuences between users have high impacts on users’ interactive behavior over items in various
recommender scenarios, such as e-commence (Lin, Gao, and
Li 2019) and online review platforms (Chen et al. 2020a).
Hence, researchers propose to incorporate social ties into
* Both authors contribute equally to this work
†

Corresponding author: Yong Xu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4115

