The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Modeling Cross- and Self-Lattice Attention Network for Chinese NER
Shan Zhao1 , Minghao Hu2∗ , Zhiping Cai1† Haiwen Chen1 , Fang Liu3
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
Information Research Center of Military Science, PLA Academy of Military Science, Beijing, China
3
School of Design, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan
{zhaoshan18, zpcai, chenhaiwen13}@nudt.edu.cn, {huminghao16}@gmail.com,{fangl}@hnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

sequences via word-character lattice structure, as shown in
Figure 1(a).
Prior approaches have attempted to utilize different network architectures to integrate word-character lattice information, such as RNN-based (Zhang and Yang 2018), CNNbased (Gui et al. 2019a), Graph-based (Gui et al. 2019b), and
Transformer-based models (Li et al. 2020). However, these
lattice methods have not considered capturing fine-grained
correlations between each character and its corresponding
matched word. For example, WC-LSTM (Liu et al. 2019)
adopts simple feature concatenation to fuse word-character
lattice information, while FLAT (Li et al. 2020) utilizes
position encoding to propagate information in a flat-lattice
structure. We argue that, for the Chinese NER task, effectively modeling dense interactions between each character
and each matched word is crucial. Taking the sentence in
Figure 1(c) as an example, it is beneficial that the character
“长 (Long)” or 江 (River) is aware of “桥 (Bridge)” being
matched with the “长江大桥 (Yangtze River Bridge)” word.
To address the above issue, we propose a Dynamic Crossand Self-lattice Attention Network (DCSAN) for Chinese
NER. The key insight comes from multimodal learning in
computer vision (Gao et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2019), where
the character and word sequences are viewed as two different modalities. To model dense interactions over wordcharacter lattice structure, we first design a cross-lattice attention module that aims to capture fine-grained correlations
between two input feature spaces. Then, we further construct a dynamic self-lattice attention module that is capable of dynamically fusing word-character features and building direct connections between two arbitrary characters despite of their distances. Given the word-character embeddings and the aligned lattice structure, DCSAN first utilizes
the cross-lattice attention module to generate word-aware
character features, and then adopts the dynamic self-lattice
attention module to combine character and word features,
eventually obtaining self-aware character features. In this
way, our network can fully capture dense interactions over
word-character lattice structure, thus providing rich representations for Chinese NER prediction.
Finally, we conducted extensive experiments on four NER
datasets to evaluate the proposed model. Experimental results show that DCSAN can achieve state-of-the-art performance and efficiency compared to a variety of compet-

Word-character lattice models have been proved to be effective for Chinese named entity recognition (NER), in which
word boundary information is fused into character sequences
for enhancing character representations. However, prior approaches have only used simple methods such as feature concatenation or position encoding to integrate word-character
lattice information, but fail to capture fine-grained correlations in word-character spaces. In this paper, we propose DCSAN, a Dynamic Cross- and Self-lattice Attention Network
that aims to model dense interactions over word-character
lattice structure for Chinese NER. By carefully combining
cross-lattice and self-lattice attention modules with gated
word-character semantic fusion unit, the network can explicitly capture fine-grained correlations across different spaces
(e.g., word-to-character and character-to-character), thus significantly improving model performance. Experiments on
four Chinese NER datasets show that DCSAN obtains stateof-the-art results as well as efficiency compared to several
competitive approaches.

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER), which aims to automatically detect named entities from giving text and identify
their categories (Zhao et al. 2020), is one of the most important tasks in information extraction. Due to the additional
word segmentation process of Chinese (Zhao et al. 2019),
Chinese NER is more difficult compared to English NER.
Traditionally, the task of Chinese NER is decoupled into a
pipeline of two separated subtasks, namely word segmentation and word sequence labeling (Yang et al. 2016). The major disadvantage of this method is error propagation: word
segmentation errors negatively impact the identification of
named entities (Peng and Dredze 2015; He and Sun 2016).
Character-based models, on the other hand, can naturally
avoid word segmentation errors, thus outperforming wordbased methods. Moreover, to explicitly inform each character about its related word information, previous works
(Zhang and Yang 2018; Liu et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2019)
have proposed to integrate word information into character
∗

Corresponding Author.
Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

14515

