The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AutoDropout: Learning Dropout Patterns to Regularize Deep Networks
Hieu Pham and Quoc V. Le
Google Research – Brain Team, Mountain View, CA 94043
{hyhieu,qvl}@google.com

Abstract

(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), it is better to only drop
the neurons in the vertical connections than to drop the neurons everywhere. Gal and Ghahramani (2016b) later propose
Variational Dropout, where they drop neurons everywhere in
the network but share a dropout pattern along the temporal
dimension. Both methods, however, are not used in the recent
Transformer architecture, which only uses vanilla Dropout.
The differences in how LSTM and Transformer implement
Dropout suggest that dropout patterns need to be tailored to
different model architectures in NLP.
In the image domain, vanilla Dropout is often only applied
to the fully-connected layers within a ConvNet (He et al.
2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Han, Jiwhan, and
Kim 2017; Hu et al. 2018; Szegedy et al. 2016). Other convolutional layers often require the dropout neurons to have
particular structures. For example, stochastic depth (Huang
et al. 2016) drops the whole residual branch in residual networks, and DropPath (Zoph et al. 2018) drops a whole branch
in multi-branched convolutional cells. Ghiasi, Lin, and Le
(2018) propose DropBlock which drop contiguous squares of
neurons in the convolutional layers. While DropBlock works
well on ResNet-50 and AmoebaNet (Real et al. 2018), it is not
proven to be successful in more recent architectures such as
EfficientNet (Tan, Pang, and Le 2020) and EfficientDet (Tan,
Pang, and Le 2020; Zoph et al. 2019). Again, the differences
in the way ConvNet architectures use dropout patterns
suggest that they also need to be specialized to architectures.
By studying the dropout patterns from previous works, we
observe that these patterns are difficult to design and need to
be specialized for each model architecture, task, and domain.
In this work, we address this difficulty by learning a specialized pattern for each model architecture, task, and domain.
To this end, we propose AutoDropout which automates the
process of designing specialized dropout patterns. The main
contribution of AutoDropout is a novel search space of structured dropout patterns. In the search space we design, one
can find a suitable for each model architecture and task. Our
search space generalizes many existing dropout patterns (Srivastava et al. 2014; Gal and Ghahramani 2016a,b; Huang
et al. 2016; Ghiasi, Lin, and Le 2018). For example, Figure 1
shows a dropout pattern from our search space. The pattern is
generated by tiling a contiguous area and then transforming
it geometrically. The resulting pattern is applied to a convolutional output channel, which is a common building block

Neural networks are often over-parameterized and hence benefit from aggressive regularization. Conventional regularization
methods, such as Dropout or weight decay, do not leverage
the structures of the network’s inputs and hidden states. As a
result, these methods are less effective than recent methods
that leverage the structures, such as SpatialDropout and DropBlock , which randomly drop the values at certain contiguous
areas in the hidden states and setting them to zero. Although
the locations of dropout areas are random, the patterns of
SpatialDropout and DropBlock are manually designed and
fixed. Here we propose AutoDropout, which automates the
process of designing dropout patterns. In our method, a controller learns to generate a dropout pattern at every channel and
layer of a target network, such as a ConvNet or a Transformer.
The target network is then trained with the dropout pattern,
and its resulting validation performance is used as a signal
for the controller to learn from. We show that this method
works well for both image recognition on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, as well as language modeling on Penn Treebank and
WikiText-2. The learned dropout patterns also transfers to
different tasks and datasets, such as from language model
on Penn Treebank to Engligh-French translation on WMT
2014. Our code will be available at: https://github.com/googleresearch/google-research/tree/master/auto_dropout.

Introduction
Modern neural networks are often over-parameterized (Nakkiran et al. 2020) and thus require proper regularization to avoid
overfitting. A common regularization method is Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), which randomly selects neurons from
some intermediate layers of a network and replaces the values
of these neurons with zero. In other words, we drop these neurons out of the current step of training. More recent studies
show that imposing certain structures to the dropped neurons
can lead to significant improvements over dropout neurons
uniformly at random (Huang et al. 2016; Tompson et al. 2020;
Ghiasi, Lin, and Le 2018; Gal and Ghahramani 2016b; Zoph
et al. 2018; Zaremba, Sutskever, and Vinyals 2014; Vaswani
et al. 2017). In practice, however, the dropout patterns are
adapted to become different for different applications.
For example, in the text domain, Zaremba, Sutskever,
and Vinyals (2014) suggest that, for a multi-layered LSTM
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9351

