The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CompFeat: Comprehensive Feature Aggregation for Video Instance Segmentation
Yang Fu1 , Linjie Yang2 , Ding Liu2 , Thomas S. Huang1 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
ByteDance Inc
3
University of Oregon

Abstract
Video instance segmentation is a complex task in which we
need to detect, segment, and track each object for any given
video. Previous approaches only utilize single-frame features
for the detection, segmentation, and tracking of objects and
they suffer in the video scenario due to several distinct challenges such as motion blur and drastic appearance change. To
eliminate ambiguities introduced by only using single-frame
features, we propose a novel comprehensive feature aggregation approach (CompFeat) to refine features at both framelevel and object-level with temporal and spatial context information. The aggregation process is carefully designed with
a new attention mechanism which significantly increases the
discriminative power of the learned features. We further improve the tracking capability of our model through a siamese
design by incorporating both feature similarities and spatial similarities. Experiments conducted on the YouTube-VIS
dataset validate the effectiveness of proposed CompFeat.

𝐹!"#

𝐹!"#

Temporal Aggregation

?
𝐹!

(a)

… 𝐹!"$ , 𝐹!"# , 𝐹! , 𝐹!%# , 𝐹!%$ …

𝐹!

Spatial
Aggregation

(b)

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed comprehensive feature aggregation (CompFeat) method. Ft denotes the video
frame at time t. (a) Previous video instance segmentation
method without feature aggregation. (b) Our proposed comprehensive feature aggregation approach for video instance
segmentation

Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a joint task of detection, segmentation and tracking of object instances in
videos (Yang, Fan, and Xu 2019). Different from instance
segmentation in image domain (Hariharan et al. 2014),
video instance segmentation not only requires to segment
object masks on individual frames, but also to track the
identities of objects across different frames. Also, unlike
semi-supervised video object segmentation (Voigtlaender
et al. 2019a; Voigtlaender and Leibe 2017; Xu et al. 2018;
Wug Oh et al. 2018; Oh et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019), video instance segmentation does not require a ground truth mask in
the first frame and all objects appear in the video should be
processed. It has essential applications in many video-based
tasks, including video editing, autonomous driving and augmented reality.
Video instance segmentation has several distinct challenges. For example, if an object is recognized as a wrong
category in one frame of the video, tracking of this object
will be extremely hard due to inconsistency of object categories. When there are multiple similar objects, finding the
correspondences of them across the video is also challenging. VIS is an important but underexplored task. The pi-

oneering work for VIS is MaskTrack-RCNN (Yang, Fan,
and Xu 2019), which is built upon Mask-RCNN (He et al.
2017), a state-of-the-art method for image instance segmentation. A new tracking branch is tailored and added in order to track object instances. However, MaskTrack-RCNN
relies on only single frame object features and neglects critical temporal information, i.e. temporal consistency of an object, motion pattern of different objects, etc, all of which can
provide abundant information for category recognition, object detection and mask segmentation across video frames.
And lots of recent video understanding work (Wang et al.
2018b; Wu et al. 2019) focused on how to utilize the temporal information. In addition, the proposed tracking head
in MaskTrack-RCNN is preliminary and ignores the spatial
layout of objects with simple object features, which has been
proven crucial by modern object tracking algorithms (Zhang
and Peng 2019; Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019) to improve
the tracking of video instances.
In order to utilize the abundant information in videos and
to harvest the benefits of modern object tracking approaches,
we propose a comprehensive feature aggregation approach
for video instance segmentation, termed CompFeat. The
main idea of CompFeat is illustrated in Fig 1. As shown
in Fig 1(a), the key object is not detected and fails to be

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1361

