The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ALP-KD: Attention-Based Layer Projection for Knowledge Distillation
Peyman Passban2, * , Yimeng Wu1 , Mehdi Rezagholizadeh1 , Qun Liu1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 Amazon
passban.peyman@gmail.com
{yimeng.wu,mehdi.rezagholizadeh,qun.liu}@huawei.com

Abstract

by an ordinary loss function (using hard labels) as well as
predictions received from T (also known as soft labels).
Training a (student) model for a natural language processing (NLP) task can be formalized as a multi-class classification problem to minimize a cross-entropy (ce) loss function,
as shown in Equation 1:

Knowledge distillation is considered as a training and compression strategy in which two neural networks, namely a
teacher and a student, are coupled together during training.
The teacher network is supposed to be a trustworthy predictor
and the student tries to mimic its predictions. Usually, a student with a lighter architecture is selected so we can achieve
compression and yet deliver high-quality results. In such a
setting, distillation only happens for final predictions whereas
the student could also benefit from teacher’s supervision for
internal components.
Motivated by this, we studied the problem of distillation for
intermediate layers. Since there might not be a one-to-one
alignment between student and teacher layers, existing techniques skip some teacher layers and only distill from a subset
of them. This shortcoming directly impacts quality, so we
instead propose a combinatorial technique which relies on
attention. Our model fuses teacher-side information and takes
each layer’s significance into consideration, then performs
distillation between combined teacher layers and those of the
student. Using our technique, we distilled a 12-layer BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019) into 6-, 4-, and 2-layer counterparts and
evaluated them on GLUE tasks (Wang et al. 2018). Experimental results show that our combinatorial approach is able to
outperform other existing techniques.

Lce = −

N X
X

[1(yi = w)×

i=1 w∈V

log pS (yi = w|xi , θS )]

(1)

where 1(.) is the indicator function, V is a vocabulary set (or
different classes in a multi-class problem), N is the number
of tokens in an input sequence, and y is a prediction of the
network S with a parameter set θS given an input x.
To incorporate teacher’s supervision, KD accompanies Lce
with an auxiliary loss term, LKD , as shown in Equation 2:
LKD = −

N X
X

[pT (yi = w|xi , θT )×

i=1 w∈V

log pS (yi = w|xi , θS )]

Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) (Buciluǎ, Caruana, and
Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) is a
commonly-used technique to reduce the size of large neural
networks (Sanh et al. 2019). Apart from this, we also consider it as a complementary and generic add-on to enrich the
training process of any neural model (Furlanello et al. 2018).
In KD, a student network (S) is glued to a powerful teacher
(T ) during training. These two networks can be trained simultaneously or T can be a pre-trained model. Usually, T
uses more parameters than S for the same task, therefore
it has a higher learning capacity and is expected to provide
reliable predictions. On the other side, S follows its teacher
with a simpler architecture. For a given input, both models
provide predictions where those of the student are penalized
* Work done while Peyman Passban was at Huawei.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13657

(2)

Since S is trained to behave identically to T , model compression can be achieved if it uses a simpler architecture than its
teacher. However, if these two models are the same size KD
would still be beneficial. What LKD proposes is an ensemble
technique by which the student is informed about teacher’s
predictions. The teacher has better judgements and this helps
the student learn how much it deviates from true labels.
This form of KD that is referred to as Regular KD (RKD)
throughout this paper, only provides S with external supervision for final predictions, but this can be extended to other
components such as intermediate layers too. The student
needs to be aware of the information flow inside teacher’s
layers and this becomes even more crucial when distilling
from deep teachers. Different alternatives have been proposed
to this end, which compare networks’ internal layers in addition to final predictions (Jiao et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020,
2019), but they suffer from other types of problems. The
main goal in this paper is to study such models and address
their shortcomings.

