The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Equivalent Causal Models
Sander Beckers
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy – Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich
srekcebrednas@gmail.com

Abstract

by which I shall do so. The aim is to formalize a suitable
definition of causal model-equivalence that is relative to a
set of variables that the models have in common: the idea
is that two models are equivalent when they agree on all
“essential” causal information that can be expressed using
these common variables. Obviously this will require motivating what I take to be (in)essential and why I choose to
focus merely on common variables.
My method focusses on the observation that causal models are characterized using two types of relations: structural
relations, i.e., having to do with the causal graph, and functional relations, i.e., having to do with how particular values
of variables are determined by values of other variables. I develop two notions of equivalence, one for each type. Causal
equivalence will then be defined as being both structurally
and functionally equivalent.
The details are as follows. The most basic structural relation is that of one variable X being an ancestor of another
variable Y . I generalize this relation along three dimensions.
First, I take into account the specific values x, x′ and y, y ′ of
the variables that are responsible for the ancestry. Second,
⃗ and Y⃗ . Third, I
I consider ancestry for sets of variables X
distinguish between potential ancestors, which are relative
to a causal model, and actual ancestors, which are relative
to a causal model and a specific context. Structural equivalence is then defined as having identical potential and actual
ancestors.
The most basic functional relation is that of one set of
⃗ being causally sufficient for another set y⃗.
variable values x
I first look into spelling out an appropriate notion of causal
sufficiency, resulting in direct sufficiency. I then generalize
this relation by defining sufficiency as its transitive closure.
Functional equivalence is defined as having identical sufficiency relations.
The structure of this paper is as follows: the next section
introduces the structural equations framework. I then offer
a motivation and clarification of the problem that this paper
is concerned with in Section 3. Section 4 focusses on the
causal structure and develops a notion of structural equivalence. In Section 5 I shift focus to functional equivalence,
by considering what makes for a good definition of causal
sufficiency. Causal equivalence is then defined as the combination of both forms of equivalence. Section 6 compares
functional equivalence to Halpern’s notion of conservative

The aim of this paper is to offer the first systematic exploration and definition of equivalent causal models in the context where both models are not made up of the same variables.
The idea is that two models are equivalent when they agree
on all “essential” causal information that can be expressed
using their common variables. I do so by focussing on the
two main features of causal models, namely their structural
relations and their functional relations. In particular, I define
several relations of causal ancestry and several relations of
causal sufficiency, and require that the most general of these
relations are preserved across equivalent models.

1

Introduction

Causal models are becoming evermore important and their
domains of application are growing rapidly, both within science (most notably AI) and in philosophy. As with all forms
of modeling, there usually exist many causal models that can
be used to describe a given system of interest. Since different models can lead to widely divergent conclusions, it
is of paramount importance to have some method to compare models and group together those that are sufficiently
similar. To do so we need to be able to establish when two
causal models are equivalent. The aim of this paper is to
offer the first systematic exploration and definition of equivalent causal models.
Of course what makes for a sensible notion of equivalence varies across different contexts. For example, there exists a well-known notion of equivalence that is used in the
epistemically limited context where one is learning a causal
model from data. However, such Markov-equivalence (as it
is called) does not apply in the context where two causal
models are fully specified and do not consist of the same
variables. Such contexts are widespread in science, but are
of particular concern when trying to capture stable, modelindependent, features of the world. Furthermore, exploring
equivalence in such an omniscient context offers a firm conceptual starting point for generalizing to contexts that involve approximation and uncertainty in future work.
Before diving into the details, I spell out the underlying
intuition of both the notion to be developed and the method
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6202

