The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Information-Theoretic Framework for Unifying Active Learning Problems
Quoc Phong Nguyen,1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low,1 Patrick Jaillet2
1

Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
2
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA
{qphong, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

However, the unknown maximum value in BO does not satisfy the requirement of a known threshold in LSE. This poses
the challenge of whether it is possible to develop a framework to unify LSE and BO. Though the work of Bogunovic
et al. (2016) has developed such a unified approach called
truncated variance reduction, it is demonstrated mainly on
problems with a discrete input domain and requires enumerating over all inputs in a set of “unclassified points”,
which can be prohibitively large in practice (or infinite when
the input domain is continuous and not discretized). In contrast, our work here proposes the first information-theoretic
framework for unifying both LSE and BO that can empirically outperform the state-of-the-art LSE criteria and scale
to real-world problems with a continuous input domain.
To shed light on the connection between LSE and BO, we
propose to view BO as an active learning problem that involves actively estimating the superlevel set of the objective
function with respect to an estimate of its maximum value;
such a problem reduces to LSE when the maximum value is
known instead. Improving the estimation of the superlevel
set in turn refines the estimate of the maximum value. As
the estimate approaches the true maximum value, the superlevel set becomes a set of the maximizers of the objective
function. Unfortunately, existing LSE criteria cannot be directly applied to BO since they either impose a noiseless
assumption (Low et al. 2012) or cannot handle an unknown
threshold (Bryan et al. 2006).
A key contribution of our work here therefore lies in introducing a novel information-theoretic active learning criterion for LSE (Sec. 3) that can be exploited for designing
a new acquisition function for BO with interesting connections to upper confidence bound (UCB) and max-value entropy search (MES) (Sec. 4). The latter connection reveals
a drawback of MES (Remark 3), which has important implications on not only MES, but also on other MES-based
acquisition functions such as those handling multiple objectives (Belakaria, Deshwal, and Doppa 2019; Suzuki et al.
2020) or fidelities (Takeno et al. 2020).
The other main contribution of our work is to show how
our proposed unifying information-theoretic framework can
be applied to solve a generalized problem of LSE and BO
involving multiple level sets/thresholds in a data-efficient
manner. This problem, namely implicit LSE (Sec. 5), is
about identifying a region of inputs whose function values

Abstract
This paper presents an information-theoretic framework for
unifying active learning problems: level set estimation (LSE),
Bayesian optimization (BO), and their generalized variant.
We first introduce a novel active learning criterion that subsumes an existing LSE algorithm and achieves state-of-theart performance in LSE problems with a continuous input
domain. Then, by exploiting the relationship between LSE
and BO, we design a competitive information-theoretic acquisition function for BO that has interesting connections
to upper confidence bound and max-value entropy search
(MES). The latter connection reveals a drawback of MES
which has important implications on not only MES but also
on other MES-based acquisition functions. Finally, our unifying information-theoretic framework can be applied to solve
a generalized problem of LSE and BO involving multiple
level sets in a data-efficient manner. We empirically evaluate
the performance of our proposed algorithms using synthetic
benchmark functions, a real-world dataset, and in hyperparameter tuning of machine learning models.

1

Introduction

Level set estimation (LSE) is about determining a level set
of an unknown function or, alternatively, a superlevel set of
the function (i.e., a region of inputs where the function values are of at least a known threshold) given a finite budget
of expensive (possibly noisy) function evaluations (Gotovos
et al. 2013). It has important applications in environmental
sensing/monitoring where the unknown function is a (spatial) field of some quantity of interest (e.g., pH, temperature, and solar radiation) (Galland, Réfrégier, and Germain
2004). On the other hand, Bayesian optimization (BO) has
gained significant recognition in science and engineering
fields (Brochu, Cora, and de Freitas 2010; Calandra et al.
2014; Krause and Ong 2011; Shahriari et al. 2015; Snoek,
Larochelle, and Adams 2012) for its effectiveness in optimizing a black-box objective function (i.e., without a closedform expression/derivative) using a finite budget of expensive (possibly noisy) function evaluations. At first glance,
one may straightforwardly regard BO as LSE by setting the
threshold as the maximum value of the objective function,
i.e., the superlevel set is reduced to a set of maximizers.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9126

