The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Model AI Assignments 2021
Todd W. Neller1 , Nathan Sprague2 , John Maraist3 , Lisa Zhang4 , Pouria Fewzee4 , Duri Long5 ,
Jonathan Moon5 , Brian Magerko5 , Alex Leto6 , Toni Lefton6 , and Tom Williams6
1

Gettysburg College, 2 James Madison University, 3 University of Wisconsin - La Crosse, 4 University of Toronto,
5
Georgia Institute of Technology, 6 Colorado School of Mines

explore the design of heuristics for A∗ search. Students constructed different heuristics for this single problem, and applied effective branching factor and other concepts to compare their solutions to each other’s and to naive BFS. The
provided code for A∗ and for modeling game gives a low
programming expectation, and focuses the assignment on
the concepts relating to heuristics.

Abstract
The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing that assignments form the core of student learning experience, we
here present abstracts of six AI assignments from the 2021
session that are easily adoptable, playfully engaging, and
flexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment specifications and supporting resources may be found at http:
//modelai.gettysburg.edu.

Text Denoising Autoencoder for News
Headlines - Lisa Zhang and Pouria Fewzee
In this assignment, students combine the techniques they
learned throughout a deep learning course to build a denoising autoencoder for news headlines, to be able to retrieve
similar headlines. The assignment combines students understanding of autoencoders, language modelling via recurrent
neural networks (RNN), data augmentation, and working
with embeddings. The cumulative nature of this assignment
makes it a good choice for a final assignment in an introductory Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, or Deep
Learning course that covers the prerequisite topics. For a traditional AI course, it is possible to modify the assignment to
use various other Information Retrieval techniques on the
provided dataset.

ScalarFlow: Implementing Reverse Mode
Automatic Differentiation - Nathan Sprague
Many of the most significant successes in artificial intelligence over the past decade have been based on progress in
the area of deep neural networks. That progress has been facilitated by high-quality deep-learning libraries like Theano,
Tensorflow and PyTorch. The key algorithm at the heart
of all of these libraries is reverse-mode automatic differentiation. Despite its importance, automatic differentiation
is rarely covered in undergraduate AI or machine learning
courses. Students may learn to use deep-learning packages,
but they are often treated as black boxes. The purpose of this
assignment is to give students a better understanding of deep
learning algorithms and frameworks by providing them the
opportunity to program an automatic differentiation engine
and to modify machine learning code built on top of that
engine.

“Unplugged” Semantic Networks and
Knowledge Representations - Duri Long,
Jonathan Moon and Brian Magerko
AI agents store and organize information in their memory
using structures known as knowledge representations. One
type of knowledge representation is a semantic net-work.
Semantic networks are a way of representing relationships
between objects and ideas. For example, a net-work might
tell a computer the relationship between different animals
(e.g. a cat IS-A mammal; a cat HAS whiskers). In this unplugged (i.e. no computer required) assignment, learners can
create their own semantic net-works by gluing down printable cards containing concepts and arrows containing relationships. Provided card decks contain concepts related to
animals, family, and musical instruments. Blank cards are
also provided for networks on custom topics. Learners will
be encouraged to reflect on the networks they create and consider the strengths and limitations of the knowledge representation using a provided list of questions that can be used

Rush Hour: Designing and Comparing
Heuristics for a Children’s Puzzle - John
Maraist
Rush Hour is a children’s puzzle based on sliding blocks
back-and-forth on a grid. One of the blocks represents the
family car, which is stuck in traffic: one or more blocks sit
in between the family car and an exit at the end of the family car’s row of the grid. Solving a puzzle configuration requires moving cars within each one’s row or column so that
the family car can move to the exit. We used Rush Hour to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15705

