The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

U-BERT: Pre-training User Representations for Improved Recommendation
Zhaopeng Qiu,1 Xian Wu,1∗ Jingyue Gao,2 Wei Fan1
1

Tencent Medical AI Lab
2
Peking University
{zhaopengqiu, kevinxwu, davidwfan}@tencent.com, gaojingyue1997@pku.edu.cn

Automotive
Motorcycle Handlebar

Abstract

.…... 5 stars all day! …… I used hand soap as a lube on
throttle grip helps it slide on throttle sleeve easier.......
Super fast shipping, two days early on ship date…
customer service is an A+++

Learning user representation is a critical task for recommendation systems as it can encode user preference for personalized services. User representation is generally learned from
behavior data, such as clicking interactions and review comments. However, for less popular domains, the behavior data
is insufficient to learn precise user representations. To deal
with this problem, a natural thought is to leverage contentrich domains to complement user representations. Inspired by
the recent success of BERT in NLP, we propose a novel pretraining and fine-tuning based approach U-BERT. Different
from typical BERT applications, U-BERT is customized for
recommendation and utilizes different frameworks in pretraining and fine-tuning. In pre-training, U-BERT focuses on
content-rich domains and introduces a user encoder and a
review encoder to model users’ behaviors. Two pre-training
strategies are proposed to learn the general user representations; In fine-tuning, U-BERT focuses on the target contentinsufficient domains. In addition to the user and review encoders inherited from the pre-training stage, U-BERT further
introduces an item encoder to model item representations.
Besides, a review co-matching layer is proposed to capture
more semantic interactions between the reviews of the user
and item. Finally, U-BERT combines user representations,
item representations and review interaction information to
improve recommendation performance. Experiments on six
benchmark datasets from different domains demonstrate the
state-of-the-art performance of U-BERT.

Toys & Games
DoDoeleph Syma Drone

Dan

First off SUPER FAST SHIPPING - this drone is
completely worth the money - so much fun - easy to
control - I would give it 10 stars - 100% satisfied highly recommended - A+++ sellers with ……

Figure 1: Two review comments written by the same user for
two items from different domains.

2017; Tan et al. 2016) incorporate more informative review
comments to enhance user representation learning. The textual content can help to better understand user preference
and in turn improve recommendation performance. However, when building the recommendation system for a particular domain A, these methods only use the reviews from A.
In case of less popular domains, the volume of review comments will be insufficient to obtain a comprehensive user
representation, which will further hurt the recommendation
performance.
In this paper, we leverage review comments from contentrich domains to improve the recommendation for contentinsufficient domains. As shown in Figure 1, this user chooses
the same group of words (highlighted in red) to express the
positive opinion towards items of two different domains. If
we managed to model his commenting habits in the automotive domain and applied them to the toy domain, we could
better predict his rating towards toys and recommend more
suitable items.
Given the observation in Figure 1 and inspired by the recent milestone work BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), we propose
a pre-training and fine-tuning based recommendation framework U-BERT. In the pre-training stage, U-BERT conducts
two self-supervision tasks to learn the general user representations based on the abundant reviews from content-rich
domains; In the fine-tuning stage, U-BERT further refines
the user representations on the reviews from the contentinsufficient domain using the supervised objective.
Moreover, different from typical BERT applications in the

Introduction
To alleviate the information overload problem, recommendation systems become an integral part of modern websites
and applications. When building recommendation systems,
learning a precise user representation is a critical task (Tay,
Luu, and Hui 2018).
Earlier recommendation methods learn user representations from the user-item rating matrix (van den Berg, Kipf,
and Welling 2017; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). However, since the rating is coarse-grained (e.g., 1 to 5 stars)
and the rating matrix is usually sparse, it is difficult to learn
accurate user representations. Hence, some recent studies (Zheng, Noroozi, and Yu 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Li et al.
∗

Xian Wu is the corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4320

