The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Strong Explanations in Abstract Argumentation
Markus Ulbricht,1 Johannes P. Wallner2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany
Institute of Software Technology, Graz University of Technology, Austria
mulbricht@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, wallner@ist.tugraz.at

Abstract
Abstract argumentation constitutes both a major research
strand and a key approach that provides the core reasoning
engine for a multitude of formalisms in computational argumentation in AI. Reasoning in abstract argumentation is carried out by viewing arguments and their relationships as abstract entities, with argumentation frameworks (AFs) being
the most commonly used abstract formalism. Argumentation
semantics then drive the reasoning by specifying formal criteria on which sets of arguments, called extensions, can be
deemed as jointly acceptable. Such extensions provide a basic way of explaining argumentative acceptance. Inspired by
recent research, we present a more general class of explanations: in this paper we propose and study so-called strong explanations for explaining argumentative acceptance in AFs. A
strong explanation is a set of arguments such that a target set
of arguments is acceptable in each subframework containing
the explaining set. We formally show that strong explanations
form a larger class than extensions, in particular giving the
possibility of having smaller explanations. Moreover, assuming basic properties, we show that any explanation strategy,
broadly construed, is a strong explanation. We show that the
increase in variety of strong explanations comes with a computational trade-off: we provide an in-depth analysis of the
associated complexity, showing a jump in the polynomial hierarchy compared to extensions.

1

F :

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 1: Example AF

tacks, together referred to as argumentation frameworks
(AFs) (Dung 1995), is sufficient in order to provide rational accounts on what can be argued for (Caminada 2018).
Known as the area of abstract argumentation, such formalisms provide so-called argumentation semantics (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011) on which sets of arguments can be deemed jointly acceptable together. Multiple argumentation semantics were defined, fitting different
purposes and range from more inclusive to more cautious
modes of reasoning. An important semantics are admissible sets of arguments, which are non-conflicting sets that
counter-attack any attack from outside the set, providing a
way to argumentatively defend each argument within the set.
Admissible sets, or, more broadly, extensions under a semantics, provide a key feature for argumentation: argumentative explanations in the form of arguments, which can be
used to show acceptability of each argument in the set. For
instance, acceptance of an argument can be specified as being a member of an admissible set (or an extension of a semantics). This is commonly referred to as credulous acceptance of that argument.

Introduction

Computational models of argumentation in Artificial Intelligence (AI) (Baroni et al. 2018; Bench-Capon and Dunne
2007) provide formal approaches to reason argumentatively,
with a wide variety of application avenues, such as legal reasoning, medical sciences, and e-governmental issues (Atkinson et al. 2017). Reasoning in this way is carried out
by instantiation of argument structures from a knowledge
base (Bondarenko et al. 1997; Modgil and Prakken 2013;
Garcı́a and Simari 2004; Besnard and Hunter 2008), which
represent all that can be argued for. Inconsistencies within
knowledge bases are then represented by conflicts among arguments, which are modelled via (directed) attacks between
arguments, reflecting a counter argument relation.
For many formal approaches to argumentation in AI,
an abstract representation of arguments and their at-

Example 1.1. Assume it is 2020 and some agents discuss
whether or not the next conference should be held virtually.
Consider the following arguments which are brought forward during the debate: “The conference should be held virtually in order to avoid a ’super spreader’ event” (e); “This
is not the same experience as a meeting in person” (d); “I
would agree with you, but not in 2020” (c); “I would never
agree with the both of you, because all this flying around destroys our environment” (b); “I think our small community
has an overall low impact on climate change” (a).
Here each argument attacks its predecessor, except for b
which attacks both d and c. This debate thus induces the AF
in Figure 1. Say, we desire to check argumentative (credulous) acceptability of argument e, in favor of a virtual conference. There is one admissible set, {a, c, e}, that contains

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6496

