The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disjunctive Temporal Problems under Structural Restrictions
Konrad K. Dabrowski,1 Peter Jonsson,2 Sebastian Ordyniak,3 George Osipov2
1

Durham University
Linköping University
3
University of Leeds
konrad.dabrowski@durham.ac.uk, {peter.jonsson,george.osipov}@liu.se, sordyniak@gmail.com
2

Abstract

discuss various other applications. DTPs also have many applications in areas outside AI such as bioinformatics and
graph theory (Pe’er and Shamir 1997), and in telecommunications via the channel assignment problem (see, for instance, Audhya et al. (2011) and Král’ (2005)).
Augmenting STPs with disjunctions (Oddi and Cesta
2000; Stergiou and Koubarakis 2000) yields a language D
as follows. We consider intervals over Q with endpoints in
Z ∪ {−∞, +∞}. The intervals may be open, closed, halfclosed, and even a single point. Let I denote the set of these
intervals and let D contain all relations
Wm
{(x1 , . . . , xt ) ∈ Qt : `=1 xi` − xj` ∈ I` }

The disjunctive temporal problem (DTP) is an expressive
temporal formalism that extends Dechter et al.’s simple temporal problem. The DTP is well studied in the literature and
has many important applications. It is known that deciding
satisfiability of DTPs is NP-hard and that, in many cases,
single-exponential algorithms (running in O(cn ) time) do not
exist under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis. The computational hardness makes it worthwhile to identify restricted
problems that are efficiently solvable. One way of doing this
is to restrict the interactions of variables and constraints. We
show that instances of DTP of any arity with integers bounded
by poly(n) can be solved in nf (w) time, where n denotes
the problem size, w is the treewidth of the incidence graph
and f is a computable function; in other words, this problem is in the complexity class XP and it can be solved in
polynomial time whenever w is fixed. We complement this
result by showing that binary DTPs that only involve the integers 0 and 1 are not fixed-parameter tractable with respect
to treewidth, i.e. they do not admit a f (w) · poly(n) time algorithm for any computable function f , under standard complexity assumptions. For instances with unbounded integers,
we show that even binary DTPs parameterized by treewidth
cannot be in XP, unless P = NP.

for arbitrary t, m ≥ 1 where i` , j` ∈ {1, . . . , t} and I` ∈ I
for all 1 ≤ ` ≤ m. The CSP for D is known as the disjunctive temporal problem (DTP). We make, without loss of
generality, the sensible assumption that the bounding values
are integers (see e.g. Tsamardinos & Pollack (2003)): (most)
real values cannot be written down with a finite number of
bits, and rational numbers can be scaled in a suitable way.
We use the rationals as the value domain (also without loss
of generality): if there is a solution to an instance of CSP(D)
over the reals, then there is also a solution over the rationals.
While the STP is a polynomial-time solvable problem, the
DTP is NP-hard (even though a number of polynomial-time
solvable fragments are known, see e.g. (Comin and Rizzi
2018; Kumar 2005)). Dabrowski et al. (2020) have additionally shown that the DTP (and many severely restricted variants) cannot be solved in O(cn ) time (for any constant c)
under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis (ETH), i.e. the hypothesis that 3SAT cannot be solved in 2o(n) time, where n is
the number of variables (Impagliazzo and Paturi 2001). This
motivates the search for efficiently solvable subproblems.
To this end, we use the framework of parameterized complexity (Flum and Grohe 2006; Niedermeier 2006; Downey
and Fellows 2013), where the run-time of an algorithm is
studied with respect to a parameter p ∈ N and the input
size n. The idea is that the parameter describes the structure of the instance in a computationally meaningful way.
Here, the most favourable complexity class is FPT (fixedparameter tractable), which contains all problems that can
be decided in f (p) · nO(1) time, where f is a computable
function. The next best option is the complexity class XP,
which contains all problems decidable in nf (p) time, i.e. the

Introduction
Temporal reasoning is a fundamental task in AI and one of
the most influential temporal formalisms is the simple temporal problem (STP) (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991). It
is a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) over a language
with relations {(x, y) ∈ R2 : ` ≤ x − y ≤ u} where
`, u ∈ R ∪ {−∞, +∞}. Even though the STP is immensely
useful in a wide range of applications, its expressive power
is limited. Increased expressibility can be achieved by using
disjunctions (Barber 2000; Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991;
Oddi and Cesta 2000; Stergiou and Koubarakis 2000). Such
disjunctive STPs are highly relevant in an AI context: examples can be found in automated planning (Gerevini, Saetti,
and Serina 2006; Venable and Yorke-Smith 2005) and multiagent systems (Bhargava and Williams 2019; Boerkoel and
Durfee 2013), while Stergiou & Koubarakis (2000, Sec. 7),
Tsamardinos & Pollack (2003) and Peintner et al. (2007)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3724

