The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Boundary Proposal Network for Two-Stage Natural Language Video Localization
Shaoning Xiao,1 Long Chen,2 * Songyang Zhang,3 Wei Ji,4 Jian Shao,1 Lu Ye,5 Jun Xiao1
1

DCD Lab, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen
3
University of Rochester
4
National University of Singapore
5
Zhejiang University of Science and Technology
{shaoningx, jiwei, jshao, junx}@zju.edu.cn, zjuchenlong@gmail.com, szhang83@ur.rochester.edu, yelue@zust.edu.cn
Abstract

（a）

We aim to address the problem of Natural Language Video
Localization (NLVL) — localizing the video segment corresponding to a natural language description in a long and
untrimmed video. State-of-the-art NLVL methods are almost
in one-stage fashion, which can be typically grouped into two
categories: 1) anchor-based approach: it first pre-defines a series of video segment candidates (e.g., by sliding window),
and then does classification for each candidate; 2) anchor-free
approach: it directly predicts the probabilities for each video
frame1 as a boundary or intermediate frame inside the positive segment. However, both kinds of one-stage approaches
have inherent drawbacks: the anchor-based approach is susceptible to the heuristic rules, further limiting the capability
of handling videos with variant length. While the anchorfree approach fails to exploit the segment-level interaction
thus achieving inferior results. In this paper, we propose a
novel Boundary Proposal Network (BPNet), a universal twostage framework that gets rid of the issues mentioned above.
Specifically, in the first stage, BPNet utilizes an anchor-free
model to generate a group of high-quality candidate video
segments with their boundaries. In the second stage, a visuallanguage fusion layer is proposed to jointly model the multimodal interaction between the candidate and the language
query, followed by a matching score rating layer that outputs
the alignment score for each candidate. We evaluate our BPNet on three challenging NLVL benchmarks (i.e., CharadesSTA, TACoS and ActivityNet-Captions). Extensive experiments and ablative studies on these datasets demonstrate that
the BPNet outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Laguage Query: He then begins performing a gymnastics routine on a beam.

11.91s

40.74s

√

（b）Anchor-based method

×

×

（c）Anchor-free method

start

end

Figure 1: (a) An illustrative example of the NLVL task.
Given a video and a query, NLVL is to localize the video segment corresponding to the query with the start point (11.91s)
and the end point (40.74s). (b) Anchor-based approach: A
number of temporal bounding boxes are placed on the video
as candidates and the best-matching one (e.g., the green one)
is chosen as the result. (c) Anchor-free approach: Each frame
is determined whether it is the boundary frame.

Localization (NLVL) (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al.
2017) has been proposed. As shown in Figure 1 (a), given an
untrimmed video and a natural language query, NLVL aims
to localize the video segment relevant to the query by determining the start point and the end point. NLVL is a worth
exploring task due to its potential applications, e.g., video
content retrieval (Shao et al. 2018) and video question answering (Lei et al. 2018; Xiao et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2017).
A straightforward solution for NLVL is the anchor-based
approach (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2018b; Chen and Jiang 2019; Ge et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2018; Wang, Ma, and Jiang
2020), which follows the same spirit of anchor-based object detectors, e.g., Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015). Specifically, this kind of method places a number of size-fixed
bounding boxes on the temporal dimension of the video, and
then matches each candidate with the sentence in a common feature space, as shown in Figure 1 (b). They model the
segment-level information of proposals and transforms the
localization problem into a multi-modal matching problem.

Introduction
Understanding video content with the aid of natural language, e.g., describing the video content by natural language
or grounding language in the video, has drawn considerable
interest in both computer vision and natural language processing communities. This kind of task is challenging since
it needs to not only understand the video and the sentence
separately but also their corresponding interaction. Recently,
a core task of this area called Natural Language Video
* Long Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, the frame is a general concept for an actual video
frame or a video clip which consists of a few consecutive frames.

2986

