The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Poverty Mapping from High Resolution Remote Sensing Images
Kumar Ayush* 1 Burak Uzkent* 1 Kumar Tanmay3 Marshall Burke2 David Lobell2 Stefano Ermon1
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Earth Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpur
kayush@cs.stanford.edu, buzkent@cs.stanford.edu, kr.tanmay147@iitkgp.ac.in, mburke@stanford.edu,
dlobell@stanford.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract

poverty prediction (Jean et al. 2016; Ayush et al. 2020; Sheehan et al. 2019; Blumenstock, Cadamuro, and On 2015;
Yeh et al. 2020) to infrastructure measurement (Cadamuro,
Muhebwa, and Taneja 2018). Compared to coarser (1030m) publicly-available imagery (Drusch et al. 2012), highresolution (< 1m) imagery has proven particularly useful
for these tasks because it is often able to resolve specific objects or features that are undetectable in coarser imagery.
For example, recent work demonstrated an approach
for predicting local-level consumption expenditure using
object detection on high-resolution daytime satellite imagery (Ayush et al. 2020), showing how this approach can
yield interpretable predictions and also outperform previous
benchmarks that rely on lower-resolution, publicly-available
satellite imagery (Drusch et al. 2012). This additional information, however, typically comes at a cost, as highresolution satellite imagery must be purchased from private
providers. Additionally, processing high-resolution images
is computationally more expensive than the coarser resolution ones (Uzkent et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2016; Meng
et al. 2017; Lampert, Blaschko, and Hofmann 2008; Wojek
et al. 2008; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Gao et al. 2018).
Given these costs, deploying these models at scale using
high-resolution imagery quickly becomes cost-prohibitive
for most organizations and research teams, inhibiting the
broader development and deployment of machine-learning
based tools and insights based on these data.
To address this problem, we propose a reinforcement
learning approach that uses coarse, freely-available public
imagery to dynamically identify where to acquire costly
high-resolution images, prior to conducting an object detection task. This concept leverages publicly available Sentinel2 (Drusch et al. 2012) images (10-30m) to sample smaller
amount of high-resolution images (<1m). Our framework is
inspired from the recent studies in computer vision literature
that perform conditional inference to reduce computational
complexity of convolutional networks in test time (Uzkent
and Ermon 2020; Wu et al. 2018).
We apply our approach to the domain of poverty prediction, and show how our approach can substantially reduce
the cost of previous methods that used deep learning on
high-resolution images to predict poverty (Ayush et al. 2020)
while maintaining or even improving their accuracy. In our
study country of Uganda, we show how our approach can re-

The combination of high-resolution satellite imagery and machine learning have proven useful in many sustainabilityrelated tasks, including poverty prediction, infrastructure
measurement, and forest monitoring. However, the accuracy afforded by high-resolution imagery comes at a cost,
as such imagery is extremely expensive to purchase at scale.
This creates a substantial hurdle to the efficient scaling and
widespread adoption of high-resolution-based approaches.
To reduce acquisition costs while maintaining accuracy, we
propose a reinforcement learning approach in which free lowresolution imagery is used to dynamically identify where to
acquire costly high-resolution images, prior to performing a
deep learning task on the high-resolution images. We apply
this approach to the task of poverty prediction in Uganda,
building on an earlier approach that used object detection
to count objects and use these counts to predict poverty.
Our approach exceeds previous performance benchmarks on
this task while using 80% fewer high-resolution images, and
could be useful in many domains that require high-resolution
imagery.

Introduction
When combined with machine learning, high-resolution
satellite imagery has proven broadly useful for a range of
sustainability-related tasks, from poverty prediction (Jean
et al. 2016; Ayush et al. 2020; Sheehan et al. 2019; Blumenstock, Cadamuro, and On 2015; Yeh et al. 2020) to infrastructure measurement (Cadamuro, Muhebwa, and Taneja
2018) to forest and water quality monitoring (Fisher et al.
2018) to the mapping of informal settlements (Mahabir et al.
2018). Compared to coarser (10-30m) publicly-available
imagery (Drusch et al. 2012), high-resolution (< 1m) imagery has proven particularly useful for these tasks because
it is often able to resolve specific objects or features that are
undetectable in coarser imagery.
When combined with machine learning, high-resolution
satellite imagery has proven broadly useful for object detection (Lam et al. 2018), object tracking (Uzkent, Rangnekar,
and Hoffman 2018, 2017), cloud removal (Sarukkai et al.
2020), and a range of sustainability-related tasks, from
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12

