The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Task Aligned Generative Meta-learning for Zero-shot Learning
Zhe Liu,1 * Yun Li, 1∗ Lina Yao, 1 Xianzhi Wang, 2 Guodong Long 2
1

University of New South Wales, Australia
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{zhe.liu1, yun.li5, lina.yao}@unsw.edu.au, {xianzhi.wang, guodong.long}@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) refers to the problem of learning
to classify instances from novel classes (unseen) that are absent in the training set (seen). Most ZSL methods infer the
correlation between visual features and attributes to train
the classifier for unseen classes. They may have a strong
bias towards seen classes during training. Meta-learning has
been introduced to mitigate the basis, but meta-ZSL methods are inapplicable when tasks used for training are sampled from diverse distributions. In this regard, we propose a
novel Task-aligned Generative Meta-learning model for Zeroshot learning (TGMZ), aiming to mitigate the potentially biased training and to enable meta-ZSL to accommodate realworld datasets that contain diverse distributions. Specifically,
TGMZ incorporates an attribute-conditioned task-wise distribution alignment network that projects tasks into a unified
distribution to deliver an unbiased model. Our experiments
show TGMZ achieves a relative improvement of 2.1%, 3.0%,
2.5%, and 7.6% over state-of-the-art algorithms on AWA1,
AWA2, CUB, and aPY datasets, respectively. Overall, TGMZ
outperforms competitors by 3.6% in the generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) setting and 7.9% in our proposed fusionZSL setting.

2

1
3

4

(a) Conventional Meta-ZSL.
2
1
3
4

(b) Proposed Meta-ZSL.

Figure 1: Visualization of model representation θ of the conventional and the proposed meta-ZSL using 1 class for query
sets. The conventional meta-ZSL (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017) is biased towards class ‘building’, while the proposed
aligned task distributions can avoid such local optimality.

2018; Kumar et al. 2019), and utilize the semantic information to infer the classification space for unseen classes.
Among ZSL algorithms, attribute-based algorithms classify
unseen classes based on visual-attribute embedding (Zhang
and Koniusz 2018; Liu et al. 2020a; Wang et al. 2019c; AlHalah and Stiefelhagen 2015), and generative methods emulate the general data distributions of unseen classes conditioned on attributes and synthesize instances for supervised
training of classifiers (Mishra et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2019;
Zhang and Koniusz 2018). All the existing ZSL algorithms
only optimize models based on seen classes but fail to explicitly mimic ZSL settings that transfer knowledge from
seen classes to unseen classes at the training time. Consequently, these algorithms are biased towards existing visualattribute correlation and fail to speculate the real classification space for unseen classes.
To address the above issue, some work (Qin et al.
2019; Pal and Balasubramanian 2019; Soh, Cho, and
Cho 2020; Demertzis and Iliadis 2020; Nooralahzadeh
et al. 2020; Verma, Brahma, and Rai 2020) introduces
meta-learning, e.g., model-agnostic meta-learning frame-

Introduction
Most current machine learning methods focus on classifying instances into existing classes based on large amounts
of labeled data (Day and Khoshgoftaar 2017). Such methods cannot well handle real-world settings where there
are many classes yet insufficient instances to cover all the
classes (Wang et al. 2019b). Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims
to classify novel (or unseen) classes based on the existing
(or seen) training set and has achieved significant success in
many fields, e.g., computer vision (Reed et al. 2016; Zhang
and Saligrama 2016), natural language processing (Firat
et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 2017), and human activity recognition (Wang, Miao, and Hao 2017).
Typical ZSL algorithms learn the correlation between visual features and the corresponding attributes, e.g., handengineering attributes (Shen et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018b)
and textual description (Srivastava, Labutov, and Mitchell
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8723

