The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Correlative Channel-Aware Fusion for Multi-View Time Series Classification
Yue Bai,1 Lichen Wang, 1 Zhiqiang Tao, 2 Sheng Li, 3 Yun Fu 1

New Idea

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia, Athens, USA
bai.yue@northeastern.edu, wanglichenxj@gmail.com, ztao@scu.edu, sheng.li@uga.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
2

Abstract
Classification

Multi-view time series classification (MVTSC) aims to improve the performance by fusing the distinctive temporal information from multiple views. Existing methods for
MVTSC mainly aim to fuse multi-view information at an
early stage, e.g., by extracting a common feature subspace
among multiple views. However, these approaches may not
fully explore the unique temporal patterns of each view in
complicated time series. Additionally, the label correlations
of multiple views, which are critical to boosting, are usually under-explored for the MVTSC problem. To address the
aforementioned issues, we propose a Correlative ChannelAware Fusion (C2 AF) network. First, C2 AF extracts comprehensive and robust temporal patterns by a two-stream structured encoder for each view, and derives the intra-view/interview label correlations with a concise correlation matrix. Second, a channel-aware learnable fusion mechanism is implemented through CNN to further explore the global correlative
patterns. Our C2 AF is an end-to-end framework for MVTSC.
Extensive experimental results on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our C2 AF over the state-ofthe-art methods. A detailed ablation study is also provided to
illustrate the indispensability of each model component.

Views and attentions in feature space

Intra-view
fusion
Inter-view
fusion

Fusions in label space

Figure 1: Multi-view temporal data has distinctive patterns
in each view such as the attention scores. Intra-view and
inter-view label correlations are crucial to improve multiview performance.
to depict human actions than each single view. For another
example, several types of human body signals are recorded
as different modalities in health-care applications, such as
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electrocardiograph
(ECG). These multi-view signals could monitor different
physical states simultaneously. Generally, multi-view time
series provide view-specific information from different angles and facilitate with each other for higher learning performance over an individual view.
Multi-view learning (MVL) has drawn significant attention, since utilizing complementary information from different views has great potential to boost the final learning
performance. MVL is successfully applied in many applications (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013; Nie et al. 2016; Nie, Cai,
and Li 2017; Tao et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019). Previous
algorithms could be roughly divided into three groups (Xu,
Tao, and Xu 2013): (1) co-training; (2) multiple kernel learning; and (3) subspace learning. Specifically, the co-training
methods integrate multi-view data via maximizing the common mutual information of different views; the multiple kernel learning methods design specific learning kernels for
each view and then combine them together; and the subspace learning methods seek for the common latent subspace shared by multiple views. Although these methods
have achieved promising results, it is not straightforward to
directly employ them for TSC due to the dynamic temporal
patterns in time series.
Existing TSC methods focusing on single-view time series have been widely explored under two cases: univari-

Introduction
Time series classification (TSC) is becoming a popular research topic recently, which provides more comprehensive
information for the changing world. Many algorithms are
proposed for modeling time series data in different application domains, e.g., transportation (Yao et al. 2018), healthcare (Harutyunyan et al. 2017), and human action (Wang,
Ding, and Fu 2019, 2018). However, compared with static
data such as images, the complicated dynamic patterns contained in time series make TSC a challenging problem. Fortunately, owing to the advanced sensing techniques, objects or events can be observed through multiple modalities, which brings in multi-view time series data to improve
the classification performance. For example, RGB, depth,
and skeleton are three common modalities for human action
recognition. They provide more comprehensive information
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Code will be released at https://github.com/yueb17/C2AF
This research is supported by the U.S. Army Research Office
Award W911NF-17-1-0367.

6714

