The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Isolation Graph Kernel
Bi-Cun Xu, Kai Ming Ting, Yuan Jiang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{xubc,tingkm,jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

tribution of the given dataset into consideration, and it can
deal with large scale datasets.
IGK is distinguished from WWL in four aspects. First,
IGK employs two types of distributions: the distribution of
node vectors in a dataset of graphs (ignoring the edges); and
the distribution of the Weisfeiler-Lehmah (WL)-embedded
node vectors. Second, although both IGK and WWL employ the same distribution of WL-embedded node vectors,
IGK invokes the first level of kernel mean embedding and
WWL does not. As a result, IGK operates in Hilbert space
and WWL in input space. Third, WWL uses the Wasserstein
distance to measure the distance between two distributions;
whereas IGK uses the second level of kernel mean embedding to measure the similarity of two distributions. Fourth,
IGK has an explicit feature map and WWL does not.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

A recent Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman (WWL) Graph Kernel has a distinctive feature: Representing the distribution of
Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL)-embedded node vectors of a graph
in a histogram that enables a dissimilarity measurement of
two graphs using Wasserstein distance. It has been shown to
produce better classification accuracy than other graph kernels which do not employ such distribution and Wasserstein
distance. This paper introduces an alternative called Isolation
Graph Kernel (IGK) that measures the similarity between two
attributed graphs. IGK is unique in two aspects among existing graph kernels. First, it is the first graph kernel which employs a distributional kernel in the framework of kernel mean
embedding. This avoids the need to use the computationally
expensive Wasserstein distance. Second, it is the first graph
kernel that incorporates the distribution of attributed nodes
(ignoring the edges) in a dataset of graphs. We reveal that
this distributional information, extracted in the form of a feature map of Isolation Kernel, is crucial in building an efficient
and effective graph kernel. We show that IGK is better than
WWL in terms of classification accuracy, and it runs orders
of magnitude faster in large datasets when used in the context
of SVM classification.

1. Introducing Isolation Graph Kernel (IGK) which has the
following unique characteristics: [i] It is the first graph
kernel which employs a distributional kernel in the framework of kernel mean embedding (KME) (Smola et al.
2007; Muandet et al. 2017). IGK is probably the first nontrivial application of two levels of KME. [ii] It is the first
graph kernel which incorporates the distribution of attributed nodes in an entire dataset of graphs. We show that
this distributional information extracted in terms of a feature map of Isolation Kernel (Ting, Zhu, and Zhou 2018)
is crucial in building an efficient and effective graph kernel.

Introduction
Measuring the similarity between graphs is a fundamental
problem in learning on graphs. Graph kernels have been
highly successful and have shown good predictive performance on a variety of classification problems (Morris et al.
2016; Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015; Togninalli et al.
2019).
A recent work has shown that it is important to use distributional information in a graph to construct a graph kernel called Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman or WWL kernel
(Togninalli et al. 2019). Because most existing graph kernels do not take distributional information into consideration (Kriege, Johansson, and Morris 2020), the WWL kernel
has better classification accuracy than these existing kernels.
However, the price WWL paid is high computational cost
because of the use of the Wasserstein distance. As a result,
it could not be used for large datasets.
This paper proposes an alternative approach called Isolation Graph Kernel (IGK). It takes more than one type of dis-

2. Verifying that the power of IGK is derived from the use of
Isolation Kernel (IK) in two aspects. [I] The data dependent property of IK makes full use of the data distribution
of the given dataset; while existing data independent kernel such as Gaussian Kernel could not. [II] A current WL
scheme (Togninalli et al. 2019) has weak discriminative
power (i.e., weak in distinguishing two non-isomorphic
graphs). The use of IK in the KME framework is a key to
improve the discriminative power of the WL scheme.
3. Showing that IGK has higher predictive accuracy than the
state-of-the-art WWL (Togninalli et al. 2019); and it runs
orders of magnitude faster in large datasets. This is because it does not employ the computationally expensive
Wasserstein distance; and the feature map of IK enables
the use of fast linear SVM.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10487

