The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inferring Camouflaged Objects by Texture-Aware Interactive Guidance Network
Jinchao Zhu, 1,2 Xiaoyu Zhang, 1,2∗ Shuo Zhang, 1,2 Junnan Liu 3
1

Institute of Robotics and Automatic Information System, College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robotics, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
College of Intelligent Systems Science and Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China
jczhu@mail.nankai.edu.cn, zhangxiaoyu@nankai.edu.cn, 1711507@mail.nankai.edu.cn, 1070715836@hrbeu.edu.cn

Local Cues

Abstract

Holistic Perception

Texture Cues

Camouflaged objects, similar to the background, show indefinable boundaries and deceptive textures, which increases the difficulty of detection task and makes the model rely
on features with more information. Herein, we design a texture label to facilitate our network for accurate camouflaged
object segmentation. Motivated by the complementary relationship between texture labels and camouflaged object labels, we propose an interactive guidance framework named
TINet, which focuses on finding the indefinable boundary
and the texture difference by progressive interactive guidance. It maximizes the guidance effect of refined multi-level
texture cues on segmentation. Specifically, texture perception
decoder (TPD) makes a comprehensive analysis of texture information in multiple scales. Feature interaction guidance decoder (FGD) interactively refines multi-level features of camouflaged object detection and texture detection level by level. Holistic perception decoder (HPD) enhances FGD results by multi-level holistic perception. In addition, we propose
a boundary weight map to help the loss function pay more
attention to the object boundary. Sufficient experiments conducted on COD and SOD datasets demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against 23 state-of-the-art
methods.

Edge Cues

(a) Input

(b) Canny (c) ConEdge (d) Texture

(e) GT

Figure 1: Given scenes like (a), how to find the camouflage
objects? We propose TINet to infer the objects from local
saliency cues, texture cues (b), contour edge cues (c), and
holistic perception (e), which is consistent with the process
of human inferring and thinking. ConEdge is object contour
extracted from GT. (b) is the Canny map of (a) and it only
shows the object areas. (d) is (b) + (c).

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) (Borji et al. 2019) aims to estimate the visual salient regions, while camouflaged object
detection (COD) aims to identify the concealed objects that
similar to their surroundings and the camouflaged objects
usually are not easy to find. So COD is more prone to serious misjudgment than SOD. They both can be used as initial
steps of many image comprehension and processing tasks,
such as image editing, image retrieval, photo composition,
and target tracking. Besides, COD research will contribute
to the development of medical image, military, agricultural,
and wildlife protection fields. Examples include pneumonia
segmentation, polyp segmentation (Fan et al. 2020b), tumor
segmentation, camouflage enemy facility detection, detection of burial mines, locust detection and rare animal detection.

A sufficiently large and finely marked COD dataset was
proposed by (Fan et al. 2020a). Most of the camouflaged
objects in the dataset are animals and they usually adapt the
color of their body to match the surroundings or hide in an
environment close to their color to avoid recognition (Owens
et al. 2014). The camouflage strategy works by deceiving
and misleading the visual perceptual system of the observer.
We can feel the effect of the strategy by trying to find the
camouflaged objects and identify the full boundaries of the
camouflaged objects in Fig. 1.
Salient objects have obvious stimulation to the visual perceptual system of the observer and can be identified instantaneously. However, the process of camouflage object detection is a longer thinking process of anti-deception, where
more types of cues are used. For example, for the first row of
Fig. 1, we first find the owl’s face (local saliency) and then
follow this clue to confirm the overall outline. For the 2,3
rows, when the colors of the camouflaged objects are sim-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3599

