The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Using Online Planning and Acting to Recover from Cyberattacks on
Software-defined Networks
Sunandita Patra,1,∗ Alexander Velazquez,2,∗ Myong Kang,2 Dana Nau1
1

Dept. of Computer Science and Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
2
Naval Research Laboratory, Information Technology Division, Washington, DC, USA
patras@umd.edu, alexander.velazquez@nrl.navy.mil, myong.kang@nrl.navy.mil, nau@umd.edu

Abstract

by RAE+UPOM, an online planning and acting engine based
on hierarchical refinement (Patra et al. 2020b).

We describe ACR-SDN, a system to monitor, diagnose, and
quickly respond to attacks or failures that may occur in
software-defined networks (SDNs). An integral part of ACRSDN is its use of RAE+UPOM, an automated acting and
planning engine that uses hierarchical refinement. To advise
ACR-SDN on how to recover a target system from faults and
attacks, RAE+UPOM uses attack recovery procedures written as hierarchical operational models. Our experimental results show that the use of refinement planning in ACR-SDN
is successful in recovering SDNs from attacks with respect
to five performance metrics: estimated time for recovery, efficiency, retry ratio, success ratio, and costEffectiveness.

For each task that one might want RAE+UPOM to accomplish, a human expert may write various refinement methods,
each of which is an alternative procedure for accomplishing
the task. If the task is to recover from a particular kind of attack on a SDN, then each refinement method might specify
a different way to try to recover. As cyberattacks become sophisticated, cyber responses have to be made sophisticated,
and refinement methods are a good way to capture complex cybersecurity domain knowledge since they support all
of the usual programming constructs, such as if-else statements, loops, and so on.

Introduction

RAE+UPOM consists of two subsystems: RAE, an actor
that executes refinement methods; and UPOM, a planner that
predicts how well each refinement method is likely to work
in the current situation. Given a task to perform, RAE will
call UPOM to get advice on which refinement method to
use. During RAE’s execution of the recommended method,
at each point where the method specifies another task to
perform, RAE will again call UPOM to get advice on what
method to use for that task. UPOM generates its advice by
performing Monte Carlo rollouts, each rollout being a simulated execution of RAE in the current situation. The larger
the number of rollouts, the better UPOM’s advice will be.

Software-defined networking is a relatively new network
management approach that enables dynamic, modular, programmatically efficient network configuration in order to
improve network performance and simplify monitoring.
Network management architectures generally have two layers: the data layer, where traffic flows and network packets are forwarded, and the control layer, which manages
packet routing. In traditional network architectures, these
two layers are highly coupled and the control is decentralized, which can lead to complexity and lack of agility. SDN
architectures decouple the two layers and have a centralized
control layer, implemented using a set of controllers.
SDNs are susceptible to a wide variety of known and unknown cyberattacks. With adversaries that can generate automated attacks at high pace and volume, as well as the possibility of system failures that can crop up at any time, it
can be difficult for human system managers to perform the
necessary recovery and defense tasks quickly enough.
In this paper, we introduce ACR-SDN, a system for recovering from cyberattacks and anomalies to a SDN. ACRSDN is implemented as a management plane, which interacts with SDN components in the control plane and data
plane. ACR-SDN has a Security Manager in charge of detecting anomalies within the SDN. Once an anomaly has
been detected, ACR-SDN’s actions for recovery are guided

Automated attack detection and diagnosis are not the focus of this paper. Rather, our focus is on recovery of the network from abnormal or insecure states. We assume that cyberattacks and system faults manifest as changes to the state.
In our experimental evaluation, we generate these states directly, and then try to recover from them. In our architecture, anomaly detection is handled by the Security Manager,
which sends tasks to RAE+UPOM, and additional diagnosis
can be done via probing actions inside refinement methods.
This paper is organized as follows. This section is followed by related work. Then, we describe an example SDN
attack-and-recovery scenario. We give some background on
refinement acting and planning (RAE and UPOM). We describe ACR-SDN and how RAE+UPOM is integrated with it.
The penultimate section gives experimental results, and the
last section provides a concluding discussion.

∗

Contributed equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15377

