The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stratified Rule-Aware Network for Abstract Visual Reasoning
Sheng Hu,1, * Yuqing Ma,1, * Xianglong Liu,1,2,† Yanlu Wei,1 Shihao Bai1
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China
husheng 7@163.com, {mayuqing,xlliu}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, {weiyanlu,16061167}@buaa.edu.cn

Attribute: Number
Context Matrix

Abstract
Abstract reasoning refers to the ability to analyze information, discover rules at an intangible level, and solve problems
in innovative ways. Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) test
is typically used to examine the capability of abstract reasoning. The subject is asked to identify the correct choice from
the answer set to fill the missing panel at the bottom right of
RPM (e.g., a 3×3 matrix), following the underlying rules inside the matrix. Recent studies, taking advantage of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have achieved encouraging
progress to accomplish the RPM test. However, they partly
ignore necessary inductive biases of RPM solver, such as order sensitivity within each row/column and incremental rule
induction. To address this problem, in this paper we propose
a Stratified Rule-Aware Network (SRAN) to generate the rule
embeddings for two input sequences. Our SRAN learns multiple granularity rule embeddings at different levels, and incrementally integrates the stratified embedding flows through
a gated fusion module. With the help of embeddings, a rule
similarity metric is applied to guarantee that SRAN can not
only be trained using a tuplet loss but also infer the best answer efficiently. We further point out the severe defects existing in the popular RAVEN dataset for RPM test, which
prevent from the fair evaluation of the abstract reasoning
ability. To fix the defects, we propose an answer set generation algorithm called Attribute Bisection Tree (ABT), forming an improved dataset named Impartial-RAVEN (I-RAVEN
for short). Extensive experiments are conducted on both PGM
and I-RAVEN datasets, showing that our SRAN outperforms
the state-of-the-art models by a considerable margin.

Progression (2-1=3-2) Arithmetic (2+3=5)
or
Arithmetic (1+2=3)

？

Answer Set

Arithmetic
Inference
Result

(2+2=4)

Figure 1: An example of RPM question and the human strategy to solve it. The underlying rule on the number of circles
could be Progression (2-1=3-2) or Arithmetic (1+2=3) along
row 1, and Arithmetic (2+3=5) along row 2. Therefore the
dominant rule is Arithmetic. Apply it to the third row to figure out the answer (2+2=4). Besides, no viable rule can be
found along the columns

1938; Carpenter, Just, and Shell 1990; Raven 2000; Kunda,
McGreggor, and Goel 2013; Strannegård, Cirillo, and Ström
2013) is one of the highly accepted and well-studied tools to
examine the ability of abstract reasoning, which is believed
as a good estimate of the real intelligence (Carpenter, Just,
and Shell 1990). An illustration of RPM is shown in Figure 1, where usually the test-taker is presented with a 3×3
matrix with the bottom right panel left blank. The goal is to
choose one image from an answer set of eight candidates to
complete the matrix correctly, namely satisfying the underlying rules in the matrix. Subjects accomplish this by looking into the first two rows/columns and inducing the dominant rules which govern the attributes in those panels. The
obtained rules can then be applied to the last row/column to
figure out which answer belongs to the blank panel.
Computational models for RPM in the cognitive science community access symbolic representations of the images (Carpenter, Just, and Shell 1990; Lovett and Forbus
2017; Lovett, Forbus, and Usher 2010; Lovett et al. 2010).
Recently there has been some success with end-to-end learning methods trying to accomplish abstract reasoning on

Introduction
Abstract reasoning, also known as inductive reasoning,
refers to the ability to analyze information, discover rules
at an intangible level, and solve problems in innovative
ways. This type of reasoning, as the foundation for human intelligence, helps human understand the world. It has
been generally regarded and pursued as a critical component to the development of artificial intelligence during the
past decades, and has attracted increasing attention in recent years. Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) test (Raven
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1567

