The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inductive Graph Neural Networks for Spatiotemporal Kriging
Yuankai Wu,1 Dingyi Zhuang,1 Aurelie Labbe,2 Lijun Sun1 *
1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada
2
HEC Montreal, Montreal, Canada
yuankai.wu@mail.mcgill.ca, dingyi.zhuang@mail.mcgill.ca, aurelie.labbe@hec.ca, lijun.sun@mcgill.ca

Abstract

nals from sampled locations during the same period. The
interpolation results can produce a fine-grained and highresolution realization of spatiotemporal data, which can be
used to enhance real-world applications such as travel time
estimation and disaster evaluation. In addition, a better kriging model can achieve higher estimation accuracy/reliability
with fewer sensors, thus reducing the operation and maintenance cost of a sensor network.
For general spatiotemporal kriging problems (e.g., in Euclidean domains), a well-developed approach is Gaussian
process (GP) regression (Williams and Rasmussen 2006;
Cressie and Wikle 2015), which uses a flexible kernel structure to characterize spatiotemporal correlations. However,
GP has two limitations: (1) the model is computationally expensive and thus it cannot deal with large-scale datasets, and
(2) it is difficult to model networked systems using existing
graph kernel structures. To solve large-scale kriging problems in a networked system, graph regularized matrix/tensor
completion has emerged as an effective solution (e.g., Bahadori, Yu, and Liu 2014; Zhou et al. 2012; Deng et al.
2016; Takeuchi, Kashima, and Ueda 2017). Combining lowrank structure and spatiotemporal regularizers, these models
can simultaneously characterize both global consistency and
local consistency in the data. However, matrix/tensor completion is essentially transductive: for new sensors/nodes introduced to the network, we cannot directly apply a previously trained model; instead, we have to retrain the full
model for the new graph structure even with only minor
changes (i.e., after introducing a new sensor). In addition,
the low-rank scheme is ineffective to accommodate timevarying/dynamic graph structures. For example, some sensors may retire over time without being replaced, and some
sensors may be introduced at new locations. In such cases,
the network structure itself is not consistent over time, making it challenging to utilize all full information.
Recent research has explored the potential of modeling
spatiotemporal data using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
GNNs are powerful in characterizing complex spatial dependencies by their message passing mechanism (Xu et al.
2018). They also demonstrate the ability and inductive
power to generalize the message passing mechanism to unseen nodes or even entirely new (sub)graphs (Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018; Zeng et al.
2020). Inspired by these works, here we develop an In-

Time series forecasting and spatiotemporal kriging are the
two most important tasks in spatiotemporal data analysis. Recent research on graph neural networks has made substantial progress in time series forecasting, while little attention
has been paid to the kriging problem—recovering signals
for unsampled locations/sensors. Most existing scalable kriging methods (e.g., matrix/tensor completion) are transductive, and thus full retraining is required when we have a new
sensor to interpolate. In this paper, we develop an Inductive
Graph Neural Network Kriging (IGNNK) model to recover
data for unsampled sensors on a network/graph structure. To
generalize the effect of distance and reachability, we generate random subgraphs as samples and the corresponding adjacency matrix for each sample. By reconstructing all signals
on each sample subgraph, IGNNK can effectively learn the
spatial message passing mechanism. Empirical results on several real-world spatiotemporal datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. In addition, we also find that the
learned model can be successfully transferred to the same
type of kriging tasks on an unseen dataset. Our results show
that: 1) GNN is an efficient and effective tool for spatial kriging; 2) inductive GNNs can be trained using dynamic adjacency matrices; 3) a trained model can be transferred to new
graph structures and 4) IGNNK can be used to generate virtual sensors.

Introduction
With recent advances in information and communications
technologies (ICT), large-scale spatiotemporal datasets are
collected from various applications, such as traffic sensing and climate monitoring. Analyzing these spatiotemporal datasets has attracted considerable attention. Time series forecasting and spatiotemporal kriging are two essential
tasks in spatiotemporal analysis (Cressie and Wikle 2015;
Bahadori, Yu, and Liu 2014). While recent research advances in deep learning have made substantial progress in
time series forecasting (e.g., Rangapuram et al. 2018; Salinas et al. 2019; Sen, Yu, and Dhillon 2019), little attention has been paid to the spatiotemporal kriging application.
The goal of spatiotemporal kriging is to perform signal interpolation for unsampled locations given the observed sig* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4478

