The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Flexible Non-Autoregressive Extractive Summarization with Threshold:
How to Extract a Non-Fixed Number of Summary Sentences
Ruipeng Jia,1,2 Yanan Cao,1,2 Haichao Shi,1,2 Fang Fang,1,2∗ Pengfei Yin,1,2 Shi Wang3∗
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiaruipeng, caoyanan, shihaichao, fangfang0703, yinpengfei}@iie.ac.cn
wangshi@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Sentence-level extractive summarization is a fundamental yet
challenging task, and recent powerful approaches prefer to
pick sentences sorted by the predicted probabilities until the
length limit is reached, a.k.a. “Top-K Strategy”. This length
limit is fixed based on the validation set, resulting in the lack
of flexibility. In this work, we propose a more flexible and
accurate non-autoregressive method for single document extractive summarization, extracting a non-fixed number of summary sentences without the sorting step. We call our approach
ThresSum as it picks sentences simultaneously and individually from the source document when the predicted probabilities exceed a threshold. During training, the model enhances
sentence representation through iterative refinement and the
intermediate latent variables receive some weak supervision
with soft labels, which are generated progressively by adjusting the temperature with a knowledge distillation algorithm.
Specifically, the temperature is initialized with high value and
drops along with the iteration until a temperature of 1. Experimental results on CNN/DM and NYT datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of ThresSum, which significantly
outperforms BERTSUMEXT with a substantial improvement
of 0.74 ROUGE-1 score on CNN/DM.

Introduction
Encoder-decoder mechanism is widely used for single document extractive summarization. The encoder is to encode
one sentence into vector representation, while the popular
decoder with top-k strategy can be divided into three steps:
predict the probability scores of those sentence vectors, sort
sentences in descending order in line with the probability
scores, and pick sentences until exceeding the length limit.
(Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017; Xiao and Carenini 2019;
Liu and Lapata 2019; Xu et al. 2020). However, there are still
two inherent obstacles for sentence-level extractive summarization:
1) Redundant phrases between selected sentences. The
naive approach for the first prediction step of decoder is to
make independent binary decisions for each sentence, leading
to the absence of overlap or redundancy modeling between
∗

Corresponding authors: Fang Fang and Shi Wang
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13134

the selected target sentences (Xu et al. 2020; Zhong et al.
2020). The first natural solution is to introduce an autoregressive decoder (Chen and Bansal 2018; Jadhav and Rajan 2018;
Liu and Lapata 2019; Xu et al. 2020), extracting sentences
one by one and allowing different sentences to influence
each other. Secondly, reinforcement learning is introduced
for decoder to consider the semantics of the entire target summary (Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018; Dong et al. 2018;
Bae et al. 2019), which combines the maximum-likelihood
cross-entropy loss with the rewards from policy gradient to
directly optimize the evaluation metric for the summarization
task. The third popular solution is to build summarization
system with a two-stage decoder (Aliguliyev 2009; Galanis
and Androutsopoulos 2010; Zhang et al. 2019a; Zhong et al.
2020), with the first stage to extract some fragments of the
original text and the second stage to select or modify on the
basis of these fragments. Unfortunately, all these approaches
with an autoregressive decoder are unstable, for there are the
train-inference gap and error propagation when extracting
sentences one by one.
2) Fixed number or proportion of summary sentences.
SummaRuNNer (Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017) first sets a
“sort” step after the “predict” step, and “pick” sorted sentences
until the length limit is reached (a.k.a. “Top-K Strategy”),
which has been a popular method employed by the following
models (Narayan, Cohen, and Lapata 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
Zhang, Wei, and Zhou 2019; Liu and Lapata 2019; Xu et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020). While a flexible extractor should
generate a non-fixed number of summary sentences based
on source document length, topics, or other aspects. The
reasonable approach is to pick sentences whose predicted
probability is over a threshold. However, it may not be an
optimal stratety since the training data is very imbalanced
in terms of summary-membership of sentences (Nallapati,
Zhai, and Zhou 2017). Furthermore, Mendes et al. (2019)
introduces the length variable into the decoder and Zhong
et al. (2020) can choose any number of sentences by matching
candidate summary in semantic space. But the decoders of
these two solutions are either autoregressive or two-stage.
To address the above two obstacles, we introduce ThresSum, a heuristic approach to strengthen the encoder by enhancing sentence representation through iterative refinement
and simplify the decoder by removing the “sort” step:

