The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Finding Sparse Structures for Domain Specific Neural Machine Translation
Jianze Liang, 1,2∗ Chengqi Zhao, 2 Mingxuan Wang, 2 Xipeng Qiu, 1 Lei Li 2
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
ByteDance AI Lab, China
{jzliang18, xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn, {zhaochengqi.d, wangmingxuan.89, lileilab}@bytedance.com

Abstract

we focus on the second thread: model fine-tuning. Finetuning is very common in domain adaptation, which first
trains a base model on the general domain data and then
fine-tunes it on each target domain (Luong and Manning
2015; Chen et al. 2017; Gu, Feng, and Liu 2019; Saunders
et al. 2019). However, non-restricted fine-tuning requires
very careful hyper-parameter tuning, and is prone to overfitting on the target domain as well as forgetting on the general domain. To tackle these issues, researchers have proposed several constructive approaches, with the view to limiting the size or plasticity of parameters in the fine-tuning
stage, which can be roughly divided into two categories: regularization and partial-tuning strategy. Regularization methods often integrate extra training objectives to prevent parameters from large deviations, such as model output regularization (Khayrallah et al. 2018), elastic weight consolidation (EWC) (Thompson et al. 2019). Regularization methods, which impose arbitrary global constraints on parameter
updates, may further restrict the adaptive process of the network, especially when domain-specific corpora are scarce.
Partial-tuning methods either freeze several sub-layers of the
network and fine-tune the others (Thompson et al. 2018), or
integrate domain-specific adapters into the network (Bapna
and Firat 2019; Vilar 2018). By only fine-tuning the domainspecific part of the model, they can alleviate the over-fitting
and forgetting problem in fine-tuning. However, the structure designed to adapting is usually hand-crafted, which
relies on experienced experts and the adapter brings additional parameters. Therefore, a more adaptive, scalable, and
parameter-efficient approach for domain adaptation is very
valuable and worth well studying.

Neural machine translation often adopts the fine-tuning approach to adapt to specific domains. However, nonrestricted
fine-tuning can easily degrade on the general domain and
over-fit to the target domain. To mitigate the issue, we propose P RUNE -T UNE, a novel domain adaptation method via
gradual pruning. It learns tiny domain-specific sub-networks
during fine-tuning on new domains. P RUNE -T UNE alleviates
the over-fitting and the degradation problem without model
modification. Furthermore, P RUNE -T UNE is able to sequentially learn a single network with multiple disjoint domainspecific sub-networks for multiple domains. Empirical experiment results show that P RUNE -T UNE outperforms several
strong competitors in the target domain test set without sacrificing the quality on the general domain in both single and
multi-domain settings. The source code and data are available
at https://github.com/ohlionel/Prune-Tune.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) yields state-of-the-art
translation performance when a large number of parallel
sentences are available (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017). However, there are many
language pairs lacking parallel corpora. It is also observed
that NMT does not perform well in specific domains where
the domain-specific corpora are limited, such as medical domain (Koehn and Schroeder 2007; Axelrod, He, and Gao
2011; Freitag and Al-Onaizan 2016; Chu and Wang 2018).
There is huge need to produce high-quality domain-specific
machine translation systems whereas general purpose MT
has limited performance.
Domain adaptation for NMT has been studied extensively.
These work can be grouped into two categories: data-centric
and model fine-tuning (Chu and Wang 2018). Data-centric
methods focus on selecting or generating target domain data
from general domain corpora, which is effective and well
explored (Axelrod, He, and Gao 2011; Chinea-Rı́os, Peris,
and Casacuberta 2017; Zeng et al. 2019). In this paper,

In this paper, we propose P RUNE -T UNE, a novel domain
adaptation method via adaptive structure pruning. Our motivation is inspired from Continual Learning (Parisi et al.
2019; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Mallya and Lazebnik 2018;
Mallya, Davis, and Lazebnik 2018; Hung et al. 2019; Lee,
Cho, and Kang 2020) and the lottery hypothesis that a
randomly-initialized, dense neural network contains a subnetwork which can match the test accuracy of the original
network after training for at most the same number of iterations (Frankle and Carbin 2019). We therefore suppose that
multiple machine translation models for different domains
can share different sparse sub-networks within a single neural network. Specifically, we first apply a standard pruning

∗
The work was done while JL was an intern at ByteDance AI
Lab.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13333

