The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Answering Regular Path Queries Under Approximate Semantics
in Lightweight Description Logics
Oliver Fernández Gil, Anni-Yasmin Turhan
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, TU Dresden, Germany
{oliver.fernandez, anni-yasmin.turhan}@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

expected results. Similarly, in applications where the data
is irregular and evolves in structure and content, it can be
hard for users to have full knowledge of its structure and to
formulate adequate queries. In such situations, queries that
over-approximate the set of answers can be very helpful.
Several approaches have been investigated to address approximate semantics for RPQs, as for instance, (Jagadish,
Mendelzon, and Milo 1995; Kanza and Sagiv 2001; Grahne
and Thomo 2006; Poulovassilis, Selmer, and Wood 2016).
In particular, (Grahne and Thomo 2006) proposes a tractable
solution that uses weighted finite-state transducers (WFTs)
to define the approximate semantics. Intuitively, such a
transducer transforms input words into corresponding output words, and computes a weight quantifying the cost of
this so-called distortion operation. The idea for RPQs is that
a transducer specifies (i) which paths are allowed as distortions of the “ideal” paths required by the query, and (ii)
the corresponding distortion costs. Approximate answers are
then tuples (a, b, η), where η is the cost of distorting a path
satisfying the query into one leading from a to b in the data.
Path queries have also been investigated in the setting of
ontology-mediated query answering (OMQA), in which semantic knowledge provided in an ontology is used to enrich
the data (Poggi et al. 2008; Bienvenu and Ortiz 2015). In
contrast to query answering over (graph) databases, OMQA
usually adopts the open world assumption by computing certain answers, which are answers that hold in all possible
models of the ontology and the data. Ontologies are often
formulated in Description Logics (DLs), which are a wellinvestigated family of fragments of first-order logic that can
be used to represent the conceptual knowledge of an application domain in a structured and formal way (Baader et al.
2003, 2017). Answering C2RPQs has been studied for very
expressive DLs (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2014), and for
families of lightweight DLs (Calvanese et al. 2007; Bienvenu, Ortiz, and Simkus 2015; Stefanoni et al. 2014). However, approaches for query answering under approximate semantics in the OMQA setting are scarce. There is prior work
on the simple case of instance queries (Ecke, Peñaloza, and
Turhan 2015) and on C2RPQs in the restricted setting of
acyclic ontologies formulated in a fragment of RDFs (Poulovassilis, Selmer, and Wood 2016).
The goal of this paper is to define approximate semantics
for C2RPQs in DLs and to devise computation algorithms

Classical regular path queries (RPQs) can be too restrictive
for some applications and answering such queries under approximate semantics to relax the query is desirable. While
for answering regular path queries over graph databases under approximate semantics algorithms are available, such algorithms are scarce for the ontology-mediated setting. In
this paper we extend an approach for answering RPQs over
graph databases that uses weighted transducers to approximate paths from the query in two ways. The first extension is
to answering approximate conjunctive two-way regular path
queries (C2RPQs) over graph databases and the second is to
answering C2RPQs over ELH and DL-LiteR ontologies. We
provide results on the computational complexity of the underlying reasoning problems and devise approximate query
answering algorithms.

Introduction
Regular path queries (RPQs) are a well-investigated query
language that attracted much attention in research on semistructured data and graph databases due to its capabilities to
navigate graph-structured data (Mendelzon and Wood 1995;
Florescu, Levy, and Suciu 1998). This interest has revived in
recent years since in many application areas data is graphstructured and represented in graph database models. RPQs
and its extensions are part of SPARQL, which is the standard
language recommended by the W3C to query RDF data. In
general, a graph database can be viewed as a labeled directed
graph, where edge labels state relations between data items.
An RPQ consists of a regular language over these labels,
and retrieves pairs of data items (a, b) that are connected
by paths complying to the specified regular language. The
extension two-way RPQs (2RPQ) can traverse graph edges
backwards and conjunctive 2RPQs (C2RPQ) allow conjunctions of 2RPQs that share variables.
In scenarios where an RPQ yields no answer over a particular database, it can be useful to relax the query to retrieve
more than the classical answers, i.e., pairs that are connected
by paths that approximate those paths required by the query.
This can be practical to provide feasible alternatives in applications where data is gathered automatically from heterogeneous data sources and exact semantics need not yield the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6340

