The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DecAug: Out-of-Distribution Generalization via
Decomposed Feature Representation and Semantic Augmentation
Haoyue Bai 1 * † , Rui Sun 2† , Lanqing Hong 2 , Fengwei Zhou 2 ,
Nanyang Ye 3‡ , Han-Jia Ye 4 , S.-H. Gary Chan 1 , Zhenguo Li 2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Nanjing University
{hbaiaa, gchan}@cse.ust.hk, {sun.rui3, honglanqing, zhoufengwei, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn, yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract
While deep learning demonstrates its strong ability to handle independent and identically distributed (IID) data, it often
suffers from out-of-distribution (OoD) generalization, where
the test data come from another distribution (w.r.t. the training one). Designing a general OoD generalization framework
for a wide range of applications is challenging, mainly due
to different kinds of distribution shifts in the real world, such
as the shift across domains or the extrapolation of correlation. Most of the previous approaches can only solve one specific distribution shift, leading to unsatisfactory performance
when applied to various OoD benchmarks. In this work, we
propose DecAug, a novel decomposed feature representation
and semantic augmentation approach for OoD generalization. Specifically, DecAug disentangles the category-related
and context-related features by orthogonalizing the two gradients (w.r.t. intermediate features) of losses for predicting
category and context labels, where category-related features
contain causal information of the target object, while contextrelated features cause distribution shifts between training and
test data. Furthermore, we perform gradient-based augmentation on context-related features to improve the robustness of
learned representations. Experimental results show that DecAug outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on various
OoD datasets, which is among the very few methods that can
deal with different types of OoD generalization challenges.

Figure 1: Illustration of the two-dimensional OoD shifts
among datasets in different OoD research areas, including
Colored MNIST, PACS, and NICO. Extensive experiments
showed that many OoD methods can only deal with one dimension of OoD shift.

training and test data, which is known as out-of-distribution
(OoD) generalization. How to deal with OoD generalization
is still an open problem.
To improve a DNN’s OoD generalization ability, diversified research endeavors are observed recently, which mainly
includes domain generalization, invariant risk minimization,
and stable learning. Various benchmark datasets are adopted
to evaluate the proposed OoD generalization algorithms,
such as Colored MNIST (Arjovsky et al. 2019), PACS (Li
et al. 2017a), and NICO (He, Shen, and Cui 2020). Among
these datasets, PACS are widely used in domain generalization (Carlucci et al. 2019; Mancini et al. 2020) to validate DNN’s ability to generalize across different image
styles. On the other hand, in recent risk regularization methods, Colored MNIST is often considered (Arjovsky et al.
2019; Ahuja et al. 2020; Krueger et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2020), where distribution shift is introduced by manipulating the correlation between the colors and the labels. In stable learning, another OoD dataset called NICO was intro-

Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated superior performances on
standard benchmark datasets from various fields, such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
object detection (Redmon et al. 2016), natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2019), and recommendation systems
(Cheng et al. 2016), assuming that the training and test data
are independent and identically distributed (IID). In practice,
however, it is common to observe distribution shifts among
* This work was done while intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

6705

