The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Training Reduces Information and Improves Transferability
Matteo Terzi1 , Alessandro Achille2 , Marco Maggipinto1 , Gian Antonio Susto1
1

Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova
2
AWS
{terzimat,marco.maggipinto}@dei.unipd.it, gianantonio.susto@unipd.it, achille@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

is not the only desiderata of adversarially trained models:
their representations are semantically meaningful and they
can be used for other Computer Vision (CV) tasks, such as
generation and (semantic) interpolation of images. More importantly, AT enables invertibility, that is the ability to reconstruct input images from their representations (Ilyas et al.
2019) by solving a simple optimization problem. This is true
also for out-of-distribution images meaning that robust networks do not destroy information about the input. Hence,
how can we explain that, while robust networks preserve information, they lack in generalization power?
In this context, obtaining good representations for a task
has been the subject of representation learning where the
most widely accepted theory is Information Bottleneck
(IB) (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000; Alemi et al. 2016;
Achille and Soatto 2018b) which calls for reducing information in the activations, arguing it is necessary for generalization. More formally, let x be an input random variable
and y be a target random variable, a good representation z of
the input should be maximally expressive about for y while
being as concise as possible about x. The solution of the optimal trade-off can be found by optimizing the Information
Lagrangian:
min −I(z, y) + βI(z, x)

Recent results show that features of adversarially trained networks for classification, in addition to being robust, enable
desirable properties such as invertibility. The latter property
may seem counter-intuitive as it is widely accepted by the
community that classification models should only capture the
minimal information (features) required for the task. Motivated by this discrepancy, we investigate the dual relationship between Adversarial Training and Information Theory.
We show that the Adversarial Training can improve linear
transferability to new tasks, from which arises a new tradeoff between transferability of representations and accuracy on
the source task. We validate our results employing robust networks trained on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet on
several datasets. Moreover, we show that Adversarial Training reduces Fisher information of representations about the
input and of the weights about the task, and we provide a
theoretical argument which explains the invertibility of deterministic networks without violating the principle of minimality. Finally, we leverage our theoretical insights to remarkably
improve the quality of reconstructed images through inversion.

Introduction
In the last 10 years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) dramatically improved the performance in any computer vision
task. However, the impressive accuracy comes at the cost
of poor robustness to small perturbations, called adversarial perturbations, that lead the models to predict, with high
confidence, a wrong class (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Terzi, Susto, and Chaudhari 2020). This undesirable
behaviour led to a flourishing of research works ensuring
robustness against them. State-of-the-art approaches for robustness are provided by Adversarial Training (AT) (Madry
et al. 2017) and its variants (Zhang et al. 2019). The rationale of these approaches is to find worst-case examples and
feed them to the model during training or constraining the
output to not change significantly under small perturbations.
However, robustness is achieved at the expense of a decrease
in accuracy: the more a model is robust, the lower its accuracy will be (Tsipras et al. 2019). This is a classic “waterbed
effect” between precision and robustness ubiquitous in optimal control and many other fields. Interestingly, robustness

where β controls how much information about x is conveyed
by z. Both AT and IB at their core aim at finding good representations: the first calls for representations that are robust
to input perturbations while the latter finds minimal representations sufficient for the task. How are these two methods related? Do they share some properties? More precisely,
does the invertibility property create a contradiction on IB
theory? In fact, if generalization requires discarding information in the data that is not necessary for the task, it should
not be possible to reconstruct the input images.
Throughout this paper we will (i) investigate the research
questions stated above, with particular focus on the connection between IB and AT and as a consequence of our analysis, (ii) we will reveal new interesting properties of robust
models.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

A fundamental result of IB is that, in order to generalize well
on a task, z has to be sufficient and minimal, that is, it should

z

Contributions and Related Works

2674

