The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improved POMDP Tree Search Planning with Prioritized Action Branching
John Mern,1 Anil Yildiz, 1 Larry Bush, 2 Tapan Mukerji, 3 and Mykel J. Kochenderfer 1
1

Stanford University, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
2
General Motors, Research and Development, Warren, MI
3
Stanford University, Department of Energy Resources Engineering, 367 Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305
{jmern91, yildiz, mukerji, mykel}@stanford.edu, bushL2@alum.mit.edu

Abstract
Online solvers for partially observable Markov decision processes have difficulty scaling to problems with large action
spaces. This paper proposes a method called PA-POMCPOW
to sample a subset of the action space for inclusion in a search
tree. The proposed method first evaluates the action space according to a score function that is a linear combination of
expected reward and expected information gain. The actions
with the highest score are then added to the search tree during tree expansion. Using this score function, actions providing the highest expected mixture of exploration and exploitation are included in the tree. Experiments show that
PA-POMCPOW is able to outperform existing state-of-theart solvers on problems with large discrete action spaces.

...

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: MCTS trees. (a) A deep search tree with a small
action space. Action nodes (squares) are sampled frequently.
(b) A shallow search tree with a large action space.

be applied to much larger problems (Silver and Veness 2010;
Somani et al. 2013; Sunberg and Kochenderfer 2018).
The POMCP algorithm (Silver and Veness 2010) adapted
UCT search (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006) by using generative models and sampling states from an unweighted particle set to search over action-observation trajectories. The
DESPOT algorithm (Somani et al. 2013) takes a similar approach, using a deterministic generative model to reduce the
tree search variance. The ABT algorithm (Kurniawati and
Yadav 2013) was proposed to improve planning speed by
reusing part of the previous belief step search tree.
Existing online methods may still fail when the action
space of the problem is very large, such as in large-scale
route planning or robotic control. During tree search, the
probability of sampling a given action from a large space
is very low, resulting in wide, shallow search trees (Sunberg
and Kochenderfer 2018), as shown in Figure 1. In MCTS
methods, shallow trees provide poor estimates of the action
values (Silver and Veness 2010).
To scale to problems with larger action and observation
spaces, the POMCPOW and PFT-DPW algorithms (Sunberg and Kochenderfer 2018) introduce double progressive widening (DPW) to POMCP. Progressive Widening (Couëtoux et al. 2011) was introduced to scale MCTS
methods to large discrete and continuous spaces by dynamically limiting the number of action nodes added during tree
expansion. Double progressive widening applies the progressive widening to both the action and observation spaces.
DPW has been shown to be sensitive to the order nodes are
selected for addition (Browne et al. 2012) and has limited

Introduction
Sequential decision making problems under uncertainty
are often modeled as partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) (Littman, Cassandra, and Kaelbling
1995). A solution to a POMDP is a policy that maps a belief over the state of the environment to an optimal action
that maximizes the sum of discounted rewards over a series
of steps. Solving POMDPs exactly is generally intractable
and has been shown to be PSPACE-complete for finite horizons (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987). Therefore, a variety of offline and online approximate solution methods have
been proposed (Kochenderfer 2015).
Offline solvers compute the full policy before any action is taken, and they are typically effective at small to
moderately sized POMDPs (Ross et al. 2008). Monte-Carlo
methods using point-based belief space interpolation were
initially explored (Thrun 1999). Many advanced solvers
now use point-based value iteration to learn an approximation to the belief value function from a finite-set of belief
points (Kurniawati, Hsu, and Lee 2008). However, because
offline solvers compute policies over the entire belief space,
they are typically not viable for large problems.
Several online planners have been developed by adapting
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for partially observable
environments. Because online planners only reason about
beliefs reachable from the current belief, they can typically
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11888

