The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Queue-Learning: A Reinforcement Learning Approach for
Providing Quality of Service
Majid Raeis, Ali Tizghadam, Alberto Leon-Garcia
University of Toronto, Canada
{m.raeis, ali.tizghadam, alberto.leongarcia}@utoronto.ca

Abstract

of the service chains. This can be achieved through different control mechanisms such as vertical (horizontal) scaling of the resources, which corresponds to adding/removing
CPU or memory resources of the existing VNF instances
(adding/removing VNF instances) in response to the workload changes (Toosi et al. 2019).
In order to study the problem of QoS assurance in
a broader context, we take a general approach and use
queueing-theoretic models for representing the service systems. Therefore, the presented results can be applied to a
wide range of problems, such as QoS assurance for VNF
chains. In this paper, we focus on dynamic service-rate control of the tandem systems as an effective approach for
providing end-to-end delay guarantees. This is closely related to the concept of vertical auto-scaling of VNF service
chains. There is a rich body of literature on the servicerate control of the service systems, the majority of which is
based on queueing theoretic approaches (Kumar, Lewis, and
Topaloglu 2013; Lee and Kulkarni 2014; Weber and Stidham 1987). However, most of this literature is limited to
simple scenarios or unrealistic assumptions, such as exponential inter-arrival and service times. This is due to the fact
that the queueing theoretic techniques become intractable as
we consider larger networks under more realistic assumptions.
Considering the shortcomings of the queueing theoretic
methods and the fact that the service-rate control problem
involves sequential decision makings, we adopt a reinforcement learning approach, which is a natural candidate for
dealing with these types of problems. In particular, we use
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al.
2015) algorithm to handle the continuous action space (service rates) and the large state space (queue lengths) of the
problem. The contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows

End-to-end delay is a critical attribute of quality of service
(QoS) in application domains such as cloud computing and
computer networks. This metric is particularly important in
tandem service systems, where the end-to-end service is provided through a chain of services. Service-rate control is a
common mechanism for providing QoS guarantees in service
systems. In this paper, we introduce a reinforcement learningbased (RL-based) service-rate controller that provides probabilistic upper-bounds on the end-to-end delay of the system, while preventing the overuse of service resources. In order to have a general framework, we use queueing theory to
model the service systems. However, we adopt an RL-based
approach to avoid the limitations of queueing-theoretic methods. In particular, we use Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) to learn the service rates (action) as a function of
the queue lengths (state) in tandem service systems. In contrast to existing RL-based methods that quantify their performance by the achieved overall reward, which could be hard
to interpret or even misleading, our proposed controller provides explicit probabilistic guarantees on the end-to-end delay of the system. The evaluations are presented for a tandem
queueing system with non-exponential inter-arrival and service times, the results of which validate our controller’s capability in meeting QoS constraints.

Introduction
End-to-end delay of a service system is an important performance metric that has a major impact on the customers’
satisfaction and the service providers’ revenues. Therefore,
providing guarantees on the end-to-end delay of a service
system is of great interest to both customers and service
providers. Ensuring quality of service (QoS) guarantees is
often a challenging task, particularly when the service system is composed of finer-grained service components. This
can be seen in many different service contexts such as cloud
computing and computer networks. Specifically, with the
emergence of Network Function Virtualization (NFV) in
cloud environments, end-to-end service networks can be created by chaining virtual network functions (VNF) together.
The goal of a cloud service provider is to efficiently manage the resources, while satisfying the QoS requirements

• We introduce an RL-based framework that takes a QoS
constraint as input, and provides a dynamic service-rate
control algorithm that satisfies the constraint without
overuse of the service resources. This makes our method
distinct from the existing service-rate control algorithms
that quantify their performance by the achieved overall reward, which is highly dependent on the reward definition
and might have no practical interpretations.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

461

