The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Training with Fast Gradient Projection Method
against Synonym Substitution Based Text Attacks
Xiaosen Wang1 * , Yichen Yang1 * , Yihe Deng2 * , Kun He1†
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
{xiaosen, yangyc}@hust.edu.cn, yihedeng@g.ucla.edu, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

tack (Liang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Ebrahimi et al. 2018),
word-level attack (Papernot et al. 2016; Samanta and Mehta
2017; Gong et al. 2018; Cheng et al. 2018; Kuleshov et al.
2018; Neekhara et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2019; Wang, Jin,
and He 2019), and sentence-level attack (Iyyer et al. 2018;
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018). For character-level attack, recent works (Pruthi, Dhingra, and Lipton 2019) have
shown that a spell checker can easily fix the perturbations.
Sentence-level attacks, usually based on paraphrasing, demand longer time in adversary generation. For word-level
attack, replacing word based on embedding perturbation or
adding/removing word is often vulnerable to the problem of
hurting semantic consistency and grammatical correctness.
Synonym substitution based attacks could better cope with
the above issues and produce adversarial examples that are
harder to be detected by humans. Unfortunately, synonym
substitution based attacks exhibit lower efficiency compared
with existing image attack methods.

Adversarial training is the most empirically successful approach in improving the robustness of deep neural networks
for image classification. For text classification, however, existing synonym substitution based adversarial attacks are effective but not very efficient to be incorporated into practical text adversarial training. Gradient-based attacks, which
are very efficient for images, are hard to be implemented for
synonym substitution based text attacks due to the lexical,
grammatical and semantic constraints and the discrete text
input space. Thereby, we propose a fast text adversarial attack method called Fast Gradient Projection Method (FGPM)
based on synonym substitution, which is about 20 times faster
than existing text attack methods and could achieve similar attack performance. We then incorporate FGPM with adversarial training and propose a text defense method called
Adversarial Training with FGPM enhanced by Logit pairing
(ATFL). Experiments show that ATFL could significantly improve the model robustness and block the transferability of
adversarial examples.

As text adversarial attack has attracted increasing interests very recently since 2018, its counterpart, text adversarial defense, is much less studied in the literature. Some research (Jia et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019) is based on interval bound propagation (IBP), originally proposed for images (Gowal et al. 2019), to ensure certified text defense.
Zhou et al. (2019) learn to discriminate perturbations (DISP)
and restore the embedding of the original word for defense
without altering the training process or the model structure.
Wang, Jin, and He (2019) propose a Synonym Encoding
Method (SEM), which inserts an encoder before the input
layer to defend synonym substitution based attacks.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have garnered tremendous
success over recent years (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Kim 2014; Devlin et al. 2019). However, researchers also find that DNNs are often vulnerable to adversarial examples for image data (Szegedy et al. 2014) as well
as text data (Papernot et al. 2016). For image classification,
numerous methods have been proposed with regard to adversarial attack (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Wang
et al. 2019) and defense (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Guo et al. 2018). Among which, adversarial training
that adopts perturbed examples in the training stage so as to
promote the model robustness has become very popular and
effective (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018).
For natural language processing tasks, however, the lexical, grammatical and semantic constraints and the discrete
input space make it much harder to craft text adversarial examples. Current attack methods include character-level at-

To our knowledge, adversarial training, one of the most
efficacious defense methods for image data (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018), has not been implemented as an effective defense method against synonym substitution based
attacks due to the inefficiency of current adversary generation methods. On one hand, existing synonym substitution
based attack methods are usually much less efficient to be
incorporated into adversarial training. On the other hand, although gradient-based image attacks often have much higher
efficiency, it is challenging to adapt such methods directly in
the text embedding space to generate meaningful adversarial examples without changing the original semantics, due to

* The first three authors contribute equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13997

