The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Beam Search Decoding for Discrete Keyphrase Generation
Xiaoli Huang,1 Tongge Xu,2∗ Lvan Jiao,1 Yueran Zu,1 Youmin Zhang3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University
3
Jiangxi Research Institute of Beihang University
{hxlist, xutg, jiaola, yueranzu, youmi}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Keyphrase Generation compresses a document into some
highly-summative phrases, which is an important task in natural language processing. Most state-of-the-art adopt greedy
search or beam search decoding methods. These two decoding methods generate a large number of duplicated
keyphrases and are time-consuming. Moreover, beam search
only predicts a fixed number of keyphrases for different documents. In this paper, we propose an adaptive generation
model-AdaGM, which is mainly inspired by the importance
of the first words in keyphrase generation. In AdaGM, a novel
reset state training mechanism is proposed to maximize the
difference in the predicted first words. To ensure the discreteness and get an appropriate number of keyphrases according to the content of the document adaptively, we equip
beam search with a highly effective filter mechanism. Experiments on five public datasets demonstrate the proposed
model can generate marginally less duplicated and more accurate keyphrases. The codes of AdaGM are available at:
https://github.com/huangxiaolist/adaGM.

Figure 1: An example of an input document and keyphrase
labels. We list the present and absent keyphrases, respectively, and present keyphrases are highlighted in red in the
document. We can see that the first words (marked with underline) of these keyphrases are different, which highlights
the importance of discreteness for keyphrase generation.

(e.g., 200) to over-generate at every decoding time-step, and
only top-K(e.g., K=10) phrases are kept, where K is consistent for each document. As a result, it suffers from high
computational costs and can only generate a fixed number
of keyphrases for various documents. To solve these problems, (Yuan et al. 2018; Chan et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020)
utilize a greedy search decoding strategy with a new training setup. Concretely, they concatenate keyphrases using delimiters into a sequence to make the model determine the
number of keyphrases, denoted as one-to-many (one2many)
mode. However, these methods tend to generate a large number of repeated keyphrases, and the extra noise (i.e., delimiter) aggravates the duplication issue (Yuan et al. 2018; Chan
et al. 2019).
In this work, we present an effective method to increase
the discreteness of the keyphrase generation, intending to
mitigate the issues mentioned above. Our method is motivated by the observation that the keyphrases of each document usually have different first words. It indicates that the
diversities of first words are the basis of keyphrases’ discreteness. We verify our intuition by counting the percentage of keyphrases with diverse first words in five popular
datasets, as shown in Table 1. It can be seen that the average proportion of all datasets reaches to near 89%, and the
percentage of three datasets even exceeds 90%.
With regard to the crucial role of the first words to interpret the discreteness of keyphrases, we propose the Adaptive

Introduction
Keyphrase generation is an important task that compresses
a document into some salient and discrete phrases, which
vary as widely as possible in terms of word choice, topic,
and meaning. These phrases can help people understand the
content quickly and further benefit downstream applications,
such as summarization (Li et al. 2018), translation (Tang
et al. 2016), and so forth. As depicted in Figure 1, the input
is usually a document, and the output is a set of keyphrases.
These keyphrases can be categorized into present keyphrases
that appear in the document like “dynamic programming”
and absent keyphrases that do not appear in the document
like “craft woodworkers”.
To predict present and absent keyphrases, generative
methods (Meng et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2018; Chen et al.
2018; Chan et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020) are proposed. Most
of the above methods are implemented by the sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) model (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Cho et al. 2014). Beam search (Meng et al. 2017; Chen
et al. 2018, 2019) is adopted initially as the decoding algorithm. The standard beam search sets a large beam size
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13082

