The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PoA of Simple Auctions with Interdependent Values ∗
Alon Eden 1 , Michal Feldman 2 , Inbal Talgam-Cohen 3 , Ori Zviran 2
1

Harvard University
Tel Aviv University
3
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
alonarden@gmail.com, michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, italgam@cs.technion.ac.il, ori.zviran@gmail.com
2

Abstract

manner, but are non-truthful. A prime example is the auctions run by e-Bay, where each item is sold separately in a
second-price auction, so that an agent interested in winning
at most one auction may be better off reporting lower than
her true values, to avoid multiple wins.
Motivated by such settings, Christodoulou et al. [2016]
pioneered the study of simultaneous item auctions, where
a single-item auction is run for each item separately. Since
such auctions are non-truthful, their performance is measured by their Bayesian Price of Anarchy (B-P OA) — the ratio between the optimal welfare and the welfare guarantee of
the worst equilibrium. Christodoulou et al. and many followups show that this simple format achieves near-optimal welfare in combinatorial settings when the auction in use is the
first- or second-price auction [Roughgarden et al. 2017]. Importantly, all prior works assume independence of different
buyers’ valuations, since otherwise the PoA might be polynomial in the number of agents (Bhawalkar and Roughgarden 2011; Feldman et al. 2013; Roughgarden 2016).
There are many settings in which the independence assumption is unrealistic. For instance, if an item being auctioned has the potential of being resold in the future, this
potential factors into agents’ values for the item, creating dependence on how others value it. Such dependence
is formally captured by the interdependent values (IDV)
model (Milgrom and Weber 1982). In this model, the correlation of values stems directly from one of the most fundamental aspects of a market — the way in which information
is dispersed among agents. In more detail, each agent has
a privately-known signal, which captures her partial knowledge about the items for sale. Her value for each item is a
function of all the information on the market related to this
item; that is, of her own signal as well as the signals of all
other agents (which are unknown to her). Since the valuations of different agents depend on the same signals, values
are correlated.
IDV settings have been studied extensively in the economic literature since Milgrom and Weber (1982), and in
the computer science literature (Ito and Parkes 2006; Constantin, Ito, and Parkes 2007; Robu et al. 2013; Chawla, Fu,
and Karlin 2014; Roughgarden and Talgam-Cohen 2016;
Eden et al. 2019); see Krishna (2009) for an overview and
the full version for additional related work. Realistic scenarios captured by this model include common value auc-

We expand the literature on the price of anarchy (PoA) of simultaneous item auctions by considering settings with correlated values; we do this via the fundamental economic
model of interdependent values (IDV). It is well-known that
in multi-item settings with private values, correlated values
can lead to bad PoA, which can be polynomially large in the
number of agents n. In the more general model of IDV, we
show that the PoA can be polynomially large even in singleitem settings. On the positive side, we identify a natural condition on information dispersion in the market, which enables
good PoA guarantees. Under this condition, we show that
for single-item settings, the PoA of standard mechanisms degrades gracefully. For settings with multiple items we show a
separation between two domains: If there are more buyers, we
devise a new simultaneous item auction with good PoA, under limited information asymmetry. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first positive PoA result for correlated values
in multi-item settings. The main technical difficulty in establishing this result is that the standard tool for establishing PoA
results — the smoothness framework — is unsuitable for IDV
settings, and so we must introduce new techniques to address
the unique challenges imposed by such settings. In the domain of more items, we establish impossibility results even
for surprisingly simple scenarios.

1

Introduction

In this work, we study simple and practical mechanisms for
selling heterogeneous items to unit-demand agents,1 with
the goal of maximizing social welfare. While much of the literature focuses on truthful mechanisms (for which it is in the
agents’ best interest to report their true values for the items),
such mechanisms are often complicated, computationally
and cognitively demanding, and must be run in a centralized
manner (Dobzinski 2011; Li 2017; Ausubel, Milgrom et al.
2006). In many real-life settings like e-commerce, the mechanisms used in practice are simple and run in a distributed
∗

For the full version, see https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.00498
(Eden et al. 2020). Due to space limitation, all missing statements
and proofs are deferred to the full version.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Where an agent has a value for each item, and her value for a
bundle is the maximal value for a bundle’s item.

5321

