The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EfficientDeRain: Learning Pixel-wise Dilation Filtering for High-Efficiency
Single-Image Deraining
Qing Guo1∗ , Jingyang Sun2 * , Felix Juefei-Xu3 , Lei Ma2 †
Xiaofei Xie1† , Wei Feng4 , Yang Liu1 , Jianjun Zhao2
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Kyushu University, Japan 3 Alibaba Group, USA
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2

PSNR Comparison on Rain100H

Abstract
Single-image deraining is rather challenging due to the unknown rain model. Existing methods often make specific assumptions of the rain model, which can hardly cover many
diverse circumstances in the real world, compelling them
to employ complex optimization or progressive refinement.
This, however, significantly affects these methods’ efficiency
and effectiveness for many efficiency-critical applications.
To fill this gap, in this paper, we regard the single-image
deraining as a general image-enhancing problem and originally propose a model-free deraining method, i.e., EfficientDeRain, which is able to process a rainy image within 10 ms
(i.e., around 6 ms on average), over 80 times faster than the
state-of-the-art method (i.e., RCDNet), while achieving similar de-rain effects. We first propose the novel pixel-wise dilation filtering. In particular, a rainy image is filtered with
the pixel-wise kernels estimated from a kernel prediction network, by which suitable multi-scale kernels for each pixel
can be efficiently predicted. Then, to eliminate the gap between synthetic and real data, we further propose an effective data augmentation method (i.e., RainMix) that helps
to train network for handling real rainy images. We perform comprehensive evaluation on both synthetic and realworld rainy datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. We release the model and code in
https://github.com/tsingqguo/efficientderain.git.

1

4.8

74.8 144.8

Time (ms)

SSIM Comparison on Rain100H

424.8

4.8

74.8 144.8

Time (ms)

Real Rainy Image

EfDeRain w/o RainMix (Ours)

RCDNet (CVPR2020)

EfDeRain (Ours)

424.8

Figure 1: Top: Comparison results (i.e., PSNR vs. Time &
SSIM vs. Time) on the Rain100H dataset. Down: an example of using EfDeRain, EfDeRain without RainMix and the
state-of-the-art RCDNet (Wang et al. 2020a) to handle a real
rainy image. Note that, the time cost of all compared methods are one-by-one evaluated on the same PC.

Introduction

Rain patterns or streaks captured by outdoor vision systems
(e.g., stationary image or dynamic video sequence), often
lead to sharp intensity fluctuations in images or videos, causing performance degradation for the visual perception systems (Garg and Nayar 2005, 2007) across different tasks,
e.g., pedestrian detection (Wang et al. 2018), object tracking
(Li et al. 2018a), semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2020),
etc. As a common real-world phenomenon, it is almost
mandatory that an all-weather vision system is equipped

with the deraining capability for usage. A deraining method
processes the rain-corrupted image/video data and removes
the rain streaks, with the intention to achieve good image
quality for the downstream vision tasks.
In many real-time applications that are efficiencysensitive and critical, (e.g., vision-based autonomous driving or navigation), being able to perform deraining efficiently on-chip is of great importance. A deraining algorithm
achieving both high efficiency and high performance (e.g., in
terms of PSNR, SSIM), while remaining at low overhead, is
of great importance for practical usage.

* Qing Guo and Jingyang Sun are co-first authors.
†

Lei Ma and Xiaofei Xie are corresponding authors:
ma.lei@acm.org, xfxie@ntu.edu.sg.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1487

