The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Representative Proxy Voting
Elliot Anshelevich,1 Zack Fitzsimmons,2 Rohit Vaish,3 Lirong Xia1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA 12180
College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA 01610
3
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India 400005
{eanshel,xial}@cs.rpi.edu, zfitzsim@holycross.edu, rohit.vaish@tifr.res.in
2

Abstract

for this set of representatives is that it captures well the opinions of the voters, even as the voters change over time, if the
voters are able to express their opinions by delegating their
vote to their closest representative (proxy).
We consider elections where the voters, the proxies, and
the candidates are all located in a metric space, and each
voter and each proxy has spatial preferences determined by
its distance to each candidate (see, e.g., Schofield 2008 for
a survey on spatial voting). We focus our results on the onedimensional case where all candidates and voters lie in the
interval [0, 1] (as in Cohensius et al. 2017). While not as general as an arbitrary metric space, it is an important step in
understanding the behavior of the problem in more general
domains. The one-dimensional assumption encompasses the
well-studied domains of single-peaked (Black 1948) and
single-crossing preferences (Mirrlees 1971).
What sets our contributions apart from the related work
on proxy voting is that we determine a proxy arrangement
without knowing the locations of the voters; that is, a θrepresentative proxy arrangement is representative of all
possible sets of voters simultaneously. In contrast, related
work on proxy voting generally selects proxies or representatives from among a given set of voters (see, e.g., Cohensius
et al. 2017; Meir, Sandomirskiy, and Tennenholtz 2020 and
the references therein).

We study a model of proxy voting where the candidates,
voters, and proxies are all located on the real line, and instead of voting directly, each voter delegates its vote to the
closest proxy. The goal is to find a set of proxies that is θrepresentative, which entails that for any voter located anywhere on the line, its favorite candidate is within a distance
θ of the favorite candidate of its closest proxy. This property guarantees a strong form of representation as the set of
voters is not required to be fixed in advance, or even be finite. We show that for candidates located on a line, an optimal proxy arrangement can be computed in polynomial time.
Moreover, we provide upper and lower bounds on the number of proxies required to form a θ-representative set, thus
showing that a relatively small number of proxies is enough
to capture the preferences of any set of voters. An additional
beneficial property of a θ-representative proxy arrangement
is that for strict-Condorcet voting rules, the outcome of proxy
voting is similarly close to the outcome of direct voting.

Introduction
It is natural to consider settings where voters either may not
be able to or may not be willing to directly cast their vote,
but instead decide to delegate their votes to a proxy. In much
of the related work on proxy voting, the proxies are chosen from the set of eligible voters to then represent the electorate (see, e.g., Cohensius et al. 2017). In this paper, we
consider a model for proxy voting that introduces proxies
to the election using only the arrangement of the candidates
and a given distance θ for any collection of voters.
We call our arrangement θ-representative since each
voter’s closest proxy is guaranteed to have a top preference
that is within θ of the voter’s. This can be interpreted as providing a set of allowed votes identified by a set of proxies
placed in the metric space, and naturally the voters cast the
vote of the proxy closest to them with the guarantee that this
preference is close to the voter’s. Another way to think about
our model is that we form a set of representatives (proxies)
whose choice does not depend on the locations of the voters
(since these locations are difficult to determine exactly, or
perhaps they are not static and change over time). The goal

Our Contributions Our main contributions are as follows
(see also Table 1):
• We introduce a new model of proxy voting and measure
for the representation of voter preferences. We consider
both the unrestricted case where the proxies can be placed
anywhere, and the restricted case where the proxies can
only be placed at the candidate locations.1
• We first provide algorithms for computing an optimal θrepresentative proxy arrangement (i.e., one that uses a
minimum number of proxies) in polynomial time (Theorems 1 and 3). However, these algorithms do not provide much insight into how many proxies are actually
necessary in order to be θ-representative, for any possible set of candidates and voters. Because of this, we also
prove upper and lower bounds on the number of proxies
1
Our results also hold if the possible proxy locations are more
general, as long as they include all candidate locations as a subset.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5086

