The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LRSC: Learning Representations for Subspace Clustering
Changsheng Li1 * , Chen Yang2 , Bo Liu3 , Ye Yuan1 , Guoren Wang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
JD Digits
{lcs,yuan-ye}@bit.edu.cn, chenyangah@gmail.com, {kfliubo,wanggrbit}@126.com

Abstract

from the same subspace. The topic of subspace clustering
has been extensively studied and applied in many research
domains (Moise and Sander 2008; Peng et al. 2016; You,
Robinson, and Vidal 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Peng et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2017; Ji et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Peng et al.
2018; Zhou et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019b; Li et al. 2020b).
To date, a number of subspace clustering methodologies,
such as iterative methods (Zhang, Szlam, and Lerman 2009;
Ho et al. 2003), statistical methods (Gruber and Weiss 2004;
Rao et al. 2009) and spectral analysis based methods (Yan
and Pollefeys 2006; Goh and Vidal 2007; Peng, Yi, and
Tang 2015), have been proposed. The spectral analysis based
methods have received more attention in recent years. The
algorithm belonging to this category generally learns an
affinity graph, and then applies spectral analysis to obtain
the clustering result. Many of the spectral analysis based algorithms are built upon the self-representative property of
data which has been successfully applied to many areas (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Peng, Zhang, and Yi 2013; Li et al.
2018, 2020a). For subspace clustering, the typical models
include low-rank representation (LRR) (Liu, Lin, and Yu
2010), sparse subspace clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), smooth representation clustering (Hu et al. 2014),
block diagonal representation (Lu et al. 2018), stochastic
sparse subspace clustering (Chen, Li, and You 2020), etc.
In many practical scenarios, the data do not necessarily
comply with the assumption that they are drawn from multiple linear subspaces. Thereby this limits the applications of
traditional subspace clustering methods. Several deep learning based solutions are thus proposed to alleviate this problem. A Basic idea among deep subspace clustering models is to non-linearly map original input into a latent space
in which a self-representative layer is incorporated to learn
the affinity graph (Ji et al. 2017). Based on this basic strategy, some representative works are successively proposed
in recent years to further boost the performance of subspace
clustering, including dual self-supervised CNN (Zhang et al.
2019a), latent distribution preserving (Zhou et al. 2019),
deep adversarial subspace clustering (Zhou, Hou, and Feng
2018), multi-scale fusion (Dang et al. 2020).
Although existing deep subspace clustering approaches
have achieved remarkable results, there is still huge room to
design more effective representation learning mechanisms
due to the following reasons: First, all methods mentioned

Deep learning based subspace clustering methods have attracted increasing attention in recent years, where a basic
theme is to non-linearly map data into a latent space, and
then uncover subspace structures based upon the data selfexpressiveness property. However, almost all existing deep
subspace clustering methods only rely on target domain data,
and always resort to shallow neural networks for modeling
data, leaving huge room to design more effective representation learning mechanisms tailored for subspace clustering.
In this paper, we propose a novel subspace clustering framework through learning precise sample representations. In contrast to previous approaches, the proposed method aims to
leverage external data through constructing lots of relevant
tasks to guide the training of the encoder, motivated by the
idea of meta-learning. Considering limited networks layers
of current deep subspace clustering models, we intend to distill knowledge from a deeper network trained on the external
data, and transfer it into the shallower model. To reach the
above two goals, we propose a new loss function to realize
them in a unified framework. Moreover, we propose to construct a new auxiliary task for self-supervised training of the
model, such that the representation ability of the model can
be further improved. Extensive experiments are performed
on four publicly available datasets, and experimental results
clearly demonstrate the efficacy of our method, compared to
state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Clustering is a popular tool for unsupervised data analytics (Hinton et al. 1999). In many real-world applications,
data from each cluster can be approximately modelled by
a proper low-dimensional subspace. For example, in movie
recommendation systems, users having similar watching
interests approximately span a low-dimensional subspace
(Zhang et al. 2012). In bioinformatics domain, the scRNAseq expression of the instances from one cell type forms a
subspace structure (Zheng et al. 2019). A typical example in
vision problems is that face images are known to lie in a linear subspace of dimension up to nine (Zhang et al. 2019a).
To deal with such data, subspace clustering is proposed to
cluster data into groups, where each group contains samples
* Changsheng Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8340

