The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Just-In-Time Inconsistency Detection Between Comments and Source Code
Sheena Panthaplackel1 , Junyi Jessy Li2 , Milos Gligoric3 , Raymond J. Mooney1
1

Department of Computer Science
2
Department of Linguistics
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
spantha@cs.utexas.edu, jessy@austin.utexas.edu, gligoric@utexas.edu, mooney@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

rameter constraints (Zhou et al. 2017), null values and
exceptions (Tan et al. 2012), locking (Tan et al. 2007),
interrupts (Tan, Zhou, and Padioleau 2011)). Some have
also addressed the notion of coherence between comments
and code as a text similarity problem with traditional machine learning models that leverage bag-of-words techniques (Corazza, Maggio, and Scanniello 2018; Cimasa
et al. 2019). In contrast, we design an approach that generalizes across types of inconsistencies and captures deeper
comment/code relationships. Furthermore, prior research
has predominantly focused on detecting inconsistencies that
already reside in a software project, within the code repository. We refer to this as post hoc inconsistency detection
since it occurs potentially many commits after the inconsistency has been introduced.
Ideally, these inconsistencies should be detected before
they ever enter the repository (e.g., during code review)
since they pose a threat to the development cycle and reliability of the software until they are found. Because inconsistent comments generally arise as a consequence of developers failing to update comments immediately following
code changes (Wen et al. 2019), we aim to detect whether a
comment becomes inconsistent as a result of changes to the
accompanying code, before these changes are merged into a
code base. We refer to this as just-in-time inconsistency detection, as it allows catching potential inconsistencies right
before they can materialize.
Detecting inconsistencies immediately following code
changes allows us to utilize information from the version
of the code before the changes, for which the comment is
consistent. By considering how the changes affect the relationship the comment holds with the code, we can determine
whether the comment remains consistent after the changes.
For instance, in Figure 1(a), the comment describes the return type of nodeIds() as an array. When the method is
modified to return a Set instead of an array, the comment no
longer describes the correct return type, making it inconsistent. Such analysis is not possible in post hoc inconsistency
detection since the exact code changes that triggered inconsistency cannot be easily pinpointed, making it difficult to
align the comment with relevant parts of the code.
Moreover, due to challenges in crafting data extraction
rules (Tan et al. 2007; Tan, Zhou, and Padioleau 2011) and
annotating substantial amounts of data (Corazza, Maggio,

Natural language comments convey key aspects of source
code such as implementation, usage, and pre- and postconditions. Failure to update comments accordingly when the
corresponding code is modified introduces inconsistencies,
which is known to lead to confusion and software bugs. In
this paper, we aim to detect whether a comment becomes inconsistent as a result of changes to the corresponding body of
code, in order to catch potential inconsistencies just-in-time,
i.e., before they are committed to a code base. To achieve this,
we develop a deep-learning approach that learns to correlate a
comment with code changes. By evaluating on a large corpus
of comment/code pairs spanning various comment types, we
show that our model outperforms multiple baselines by significant margins. For extrinsic evaluation, we show the usefulness of our approach by combining it with a comment update model to build a more comprehensive automatic comment maintenance system which can both detect and resolve
inconsistent comments based on code changes.

1

Introduction

Comments serve as a critical communication medium for
developers, facilitating program comprehension and code
maintenance tasks (Buse and Weimer 2010; de Souza, Anquetil, and de Oliveira 2005). Code is highly-dynamic in nature, with developers constantly making changes to address
bugs and feature requests. Many code changes require reciprocal updates to the accompanying comments to keep them
in sync; however, this is not always done in practice (Wen
et al. 2019; Fluri et al. 2009; Ratol and Robillard 2017; Jiang
and Hassan 2006; Zhou et al. 2017; Tan et al. 2007). Outdated comments which inaccurately portray the code they
accompany adversely affect the software development cycle
by causing confusion (Wen et al. 2019; Jiang and Hassan
2006; Tan et al. 2007; Zhou et al. 2017) and misguiding developers, hence making code vulnerable to bugs (Jiang and
Hassan 2006; Tan et al. 2007; Ibrahim et al. 2012). Therefore, it is desirable to have systems that can automatically
detect such inconsistencies and alert developers.
Previous work has explored heuristic-based approaches
for automatically detecting specific types of inconsistencies (e.g., identifier naming (Ratol and Robillard 2017), paCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

427

