The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Market-Based Explanations of Collective Decisions
Dominik Peters, 1 Grzegorz Pierczyński, 2 Nisarg Shah, 3 Piotr Skowron 2
1

Harvard University
University of Warsaw
3
University of Toronto
dominikp@cs.cmu.edu, g.pierczynski@mimuw.edu.pl, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu, p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl
2

Abstract

For approval-based committee elections, axioms that capture how well minorities of voters with common interests are
represented have received considerable attention in recent
years (Aziz et al. 2017; Brill et al. 2017; Sánchez-Fernández
et al. 2017; Lackner and Skowron 2018; Peters and Skowron
2020). The starting point of our discussion is that even the
strongest of these axioms fail to ensure that the selected committee is intuitively fair or proportionally representative on all
instances. We explain this via the example of the core (Aziz
et al. 2017; Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018; Cheng et al.
2019; Jiang, Munagala, and Wang 2019; Peters and Skowron
2020).

We consider approval-based committee elections, in which a
size-k subset of available candidates must be selected given approval sets for each voter, indicating the candidates approved
by the voter. A number of axioms capturing ideas of fairness
and proportionality have been proposed for this framework.
We argue that even the strongest of them, such as priceability
and the core, only rule out certain undesirable committees,
but fail to ensure that the selected committee is fair in all
cases. We propose two new solution concepts, stable priceability and balanced stable priceability, and show that they
select arguably fair committees. Our solution concepts come
with a non-trivial-to-construct but easy-to-understand marketbased explanation for why the chosen committee is fair. We
show that stable priceability is closely related to the notion of
Lindahl equilibrium from economics.

Outcomes in the Core do not Have to be Fair
Assume that there are n voters. Each voter i specified a subset of candidates Ai that she approves, and the goal is to
select a committee of exactly k candidates. The high-level
idea behind the core is that a group of voters S should be
able to decide on at least b|S|/n · kc candidates in the elected
committee. Formally, we say that a committee W is in the
core if there exists no group of voters S and no subset of
candidates T such that |T | ⩽ |S|/n · k and each voter from S
prefers T over W (i.e. approves more candidates in T than in
W ). The core is a very strong concept. It implies a number of
weaker properties, such as extended justified representation
(EJR) (Aziz et al. 2017), proportional justified representation (PJR) (Sánchez-Fernández et al. 2017), and justified
representation (JR) (Aziz et al. 2017). In fact, the core is so
strong that, for the time being, it is not known whether there
always exists a committee in the core for approval-based
elections. However, even this strong property can sometimes
allow dramatically unfair committees, as the example below
illustrates.
Example 1. Fix an integer L. Consider the following instance with n = kL voters. Voters 1, . . . L approve candidates c1 , . . . , ck . For each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k − 1} voters
iL + 1, . . . , iL + L − 1 approve candidate ck+i . The remaining k − 1 voters approve candidates c2k , . . . , c3k−2 , each
voter approving a different candidate. This instance is depicted in Figure 1. The candidates correspond to the boxes;
each candidate is approved by the voters who are below the
corresponding box.
For this instance, the committee W1 = {c1 , . . . , ck } (the
committee marked green) is in the core. In fact this committee

Introduction
A committee election is a scenario where a group of
individuals–called voters—collectively selects a size-k subset
of available candidates, for a given k. The model of committee elections describes real-life situations such as selecting
political representatives for a group of voters, selecting finalists or laureates in a contest (where voters correspond to
judges or experts who collectively select a subset of contestants), deciding on locations of public facilities (Farahani and
Hekmatfar 2009; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016), and
selecting validators in the blockchain protocol (AmoussouGuenou et al. 2020a,b).
A committee election rule is a function specifying how
voters’ preferences map to the collective decision on which
candidates should be selected. We focus on the model of
approval preferences, in which each voter approves a subset
of the candidates. A number of different committee election
rules have been proposed for this model (Faliszewski et al.
2017; Lackner and Skowron 2020). In order to choose the
right rule for a given scenario, one needs to be able to reason
about these rules in a principled way. Various approaches
have been proposed for this purpose. A compelling one is
the axiomatic approach, in which one formulates desirable
mathematical properties and asks which voting rules satisfy
them.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5656

