The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Teacher Guided Neural Architecture Search for Face Recognition
Xiaobo Wang1,2
1

2

Sangfor Technologies Inc., Shenzhen, China
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wangxiaobo2015cbsr@gmail.com

Abstract

downsize a network regardless of the structural difference
between teacher and student networks.
For face recognition knowledge distillation, there have
been several attempts (Wang, Lan, and Zhang 2017; Luo
et al. 2016; Karlekar, Feng, and Pranata 2019; Ge et al. 2018;
Feng et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a, 2020a)
in literatures to distil large CNNs, so as to make their deployments easier. Hinton et al. (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean. 2015)
propose the first knowledge distillation based on the soften
probability consistency, where a temperature parameter is
introduced in the softmax function to disclose the similarity
structure of data. Romero et al. (Romero, Ballas, and Kahou.
2014) used the hidden layer of a teacher network as a hint
for a student network to improve the performance. Wang et
al. (Wang, Lan, and Zhang 2017) use both the knowledge of
soften probabilities and one-hot labels for face recognition
and alignment. Luo et al. (Luo et al. 2016) propose a neuron selection method by leveraging the essential characteristics (domain knowledge) of the learned face representation.
Karlekar et al. (Karlekar, Feng, and Pranata 2019) simultaneously exploit one-hot labels and feature vectors for the
knowledge transfer between different face resolutions. Ge
et al. (Ge et al. 2018) develop a selective knowledge distillation, which selectively distils the most informative facial features by solving a sparse graph optimization problem. Feng et al. (Feng et al. 2019) exploit the capability of
a teacher model to transfer the similarity information to a
small model by adaptively varying the margin between positive and negative pairs. Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2019a) propose an improved knowledge distillation scheme, where the
teacher model uses the original training set and the student
uses the low-resolution augmented training set. Peng et al.
(Peng et al. 2019) use the knowledge of probability consistency to transfer not only the instance-level information, but
also the correlation between instances. While these methods
improve performance over the typical directly training the
student network, they still come with a common limitation:
the pre-defined student network is hand-crafted heuristic,
which is sub-optimal because it requires much effort from
experts to explore a suitable one from the large design space.
In this paper, we propose a novel teacher guided neural
architecture search method from a probability optimization
perspective. Based on the investigation of several popular
knowledge used for distillation, we design a simple but very

Knowledge distillation is an effective tool to compress large
pre-trained convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or their
ensembles into models applicable to mobile and embedded
devices. However, with expected flops or latency, existing
methods are hand-crafted heuristics. They propose to predefine the target student network for knowledge distillation,
which may be sub-optimal because it requires much effort
to explore a powerful student from the large design space.
In this paper, we develop a novel teacher guided neural architecture search method to directly search the student network with flexible channel and layer sizes. Specifically, we
define the search space as the number of the channels/layers,
which is sampled based on the probability distribution and
is learned by minimizing the search objective of the student
network. The maximum probability for the size in each distribution serves as the final searched width and depth of the
target student network. Extensive experiments on a variety of
face recognition benchmarks have demonstrated the superiority of our method over the state-of-the-art alternatives.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have gained impressive success in the recent advanced face recognition systems (Li
et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2017, 2018b,a, 2019; Wang et al.
2019b). However, the performance advantages are often
driven at the cost of training and deploying resourceintensive networks with millions of parameters. As face
recognition shifts toward mobile and embedded devices, the
computational cost of large CNNs prevents them from being
deployed to these devices. It motivates research of developing compact yet still discriminative models. Several directions such as model pruning, model quantization and knowledge distillation have been suggested to make the model
smaller and cost-efficient. Among them, knowledge distillation is being actively investigated. For a pre-given larger
network (teacher), the distillation process aims to learn a
compact network (student) by utilizing the knowledge of
teacher as supervision. The key to success in knowledge distillation is the designed student network and the exploited
dark knowledge. Unlike other compression methods, it can
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2817

