The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Sample-Efficient Algorithm for Episodic Finite-Horizon MDP with Constraints
Krishna C. Kalagarla, Rahul Jain, Pierluigi Nuzzo
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
{kalagarl,rahul.jain,nuzzo}@usc.edu

Abstract

We address the problem of online learning of CMDPs
with unknown transition probabilities, by requiring only observed trajectories rather than sampling the transition function for any state-action pair from a generative model, which
may not always be available. An important question which
arises in online learning is the exploration-exploitation
dilemma, i.e., the trade-off between exploration, to gain
more information about the model, and exploitation, to minimize the cost. In this respect, the performance of learning algorithms is commonly evaluated in terms of (i) regret,
i.e., the difference between the cumulative cost of the agent
and that of the optimal policy in hindsight, and (ii) sample
complexity, i.e., the number of steps for which the learning agent may not play a near-optimal policy. We consider a
policy to be near-optimal if the expected cumulative cost is
close to the optimal and the constraints are satisfied within a
small tolerance. In this paper, we address sample efficiency
by proposing an algorithm that provides probably approximately correctness (PAC) guarantees.
Our algorithm leverages the concept of optimism in the
face of uncertainty (Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer, Jaksch,
and Ortner 2009) to balance exploration and exploitation.
The learning agent repeatedly defines a set of statistically
plausible transition models given the observations made so
far. It then chooses an optimistic transition probability model
and an optimistic policy with respect to the given constrained MDP problem. This planning step is formulated
as a linear programming (LP) problem in occupancy measures, whose solution gives the desired optimistic policy.
This policy is executed for multiple episodes until a stateaction pair has been visited sufficiently often. The total visitation counts are then updated and these steps are repeated.
We show that the number of episodes in which the learning agent plays an -suboptimal policy is upper bounded by

2
H2
Õ |S||A|C
log2 1δ with probability at least 1 − δ, where
2
C is an upper bound on the number of possible successor
states for a state-action pair, |S| and |A| are the state and
action space sizes, respectively, and H is the time horizon.
Contribution. In this paper, we present one of the
first online algorithms with PAC guarantees for episodic
constrained MDPs with unknown transition probabilities.
We build on a previous result which provides a probably
approximately correct (PAC) algorithm for unconstrained
episodic MDPs (Dann and Brunskill 2015). However, differ-

Constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs) formalize
sequential decision-making problems whose objective is to
minimize a cost function while satisfying constraints on various cost functions. In this paper, we consider the setting of
episodic fixed-horizon CMDPs. We propose an online algorithm which leverages the linear programming formulation of
repeated optimistic planning for finite-horizon CMDP to provide a probably approximately correctness (PAC) guarantee
on the number of episodes needed to ensure a near optimal
policy, i.e., with resulting objective value close to that of the
optimal value and satisfying the constraints within low tolerance, with high probability. The number of episodes needed
is shown to have linear dependence on the sizes of the state
and action spaces and quadratic dependence on the time horizon and an upper bound on the number of possible successor
states for a state-action pair. Therefore, if the upper bound on
the number of possible successor states is much smaller than
the size of the state space, the number of needed episodes becomes linear in the sizes of the state and action spaces and
quadratic in the time horizon.

Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman 1994) offer
a natural framework to express sequential decision-making
problems and reason about autonomous system behaviors.
However, the single cost objective of a traditional MDP formulation may fall short of fully capturing problems with
multiple conflicting objectives and additional constraints
that must be satisfied. Consider, for example, an autonomous
car that is required to reach a destination at the earliest, but
also satisfy a set of safety requirements and fuel consumption constraints, while keeping a desired comfort level (Le,
Voloshin, and Yue 2019). The framework of constrained
MDPs (CMDPs) (Altman 1999) extended MDPs by considering additional constraints on the expected long-term performance of a policy. The objective in a CMDP is to minimize the expected cumulative cost while satisfying the additional constraints. In this paper, we consider episodic finitehorizon CMDPs, where an agent interacts with a CMDP repeatedly in episodes of fixed length, a setting that can model
a large number of repetitive tasks such as goods delivery or
customer service.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8030

