The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

To Choose or to Fuse? Scale Selection for Crowd Counting
Qingyu Song1,2 ∗ , Changan Wang1 ∗ , Yabiao Wang1 ,
Ying Tai1 , Chengjie Wang1 , Jilin Li1 , Jian Wu2 † , Jiayi Ma3
2

1
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{changanwang, caseywang, yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli}@tencent.com,
{qingyusong, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address the large scale variation problem
in crowd counting by taking full advantage of the multiscale feature representations in a multi-level network. We
implement such an idea by keeping the counting error of
a patch as small as possible with a proper feature level
selection strategy, since a specific feature level tends to
perform better for a certain range of scales. However,
without scale annotations, it is sub-optimal and error-prone
to manually assign the predictions for heads of different
scales to specific feature levels. Therefore, we propose
a Scale-Adaptive Selection Network (SASNet), which
automatically learns the internal correspondence between the
scales and the feature levels. Instead of directly using the
predictions from the most appropriate feature level as the
final estimation, our SASNet also considers the predictions
from other feature levels via weighted average, which
helps to mitigate the gap between discrete feature levels
and continuous scale variation. Since the heads in a local
patch share roughly a same scale, we conduct the adaptive
selection strategy in a patch-wise style. However, pixels
within a patch contribute different counting errors due to
the various difficulty degrees of learning. Thus, we further
propose a Pyramid Region Awareness Loss (PRA Loss) to
recursively select the most hard sub-regions within a patch
until reaching the pixel level. With awareness of whether
the parent patch is over-estimated or under-estimated, the
fine-grained optimization with the PRA Loss for these
region-aware hard pixels helps to alleviate the inconsistency
problem between training target and evaluation metric. The
state-of-the-art results on four datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our approach. The code will be available at:
https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/CrowdCountingSASNet.

𝑃5

𝑃4

𝑃3

𝑃2

𝑃1

Figure 1: Original input images (left column) and visualizations of our adaptive selection results (right column). In the
visualizations, we use points with different colors to represent the persons’ heads. The colors represent the most appropriate feature levels selected by our SASNet for these
points. There are totally five feature levels {P1 , ..., P5 } in
SASNet, and the resolution of which increases from P5 to
P1 . The rich detail information in high-resolution feature
levels is helpful to the prediction of small scale heads, while
the low-resolution feature levels with rich contextual information perform better for large scale heads. However, it is
non-trivial to manually assign the correspondence relations
since the irregular partition boundaries and the inhomogeneous crowd distribution. Instead, the proposed adaptive selection strategy automatically learns the internal relations
and the visualizations demonstrate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of people
within given images or videos. Most recent state-of-the-art
works (Zhang et al. 2016; Li, Zhang, and Chen 2018) adopt
deep learning based methods and transform original annotations, i.e., center points of people’s heads, into density maps
as training targets. However, a major challenge for the task

is the extremely large scale variation of crowds, which becomes even more tricky due to the lack of scale annotations.
In recent years, numerous methods have been proposed to
tackle with the large scale variation problem of crowd counting. One feasible workaround is to use the multi-column networks (Zhang et al. 2016; Onoro-Rubio and López-Sastre
2016; Sam, Surya, and Babu 2017), which aggregate several
branches with various receptive fields to acquire features

∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2576

